IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

2059

GSA-DT: A Malicious Traffic Detection Model
Based on Graph Self-Attention Network
and Decision Tree
Saihua Cai , Member, IEEE, Han Tang, Jinfu Chen , Member, IEEE, Tianxiang Lv,
Wenjun Zhao, and Chunlei Huang

Abstract—Malicious attack has shown a rapid growth in recent
years, it is very important to accurately detect malicious traffic to
defend against malicious attacks. Compared with machine learning and deep learning technologies, graph convolutional neural
network (GCN) achieves better detection results of malicious
traffic due to additional consideration of the correlation between
network traffic features. However, existing GCN-based detection
models suffer from fixed weight assignment, only focusing on
local features, lack the ability to model graph structure and
relationships as well as having gradient disappearance. To solve
these problems, this paper proposes the GSA-DT model based
on graph self-attention network and decision tree. GSA-DT first
preprocesses the original network traffic to obtain better traffic
features and labels, and then uses GCN to extract the topological
structure of network traffic as well as capture the correlation
relationships among traffic features, where the ReLU activation
function is replaced by LeakyReLU to overcome the problems of
neuron “death” and gradient disappearance during the training
process; It also introduces the self-attention mechanism into
GCN to assign larger weights to the key features to reduce the
interference of redundant features. Finally, GSA-DT uses decision
tree to perform the detection of malicious traffic. Experimental
results on four network traffic datasets show that GSA-DT model
improves the detection accuracy over 1% on average than seven
advanced malicious traffic detection models, and it also performs
better in F1-measure, TPR, FPR as well as stability.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, graph self-attention
network, decision tree, LeakyReLU, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, malicious attacks show a rapid growth
trend, leading to severe service disruptions, thereby impacting the daily life of people. To mitigate the escalating security

I

Received 26 April 2024; revised 4 October 2024 and 16 December 2024;
accepted 16 January 2025. Date of publication 12 February 2025; date
of current version 22 April 2025. This work was partly supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62202206,
U1836116, 62172194), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant
no. 2023T160275), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant
no. BK20220515), and the Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was M. Sayıt. (Corresponding author: Jinfu Chen.)
The authors are with the School of Computer Science
and Communication Engineering, and the Jiangsu Provincial
Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security Technology,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China (e-mail: caisaih@
ujs.edu.cn;
2222208016@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn;
2222008039@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
2222208077@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
2232208014@stmail.ujs.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3531885

risks, it is crucial to promptly detect the malicious attacks.
Malicious attacks will generate malicious traffic, therefore,
accurately detecting malicious traffic can find hidden attack
behaviors, which can defend against network intrusion [1].
Previously, researchers mainly used statistics-based [2],
port-based [3], signature-based [4] and other methods to
detect malicious traffic. However, these methods show great
limitations in face of unknown types of malicious traffic.
Among them, statistics-based approaches have difficulty to
identify malicious traffic that does not fit a known model or
preset thresholds; Port-based approaches become ineffective
due to the absence of fixed port numbers; Signature-based
methods achieve low detection accuracy and robustness due
to the use of techniques such as mutation, encryption and
obfuscation in malicious attacks.
In recent years, machine learning (e.g., support vector
machine [5], KNN [6], etc.) methods have been widely used
in the field of malicious traffic detection, but the use of
machine learning models has the following limitations: (1)
It is very difficult in effectively identifying the complex
patterns and nonlinear relationships in network traffic [7];
(2) It relies on additional preprocessing to deal with the
problems included in complex network such as packet loss,
retransmission and reordering [8]; (3) It has weak ability to
recognize unknown attack types in complex tasks, has poor
generalization ability and weak feature expression ability [9].
Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep
learning has stronger ability to handle the complex network
traffic, stronger end-to-end learning ability, stronger ability
to capture nonlinear relationships and can provide more
robust and reliable detection results, therefore, deep learning
techniques have gained widespread attention in recent years.
However, traditional deep learning models (e.g., TCN, LSTM,
RNN, etc.) do not consider the correlation between the features
of network traffic in the model training process. In the network
activities, the source IP and destination IP addresses as well
as the source port and destination port have tight correlations,
therefore, analyzing and modeling the correlation can improve
the detection ability.
As a powerful deep representation learning method, GCN
can learn node representation vectors that contain the
information about nodes’ own features and associations with
other nodes [10]. GCN shows remarkable performance in
network analysis through constructing network traffic topology

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

graphs as well as performing message passing and node
updating on the graphs to capture the complex correlations
among network traffic. For this reason, GCN models have
been introduced in recent years for malicious traffic detection.
However, existing GCN model [11] still has some shortcomings: (1) Assigning same weight to all features of network
traffic, resulting in unable distinguish feature importance;
(2) Only focusing on local features while ignoring global
contextual information, resulting in cannot adequately capture
the global dependencies of network traffic; (3) Lacking the
ability to model graph structure and relationships, resulting
in cannot well capture the dynamic nature in graph structure
and complex relationships; (4) Having the problem of gradient
disappearance due to using ReLU activation function, resulting
in have limitation in nonlinear representation capability as
well as capture the complex graph structure. These limitations
affect the detection accuracy of GCN model.
In this paper, we propose a malicious traffic detection model
called GSA-DT based on graph self-attention network and
decision tree to solve these problems. The main contributions
can be summarized as follows:
• We combine the GCN model with self-attention mechanism to achieve accurate detection of malicious traffic,
this combination not only helps the detection model
better learn the relationship between the features through
GCN, but also helps extract the important features
through self-attention mechanism and assign larger
weights to them. In addition, we replace the ReLU
activation function in the GCN model with nonlinear
activation function LeakyReLU, which solves the gradient disappearance and neuron “death” problems of
ReLU through its non-zero slope, thereby improving
the detection performance.
• We leverage the interpretability of decision tree to
improve the transparency of the model’s predictive reasoning; In addition, we utilize the strong generalization
capability of decision tree to effectively handle the
nonlinear relationships among network traffic features,
thereby achieving the superior detection performance in
complex network traffic environment.
• We introduce the Gini coefficient as a replacement for
entropy in the decision tree and use it as the feature
selection metric to measure the importance of features,
thereby selecting the features much faster and further
reducing the computation time; In addition, we also
replace the Focal loss function in the decision tree
with Cross-Entropy loss function to automatically pay
more attention on a small number of hard-to-distinguish
malicious traffic samples, thereby improving the detection
performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides an overview of related works. Section III detailed
describes the malicious traffic detection model called GSADT based on GCN and decision tree. Section IV gives
and analyzes the experimental results. Section V discusses
the potential threats that may affect the detection results.
Finally, the whole paper is summarized and the future research
directions are discussed in Section VI.

II. R ELATED W ORKS
Malicious traffic detection is a technique to effectively
distinguish the malicious traffic from normal traffic, thereby
maintaining the security of cyberspace. Initially, scholars used
statistical-based [2], port-based [3], and signature-based [4]
techniques to detect malicious traffic, but these traditional
detection methods are difficult to effectively deal with increasingly sophisticated and stealthy network attacks, as well as
difficult to adapt to new and unknown malicious attacks. With
the rapid development of artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning techniques are widely used to effectively
detect malicious attacks (including denial-of-service (DoS)
attacks, malware infections, unauthorized access attempts, etc.)
through learning their features.
Machine learning-based methods construct the machine
learning models via learning the features of normal traffic and
malicious traffic. Subsequently, the trained machine learning
models are used to classify the collected network traffic,
thereby effectively detecting malicious traffic and discovering
malicious attacks. Wang et al. [5] proposed a cloud-based
intrusion detection system called SCAEPSVM-IDS, but this
algorithm lacks a detailed parameter optimization strategy.
Machine learning-based methods usually require manually
extracting the effective features from complex and variable
network traffic; In addition, they cannot effectively extract the
relevant features, resulting in a serious impact on the detection
accuracy.
Unlike machine learning-based methods that require manual extracting the features, deep learning-based models have
been widely studied in recent years due to their ability to
automatically learn the features of network traffic and capture
the complex patterns and rules associated with malicious
behavior. For example, Haghnegahdar and Wang [12] proposed
a model called WOA-ANN that uses artificial neural network
to determine the optimal weights, it overcomes the drawbacks of tendency to fall into local minimal value, but this
method suffers from high time complexity. Kan et al. [13]
proposed an adaptive particle swarm optimized convolutional
neural network (APSO-CNN) for IoT intrusion detection,
it used particle swarm algorithm to optimize the structural
parameters of a 1-D CNN by adaptive inertia weights, but
its heuristic optimization algorithm had a long search time
for offline models and redundant instances. Chiba et al. [14]
introduced a backpropagation neural network (BPNN)-based
optimization method and constructed an effective network
intrusion detection system to effectively improve the detection
accuracy, but these two methods can not effectively handle the
temporal and sequential information. Chang and Branco [15]
proposed two new graph neural network models called EResSAGE and E-ResGAT, which can significantly improve
the detection accuracy on minority classes of data samples
when dealing with class imbalance problem; However, these
two models require higher computational complexity and
training time. Huda et al. [16] introduced a fuzzy aggregation
method using a modified density peak clustering algorithm
(MDPCA) and deep belief network (DBN), it could adapt
to dynamic changes of new malware,but it had a large time

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

complexity. Chen et al. [17] proposed a bi-directional temporal
convolutional network-based malicious traffic detection model
called BiTCN, it addressed the limitations of existing models
and obtained high detection accuracy and better stability,
but the bidirectional operation increases the training time
of the model, especially on large-scale datasets. Venturi et
al. [18] proposed a network intrusion detection system called
ARGANIDS based on adversarial regularized graph selfencoder, it uses a GNN to capture the topology and traffic
features, and adopts the adversarial training to make the model
more robust to noisy and sparse data, thereby further improving the detection efficiency on complex network attacks;
However, ARGANIDS relies on constructing detailed graph
structures of network topologies, which may not be suitable for
network environments with fast changing dynamics and large
traffic sizes. Lin et al. [19] proposed a new multi-modal deep
learning framework, it used raw byte and length sequences
as the inputs and used a self-attention mechanism to learn
the deep relationships between network packets in a stream.
However, traditional deep learning models do not consider the
correlations between the features of network traffic as well as
ignore the topological information and contextual relationships
of network traffic, as well as cannot fully consider the temporal
and dynamically changing characteristics of data, resulting in
a limited ability to process sequential data.
To solve the problems of traditional deep learning-based
methods, scholars tried to introduce GCN models for malicious
traffic detection. For example, Lan et al. [20] proposed a
GraphSAGE-based model called E-minBatch GraphSAGE, it
took the source ports of application layer and source IP
addresses as source nodes, as well as the target ports of
application layer and target IP addresses as target nodes,
and the remaining traffic information as edge information to
complete the construction of graph structure, but this model is
limited in detecting industrial Internet traffic. Jiang et al. [21]
designed a new trust assessment framework called GATrust
based on the graph attention network, it assigned different
attention coefficients to multifaceted attributes in the online
social networks, thereby improving the prediction accuracy of
social trust assessment, but its generality on graph structure
data has not been tested. Zheng et al. [22] proposed an
encrypted malicious traffic detection method called GCN-ETA
based on graph convolutional neural network, it integrated
a new traffic representation and an association construction
scheme of network traffic; However, the flow direction of
network traffic and the weights of different association types
were not considered; In addition, this model also did not
address the feature redundancy problem.
To solve these problems in existing GCN-based methods,
this paper proposes the GSA-DT method based on graph selfattention network and decision tree to accurately detect malicious
traffic. A comparison of the proposed GSA-DT and some
reviewed malicious traffic detection methods is shown in Table I.
III. GSA-DT M ODEL
In this section, we describe the malicious traffic detection
model called GSA-DT based on graph self-attention network

2061

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC D ETECTION M ETHODS

Fig. 1.

The framework of GSA-DT model.

and decision tree from six aspects, including the general
introduction of GSA-DT model, the traffic preprocessing, the
construction of traffic topology relationships, the use of GCN
model, the feature selection based on self-attention mechanism
and the detection of malicious traffic based on decision tree.
A. General Introduction of GSA-DT Model
The GSA-DT first combines the GCN and self-attention
mechanism to learn the complex relationship and feature representation of network traffic, and then combines the decision
tree for malicious traffic detection. As shown in Fig. 1, the
GSA-DT includes pre-processing phase, traffic topology relationship construction phase, GCN model construction phase,
self-attention mechanism-based feature selection phase and
decision tree-based detection phase.
(1) In the pre-processing phase, the process of traffic
analysis, traffic cleaning, information extraction and traffic
labeling provide accurate training samples and labels for
malicious network traffic detection and analysis.
(2) In the traffic topology relationship construction phase,
the address information is used to construct the relationship
between traffic nodes and transform them into traffic adjacency
matrix and traffic diagonal matrix.
(3) In the GCN construction phase, the topological structure
information of network traffic graph is extracted to capture the
feature relationships between network traffic; In addition, the
LeakyReLU activation function is used to solve the gradient
disappearance problem and neuron “death” problem of ReLU
activation function.

2062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

TABLE II
A N E XAMPLE OF N ETWORK T RAFFIC

(4) In the self-attention mechanism-based feature selection
phase, we assign different weights to the features with correlations, this process ignores the features that contribute less to
the correlation information of nodes and gives large weight to
the features with stronger importance.
(5) In the decision tree-based detection phase, the filtered
correlation features are classified to quickly and accurately
detect malicious traffic.
B. Data Pre-Processing
The original network traffic is mostly in PCAP type,
therefore, the original network traffic needs to be processed to
make it suitable for GSA-DT model. In this paper, we process
the original traffic through traffic analysis, traffic cleaning,
information extraction and traffic labeling.
(1) The traffic analysis phase calls the Wireshark tool to
analyze the original network traffic, thereby obtaining the
statistical information of network traffic, such as the number
of packets, source IP and destination IP statistics, protocol
distribution, etc.
(2) The traffic cleaning phase calls the statistical information
as well as removes the empty and duplicate information, thus
improving the generalization ability of the model.
(3) The information extraction phase mainly extracts the
feature information in network traffic, including: source IP
address, destination IP address, incoming and outgoing traffic
packet size, incoming and outgoing traffic packet number,
traffic packet number, port number and other information. We
select these features because empirical analysis shows that
in malicious behavior detection, the abnormal IP addresses,
unconventional port usage, and a large number of small traffic
packets may indicate the malicious activities. And then, the
string information is segmented using Pandas library and
written the traffic information in the form of Dataframe.
(4) The traffic labeling phase aims to label the traffic
detection information (including: normal traffic, malicious
traffic, and malicious traffic categories) according to the traffic
type, thereby providing accurate training samples and labels
for malicious traffic detection and analysis. In addition, the
obtained traffic information is stored in the form of tables to
obtain the suitable form for detection model.
C. Constructing Traffic Topology Relationships
In the phase of constructing traffic topology relations, it
is necessary to construct traffic tables that have undergone
preprocessing operations to obtain traffic topology maps,
thereby facilitating the detection of malicious traffic. After
obtaining the traffic information, different nodes are connected
with the source IP address as starting point and the destination
IP address as ending point. At the same time, each different
IP node is numbered to form the network topology. The
information carried by connected edges on the graph is the
characteristic information, including: source IP address, destination IP address, traffic packet size, traffic packet number,
port number, etc.
The traditional methods mainly construct graph structures
based on the relationship between nodes and edges in the

Fig. 2.

The traffic topology relationships diagram.

network and extract relevant features to describe the properties
and behaviors of the nodes and edges, but these methods lack
classification by nodes, and thus cannot capture the differences
and correlations between the network traffic generated by different nodes. For this reason, we improve it through classifying
network traffic in the graph by node and treating the network
traffic generated by same node as the same traffic type, thus
transforming the problem of malicious traffic detection into
malicious node detection. Specifically, when constructing a
network traffic graph, each node represents a network entity,
such as an IP address or a device. In order to better detect
malicious traffic, we add labels representing the traffic type
of each node. By adding labels to the nodes, the model can
easily distinguish traffic and identify different types of attacks.
Among them, the traffic label of each node can be set based
on its communication behavior and specific features, and the
label can cover different types of malicious traffic, thus, the
traffic type is identified by adding an attribute to each node.
Taking the network traffic shown in Table II as an example. Assuming that source IP 10.0.2.15 is node 1 (as
marked in the parentheses), and its destination IPs are
173.194.10.145 (noted as node 2) and 216.58.211.3
(noted as node 3), there is an association between node 1 and
nodes 2 and 3 in the topology, as illustrated by the traffic
topology in Fig. 2. In this network traffic graph, each node
(such as nodes 1, 2 and 3) represents a network entity.
To improve the detection accuracy of malicious traffic, we
assign specific traffic type labels rather than general “malicious” or “benign” label to each node to represent different
types of traffic. For example, if node 1’s behavior resembles
normal communication patterns, it can be labeled as “benign
traffic”; However, if node 2 shows the characteristics of a
DDoS attack, it would be labeled as “DDoS”, and if node 3’s
traffic matches the patterns of malware distribution, it would
be labeled as “malware”. These specific labels not only help
the model distinguish between benign traffic and malicious
traffic, but also identify the exact type of malicious behavior,
such as DDoS, phishing, malware, etc.
After constructing the traffic topology, the adjacency matrix
B and diagonal matrix D are obtained according to the

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

2063

Equation (2), where σ denotes the activation function and θ1
is the initial weight matrix.
H1

Fig. 3.

The adjacency matrix and diagonal matrix of network traffic.

constructed diagram of traffic topology relationships. The
value of Bi,j in B is 0 or 1, where 0 means there is no
connection between two nodes and 1 means two nodes have
network communication. Take node 1 as an example, it has
network communication with node 2 and node 3, then B1,2 ,
B2,1 , B1,3 and B3,1 are recorded as 1. Because there is no
connection between node 1 and node 4, B1,4 and B4,1 are
recorded as 0. Matrix D is used to represent the number of
neighboring nodes connected with each node, and the number
of neighboring nodes is added 1 when there is a network
communication between node, where Di,i denotes the number
of neighboring nodes connected to node i. Since node 1 is
adjacent to node 2 and node 3, D1,1 is recorded as 2. The final
adjacency matrix B and diagonal matrix D obtained from the
network traffic listed in Table II are shown in Fig. 3.
D. Graph Convolutional Neural Network
After obtaining the adjacency matrix and diagonal matrix, it
is necessary to construct a structure to process them. Currently,
the GIN [23], GraphSAGE [20] and GCN [24] are often used
as the backbone of the model. Among them, a key property of
GIN model is that the aggregation of node features is invariant,
but network traffic is the packets transmitted from one place
to another over a period of time, this process is dynamic, thus,
GIN model is not applicable to our scenario; GraphSAGE
only considers the aggregation between nodes and neighboring
nodes but ignores the internal correlation between the features,
resulting in not being able to capture the global topology
information well. Compared with these two models, GCN can
better learn the information of neighboring nodes around each
node, can learn the parameters for different node locations in a
single training through parameter sharing, as well as can better
balance the computational complexity and expressive power
by means of feature propagation and convolutional operations.
Therefore, we choose GCN as the backbone of the model.
GCN is a multi-layer convolutional neural network, it learns
from the attributes between the nodes in the established
graph and the neighboring nodes to obtain a new feature
representation for each node. To improve the computational
efficiency, matrixs B and D need to be normalized using
Equation (1) to obtain the normalization matrix S.
S = D −1/2 BD −1/2 .

(1)

After sending S as input to 1-D convolutional network,
the first-order neighbor association feature H1 is learned by

= σ(S θ1 ).

(2)

The features of network traffic often show the complex
nonlinear patterns, retaining the nonlinear mapping capabilities
can help to better capture these complex nonlinear patterns,
thereby improving the detection accuracy. Therefore, it is
required to use activation function with stronger nonlinear
expressivity to better fit such nonlinear features. GCN usually
uses ReLU activation function, but use of ReLU has the
following problems: (1) The output is zero when the input is
negative (that is, appearing neuron “death” problem), resulting
in some neurons being unable to update the corresponding
weights during the training process due to the cessation of
learning; (2) Leads to the problem of gradient disappearance, especially the gradient may become very small in the
backpropagation process. To solve these problems, scholars
replaced it with Sigmoid [25], ELU [17] and Tanh [26] in
recent years. In contrast, the LeakyReLU activation function
retains the linear properties of ReLU at positive inputs, which
effectively avoids the problem of gradient vanishing; It is also
able to maintain a more stable gradient update rate, avoiding
almost no effective gradient update in the first few layers like
Tanh. These advantages of LeakyReLU motivate us to use it
instead of ReLU to achieve better detection result.
After acquiring the features, the deep features are obtained
by stacking multiple convolutional networks to get a larger
perceptual field. For the k th convolutional layer, its features
Hk are nonlinearized from the features obtained from previous
(k − 1) layer using LeakyReLU. The details are shown in
Equation (3).
Hk = σ(SHk −1 θk ).

(3)

During the training process of GCN model, the graph
association relationship representation is achieved by learning
its association relationship to obtain the feature information
of different nodes with their neighbor nodes and edge
information. At the same time, with the help of sharing same
network node structure information, the features of each node
for each global inter-neighbor node are obtained under the
action of multi-layer convolution, thereby obtaining the spatial
structure characteristics of network traffic.
E. Self-Attention Mechanism
Although GCN has strong ability in feature learning of
network traffic, but it does not give more attention to the
features that reflects malicious traffic, which leads to unstable
detection result, it is necessary to assign different weights
to the features according to their importance in the feature
screening process. The self-attention mechanism reduces the
impact of unimportant and redundant features [27], [28], [29]
on malicious traffic detection by assigning larger weights to
the features that have a greater impact on malicious traffic
detection and smaller weights to these unimportant features.
Based on the advantage of self-attention mechanism, this
paper improves the GCN model via adding the self-attention

2064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

mechanism layer, thereby further improving the detection
ability of GCN model.
The self-attention mechanism obtains the relevance of
different traffic inputs through computing the attention
coefficients on different relevant inputs, and then assigns the
low weights to the irrelevant features to retain important vector
features. The overall structure of self-attention mechanism
is shown in the upper right corner of Fig. 1, it is mainly
composed of Query, Key and Value. Firstly, it inputs the n
feature vectors h obtained by GCN into self-attention model,
and then obtains the traffic feature matrix L through stitching
the features via the input layer. The specific process is shown
in Equation (4).
L = [h1 , h2 , . . . , hn ].

(4)

Meanwhile, L is input into the embedding layer to map it
to three different spaces to obtain Q, K and V matrices. This
process is shown in Equation (5), where WQ , WK and WV
represent the randomly obtained space matrices, respectively.
Q = WQ ∗ L, K = WK ∗ L, V = WV ∗ L.

(5)

After obtaining three different spatial matrices, the similarity between each query vector qi and each different traffic
vector is calculated to obtain the linkage score (recorded as
Score). The used similarity measure is shown in Equation (6),
where the Score is obtained by calculating the product of each
vector’s own q and k and then summing them. Finally, the
weight relationship matrix A of L is obtained by stitching the
Score, which is shown in Equation (7).
Scorei =

n


qi ∗ ki .

(6)

i=1

A = [Score1 , Score2 , . . . , Scoren ].

(7)

And then, the Softmax function is used to normalize A to
obtain similarity matrix A , thus reducing the computational
difficulty, which is shown in Equation (8).
A = Softmax(A) = n

e si

j =1 e

sj .

(8)

Finally, the attention output matrix O is calculated by
weighting and summing the key value matrix V based on A ,
which is shown in Equation (9).
O = V ∗ A .

(9)

F. Decision Tree
After getting the feature vector O, it is required to use
feature vector to determine whether the network traffic is
malicious traffic. For the detection of malicious traffic, the
interpretability is very important, but it is a common problem
encountered by deep learning models. The introduction of
GCN allows the model to learn more informative and discriminative features that can be used to improve the detection
accuracy. To enhance the interpretability of detection models,
it is better to integrate a machine learning model to provide
a transparent and interpretable framework for distinguishing
malicious traffic from normal traffic, thereby facilitating the

interpretability of the predictive reasoning process. Compared
with other machine learning models, decision tree has the
advantages of small computational effort, easy transformation
of classification rules, high accuracy and strong generalization [30], where the internal nodes represent the characteristic
features of network traffic and the leaf nodes represent its
traffic classification labels.
In the detection phase, the obtained associated traffic features are input and the loss value is calculated via loss
function, thereby obtaining the parameters according to this
value. Currently, the commonly used loss functions include:
mean square error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE), focal
loss and cross-entropy loss. The malicious traffic detection
belongs to multi-classification research, it requires GSA-DT
model to be able to automatically detect malicious traffic by
learning the features of network traffic, therefore, focal loss is
not suitable due to the need of manually adjusting the weight
parameters and the lack of automation capability. In addition,
the scale of malicious traffic generated by malicious attacks is
much smaller compared to that of normal traffic generated by
normal accesses, i.e., there is a data imbalance in the network
traffic, which leads to the fact that both MSE and MAE are
not suitable for our research scenario due to their excessive
focus on the main category (normal traffic). Compared with
these commonly used loss functions, the cross-entropy loss
can automatically focus the attention on a small number of
hard-to-distinguish malicious traffic samples, which improves
the detection ability of the model. For this reason, it is chosen
as the loss function in the decision tree model. The loss
function of cross-entropy is shown in Equation (10), where
pi represents the probability vector of predicted classification
results, yi represents the label category of actual samples.
Finally, the corresponding parameters are updated through
backward derivation.
Loss = −

K


yi log(pi ).

(10)

i=1

Both Gini coefficient and entropy are commonly used
feature selection metrics to measure the importance of features
and they have different properties in decision trees. The
Gini coefficient is a measure of impurity that measures the
probability that two samples are randomly selected from a
dataset and their category labels do not match. The smaller
Gini coefficient indicates the lower impurity of the dataset
and the higher importance of the feature. The process of Gini
coefficient calculation does not involve logarithmic operations,
thus, the computation is more efficient. Entropy is another
commonly used feature selection metric, which measures the
degree of information clutter in a dataset. The calculation
of entropy requires logarithmic operations, which requires
more computational time compared to the Gini coefficient. In
the case of large-scale datasets and complex feature spaces,
the Gini coefficient can perform feature selection faster and
reduce the computation time. Therefore, we use the Gini
coefficient (shown in Equation (11)) as a feature selection
function, where k represents the number of traffic categories
and pi represents the probability that the traffic belongs to i th

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

2065

category. The classification result is measured by the value
of Gini coefficient, and the classification of network traffic is
performed based on the rank of calculated Gini coefficients.
Gini(D) =

k


pi (1 − pi ) = 1 −

i=1

k


pi 2 .

(11)

i=1

In general, the proposed GSA-DT model uses GCN network
as the main body to fully consider the correlation features of
network traffic as well as adopts the LeakyReLU activation
function to solve the neuron “death” problem of ReLU and
thus improving the expressiveness of GCN model. And then,
it uses a self-attention mechanism to provide larger weight
for important features as well as reduce the influence of
redundant features; In addition, it uses decision tree to classify
the network traffic, thus improving the detection accuracy of
malicious traffic while providing the model a stronger generalization capability. With these improvements, the proposed
GSA-DT model can effectively capture the features of global
network traffic by learning the differences and correlations
between different types of network traffic, thereby accurately
detecting malicious traffic.
In summary, our model utilizes the GCN and self-attention
mechanism to effectively enhance the feature representation,
which in turn achieves interpretability through decision tree.
Such integration aims to ensure effective detection of malicious traffic while balancing performance and interpretability.
G. The Workflow of GSA-DT Model
The flowchart of GSA-DT is shown in Fig. 4, it is composed
feature pre-processing phase, feature extraction phase and
malicious traffic detection phase.
(1) In the feature pre-processing phase, network traffic
will undergo a series of operations including traffic analysis,
cleaning and labeling to ensure that it can be used in the
correct format and structure for subsequent analysis; One of
the key tasks in this phase is to construct the topology of
network traffic using the source and destination IP addresses,
and then generate the adjacency and diagonal matrices to better
represent the relationships between traffic nodes.
(2) In the feature extraction phase, GCN is used to extract
the topological structure of network traffic, allowing the model
to capture the intrinsic correlations between the features; And
then, the LeakyReLU is adopted to replace the traditional
ReLU to solve the gradient vanishing and “neuron death”
problems. In addition, the model also introduces a selfattention mechanism to focus on the key features and assign
large weights to important features, thereby reducing the
impact of redundant features. These improvements improve the
model’s ability to distinguish between normal and malicious
traffic.
(3) In the malicious traffic detection phase, the decision tree
with Gini coefficient as feature evaluation index is used to
classify the extracted features, thereby efficiently and accurately detecting malicious traffic while reducing false positive
and false negative rates, and providing good interpretability.
The detailed process of malicious traffic detection using
GSA-DT model is shown in Algorithm 1. Firstly, the network

Fig. 4.

The flowchart of GSA-DT model.

Algorithm 1 GSA-DT
Input:
Network traffic NT, learning rate, hidden, epoch, dropout
Output:
Detection result R
1: preprocess NT to obtain features X
2: Initialize parameters (learning rate, hidden, epoach, dropout)
3: construct traffic topology relationships G
4: G→ GCN model
5: for each epoch in R do
6:
for each hidden in R dataset do
7:
extract traffic features according to learning rate and
dropout
8:
classification result←label
9:
calculate loss function
10:
renew weight W
11:
obtain traffic correlation feature H
12:
end for
13:
assign features’ weight W  using self-attention mechanism
14: end for
15: R = DT (H , W  )
16: return R

traffic is preprocessed and the relationship between network
traffic node is constructed using the address information of
traffic to get the key information and feature annotations
of network traffic. Based on the obtained network traffic
information, the contained address information is extracted and
the traffic topology relationship graph is constructed based
on the source IP address and destination IP address and
other information, thereby obtaining the adjacency matrix and
diagonal matrix of network traffic. And then, the features
are extracted using GCN for the constructed network traffic
graph structure, and the features with stronger correlation are
obtained by giving large weight to the important traffic features
and ignoring the features that contribute less to the node
correlation information through self-attention mechanism. In
addition, the ReLU activation function in the GCN model is
replaced by the LeakyReLU, thus improving the expressiveness of the model as well as making the model to have better
properties when handling negative anomalies and preserving
negative gradients. Next, the filtered correlated features are
classified in combination with the decision tree, thus detecting
malicious traffic more accurately. Finally, the test set is input
to the GSA-DT model to verify its detection effect.
IV. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
We compare GSA-DT model with seven malicious traffic
detection models on four network traffic datasets to test its
efficiency. Experiments are conducted on a Linux 64-bit OS

2066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

with Intel Xeon Gold 5218R CPU and NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3090 GPU, using Python (Python version 3.8) as the AI library.
A. Description of Network Traffic Datasets
To verify the detection efficiency of GSA-DT model, we
use four network traffic datasets (USTC-TC2016, Stratosphere,
CTU and UJS-IDS2024) in the experiments, the distribution
of these network traffic datasets is shown in Table III, where
all normal network traffic are classified into “Normal”.
(1) USTC-TFC2016 [31] contains ten types of malicious
traffic and one normal traffic (composed of ten categories of
normal traffic) collected by the simulated devices from 2011
to 2015, the format is pcap file and the labels of traffic types
are provided.
(2) Stratosphere [32] is a network traffic dataset with a
mixture of encrypted and non-encrypted traffic, it includes a
series of network IPS/IDS traffic, such as Zeus and botnets.
Because the scale of malicious traffic is large than normal
traffic in this dataset, we integrated some normal traffic in
CTU-13 dataset into this dataset to balance the scale of
network traffic.
(3) CTU [33] is a network traffic dataset collected by the
devices from 2016 to 2019, it contains ten types of malicious
network traffic and one type of normal network traffic.
(4) UJS-IDS2024 is a network traffic dataset collected by
multiple normal software and malware in the real environment
by the Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security
Technology of Jiangsu University from March 5, 2024 to April
18, 2024.
In the experiments, we follow the 90%/10% ratio to divide
each network traffic dataset into a training set and a testing
set, where 90% of the data is used to train the model and
the remaining 10% is used to evaluate the performance of
the model. This segmentation method ensures that the model
can be trained on sufficient data, while also evaluates its
generalization ability through unseen data.
B. Evaluation Metrics
In order to evaluate the efficiency of GSA-DT model, we
use four widely used evaluation metrics including TPR, FPR,
F1_measure and Accuracy in the experiments [17], [19], [34],
[35], they are calculated as shown in Equations 12 to 15. These
four metrics can well evaluate GSA-DT model from different
perspectives. Among these equations, TP (True Positive) is the
number of malicious traffic correctly identified by GSA-DT,
FP (False Positive) is the number of normal traffic incorrectly
identified as malicious by GSA-DT, FN (False Negative) is
the number of malicious traffic not correctly identified by
GSA-DT, TN (True Negative) is the number of normal traffic
correctly identified by GSA-DT.
(1) TPR (Ture Positive Rate): It indicates the number of
correctly-detected malicious network traffic to the total number
of malicious network traffic samples, which is calculated by
Equation (12).
TPR =

TP
(TP + FN )

(12)

(2) FPR (False Positive Rate): It indicates the number of
mis-detected malicious network traffic to the total number
of normal network traffic samples, which is calculated by
Equation (13).
FPR =

FP
(TN + FP )

(13)

(3) F1_measure: It is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall with a maximum of 1 and a minimum of 0, which is
calculated by Equation (14).
F 1_measure =

TP
TP
2 × TP+FP
× (TP+TN)
TP
TP
TP+FP + (TP+TN)

(14)

(4) Accuracy: It indicates the ratio of the number of accurately detected network traffic samples to the total number of
network traffic samples, which is calculated by Equation (15).
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN

(15)

C. Baselines
To evaluate the efficiency of GSA-DT model, seven baselines are used in the experiments.
(1) E-minBatch GraphSAG [20]: It is a graph neural
network for malicious traffic detection, it represents the association relationships between the features of network traffic by
constructing a graph structure and performs malicious traffic
detection by aggregating the information of neighboring nodes.
(2) GATrust [21]: It is a graph neural network model based
on graph attention mechanism, it integrates multiple attributes
(including user context-specific information, network topology
information and locally generated social trust relationships)
of users, and assigns different attention coefficients to the
attributes of users in online social networks, thereby improving
the prediction accuracy.
(3) GCN-ETA [22]: It is an encrypted malicious traffic
detection model based on GCN, it improves the traditional
GCN by considering the statistical features of network flows
(internal information) and the structural information between
network flows (external connections), thereby effectively
improving the detection efficiency.
(4) TCN [36]: It is a malicious traffic detection model based
on temporal convolutional network, it extracts the key features
using the features of byte sequences in network traffic packets
as well as avoids neurons “death” by changing the ReLU to
ELU, thereby obtaining high detection performance.
(5) XGBoost [37]: It is an ensemble malicious traffic
detection model based on gradient boosting decision tree, it
also uses WOA (Whale Optimization Algorithm) to seek for
the best parameters.
(6) BiTCN [17]: It is a malicious traffic detection model
based on bidirectional temporal convolution network (BiTCN),
it uses TCN model to better grasp the sequence characteristics
of network traffic as well as improves the original one-way
model to a two-way model to capture more characteristics of
network traffic.
(7) PENA [19]: It is a packet-level end-to-end attentive
network, it treats original byte and length sequences as inputs

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

2067

TABLE III
T HE I NTRODUCTION OF O RIGINAL N ETWORK T RAFFIC

and uses the self-attention mechanism to learn the deep
relationships between network packets.
D. The Selection of Parameters
For the proposed GSA-DT model, the parameters including
the number of hidden units, dropout and epoch number will
affect its detection efficiency. To obtain better detection accuracy, we test the efficiency of GSA-DT under these parameters
on three widely used public network traffic datasets, where the
used loss function is LeakyReLU. The experimental results
are shown in Fig. 5-Fig. 7.
As can be seen from Fig. 5 that GSA-DT has best
performance and smoother fluctuations when the number is
selected as 16 on three datasets. When the number is select
less than 16, the performance is worse; With the increase
number of hidden units, the performance of GSA-DT shows
a decrease trend, which is caused by the overfitting. After
a comprehensive comparison, the number of hidden units is
chosen to be 16. As is shown in Fig. 6 that on USTC-TC2016
and Stratosphere datasets, the performance of GSA-DT is
low when the dropout is chosen as less than 0.05, it is
owing to that the lower dropout causes the model to be
overly dependent on specific neurons, making the network
less expressive and prone to overfitting. In contrast, when the
dropout is chosen as 0.06 and 0.07, the performance is lower
than that when it is chosen as 0.05, the reason is that large
dropout causes many neurons to be randomly discarded, thus
losing a large amount of information. On the CTU dataset, the
performance of GSA-DT model is higher when the dropout
is chosen as 0.05. After a comprehensive comparison, the
dropout is chosen as 0.05. As is shown in Fig. 7 that compared
with seven detection models, GSA-DT has the best detection
accuracy at different epochs, this is because it considers the
correlation between traffic features and combines self-attention
mechanism to better capture the features. It can be seen from
Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b) that when the epoch number is less than
5, GSA-DT shows a growth trend as epoch number increases,
but there is a significant decline with the further increase of
epoch number. When the epoch number is larger than 8, GSADT has stable trend, and it has better performance when the
epoch number is set to 10. Therefore, the epoch number is
chosen as 10.
E. Detection Results of GSA-DT Model
To validate the performance of GSA-DT model, we conducted a large number of experiments on four network traffic

datasets and compared the results with seven state-of-the-art
models. The average experimental result is shown in Table IV.
The experimental results in Table IV show that on the
USTC-TFC2016 dataset, GSA-DT has better performance than
seven compared models, and its average detection accuracy
can reach to 99.96%, while the GCN-ETA model has the worst
performance of 97.50%. In contrast, the TCN and XGBoost
only consider the attribute statistical features of network traffic
without considering the relationship between network traffic,
thus, their detection accuracy is slightly lower than that of
GSA-DT model. Compared with GATrust, a graph-based malicious traffic detection model with better detection results, the
GSA-DT model has improved the detection accuracy by about
1.54%, TPR by about 1.89%, and F1-measure by about 1.92%,
and decreased the FPR by about 0.36%. In addition, the GSADT model has the least fluctuation in detection efficiency.
For the Stratosphere dataset that contains encrypted network
traffic, the detection effectiveness of all eight models shows
a decrease trend, but GSA-DT still performs best among all
models, which can reach to about 98.49%, while the accuracy
of other detection models is 96.5% on average. Because
the encrypted traffic hides the attack information through
encryption protocols, it is difficult to extract the statistical
features of network traffic, which leads to the poor detection
performance of TCN and XGBoost models because they do
not use relevant features. Compared with them, three graphbased detection models (including GCN-ETA, E-minBatch
GraphSAGE and GATrust) improve the detection efficiency
in some metrics, but they have lower TPR due to the fact
that not use a self-attention mechanism to assign larger weight
to important features. Compared with GCN-ETA, E-minBatch
GraphSAGE and GATrust, GSA-DT has improved accuracy by
about 0.98%, 2.18% and 2.15%, TPR by about 2.67%, 1.41%
and 0.96%, F1-measure by about 1.35%, 1.58% and 1.38%.
The experimental results show that GSA-DT performs well
on the encrypted network traffic via learning the correlation
relationships and assigning differential weights to features.
The experimental results on CTU dataset show that GSADT has better performance than the compared models. In the
metrics of accuracy, TPR and F1-measure, GSA-DT improves
about 3.03%, 3.92% and 3.4% over E-minBatch GraphSAGE
model, about 1.69%, 2% and 2.02% over GATrust model,
about 3.84%, 2.92% and 2.46% over GCN-ETA model, about
0.92%, 1.29% and 1.09% over TCN model, about 1.5%, 2.83%
and 2.41% over XGBoost model. Compared with BiTCN and
PENA, GSA-DT has improved accuracy by about 0.76% and
0.35%, TPR by about 0.73% and 0.51%, F1-measure by about

2068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 5.

The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different number of hidden units.

Fig. 6.

The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different dropout.

Fig. 7.

The detection accuracy of GSA-DT under different epoch number.
TABLE IV
AVERAGE D ETECTION E FFICIENCY OF E IGHT M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC D ETECTION M ODELS (%)

0.84% and 0.52% respectively, and decreased the FPR by
about 0.74% and 0.2%. On the UJS-IDS2024 dataset, the
GSA-DT model improved about 5.04%, 4.07% and 4.66%
over EminBatch GraphSAGE, about 0.4%, 0.32% and 0.22%
over GATrust in terms of accuracy, TPR and F1-measure.
In summary, the traditional deep learning-based detection
models have relative low performance for not considering

the correlation between features, and the traditional graphbased detection models improve the detection accuracy due to
they learn more features through the additional consideration
of correlation between traffic features. However, graph-based
models do not perform well in detecting small classes of
malicious traffic. Compared with seven baselines, the proposed
GSA-DT model exhibits excellent performance and achieves

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

TABLE V
T IME C OST OF GSA-DT M ODEL U NDER D IFFERENT S IZES OF
UJS-IDS2024 DATASET ( SEC .)

significant improvements in all evaluation metrics, which can
be attributed to the following factors: (1) The introduction of
self-attention mechanism makes it assigning large weights to
the important features, which leads it to reduce the impact
of redundant features on malicious traffic detection; (2) The
use of decision tree makes GSA-DT having the advantages
of good multi-classification capability, robustness to missing
data and outliers, and efficient feature selection and training;
(3) The use of LeakyReLU solves the neuron “death” problem
and gradient disappearance problem of ReLU.
F. Stability Analysis of GSA-DT Model
In addition to the detection efficiency, the stability of
detection model is another important index. In this subsection,
we compare the stability of GSA-DT with seven detection
models on four network traffic datasets, and the experimental
result is shown in Fig. 8.
As is shown in Fig. 8 that on these datasets, GSA-DT model
has highest detection accuracy, TPR and F1-measure as well as
lowest FPR compared with seven detection models, and it also
has no outlier in detection results as well as has minimal gap
between the upper and lower quartiles. In contrast, the machine
learning-based XGBoost model has many outliers due to it
tends to overfit the real data as well as ignores the correlation
between the contexts of network traffic. Because TCN model
considers the temporal characteristics of network traffic during
the training process, it shows higher performance in terms
of accuracy, but it ignores the correlation between features
during the training process, resulting in a large gap between
the upper and lower quartiles. Compared with XGBoost and
TCN models, the graph-based detection models GCN-ETA, EminBatch GraphSAGE, and GATrust have larger differences
between the upper and lower quartiles but with few outliers,
which is largely due to the fact that these graph-based models
consider the correlation of features. However, compared with
GSA-DT model, these three graph-based detection models do
not assign different weights to the features, which leads them
facing feature redundancy problem and thus having relatively
low detection efficiency. For the PEAN method, it has the
higher accuracy, TPR and F1-measure than other six methods
except for GSA-DT method.
Overall, the proposed GSA-DT model has the highest detection performance, and its detection results are concentrated in
smaller boxes as well as has no outlier, which indicates that
GSA-DT model has good detection stability.
G. Scalability of GSA-DT Model
To test the scalability of GSA-DT model, we use the
UJS-IDS2024 dataset in the experiments, where different

2069

sizes of network traffic are selected in the experiments. Each experiment is conducted for 30 times, and
the average time cost is calculated and shown in
Table V.
It can be seen from Table V that the time cost of our
proposed GSA-DT model is slightly longer than that of the
TCN, XGBoost and BiTCN models when processing different
sizes of network traffic, which is less than three graph-based
detection models of E-minBtach GraphSAGE, GATrust and
GCN-ETA. For the proposed GSA-DT model, its time cost
is mainly concentrated in the model training phase, which
is mainly due to the fact that the training process of the
model needs to transform the original network traffic into
a suitable traffic topology graph to capture more correlation
information, and this complex process will consume more
time than traditional deep learning models (e.g., TCN). Once
the GSA-DT model is trained, utilizing it to detect malicious
traffic will consume much less time. Therefore, the proposed
GSA-DT model has the strong scalability than other graphbased malicious traffic detection models.
H. Ablation Experiments
To verify the role of each module in the GSA-DT model,
we conducted a series of ablation experiments and the experimental results are shown in Table VI. GCN indicates the
original GCN model; GCN-SA indicates that self-attention
mechanism is added to the original GCN model; GCN-SALR indicates that LeakyReLU is used in the GCN-SA model;
GCN-DT indicates that decision tree is used in the GCN
model; GCN-DT-LR indicates that LeakyReLU is used in
the GCN-DT model; GCN-SA-DT indicates that self-attention
mechanism and decision tree are added to the original GCN
model.
It can be seen from the results that removing or replacing any
module including LeakyReLU, decision Tree or self-attention
mechanism will lead to a decrease performance. Among these
modules, self-attention mechanism plays the most critical
role. As can be seen from Table VI that the introduction of
self-attention mechanism significantly improves the detection
accuracy, which is due to that it has the ability to adaptively learn
the correlation and importance between network traffic features,
as well as enable the model to flexibly select features by learning
the weights between different features, thereby providing the
model a good generalization ability and reducing the redundancy
of features. In addition, the change of activation function from
the original ReLU to LeakyReLU can solve the neuron “death”
problem as well as reduce the risk of gradient disappearance.
Especially on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset that contains many
attack types with detailed attack labels, the optimization of
activation function can achieve good result. Moreover, the use
of decision tree makes GSA-DT having the advantages of easy
interpretation, good multi-classification capability, robustness
to missing data and outliers, and efficient feature selection and
training, which can improve the detection performance of GSADT model. The experimental results in Table VI show that the
proposed GSA-DT model achieves the best detection results
with better generalization ability on all four network traffic

2070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

Fig. 8.

The stability of eight malicious detection models.

TABLE VI
AVERAGE D ETECTION ACCURACY OF D IFFERENT M ODULES ON
M ALICIOUS D ETECTION M ODELS (%)

TABLE VII
T IME C OST OF GSA-DT W ITH G INI C OEFFICIENT AND E NTROPY ( SEC .)

datasets, which indicates that these improvements in GSADT are very effective in improving the detection of malicious
traffic.
In addition, we also add the experiments to verify that the
use of Gini coefficient consumes less time than entropy, and
the experimental results are show in Table VII. GSA-DT-Gini
means the GSA-DT model with Gini coefficient and GSA-DTentropy means the GSA-DT model with entropy.
It can be seen from Table VII that the time cost of GSADT model with the use of Gini coefficient is shorter than that
with the use of entropy, which is due to the fact that the
computing of Gini coefficient only involves the Gini impurity
of each feature, whereas the computing of entropy needs to
consider the information of each feature. Experimental results
demonstrate the use of Gini coefficient reducing the time cost
in large-scale and complex network traffic.

I. Discussion
Extensive experimental results show that the proposed GSADT model can effectively solve the problems of existing
malicious traffic models. For the GSA-DT model, it first
performs pre-processing operations on original network traffic
to obtain better network traffic and their labels, and then uses
GCN to extract the topological structure of network traffic
as well as capture the correlation relationships among traffic
features. In the GSA-DT model, the commonly used ReLU
activation function is replaced with LeakyReLU to overcome
the problems of neuron “death” and gradient disappearance.
In addition, GSA-DT model also introduces the self-attention
mechanism in the GCN model to assign larger weights to the
key features, thereby reducing the interference of redundant
features. Finally, GSA-DT uses decision tree to perform
the detection of malicious traffic. These improvements make

GSA-DT method show improvements in terms of accuracy,
F1-measure, FPR, TPR and stability.
For the proposed GSA-DT method, it can achieve better
detection accuracy due to it constructs a graph representation
to capture richer interdependencies among the features of
network traffic, but this process consumes much time. That
is, GSA-DT method improves the detection accuracy by consuming more time, which is similar with deep learning-based
malicious traffic detection methods. We can improve the time
efficiency of GSA-DT using the following potential strategies:
(1) Optimize the GCN using pruning and quantization techniques to remove the neurons and connections that contribute
less to the detection results, thus reducing the computational
cost. (2) Incorporate the operation of sparsifying the adjacency
matrix before using normalization method, thus effectively
reducing the memory usage and computational complexity.
(3) Use the parallel computing and distributed processing to
accelerate the model’s inference speed, thereby achieving the
real-time processing.
There are several practical considerations that need to
be considered when deploying GSA-DT model in realworld network environments: (1) Integration with existing
network infrastructure: GSA-DT model utilizes GCN and
self-attention mechanism to improve the detection accuracy,
it has a relatively high demand on computational resources,
thus, it is necessary to evaluate the availability of sufficient
computational power in the existing network infrastructure
to support real-time operation. (2) Handling live traffic:
GSA-DT model performs malicious traffic detection through
graph structure construction and feature extraction, which may
lead to processing delays, therefore, the inference speed of
the model needs to be optimized when deploying GSA-DT
model in high-traffic environments, e.g., reducing the depth of
network layers or parallelizing the processing to reduce the
computational latency. (3) Maintaining system performance
under varying conditions: The performance of GSA-DT
model may vary under different network conditions, especially
encountering novel cyber-attack patterns, thus, it is necessary
to retrain and update periodically to make it adapt to new
network environment.
V. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In Section VI, extensive experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of GSA-DT model. However, our findings
still present two major threats in the following areas.
Internal validity: We consider many parameters (including
epoch number, dropout, number of hidden units, etc.) under

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

different situations, but not consider the parameters such
as the number of network layers and filter settings, the
changes of these different parameter combinations leave many
possibilities. In this paper, we verify the effectiveness of
GSA-DT by changing several parameters and finally select
the parameter with better experimental results as the final
parameter, although this manner leads to better experimental
results, but it does not guarantee that the selected parameters
are optimal. In addition, the used preprocessing methods
include traffic analysis, traffic cleaning, information extraction
and traffic labeling, but different preprocessing can lead to
differences and eventually lead to changes in the experimental
results, therefore, whether there is a better preprocessing
method remains to be investigated. Moreover, we compare
the models of GATrust [21], GCN-ETA [22], E-minBatch
GraphSAG [20], TCN [36], XGBoost [37], BiTCN [17] and
PEAN [19] in this paper, but we do not get the full details of
the model, therefore, the experimental results may have errors.
External validity: External validity threats are mainly
caused by the used network traffic datasets, where experiments
are conducted using four datasets that contains various malicious traffic to validate the detection efficiency of GSA-DT,
but there are more categories of malicious traffic in real life,
and the used datasets are only a small fraction of the categories
of intrusion traffic in real cyberspace, therefore, there is no
guarantee that GSA-DT model can maintain a high detection
accuracy for all malicious traffic in practical applications. In
the future, we need to conduct experiments on more datasets to
further validate the efficiency of GSA-DT model. In addition,
the current study targets unencrypted or mixed (containing
both encrypted and unencrypted traffic) malicious traffic, while
the performance of GSA-DT model on encrypted network
traffic is not yet known.
The attacker may attack model by analyzing the model’s
classification logic and generating traffic specifically designed
using adversarial sample generation, which may cause the
model to misreport normal traffic as malicious or misreport
some malicious traffic. Therefore, the robustness of model
can be improved against such adversarial attacks from the
following perspectives: (1) Enhance the model by adversarial
training and use adversarial generation network to construct
simulated adversarial traffic as well as integrate them into
training process, thereby improving the model’s capability of
detecting unknown adversarial traffic; (2) Use the idea of
model stacking to integrate multiple models, so that even one
model is successfully breached other models can still function,
thus improving robustness of the model; (3) Take necessary
measures (e.g., encryption, code obfuscation, etc.) from the
system level to prevent the model from being easily accessed,
thus making it more difficult for attackers to reverse the model;
(4) Use the online learning approach to optimize and update
the model instead of using a fixed offline training model, thus
improving the model’s adaptability to emerging attacks.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
With the popularity of Internet and the advent of digital age,
the number of network attacks are increasing, which brings

2071

great risks to individuals, organizations and society. Therefore,
it is very crucial to accurately detect malicious traffic generated
by network attacks to maintain network security. To achieve
better detection performance, this paper proposes a malicious
traffic detection model called GSA-DT. It first analyzes the
IP information between different network nodes such as user
communication and transaction. And then, it uses GCN to
capture the topology in the network traffic from the associated
features in network traffic; It also uses self-attention mechanism to assign larger weights to the key features. Finally, it
uses a decision tree to detect malicious traffic. In addition, the
ReLU is replaced by LeakyReLU to overcome neuron “death”
problem and gradient disappearance, thereby improving the
detection performance. Extensive experimental results on four
network traffic datasets show that GSA-DT has better TPR,
FPR, F1-measure and accuracy on most types of malicious
traffic compared with seven state-of-the-arts, and it also has
better stability.
The proposed GSA-DT model has the following drawbacks:
(1) Its time cost in the training phase is still relatively long,
which is mainly due to that long time need to be spent in
processing the features of network traffic. (2) The use of
self-attention mechanism may focuses excessively on specific
features while neglecting others, leading to biased detection
results. (3) It is unable to handle the data imbalance problem
and this problem is indeed a highly publicized and important
challenge in malicious traffic detection.
In the future, we would like to do the following researches
to improve the detection of malicious traffic: (1) The specific
research directions: (I) Further optimize the efficiency of
GSA-DT model in handling real-time network traffic, especially in large-scale network environments; (II) Explore the
model compression techniques, feature selection optimization
and more efficient GCN models to improve the real-time detection performance; (III) Explore the cross-domain applications
of GSA-DT model in different network environments and
different types of malicious traffic detection, and study how
to maintain efficient and accurate performance in IoT device
networks, enterprise intranets and public cloud environments.
(2) The potential improvements in model architecture:
(I) Introduce a more complex attention mechanism such as
adaptive attention models to capture more complex feature
relationships; (II) Combine the GSA-DT with other detection
models (e.g., deep learning models or rule-based models) to
form a hybrid detection system; (III) Study how to efficiently
deploy the GSA-DT models on distributed network environments or edge devices. All these improvements lead GSA-DT
model achieve high detection accuracy, low-latency and highthroughput of malicious traffic detection.

R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learning for
encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102542.
[2] V. C. Cunha, A. Z. Zavala, D. Magoni, P. R. M. Inácio, and M. M. Freire,
“A complete review on the application of statistical methods for evaluating internet traffic usage,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 128433–128455,
2022.

2072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

[3] A. Blaise, M. Bouet, V. Conan, and S. Secci, “Detection of zero-day
attacks: An unsupervised port-based approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 180,
Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107391.
[4] H.-Y. Kwon, T. Kim, and M.-K. Lee, “Advanced intrusion
detection combining signature-based and behavior-based detection methods,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 6, p. 867, 2022.
[5] W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intrusion
detection method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 1634–1646, Jul.–Sep. 2022.
[6] A. I. Saleh, F. M. Talaat, and L. M. Labib, “A hybrid intrusion detection
system (HIDS) based on prioritized k-nearest neighbors and optimized
SVM classifiers,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 51, pp. 403–443, Mar. 2019.
[7] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[8] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted
traffic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 3, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134.
[9] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet:
Robust malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and
confidence mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 6871–6885, 2024.
[10] M. Chen, Z. Wei, Z. Huang, B. Ding, and Y. Li, “Simple and deep graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
pp. 1725–1735.
[11] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. M. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating botnet detection
with graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06344.
[12] L. Haghnegahdar and Y. Wang, “A whale optimization algorithm-trained
artificial neural network for smart grid cyber intrusion detection,” Neural
Comput. Appl., vol. 32, pp. 9427–9441, Jul. 2020.
[13] X. Kan et al., “A novel IoT network intrusion detection approach
based on adaptive particle swarm optimization convolutional neural
network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 568, pp. 147–162, Aug. 2021.
[14] Z. Chiba, N. Abghour, K. Moussaid, A. El Omri, and M. Rida,
“A novel architecture combined with optimal parameters for back
propagation neural networks applied to anomaly network intrusion
detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 75, pp. 36–58, Jun. 2018.
[15] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Embedding residuals in graph-based solutions:
The E-ResSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms. A case study in intrusion
detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, pp. 6025–6040, May 2024.
[16] S. Huda, S. Miah, J. Yearwood, S. Alyahya, H. Al-Dossari, and R. Doss,
“A malicious threat detection model for cloud assisted Internet of Things
(CoT) based industrial control system (ICS) networks using deep belief
network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 120, pp. 23–31, Oct. 2018.
[17] J. Chen, T. Lv, S. Cai, L. Song, and S. Yin, “A novel detection model for
abnormal network traffic based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
network,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 157, May 2023, Art. no. 107166.
[18] A. Venturi, M. Ferrari, M. Marchetti, and M. Colajanni, “ARGANIDS:
A novel network intrusion detection system based on adversarially
regularized graph autoencoder,” in Proc. 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl.
Comput., 2023, pp. 1540–1548.
[19] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[20] J. Lan et al., “E-minBatch GraphSAGE: An industrial internet attack
detection model,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, Jul. 2022,
Art. no. 5363764.
[21] N. Jiang, J. Wen, J. Li, X. Liu, and D. Jin, “GATrust: A multi-aspect
graph attention network model for trust assessment in OSNs,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5865–5878, Jun. 2023.
[22] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, and T. Feng, “GCN-ETA: High-efficiency encrypted
malicious traffic detection,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, Jan. 2022,
Art. no. 4274139.
[23] J. Xiao, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Graph isomorphism network for materials property prediction along with explainability analysis,” Comput.
Mater. Sci., vol. 233, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 112619.
[24] L. Zhao et al., “T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for
traffic prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 9,
pp. 3848–3858, Sep. 2020.
[25] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[26] T.-Y. Kim and S.-B. Cho, “Web traffic anomaly detection using C-LSTM
neural networks,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 106, pp. 66–76, Sep. 2018.

[27] Y. Qu, R. K. Baghbaderani, H. Qi, and C. Kwan, “Unsupervised
pansharpening based on self-attention mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 3192–3208, Apr. 2021.
[28] Y. Ding, M. Jia, Q. Miao, and Y. Cao, “A novel time–frequency
transformer based on self–attention mechanism and its application in
fault diagnosis of rolling bearings,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 168,
Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108616.
[29] M.-H. Guo, Z.-N. Liu, T.-J. Mu, and S.-M. Hu, “Beyond self-attention:
External attention using two linear layers for visual tasks,” 2021,
arXiv:2105.02358.
[30] V. G. Costa and C. E. Pedreira, “Recent advances in decision trees: An
updated survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 4765–4800, 2023.
[31] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2017, pp. 712–717.
[32] 2015, “Stratosphere laboratory Datasets,” Dataset, Stratosphere, Mar. 13,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasetsoverview
[33] O. Roques, S. Maffeis, and M. Cova, “Detecting malware in TLS
traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw. 30th Anniv. (LCN),
2019, pp. 1–77.
[34] K. Sood, M. R. Nosouhi, D. D. N. Nguyen, F. Jiang, M. Chowdhury, and
R. Doss, “Intrusion detection scheme with dimensionality reduction in
next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 965–979, 2023.
[35] H. Xu, S. Han, X. Li, and Z. Han, “Anomaly traffic detection based
on communication-efficient federated learning in space-air-ground integration network,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 12,
pp. 9346–9360, Dec. 2023.
[36] J. Chen, S. Yin, S. Cai, C. Zhang, Y. Yin, and L. Zhou, “An efficient
network intrusion detection model based on temporal convolutional
networks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. Softw. Qual., Rel. Security
(QRS), 2021, pp. 768–775.
[37] Y. Song, H. Li, P. Xu, and D. Liu, “A method of intrusion detection
based on WOA-XGBoost algorithm,” Discr. Dyn. Nat. Soc., vol. 2022,
no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 5245622.

Saihua Cai (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the College of Information
and Electrical Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently
an Associate Professor with the School of Computer
Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China. He has published
more than 90 papers in some famous journals
or conferences, including ACM Transactions on
Privacy and Security, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON R ELIABILITY , ASE, and ISSRE. His major
research interests include malicious traffic detection, outlier detection, and
software testing. He is a member of ACM, and a Senior Member of the
China Computer Federation.

Han Tang received the B.E. degree in software engineering from Pujiang College, Nanjing, China, in
2022. She is currently pursuing the master’s degree
in computer technology with Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. Her research interest includes
malicious traffic detection.

CAI et al.: GSA-DT: A MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION MODEL

2073

Jinfu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently a Full
Professor with the School of Computer Science and
Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. He has published more than
100 papers in some famous journals or conferences, including the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
R ELIABILITY, Information Sciences, Information
and Software Technology, and Software: Practice
and Experience. His major research interests include software testing, software
security, and trusted software. He is a member of ACM, and the China
Computer Federation.

Wenjun Zhao received the B.E. degree in software
engineering from Yancheng Teachers College in
2022. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree
in computer technology with Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. His research interests include
malicious traffic detection and data augmentation.

Tianxiang Lv received the M.D. degree in computer
science and technology from Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China, in 2023. He has published two
papers in Information and Software Technology and
QRS. His major research interest includes malicious
traffic detection.

Chunlei Huang received the B.E. degree in automation from the Nanjing Institute of Technology,
Nanjing, China, in 2012. He is currently pursuing
the master’s degree in software engineering with
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. He is currently
working with Zhenjiang Maternal and Child Health
Hospital, Zhenjiang. His research interests include
malicious traffic detection and healthcare insurance
fraud detection.