IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

3631

GT-HAD: Gated Transformer for Hyperspectral
Anomaly Detection
Jie Lian , Lizhi Wang , Member, IEEE, He Sun , and Hua Huang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) aims to
distinguish between the background and anomalies in a scene,
which has been widely adopted in various applications. Deep
neural network (DNN)-based methods have emerged as the
predominant solution, wherein the standard paradigm is to
discern the background and anomalies based on the error of
self-supervised hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction. However, current DNN-based methods cannot guarantee correspondence between the background, anomalies, and reconstruction
error, which limits the performance of HAD. In this article, we propose a novel gated transformer network for HAD
(GT-HAD). Our key observation is that the spatial–spectral similarity in HSI can effectively distinguish between the background
and anomalies, which aligns with the fundamental definition
of HAD. Consequently, we develop GT-HAD to exploit the
spatial–spectral similarity during HSI reconstruction. GT-HAD
consists of two distinct branches that model the features of the
background and anomalies, respectively, with content similarity
as constraints. Furthermore, we introduce an adaptive gating unit
to regulate the activation states of these two branches based on a
content-matching method (CMM). Extensive experimental results
demonstrate the superior performance of GT-HAD. The original code is publicly available at https://github.com/jeline0110/
GT-HAD, along with a comprehensive benchmark of state-ofthe-art HAD methods.
Index Terms— Content similarity, gating unit, hyperspectral
anomaly detection (HAD), transformer.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE hyperspectral image (HSI) captures the power distribution of a scene as 3-D data, which delineates the
spectral intensity for each wavelength at every pixel location
[1], [2], [3]. The rich spectral and spatial information in
HSI has proven beneficial for diverse scene analysis and
understanding tasks. One such task is hyperspectral anomaly
detection (HAD), which focuses on distinguishing between
the background and anomalies in a scene. Recently, HAD
has found applications in various domains, including remote
sensing, military surveillance [4], and mineral exploration [5].

T

Manuscript received 1 June 2023; revised 14 December 2023; accepted
9 January 2024. Date of publication 12 February 2024; date of current
version 6 February 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62322204, Grant 62131003, Grant
62072038, and Grant 62301534. (Corresponding author: Lizhi Wang.)
Jie Lian and Lizhi Wang are with the School of Computer Science, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: lianjie@bit.edu.cn;
wanglizhi@bit.edu.cn).
He Sun is with the Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging
Technology, Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100094, China (e-mail: sunhe@aircas.ac.cn).
Hua Huang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing 100875, China (e-mail: huahuang@bnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3355166

According to the strategies employed to distinguish between
the background and anomalies, existing HAD methods can
be categorized into three groups: 1) statistics-based methods
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17], 2) representation-based methods [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], and 3) deep
neural network (DNN)-based methods [30], [31], [32], [33],
[34], [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]. Statisticsbased methods assume that the background follows a specific
data distribution, and the pixels that do not conform to
this data distribution are regarded as anomalies. However,
the background in different scenarios may follow distinct
data distributions, and thus restricting the background to a
single data distribution would limit the generalization ability
of the model. Representation-based methods can be classified into two categories. The first category assumes that
the background can be approximately represented by several
basis signals extracted from the HSI, while anomalies cannot.
The second category utilizes matrices or tensors to represent
the background and anomaly components, which are then
solved within a mathematical optimization framework. However, representation-based methods typically introduce a large
number of parameters that require manual tweaking, subject to
individual experience, which results in uncertainty regarding
method accuracy.
Owning to the powerful capability of feature modeling,
DNN-based methods have emerged as the mainstream solutions for HAD. Unlike other methods, DNN-based methods
do not rely on prior distribution assumptions or manual
parameter tweaking. Instead, DNN-based methods employ the
self-supervised HSI reconstruction as a proxy task of HAD,
where the background can be accurately reconstructed by
the network while anomalies cannot. Thus, the reconstruction
errors, i.e., the differences between the original HSI and the
reconstructed one, are treated as indicators of the anomalies.
However, it is not always guaranteed that the correspondence between the background, anomalies, and reconstruction
error will hold in current DNN-based methods. The fundamental reason is that DNNs tend to prioritize the reconstruction
of HSI contents with simple data distributions, which results
in reconstruction difficulties of the background with complex data distribution and reconstruction over-fitting of the
anomalies with simple data distribution. Such a scenario
deviates from the basic assumption of the DNN-based methods
that anomalies should have significantly higher reconstruction
errors than the background.
To address such issues, feature constraints should be
imposed on the background and anomalies to guide the HSI
reconstruction. Specifically, the ability of DNN to reconstruct
the background can be enhanced by enhancing the background

2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Example intuitively shows the content similarity in HSI. (a) Spectral
curves of PA –Pa4 . (b) Spectral curves of PB –Pb4 . The background (PB )
exhibits high similarity with its surrounding contents (Pb1 –Pb4 ), while the
anomaly (PA ) displays different characteristics and exhibits low similarity
with the surrounding contents (Pa1 –Pa4 ).

features, while preventing DNN from over-fitting the anomalies can be achieved by weakening the anomaly features.
Recently, several DNN-based methods have been proposed
to incorporate specific constraints to guide the HSI reconstruction. The autonomous HAD network (Auto-AD) [31]
assumes that the network can reconstruct the background while
anomalies appear as reconstruction errors, and the errors are
used as adaptive weights to further suppress the anomalies
reconstruction. However, Auto-AD overlooks the fact that it
is difficult to reconstruct the background with a complex data
distribution, which results in reconstruction errors that may
mistakenly suppress the background reconstruction. The deep
low-rank (LR) prior-based method (DeepLR) [32] assumes
that the reconstructed HSI exhibits an LR characteristic, while
the anomalies deviate from this distribution and appear as
reconstruction errors. Yet the high-frequency information in
the reconstructed background would be lost when enforcing
an LR distribution, which increases false alarm rates (FARs)
in HAD. Existing constraints primarily concentrate on suppressing the anomalies reconstruction, while neglecting the
reconstruction quality of the background. This limits their
applicability in certain scenarios. Hence, further investigation
is necessary to develop more robust and accurate DNN-based
HAD methods.
Back to the basics of HAD, the anomalies are defined
as such pixels that possess different spectral characteristics
from their surrounding contents. This definition implies that
the background exhibits high similarity with its surrounding
contents, whereas anomalies exhibit low similarity, as depicted
in Fig. 1. This principle motivates us to exploit the content
similarity as the feature constraint to enhance the background
features and weaken the anomaly features, thus guiding the
reconstruction of the background and anomalies.
In this article, we propose a novel gated transformer network for HAD (GT-HAD), which leverages the exceptional
capabilities of the transformer in capturing content similarity
[43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], aligning with our motivation in exploiting content similarity in HSI reconstruction.
The proposed GT-HAD comprises two branches dedicated

to enhancing background features and weakening anomaly
features by mining the content similarity in HSI. In addition, we develop a gating unit to regulate the activation
states of each branch based on a content-matching method
(CMM). Comprehensive experiments demonstrate superior
performance compared with state-of-the-art HAD methods.
We believe our study would propel further research on
integrating transformers into HAD tasks and encourage the
exploration of additional possibilities for HAD methods.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows.
1) We introduce a new GT-HAD, which leverages content
similarity to guide the reconstruction of both background
and anomalies.
2) We develop a gating unit to regulate the activation states
of different branches in GT-HAD, based on a CMM.
3) We perform comprehensive comparative experiments
and ablation studies on six HSI datasets to demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed
GT-HAD.
The remaining sections of this article are structured as
follows. Section II provides an overview of related works on
HAD, Section III presents the details of GT-HAD, Section IV
presents the experimental results and analysis, and finally,
Section V concludes the article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we briefly review the related work of
HAD in statistics-based, representation-based, and DNN-based
methods, respectively.
A. Statistics-Based
Statistics-based methods are the earliest proposed and
widely used methods for the HAD task. The Reed–Xiaoli
(RX) algorithm [6], based on the principle of the generalized
likelihood ratio test (GLRT), is widely recognized as the
benchmark method in this field. The RX assumes that the
background follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution, and
then the anomalies are detected by estimating the Mahalanobis distance between each test pixel and the background.
Inspired by the classical RX, various improved versions are
subsequently proposed, such as the local RX (LRX) [7], the
weighted RX (WRX) [8], and the subspace RX (SRX) [9].
However, as abnormal targets often involve multiple pixels,
RX-based methods relying on test point vector calculation
may exhibit suboptimal detection performance. To address this
issue, a two-step GLRT (2S-GLRT) method [10] is proposed,
which considers the background information around each test
pixel and aggregates neighboring pixels to detect multipixel
anomalies. Besides the GLRT-based methods, many kernelbased HAD methods are proposed in the literature [11], [12],
[13], [14]. The distributed online one-class support vector
machine (doCSVM) method [13] maps the data into the kernel
space and then separates the anomalies from the background.
The kernel isolation forest detection (KIFD) method [14]
assumes that the anomalies are more easily isolated than the
background in kernel space and constructs an isolation forest
to detect isolated pixels in the image. Moreover, different
from the above methods, the recent MsRFQFT method [17]
analyzes the discriminative properties of background and
anomalies in the frequency domain.
Yet most statistics-based methods heavily rely on data
assumptions, which limit their generalization capabilities in

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

different application scenarios. Furthermore, in the presence of
complex scenes and noisy data, statistics-based methods may
fail to capture subtle features or changes, potentially resulting
in missed detection or false positives.
B. Representation-Based
In addition to statistics-based methods, representation theory has recently been applied to develop HAD algorithms.
The collaborative representation detection (CRD) algorithm
[18] is the pioneer of the representation-based methods,
which assumes that background pixels can be approximated
by a linear combination of their neighboring spatial pixels,
while abnormal pixels cannot. Following the original CRD,
a series of improved CRD-based methods have also been
proposed, e.g., the sparse CRD (SCRD) [19], the weighted
CRD (WCRD) [20], and the recursive CRD (RCRD) [21].
Unlike pixel-wise detection in CR-based methods, LR and
sparse representation (LRASR) methods [22], [23], [24], [25]
focus on exploiting the pixel correlations in HSI and become
more attractive. The LR and CRD (LRCRD) method [22]
utilizes a nuclear norm and a weighted l2-norm to regularize
the representation coefficient to combine the global structure
and local attributes of HSI. Similarly, the graph and total
variation regularized LR representation (GTVLRR) method
[25] exploits the graph Laplacian to regularize the representation coefficient to preserve the local geometrical structure and
spatial relationships in HSI. Yet most LRASR methods convert 3-D HSI into a 2-D matrix, which destroys the inherent
3-D structure property of HSI. To tackle this problem, several
tensor representation-based methods [26], [27], [28], [29]
are proposed. The prior-based tensor approximation (PTA)
method [26] uses a third-order tensor to preserve the data
structure for integrated consideration of all the dimensions.
The principal component analysis (PCA)-based tensor LRASR
(PCA-TLRSR) method [29] utilizes a 3-D tensor LR model to
separate the LR background part from HSI, then detects the
anomalies using the rest sparse tensor.
However, most representation-based methods require manual parameter tweaking, which increases the complexity of
the algorithm. In addition, the detection results are sensitive
to parameter selection and adjustment, leading to uncertainty
in the accuracy of the methods.
C. DNN-Based
Different from the preceding two kinds of HAD methods,
DNN-based methods [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36]
aim to distinguish between the background and anomalies
according to the error of the self-supervised HSI reconstruction, which is free of prior distribution assumption or
manual parameter tweaking. Auto-AD [31] leverages a fully
convolutional autoencoder to reconstruct the original HSI from
noise input, with the anomalies appearing as the reconstruction
errors. WeaklyAD [35] employs a spectral-constrained generative adversarial network (GAN) for HSI reconstruction, where
abnormal pixels demonstrate higher reconstruction errors compared with background pixels. Besides the conventional reconstruction error-based methods, some variant methods [37],
[38], [39] have been proposed. The deep support vector data
description (DSVDD) classifier transforms anomaly detection
into a classification problem, which uses the deep features
to train a compact hypersphere. At the test phase, once the
feature of a sample is outside the hypersphere, the sample is

3633

classified as an anomaly. In addition, some methods [40], [41],
[42] use the reconstruction networks as feature extractors and
then detect anomalies in the deep feature. The LR embedded
network (LREN) [42] learns spectral features through the joint
training of an auto-encoder and a Gaussian mixture model,
followed by an LR representation for generating detection
results based on the learned deep feature.
Although the methods above have achieved some positive
results, they neglect to utilize the inherent data characteristics
of HSI to distinguish between the background and anomalies, which limits their effectiveness in certain instances. In
contrast, our proposed GT-HAD focuses on exploring the
content similarity in HSI and utilizes the content similarity
to process the background and anomalies, thus increasing the
discrimination between the background and anomalies.
III. M ETHOD
Drawing inspiration from the content similarity in HSI and
the exceptional performance of the transformer in capturing
such similarity, we present a novel GT-HAD. This section
introduces the GT-HAD and illustrates the implementation
details.
A. Overall Framework
The anomaly detection process of GT-HAD is divided into
two stages, as depicted in Fig. 2. In the training stage, the
network is optimized through the mean square error (MSE)
loss function, where the HSI cubes are used as training data.
Our proposed network is highly lightweight and consists of
a newly developed gated transformer block (GTB) and two
3 × 3 convolution layers. Two feature-modeling branches
exist in the GTB, namely, the anomaly-focused branch (AFB)
and background-focused branch (BFB), which are used to
reconstruct the background and anomalies, respectively. The
activation states of AFB and BFB are regulated by a gating
unit, with the gating states determined by a CMM. In the
detection stage, the reconstruction errors of all HSI cubes are
used to generate an anomaly map as the final detection result.
The overall process is described as follows.
Given a 3-D HSI data, X ∈ R H ×W ×D , where H , W , and D
represent the height, width, and number of spectral bands of
HSI, respectively. We first apply a sliding window to partition
N
X into N overlapped HSI cubes X = {xi }i=1
, with the cube
size being H × W × D. The default values for the cube height
H and cube width W are set to 9, and the sliding stride of
the window is set to 3. Subsequently, these HSI cubes are fed
into the proposed network to be reconstructed.
First, a 3 × 3 convolution layer is applied to map HSI cube
xi into feature map f i ∈ RH×W×C , where C is the number
of channels and is set to 64 by default. Then, the feature map
f i is fed into GTB to generate an updated feature map f̂ i ∈
RH×W×C . The gating unit determines whether the AFB or
BFB processes the feature map f i . Finally, the reconstructed
HSI cube x̂ i ∈ RH×W×D can be obtained by applying another
3 × 3 convolution layer to model the updated feature map f̂ i .
To optimize the network, we use MSE as the loss function
B

L(θ) =

1 X
2
xi − xˆi 2
B i=1

(1)

where θ refers to the learnable parameters in the proposed net
and B represents the batch size per training iteration.

3634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 2. Framework of GT-HAD. The proposed network is designed based on a transformer-like architecture and trained using numerous HSI cubes. In the
detection stage, the reconstruction errors of the HSI cubes are utilized for detecting anomalies.

Once the training is completed, anomaly detection can be
performed. We first obtain the residual map m i ∈ RH×W by
measuring the difference between the HSI cube xi and its
corresponding reconstructed one xˆi . Then, all residual maps
N
M = {m i }i=1
are aggregated and folded to generate the final
anomaly map M ∈ R H ×W .
B. Gated Transformer Block
As shown in Fig. 2, GTB is composed of two components:
a gated dual-branch network (GDBN) and a feed-forward
network (FFN). GDBN comprises a single layer normalization (LN) and two distinct feature-modeling branches activated/deactivated by a gating unit. For each input feature map
f i of GDBN, we use gi to symbolize the corresponding gating
state. Specifically, if feature map f i contains anomaly features,
gi equals 0, and AFB is activated. Conversely, if feature map
f i solely comprises background features, gi equals 1, and BFB
is activated. The processing flow of GDBN is represented as

AFB(LN( f i )), if gi = 0
f̃ i =
(2)
BFB(LN( f i )), if gi = 1
where feature map f̃ i ∈ RH×W×C is the output of GDBN.
FFN comprises an LN and a multilayer perceptron (MLP),
and the skip connection is exploited for bridging the information flow between the head and the tail of FFN. MLP consists
of two linear layers with a GELU activation in between.
The first linear layer expands the channel dimension by a
factor of 2, and the second linear layer restores the channel
dimension to the original one. The computation process of
FNN is formulated as

fˆi = MLP LN f̃ i + f̃ i
(3)

where feature map fˆi ∈ RH×W×C is the final output of GTB.
Next, we introduce the details of AFB and BFB,
respectively.
1) Anomaly-Focused Branch: We denote the input feature
map of AFB as f i A ∈ RH×W×C . The chief goal of AFB is to
remove the anomaly features from the feature map f i A , thereby
suppressing the anomalies’ reconstruction.
To achieve this goal, we propose a feature redefinition
approach where we divide the feature map f i A into several
parts and redefine each part by taking a weighted sum of
its surrounding parts, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). Anomalies
typically exhibit low similarity with surrounding contents.
Consequently, when a specific part contains anomaly features,
this part cannot be accurately defined by its surrounding parts,
which results in the removal of anomaly features. To better
capture the content similarity in HSI, we perform the feature
redefinition process at the patch level instead of the pixel level,
as the patch contains both spectral and spatial information,
which ensures the integrity of the HSI content.
Specifically, we partition the feature map f i A into J A
JA
nonoverlapped feature patches P A = { pa }a=1
with a patch size
of L A × C, where L A = h A w A represents the flattened spatial
dimension of the patch. The default values for the patch height
h A and patch width w A are set to 3. Then, the similarity weight
between a feature patch pa and its adjacent feature patch p j
is calculated as

S pa , p j = pa W A , p j W A
(4)
where W A ∈ RC×(C/4) represents a learnable weight matrix
and ⟨·, ·⟩ means the dot-product. Subsequently, the similarity
weight S( pa , p j ) ∈ R1 is collected across the search region
Z and fed into a soft-max function to obtain the correlation

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 3. Methods of modeling the features of AFB and BFB, respectively.
(a) For each part in feature map f i A , generate a brand new feature for it by
taking a weighted sum of its surrounding parts. (b) For each part in feature
map f iB , generate an enhanced feature for it by aggregating its surrounding
parts.

3635

Fig. 4. Illustration of CMM procedure. During training, the activation states
of AFB and BFB are controlled by the gating unit, whose operational states
are determined by CMM.

V ∈ R JB ×L B ×C
Q = TB W B ,

K = TB W B ,

V = TB

(8)

C×(C/4)

weight as
exp S pa , p j
z∈Z exp(S( pa , pz ))


ωa j = P

(5)

where Z = {z|1 ≤ z ≤ J A and z ̸ = a} is the set of indexes of
neighboring feature patches of pa . Then, patch-wise features
are aggregated according to the correlation weights
X
pˆa =
ωa j p j
(6)
j∈Z

where pˆa ∈ R L A ×C represents the redefined feature patch.
Finally, the output of AFB is obtained as


JA
(7)
f˜i = I pˆa a=1
where I(·) represents the reshape and fold operation to combine this set of redefined feature patches into a new feature
map f˜i ∈ RH×W×C .
2) Background-Focused Branch: We denote the input feature map of BFB as f i B ∈ RH×W×C . The primary objective
of BFB is to enhance the background features in the feature
map f i B , thus strengthening the background reconstruction.
Here, we develop a feature enhancement approach to
achieve this objective. Unlike anomalies, the background
exhibits high similarity with surrounding contents. Hence,
each part of the feature map f i B is enhanced by aggregating
its surrounding parts, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). Previous
works [49], [50], [51] have shown that leveraging image
structure prior is effective for image reconstruction, and we
anticipate that it would also be advantageous for background
reconstruction. Taking this into consideration, we perform the
feature enhancement process at the patch level, as the patch
retains structural information.
The entire procedure of BFB is regarded as a patch-level
self-attention calculation process. To be specific, we first
partition the feature map f i B into J B nonoverlapped feature
JB
patches P B = { pb }b=1
with a patch size of L B × C, where the
size of L B is equal to L A and J B = J A . For the convenience
of calculation, we reshape the feature patches P B into a tensor
format TB ∈ R JB ×L B ×C . Then, the self-attention computation
is restricted to each nonoverlapped feature patch.
The feature patches tensor TB is first projected into query
Q ∈ R JB ×L B ×(C/4) , key K ∈ R JB ×L B ×(C/4) , and value

where W B ∈ R
represents a learnable weight matrix
and shares the parameters with W A . Next, for the dimension
matching requirement, Q, K , and V are, respectively, reshaped
to Q̂ ∈ R JB ×H , K̂ ∈ R JB ×H , and V̂ ∈ R JB ×H , where H =
(L B C/4). Finally, attention is calculated by the self-attention
mechanism
 
f̃ i = R Softmax Q̂ K̂ T V̂
(9)
where K̂ T represents the transpose of matrix K̂ and R(·)
represents the dimension reshape operation.
C. Content-Matching Method
In the process of training, the activation states of AFB and
BFB are regulated by the gating unit, whose control states
are determined by a CMM. This section provides a detailed
explanation of CMM.
N
To record the gating states during feature maps { f i }i=1
processing in GTB, we utilize the notation G
=
[g1 , . . . , gi , . . . , g N ]. Initially, all elements in gating states
list G are initialized to zero, which indicates that all feature
N
maps { f i }i=1
are fed into AFB at the start of the training.
When feature map f i solely comprises background features
and passes through the AFB, its primary contents can be
preserved since each feature patch in the feature map f i can
be approximately defined by its adjacent feature patches. As
a result, the corresponding reconstructed HSI cube xˆi exhibits
good reconstruction quality. Conversely, if feature map f i
contains anomaly features, such features will be removed when
the former passes through the AFB, which results in poor
reconstruction quality of the reconstructed HSI cube xˆi , due
to the loss of contents. The CMM determines the presence
of anomaly features in the feature map f i by evaluating the
content matching degree between the HSI cube xi and the
reconstructed one xˆi and then sets the gating states.
The specific CMM procedure is illustrated in Fig. 4. The
CMM searches for the most similar one to the reconstructed
N
HSI cube xˆi within the HSI cubes set {xi }i=1
. If the searched
HSI cube xv and the reconstructed one xˆi have identical
indexes, the reconstructed one xˆi is deemed to have no contents
loss and has consistent contents with the original HSI cube xi .
It implies that the feature map f i solely comprises background
features and should be fed into the BFB in the next training
iteration, with the gating state gi transitioning from 0 to 1.

3636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 1 GT-HAD

Fig. 5. Compare the residual responses before and after using RD. (a) Airport
scene. (b) Abnormal target. (c) Residual response before using RD. (d) Residual response after using RD.

Conversely, if the indexes are distinct, the reconstructed HSI
cube xˆi is deemed to have a content loss and exhibit a
low content matching degree with the original one xi . It
implies that the feature map f i contains anomaly features and
should continue to pass through the AFB in the next training
iteration, with the gating state gi remaining at 0. Notably, the
Euclidean distance is used to estimate the similarities between
N
the reconstructed HSI cube xˆi and the HSI cubes {xi }i=1
, when
searching for the most similar HSI cube pair.
As the training progresses, CMM gradually updates the values of the elements in gating states list G. Then, an increasing
number of feature maps solely comprising background features
are directed to BFB and separated from AFB to focus on the
background reconstruction.
D. Anomaly Detection
After completing the training, the reconstruction errors of
all image pixels are used to generate the anomaly map. The
residual cube is denoted as ri = (xi − xˆi )2 ∈ RH×W×D , and
then we sum the residual cube ri along the band dimension
to obtain the residual map m i ∈ RH×W . Finally, the anomaly
map is generated as

N
M = F {m i }i=1
(10)
where F(·) represents the fold operation to combine all the
residual maps into the anomaly map M ∈ R H ×W . Since
overlaps exist between the residual maps, we use the average
operation to deal with the overlapped areas. This strategy
can suppress the blocking effect [52] in the final output and
establish the information interaction between residual maps.
However, the pixel mixing phenomenon is obvious at the
boundaries between the background and anomalies, which
decreases the spectral differences between the background and
anomalies. Therefore, it is challenging to detect the anomalies
near the boundaries, which results in low residual responses,
as shown in Fig. 5(c). We use a residual postprocessing method
called residual diffusion (RD) to address this issue.
For a voxel in the residual cube ri , we recalculate its
value, i.e., averaging the residuals within the 3-D space
centered around this voxel. In this way, within the region of
abnormal targets, high residuals diffuse toward the areas with
low residuals, which increases the residual response in those
areas, as shown in Fig. 5(d). To implement the RD, a 3-D
average pooling filter with a kernel size of 3 × 3 × 5 is
utilized
ei = AvgPool3d(ri )

(11)

where AvgPool3d represents the 3-D average pooling. Then,
we sum the recalculated residual cube ei ∈ RH×W×D along
the band dimension to obtain the residual map m i .
The proposed GT-HAD method is described in detail in
Algorithm 1.

N
Input: HSI cubes X = {xi }i=1
Initialize: gating states list G = [g1 , . . . , gi , . . . , g N ] =
[0, . . . , 0, . . . , 0]
Training of the network:
while training process do
1: net forward using (2) - (9);
2: update G;
3: calculate the loss function using (1);
4: net backward;
end while
Output: obtain the anomaly map using (10) - (11);

IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we compare the performance of GT-HAD
with ten existing HAD methods on six real HSI datasets.
The results indicate that GT-HAD outperforms the existing
methods significantly.
A. Datasets Description
Here we introduce the six HSI datasets and these datasets
are gathered and available in our project.1
1) Los Angeles-1 Dataset: This dataset is acquired using
the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
sensor over the region of Los Angeles. It comprises an image
of dimensions 100 × 100 pixels, with a spatial resolution
of 7.1 m/pixel and 205 spectral bands. The dataset exhibits
144 abnormal pixels originating from several airplanes, which
account for 1.44% of the total number of pixels.
2) Los Angeles-2 Dataset: The second dataset is also captured by the AVIRIS sensor from Los Angeles. There exist
two airplanes with 87 abnormal pixels to be detected in this
image, constituting 0.87% of the total number of pixels. It
consists of 205 spectral bands, with a spatial size of 100 ×
100 and a spatial resolution of 7.1 m/pixel.
3) Gulfport Dataset: The third dataset is acquired utilizing
the AVIRIS sensor from Gulfport, which features a spatial
resolution of 3.4 m/pixel. The image has a spatial extent
of 100 × 100 and encompasses 191 spectral bands, after
excluding unsuitable bands. The anomalies come from three
airplanes in various scales with 60 abnormal pixels, which
occupy 0.60% of the total number of pixels.
4) Texas Coast Dataset: The fourth dataset is captured by
the AVIRIS sensor over the Texas Coast region. It comprises
100 × 100 pixels with a spatial resolution of 17.2 m/pixel
and contains 204 spectral bands. The dataset contains several
houses exhibiting abnormal characteristics, with 67 abnormal
pixels accounting for 0.67% of the total number of pixels.
5) Cat Island Dataset: The fifth dataset pertains to the
Cat Island vicinity, which exhibits a spatial resolution of
17.2 m/pixel and a spatial resolution of 150 × 150. Following
the exclusion of the noisy bands, 188 spectral bands are
retained for analysis. Anomalies consist of a single airplane
with 19 abnormal pixels, which account for 0.08% of the total
number of pixels. Similar to the previous datasets, the AVIRIS
sensor is employed for data acquisition.
6) Pavia Dataset: The final dataset, Pavia, is acquired using
the reflective optics system imaging spectrometer (ROSIS)
sensor. The image has a spatial extent of 150 × 150 and
1 https://github.com/jeline0110/GT-HAD

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

3637

TABLE I
O PTIMAL PARAMETERS OF T EN HAD M ETHODS ON S IX DATASETS

exhibits a spatial resolution of 1.3 m/pixel, along with
102 spectral bands, following the exclusion of unsuitable
bands. The primary anomalies are several vehicles on the
bridge, encompassing 68 abnormal pixels, which correspond
to 0.30% of the total number of pixels.
B. Experiment Setup
1) Comparison Methods: We compare GT-HAD with
ten existing HAD methods, including RX [6], KIFD [14],
2S-GLRT [10], MsRFQFT [17], CRD [18], GTVLRR [25],
PTA [26], PCA-TLRSR [29], LREN [42], and Auto-AD
[31]. RX, KIFD, 2S-GLRT, and MsRFQFT are statisticsbased methods, CRD, GTVLRR, PTA, and PCA-TLRSR are
representation-based methods, while LREN and Auto-AD are
DNN-based methods. Among these methods, RX and CRD
are regarded as the most classical methods for the HAD task,
while the other methods have also gained widespread attention
in recent literature and have shown competitive performance.
We empirically tune the parameters of all compared methods
and select the optimal parameters for comparative experiments.
Specifically, in RX, no parameters that need to be tuned. In
KIFD, the first ζ principal components of HSI are used as
input, and we vary its value from 50 to 300 to determine the
optimal detection performance. For 2S-GLRT, we investigate
the detection performance under various outer window sizes
wout ranging from 5 to 25 and inner window sizes win ranging
from 3 to 15, then the best detection performance under
specific window sizes (wout , win ) is collected. In MsRFQFT,
the selected band number Nd is fixed at 3, and the tuning
range of parameter σ is set to 0.2–10 with the step of 0.2.
We tune the parameters (Nd , σ ) for each dataset individually to achieve the best performance. Similar to 2S-GLRT,
for CRD, we first fix λ at 10−6 , then vary wout and win
from 5 to 25 and from 3 to 15, respectively. Finally, the optimal
detection performance is achieved using specific window sizes
(wout , win ). In GTVLRR, the dictionary is constructed with
a category set of 6, and the largest 20 elements in each
category are selected as the atoms of the dictionary. Then,
the parameters (λ , β, γ ) are tuned based on the suggestions
in the original article [25]. For PTA, parameters α, τ , and β
are set to 1, and parameter µ and truncated LR r are set in
the range {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 10, 102 , 103 , 104 } and
range 0–40, respectively. The optimum detection performance
is determined by employing a specific parameter set (µ, r ).
In PCA-TLRSR, the first d principal components of HSI are
used as input, and d is varied from 1 to 20. Meanwhile,
parameters λ and λ ′ are selected from the set {0.001, 0.005,
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}. Finally, the best detection

performance is determined based on a specific parameter list
(d, λ , λ ′ ). In Auto-AD, the training process stops when the
average variation of the loss falls below a certain threshold σ ,
which is varied from 1.0 × 10−5 to 1.5 × 10−5 to achieve the
optimal detection performance. In LREN, the coefficient λ in
the optimization problem requires tuning. The optimal values
of λ are obtained for different datasets by varying its value
from 10−6 to 1. Table I summarizes the optimal parameters of
ten HAD methods on six datasets.
For the training of GT-HAD, we apply the adaptive moment
estimation (ADAM) to optimize the model. The training
process consists of 150 epochs, with a batch size of 64 and
a learning rate of 0.001. Besides, all DNN-based methods, including GT-HAD, are implemented on an NVIDIA
3090 GPU. In terms of deep learning framework, GT-HAD
and Auto-AD use Pytorch 1.7.0, while LREN utilizes Tensorflow 1.14.0. On the other hand, all non-DNN methods are
implemented using MATLAB 2020a on a computer with an
Intel i7-10700 CPU and 16 GB of RAM.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We utilize qualitative and quantitative evaluation metrics to evaluate the detection performance
of the compared HAD methods. The qualitative evaluation
metrics include color anomaly map, box-whisker plot [53],
2-D and 3-D receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves
[54], and the quantitative evaluation metric uses the area under
the 2-D ROC curve (AUC). The color anomaly map provides
insight into the detection performance of the methods on
both background suppression and anomaly response, while
the box-whisker plot assesses the separability between the
background and anomalies. In addition, 2-D and 3-D ROC
curves illustrate the relationship between the probability of
detection (PD) and FAR at different thresholds (τ ). PD denotes
the number of correctly detected abnormal pixels among all
the abnormal pixels, while FAR is the number of pixels that are
marked as abnormal targets among all the background pixels.
A 2-D ROC curve that approaches the upper-left corner of
the axis indicates a better detection performance and a larger
AUC. The ideal AUC is 1, signifying that all abnormal targets
are detected with no false alarms.
C. Comparison Results
In this section, we provide a unified analysis of the detection
performance of 11 methods on six datasets.
The color anomaly maps of different methods on each
dataset are presented in Fig. 6. We can see that GT-HAD
achieves a balance between background suppression and
anomaly response on the Los Angeles-1, Los Angeles-2,
Gulfport, and Pavia datasets. Taking Los Angeles-1 as an

3638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 6. Color anomaly maps of different HAD methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island.
(f) Pavia.

Fig. 7. Box-whisker plots of different methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia.

example, while KIFD, GTVLRR, and PCA-TLRSR can highlight the anomalies to some extent, they generate a high
number of false alarms in the background region. On the other
hand, although RX, 2S-GLRT, CRD, Auto-AD, and LREN
exhibit lower residual responses in the background region,
they miss most anomalies. Conversely, GT-HAD can locate all
anomalies effectively and suppress the background with high
accuracy. On the Texas Coast dataset, 2S-GLRT, CRD, AutoAD, and GT-HAD closely resemble the ground-truth map,

but the other three methods exhibit limited responses in the
abnormal region compared with GT-HAD. Of the 11 methods
evaluated across six datasets, only 2S-GLRT on the Cat Island
dataset performs similar performance to GT-HAD. These color
anomaly maps provide compelling evidence that GT-HAD
achieves effective background reconstruction while successfully suppressing the anomaly reconstruction.
Fig. 7 shows the box-whisker plots achieved by 11 methods
on six datasets. The box-whisker plots show the abnormal

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

3639

Fig. 8. Two-dimensional and 3-D ROC curves of different methods on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast.
(e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia. (a1)–(f1) Two-dimensional ROC curves. (a2)–(f2) Three-dimensional ROC curves.
TABLE II
AUC S CORES OF E LEVEN HAD M ETHODS ON S IX DATASETS

pixel distributions in red boxes and the background pixel
distributions in blue boxes, with the distance between red and
blue boxes indicating the background anomaly separability.
Especially, the height of the blue box reflects whether the
background is well suppressed. As shown In Fig. 7, we can see
that GT-HAD balances the background-anomaly separability
and background suppression degree on all six datasets. Using
Los Angeles-2 as an example, although KIFD has better
background-anomaly separability than other methods, it cannot
suppress the background nicely. On the other hand, while
2S-GLRT has better background suppression performance
than other methods, it cannot separate the background and
anomalies well. GT-HAD, by contrast, performs well on both
the background-anomaly separability and background suppression degree. In conclusion, the excellence of GT-HAD in
enhancing background reconstruction and suppressing anomalies reconstruction provides satisfactory background-anomaly
separability and background suppression degree.
The 2-D and 3-D ROC curves obtained by 11 methods on
six datasets are illustrated in Fig. 8. We can see that the

Fig. 9. Network structures of (a) base model, (b) base + AFB model,
(c) base + AFB + BFB model, and (d) base + AFB + BFB + RD model,
respectively. For simplicity, S- and D-network represent the shallow and deep
network layers of the model. G stores the gating states.

3640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF GT-HAD ON S IX DATASETS

Fig. 10. Ablation visualization results on six datasets. Row 1 represents the (a) ground-truth maps of the six datasets. Rows 2–5 represent the corresponding
anomaly maps for (b) base model, (c) base + AFB model, (d) base + AFB + BFB model, and (e) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively. The
yellow boxes visible in (b)–(e) locate the background regions that we focus on.

2-D ROC curves of GT-HAD are positioned closest to the
upper-left corner of the axis on all the datasets. For example,
on the Los Angeles-2 dataset, although 2S-GLRT exhibits
slightly higher PDs than GT-HAD when FAR values range
from 0.05 to 0.1, GT-HAD shows higher PDs in terms of
the overall curve comparison and is closer to the upper-left
corner of the axis. The AUC scores of all evaluated methods
across six datasets are presented in Table II, with the highest
AUC score highlighted in bold for each row. It can be

seen that GT-HAD outperforms all other methods on the
six datasets in AUC scores. Furthermore, by analyzing the
3-D ROC curves, we can observe that GT-HAD successfully
maintains a well-balanced relationship between the PD and
FAR at various thresholds on all six datasets. The presented
results not only confirm the robustness of GT-HAD across
various scenarios but also intuitively present the performance
of GT-HAD under different threshold settings. In a word, GTHAD excels in both 2-D and 3-D ROC analyses, consistently

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

3641

Fig. 11. Three-dimensional residual response maps on six datasets. Rows 1–4 represent the residual responses of abnormal regions of (a) base model,
(b) base + AFB model, (c) base + AFB + BFB model, and (d) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively. Rows 5–8 represent the residual responses
of background regions of (e) base model, (f) base + AFB model, (g) base + AFB + BFB model, and (h) base + AFB + BFB + RD model, respectively.

achieving superior AUC scores across all evaluated datasets.
Indeed, the integrated capabilities of enhancing background
reconstruction and suppressing anomalies reconstruction in
GT-HAD ensure the balance between PD and FAR at various
thresholds.
D. Ablation Study
This section conducts an ablation study on six datasets to
evaluate the impact of AFB, BFB, and RD. First, we establish
a base model by replacing AFB and BFB in the GT-HAD
with a feature identity-mapping operation while deactivating
RD. Then, we progressively integrate AFB, BFB, and RD
into the base model. To facilitate a clear discussion, we refer
to these models as the base model, base + AFB model,

base + AFB + BFB model, and base + AFB + BFB + RD
model. Fig. 9 illustrates the corresponding network architectures. All models initialize the same training epochs, batch
sizes, and learning rates for a fair comparison. Finally, ablation
quantitative and visualization results are reported in Table III
and Fig. 10. To better illustrate the detection results, we also
present the 3-D residual response maps in Fig. 11, where the
residual responses of background and anomalies are intentionally separated for display.
1) Effectiveness of AFB: In Fig. 10(b), the color anomaly
map generated by the base model illustrates that the conventional DNN model faces challenges in reconstructing the
background with complex data distribution (yellow boxes)
and is prone to over-fitting the anomalies with simple data

3642

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 12. Two-dimensional ROC curves (PD, τ ) of base model and base +
AFB model on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia.

distribution, which aligns with our previous analysis. We
decompose that into two subproblems, i.e., difficulty in
reconstructing the complex background and susceptibility to
over-fitting the simple anomalies. AFB is exactly designed to
address the latter subproblem.
The results in Fig. 10(c) clearly show that the base + AFB
model can effectively highlight abnormal regions and generate
higher residual responses compared with the base model.
These visual results are more intuitive in the 3-D residual
response maps presented in Fig. 11(a) and (b). It is worth
noting that the base + AFB model exhibits similar background
suppression performance to the base model, as shown in
Figs. 10(b) and (c) and 11(e) and (f). It suggests that even
though AFB is designed for extracting anomalies, it can also
effectively suppress the simple background. However, it may
not be as effective in suppressing the complex background.
Finally, the base + AFB model achieves higher PDs than the
base model at various thresholds, which leads to a significant
improvement in AUC score, as shown in Fig. 12 and the first
two rows of Table III. These experimental results sufficiently
validate the effectiveness of AFB in extracting the anomalies.
2) Effectiveness of BFB: The inability of AFB to effectively
suppress the complex background promotes the proposal of
BFB. By leveraging CMM, BFB is activated and focuses on
reconstructing the regions marked by CMM. Given that CMM
is the foundation of BFB, conducting a thorough analysis of
the marking performance of CMM is crucial. The marking
results of CMM are visually presented in Fig. 13(b), with the
red areas indicating the marked background pixels.
CMM assesses the presence of background pixels in the HSI
cube by gauging whether the HSI cube exhibits the highest
similarity to itself after reconstruction. However, in certain
smooth regions, adjacent HSI cubes exhibit an exceedingly

high degree of similarity, as observed in the grassland and
water surface regions of Fig. 13. Hence, when CMM searches
for the most similar HSI cube to the reconstructed HSI cube,
it is prone to misidentifying the neighboring cube of the
target cube as the search result. Ultimately, the pixels within
these cubes fail to be marked as background pixels. Although
not marked as background pixels, these pixels exhibit high
similarity with the surrounding content. Hence, these pixels
can be well represented by the surrounding contents, which
allows for effective reconstruction without adversely affecting
the detection results. This indicates that our method exhibits a
high level of fault tolerance. Table IV reports the quantitative
measures of pixel overlap between the marked background
pixels and the abnormal pixels. These results demonstrate that
CMM performs excellently in marking the background and can
effectively circumvent most anomalies. This characteristic is
particularly advantageous since it ensures that the constraints
imposed by AFB on anomalies remain unaltered by BFB.
Fig. 10(c) and (d) depicts the color anomaly maps of
the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model,
respectively. In addition, Fig. 11(b), (c), (f), and (g) depicts
the 3-D residual responses of anomalies and background for
the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model,
respectively. Based on these visualization results, two conclusions can be drawn. First, BFB outperforms AFB in terms
of suppressing the complex background. Second, BFB has
minimal negative effects on anomalies, which enables the
base + AFB + BFB model to highlight abnormal regions
similar to the base + AFB model effectively. The AUC scores
of the base + AFB model and base + AFB + BFB model are
reported in the second to third rows of Table III. Moreover,
Table V reports the increase rate (IR) in the running time
of the model after using CMM on each dataset. It can be
observed that the running time of the base + AFB + BFB
model increases by only 10% compared with the base + AFB
model when CMM is used, yet the AUC score improves
considerably. The comprehensive analyses provide evidence
that BFB exhibits superior performance in suppressing the
complex background and that its core module, CMM, is highly
effective in marking the background.
3) Effectiveness of RD: Figs. 10(d) and (e) and 11(c), (d),
(g), and (h) show that RD can effectively raise the residual responses of the abnormal region while leaving that
of the background region nearly unchanged. The fundamental reason is that BFB has effectively suppressed the
background region, thereby minimizing the negative impact
of the RD on the background region. The residuals flow
within the abnormal region and merge, thus increasing the
residual response contrast between the abnormal and background regions. Moreover, the RD effect brings the shape
of the anomaly response region closer to the actual shape
of the abnormal target. Fig. 14 gives the box-wisher plots of
the base + AFB + BFB and base + AFB + BFB + RD
models. We can see that the background-anomaly separability
of the base + AFB + BFB + RD model is larger than
that of the base + AFB + BFB model. It indicates that the
positive impact of RD on the residual response of the abnormal
region is much greater than its negative impact on that of the
background region. Finally, the base + AFB + BFB + RD
model obtains further improvements in AUC scores than the
base + AFB + BFB model, as reported in the third to fourth
rows of Table III. Sufficient experimental results demonstrate
the efficacy of RD in boosting the detection performance.

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

3643

Fig. 13. Background marking results of CMM on six datasets. (a) Display the false-color maps of the six datasets. (b) Display the marking results of CMM,
where the red areas indicate the marked background pixels and the white areas indicate the abnormal pixels.

TABLE IV
OVERLAP (P IXELS ) B ETWEEN THE A BNORMAL P IXELS AND THE M ARKED
BACKGROUND P IXELS ON S IX DATASETS

TABLE V
RUNNING T IME (s) OF W HETHER GT-HAD U SES CMM ON S IX DATASETS

TABLE VI
M ODEL G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE A SSESSMENT
Fig. 14. Box-wisher plots of base + AFB + BFB and base + AFB + BFB
+ RD models on six datasets. (a) Los Angeles-1. (b) Los Angeles-2. (c) Gulfport. (d) Texas Coast. (e) Cat Island. (f) Pavia.

E. Model Generalization
In this section, we conduct a cross-validation experiment
to assess the model’s generalization. The number of layer
channels in the network is determined by the input HSI data
band number. Hence, of the six HSI data, only Los Angeles-1
and Los Angeles-2 are suitable for the cross-validation experiment since these two datasets have the same band number.
The experimental results are shown in Table VI. The stability
in AUC scores across different testing datasets highlights the
generalization behavior of GT-HAD.
F. Model Complexity
In this section, we evaluate GT-HAD in terms of efficiency.
Since DNN-based and non-DNN methods are implemented

TABLE VII
M ODEL C OMPLEXITY OF T HREE DNN-BASED M ETHODS

on different hardware platforms and software, we mainly
compare GT-HAD with LREN and Auto-AD for the sake
of fairness. Table VII gives the model complexity of the
involved DNN-based methods, and the experimental data

3644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

utilizes the Los Angeles-1 dataset. Compared with LREN
and Auto-AD, GT-HAD has the fewest parameters and the
shortest running time. The running time of LREN comprises three parts, i.e., spectrum mapping, dictionary construction, and optimized-problem solving. Although LREN
has fewer floating point operations (FLOPs) than GT-HAD,
the optimized-problem solving stage of LREN significantly
increases the running time, which leads to LREN having
a longer total time than GT-HAD. In summary, GT-HAD
exhibits superior detection performance and demonstrates
lower model complexity.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose GT-HAD, a novel GT-HAD,
which utilizes content similarity to guide the HSI reconstruction. GT-HAD contains two key components, i.e., an AFB
that focuses on suppressing the anomalies reconstruction and
a BFB that focuses on strengthening the background reconstruction. In addition, a gating unit is developed to regulate
the activation states of these two branches based on a CMM.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that GT-HAD outperforms many existing HAD methods and exhibits superior
detection performance. Our study introduces a new perspective
on integrating transformers into HAD tasks, and it can serve as
a stepping stone for further research in this direction. In future
work, we would like to devise a streamlined and efficient HAD
method. As we delve into this research, the criticality lies
not only in advancing the algorithms themselves but also in
optimizing the computational efficiency of HAD to meet the
stringent requirements of real-time applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their great
efforts in reviewing this article.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Fang, P. Zhou, X. Liu, P. Ghamisi, and S. Chen, “Context enhancing
representation for semantic segmentation in remote sensing images,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Sep. 9, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3201820.
[2] N. He, L. Fang, S. Li, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Skip-connected covariance
network for remote sensing scene classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1461–1474, May 2020.
[3] R. Dian, S. Li, and L. Fang, “Learning a low tensor-train rank representation for hyperspectral image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 2672–2683, Sep. 2019.
[4] M. Shimoni, R. Haelterman, and C. Perneel, “Hypersectral imaging
for military and security applications: Combining myriad processing
and sensing techniques,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag. Replaces
Newsletter, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 101–117, Jun. 2019.
[5] S. Sudharsan, R. Hemalatha, and S. Radha, “A survey on hyperspectral
imaging for mineral exploration using machine learning algorithms,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. Netw. (WiSPNET),
Mar. 2019, pp. 206–212.
[6] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Oct. 1990.
[7] H. Kwon, “Adaptive anomaly detection using subspace separation for
hyperspectral imagery,” Opt. Eng., vol. 42, no. 11, p. 3342, Nov. 2003.
[8] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “WeightedRXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics
estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366,
Jun. 2014.
[9] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.

[10] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
Oct. 2022.
[11] Y. Gu, Y. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “A selective kernel PCA algorithm for
anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust. Speed Signal Process. Proc., vol. 2, Toulouse, France, May 2006,
pp. 725–728.
[12] V. Roth, “Kernel Fisher discriminants for outlier detection,” Neural
Comput., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 942–960, Apr. 2006.
[13] X. Miao, Y. Liu, H. Zhao, and C. Li, “Distributed online one-class
support vector machine for anomaly detection over networks,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 1475–1488, Apr. 2019.
[14] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020.
[15] Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. Wu, and T. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with Otsu-based isolation forest,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 9079–9088, 2021.
[16] C.-I. Chang, H. Cao, and M. Song, “Orthogonal subspace projection
target detector for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 4915–4932, 2021.
[17] B. Tu, X. Yang, W. He, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection using reconstruction fusion of quaternion frequency domain
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jan. 31,
2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3227167.
[18] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[19] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533,
Jun. 2015.
[20] R. Wang, H. Hu, F. He, F. Nie, S. Cai, and Z. Ming, “Self-weighted
collaborative representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Signal
Process., vol. 177, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 107718.
[21] N. Ma, Y. Peng, and S. Wang, “A fast recursive collaboration representation anomaly detector for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 588–592, Apr. 2019.
[22] H. Su, Z. Wu, A.-X. Zhu, and Q. Du, “Low rank and collaborative
representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection via robust dictionary construction,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 169,
pp. 195–211, Nov. 2020.
[23] S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Zhong, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection via locally enhanced low-rank prior,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6995–7009, Oct. 2020.
[24] Y. Xu, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Chang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
decomposition-based dictionary reconstruction and anomaly extraction
framework for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1248–1252, Jul. 2020.
[25] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized lowrank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, Jan. 2020.
[26] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
Mar. 2022.
[27] S. Sun, J. Liu, X. Chen, W. Li, and H. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with tensor average rank and piecewise smoothness constraints,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 4, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152252.
[28] S. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, and W. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection based on adaptive low-rank transformed tensor,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jan. 24, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3236641.
[29] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
[30] J. Lei, S. Fang, W. Xie, Y. Li, and C.-I. Chang, “Discriminative reconstruction for hyperspectral anomaly detection with spectral learning,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 7406–7417,
Oct. 2020.
[31] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.

LIAN et al.: GT-HAD: GATED TRANSFORMER FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

[32] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Deep low-rank prior for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5527017.
[33] X. Wang, L. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Local spatial–spectral informationintegrated semisupervised two-stream network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5535515.
[34] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, D. Quan, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, “AUD-net: A
unified deep detector for multiple hyperspectral image anomaly detection
via relation and few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., early access, Oct. 27, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3213023.
[35] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
[36] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BS3 LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218.
[37] K. Li et al., “Spectral–spatial deep support vector data description for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522316.
[38] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 72, 2022, Art. no. 5001817.
[39] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514.
[40] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising CNN regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9553–9568,
Nov. 2021.
[41] C. Zhao, C. Li, S. Feng, and W. Li, “Spectral–spatial anomaly detection via collaborative representation constraint stacked autoencoders
for hyperspectral images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19,
pp. 1–5, 2022.
[42] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank
embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 35, 2020, pp. 4139–4146.
[43] H. Du, J. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Wang, and E. Meijering, “SwinPA-net: Swin
transformer-based multiscale feature pyramid aggregation network for
medical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, Sep. 19, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3204090.
[44] Y. Wang et al., “Learning oriented object detection via naive geometric
computing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access,
Feb. 10, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3242323.
[45] H. Chen, G. Yang, and H. Zhang, “Hider: A hyperspectral image
denoising transformer with spatial–spectral constraints for hybrid noise
removal,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Oct. 19,
2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3215751.
[46] I. O. Tolstikhin et al., “MLP-Mixer: An all-MLP architecture for
vision,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2021,
pp. 24261–24272.
[47] M. Chen, H. Peng, J. Fu, and H. Ling, “AutoFormer: Searching transformers for visual recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), 2021, pp. 12270–12280.
[48] D. Lian, Z. Yu, X. Sun, and S. Gao, “AS-MLP: An axial shifted MLP
architecture for vision,” 2021, arXiv:2107.08391.
[49] T. Plötz and S. Roth, “Neural nearest neighbors networks,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2018, pp. 1087–1098.
[50] Z. Zha, X. Yuan, J. Zhou, C. Zhu, and B. Wen, “Image restoration
via simultaneous nonlocal self-similarity priors,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 29, pp. 8561–8576, 2020.
[51] C. Mou, J. Zhang, and Z. Wu, “Dynamic attentive graph learning
for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 4328–4337.

3645

[52] Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, F. Wen, and C. Zhu, “AMP-net: Denoisingbased deep unfolding for compressive image sensing,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 1487–1500, 2021.
[53] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: A
simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann. Intern. Med., vol. 110,
no. 11, pp. 916–921, 1989.
[54] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target
detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2021.

Jie Lian received the B.S. degree from the
Southwest University of Science and Technology,
Mianyang, China, in 2017, and the M.S. degree from
North China Electric Power University, Beijing,
China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing.
His research interests include hyperspectral and
medical image processing.

Lizhi Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2011 and 2016, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interests include computational photography and image
processing.
Dr. Wang received the Best Paper Runner-Up
Award of ACM MM 2022 and the Best Paper Award
of IEEE VCIP 2016.

He Sun received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
and electrical engineering from the University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow, U.K., in 2020.
He is currently an Assistant Researcher with the
Key Laboratory of Computational Optical Imaging
Technology, Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
His research interests include hyperspectral target
detection and band selection.

Hua Huang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1996 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University,
Beijing, China. His main research interests
include image and video processing, computational
photography, and computer graphics.
Dr. Huang received the Best Paper Award of ICML
2020/EURASIP2020/PRCV2019/ChinaMM2017.