16840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Guarding Graph Neural Networks for Unsupervised
Graph Anomaly Detection
Yuanchen Bei , Sheng Zhou , Jinke Shi, Yao Ma, Member, IEEE, Haishuai Wang,
and Jiajun Bu , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Unsupervised graph anomaly detection aims at
identifying rare patterns that deviate from the majority in
a graph without the aid of labels, which is important for a
variety of real-world applications. Recent advances have utilized graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn effective node
representations by aggregating information from neighborhoods.
This is motivated by the hypothesis that nodes in the graph
tend to exhibit consistent behaviors with their neighborhoods.
However, such consistency can be disrupted by graph anomalies
in multiple ways. Most existing methods directly employ GNNs to
learn representations, disregarding the negative impact of graph
anomalies on GNNs, resulting in suboptimal node representations and anomaly detection performance. While a few recent
approaches have redesigned GNNs for graph anomaly detection
under semi-supervised label guidance, how to address the adverse
effects of graph anomalies on GNNs in unsupervised scenarios
and learn effective representations for anomaly detection are still
underexplored. To bridge this gap, in this article, we propose a
simple, yet effective framework for guarding GNNs for unsupervised graph anomaly detection (G3AD). Specifically, G3AD
first introduces two auxiliary networks along with correlation
constraints to guard the GNNs against inconsistent information
encoding. Furthermore, G3AD introduces an adaptive caching
(AC) module to guard the GNNs from directly reconstructing
the observed graph data that contains anomalies. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our G3AD can outperform
20 state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic and real-world
graph anomaly datasets, with flexible generalization ability in
different GNN backbones.
Index Terms—Graph anomaly detection, graph learning, graph
neural networks (GNNs), unsupervised anomaly detection.

N OMENCLATURE
Abbreviation
G = ( A, X)
A
X

Expansion
Attributed graph with anomalies.
Graph adjacency matrix.
Node attribute matrix.

Received 25 April 2024; revised 20 February 2025; accepted 4 May 2025.
Date of publication 29 May 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62476245 and in part by Zhejiang Provincial Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant LTGG23F030005. (Corresponding
author: Sheng Zhou.)
Yuanchen Bei, Jinke Shi, and Haishuai Wang are with the College
of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China (e-mail: yuanchenbei@zju.edu.cn; shijinke@zju.edu.cn;
haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn).
Sheng Zhou and Jiajun Bu are with Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible
Perception and Intelligent Systems, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058,
China (e-mail: zhousheng zju@zju.edu.cn; bjj@zju.edu.cn).
Yao Ma is with the Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: majunyao@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3569526

V
E
Ni
n = |V|
d
k
Y
S

Set of nodes in G.
Set of edges in G.
Neighborhood set of node vi .
Number of nodes in G.
Dimension of node attributes in G.
Number of graph anomalies in G.
Anomaly label set of nodes.
Anomaly score vector indicating node
abnormalities.
I. I NTRODUCTION

RAPH anomaly detection aims to identify rare patterns
or behaviors that significantly deviate from the majority
of a graph [1], [2], [3]. It has attracted increasing attention
from both academia and industry due to its practical applications, such as network intrusion detection [1], social spammer
detection [4], and financial fraud detection [5]. The scarcity
of anomaly labels in real-world applications, coupled with the
challenge of acquiring such labels, has led to a widespread
study of unsupervised graph anomaly detection [6], [7]. Pioneer works on graph anomaly detection have separately mined
the attributed anomalies and topological anomalies by feature
engineering and graph structure encoding, respectively [8], [9].
Recent breakthroughs in graph neural networks (GNNs) have
empowered the unified modeling of attributes and topology,
leading to significant advancements in unsupervised graph
anomaly detection [10], [11], [12].
The success of representative GNNs, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), has heavily relied on aggregating information
from neighborhoods sharing similar patterns, for example,
label homophily and feature consistency [13], [14]. Although
successful, in graphs with anomalies, we argue that this foundation can be easily undermined by various graph anomalies
in multiple ways [15]. Fig. 1(b)–(d) illustrates toy examples
of the three main types of graph anomaly impacts on GNNs.
1) As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the attributed-induced anomalies where node features are corrupted, such as the
account takeover in social networks, will directly result
in aggregating incorrect information from neighborhoods.
2) As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), the topological-induced
anomalies that connect to incorrect neighborhoods,
such as the fraudsters in E-commerce systems, will
result in aggregating information from inconsistent
neighborhoods.

G

2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

16841

Fig. 2. Concept maps between the (a) existing GNN-based unsupervised graph
anomaly detection paradigm and (b) our proposed GNN-guarded unsupervised
graph anomaly detection paradigm.

Fig. 1. Toy examples of GNN message passing on clear graphs and the graphs
under three types of anomaly impacts. (a) Clean graph; (b) attribute-induced
anomaly; (c) topology-induced anomaly; and (d) mixed anomalies.

3) More seriously, as illustrated in Fig. 1(d), the mixed
anomalies that simultaneous occurrence of multiple
anomaly types is a more common situation and will have
a significantly more detrimental impact on GNNs.
Existing unsupervised graph anomaly detection methods
have primarily focused on designing effective unsupervised
anomaly scoring functions in the representation space learned
directly from GNNs while overlooking the negative impact
of anomalies on the inherent GNNs themselves [3], [16],
[17]. This is crucial for accurate anomaly detection, which
is indispensable to discriminative node representations. Under
this limitation, the representation learning ability of GNNs is
hampered from adequately capturing normal patterns in the
graph, thereby leading to suboptimal representation learning
and anomaly detection performance. Hence, it is crucial to
alleviate the negative impact of anomalies and fully release
the power of GNNs for anomaly detection.
Although important, addressing the negative impacts of
graph anomalies on GNNs in unsupervised scenarios is nontrivial. An intuitive solution might involve the development
of innovative GNNs that adapt to certain graph anomalies.
This has attracted increasing attention, and a few very recent
works have achieved tremendous success in semi-supervised
scenarios [18], [19]. However, the lack of labels in unsupervised anomaly detection poses a significant challenge in
guiding the redesign of GNNs, which is more commonly
encountered in practice. More importantly, while anomalies
do exist on the graph and exert certain effects on GNNs, they
account for only a small fraction of the total. The majority
of patterns remain normal and can be effectively captured
by GNNs. Therefore, a complete redesign or deprecation
of GNNs could risk compromising the identification of the
majority of normal patterns due to the influence of a minor
proportion of anomalies, especially in unsupervised contexts.
Therefore, how to reduce the impact of anomalies on GNNs
while enabling them to capture the majority of normal patterns
effectively and aid in unsupervised anomaly detection?
To answer the above underexplored research question, in
this article, we propose a simple, yet effective framework
for guarding graph neural networks for unsupervised graph
anomaly detection (G3AD). Instead of directly encoding the

observed graph with anomalies, G3AD first introduces two
auxiliary encoders tailored with correlation constraints to
guard the GNNs against encoding inconsistent information.
Subsequently, to optimize GNNs in an unsupervised manner
and detect multiple types of unknown anomalies, G3AD
proposes a comprehensive learning objective that includes both
local attribute/topology reconstruction and global consistency
alignment, which also serves as anomaly scoring. During
this process, to avoid directly reconstructing the observed
graph with anomalies G3AD introduces an adaptive caching
(AC) module to guard the GNNs from misleading learning objectives during model training. Fig. 2 illustrates the
comparison between the existing GNN-based unsupervised
graph anomaly detection paradigm and the one under G3AD
framework. Extensive experiments on both four synthetic and
two real-world graph anomaly datasets demonstrate that G3AD
outperforms 20 state-of-the-art unsupervised graph anomaly
detection models. Further in-depth analysis from diverse perspectives also demonstrates the strengths of G3AD. The main
contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
1) We emphasize the negative impact of unknown anomalies on GNNs, which is crucial for graph anomaly
detection under unsupervised settings while overlooked
by most existing unsupervised works.
2) We propose G3AD, a simple yet effective framework
to guard GNNs from encoding inconsistent information
and directly reconstructing the abnormal graph in unsupervised graph anomaly detection.
3) We conduct extensive experiments on 20 widely used
datasets, including both synthetic and real-world scenarios. Experimental results show that the proposed G3AD
outperforms 20 state-of-the-art baselines.
In the following sections, we will first review the previous
work related to our method in Section II. Second, we will give
some key preliminaries of our work in Section III. Then, the
detailed description of the proposed G3AD will be introduced
in Section IV. To further verify the effectiveness of G3AD,
we conduct various experiments in Section V. Finally, the
conclusion of this article is posed in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Graph Neural Networks
GNNs are a series of deep learning models specifically
designed for processing graph-structured data [20], [21]. The

16842

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

core design of GNNs is to learn node representations by aggregating and propagating information from neighborhoods to the
central nodes. This information propagation (message passing)
allows GNNs to capture complex topology dependencies and
contextual information among nodes [22], [23].
Typically, in GNNs, each node has an initial feature representation, and through multiple layers of message aggregation
and propagation operations, the node representations are gradually updated and refined [20], [21], [24]. Representatively,
graph convolution networks (GCNs) [20] adopt the graph
convolution operator and stack it into multiple layers for
neighbor message passing. Graph attention networks (GATs)
[24] further introduce the attention mechanism to consider
the different importance of neighbor nodes and dynamically
assign different weights when aggregating neighbor features.
GraphSAGE [21] extends and improves the graph convolution
to handle large-scale graph data, with the key idea of generating node representations through sampling and aggregating
neighbor nodes.
Because real-world data can be widely modeled as graphs,
GNNs have emerged as a significant branch within the field
of neural network research [23], [25]. They possess the
ability to perform learning on graph-structured data, automatically extracting features and making predictions, providing
an effective solution for tasks on graph data. Based on these
advantages, GNNs have achieved significant success in various
application domains, such as social network analysis [26],
[27], recommendation systems [28], [29], and bioinformatics
[30], [31].
B. Unsupervised Graph Anomaly Detection
Graph anomaly detection technologies have been widely
applied in real-world systems to ensure their robustness and
security, such as financial transaction networks [19], social
network applications [32], and E-commerce systems [33].
Existing graph anomaly detection methods in unsupervised
manners can be largely divided into four main categories.
1) Classical Shallow Models: SCAN [34] can be utilized
for anomaly detection based on structural similarity.
MLPAE [35] detects anomalies with nonlinear transformations.
2) Enhanced GNNs: GAAN [36] utilizes a generative
adversarial framework to train the graph encoder with
real graph and anomalous fake graph samples. ALARM
[37] proposes a multiview representation learning framework with multiple graph encoders and a well-designed
aggregator. AAGNN [11] then enhances the GNN with
an abnormality-aware aggregator.
3) Deep Graph Autoencoder Models: Dominant [38] first
introduces a deep graph autoencoder model with a
shared encoder to measure anomalies by reconstruction
error. AnomalyDAE [39] introduces asymmetrical crossmodality interactions between autoencoders. ComGA
[40] further designs a community-aware tailored graph
autoencoder to make the representation between normal
and anomalous nodes more distinguishable. Recently,
CoCo [41] enhances the graph autoencoder-based
anomaly detector with node-level context correlation
modeling.

4) Graph Contrastive Learning Methods: CoLA [42]
exploits the local information and introduces a selfsupervised graph contrastive learning method to detect
anomalies. Furthermore, ANEMONE [43] utilizes the
graph contrastive learning method at multiple scales.
SL-GAD [16] further performs anomaly detection from
both generative and multiview contrastive perspectives. Sub-CR [17] then proposes a self-supervised
method based on multiview contrastive learning with
graph diffusion and attribute reconstruction. Furthermore, ARISE [44] enhances graph contrastive learning
with substructure discovery. NLGAD [6] adopts multiscale graph contrastive learning with a hybrid normality
measurement.
However, the above GNN-based models directly apply the
message passing without anomaly guarding, neglecting the
impact of neighborhood inconsistency on GNN mechanisms,
thus the performance of GNNs is harmed and limited.
C. Neighborhood Consistency in Graphs
The nature that neighboring nodes in real-world graphs tend
to share consistent behaviors, such as labels or attributes [45],
has been the foundation of many GNNs. As introduced in
Section II-A, pioneer representative works of GNNs [20], [21],
[24] have utilized the neural message passing by aggregating information from neighbors, which is a straightforward
way of applying the feature consistency. Later works have
proved that such message passing is equivalent to classic
label propagation, where the labels are propagated along with
the connection between neighboring nodes [46]. This can be
viewed as utilizing the neighborhood consistency in labels,
which is also widely called the homophily assumption in
practice [14].
However, the homophily assumption may not always hold
in real-world graphs [47], [48], [49]. To tackle this challenge,
recent works have been made on the heterophily GNN for
representation learning under graphs with low neighborhood
consistency. Representatively, MixHop [50] mixes powers of
the adjacency matrix for graph convolution to ease the limitation. H2GCN [51] designs a model with ego and neighbor
separation, higher-order neighbors, and intermediate representations combination. LINKX [52] separately embeds the
adjacency and node features with simple MLP transformations
rather than the aggregation based on neighborhood consistency. GloGNN [53] performs aggregation from the whole set
of nodes with both low-pass and high-pass filters.
Nevertheless, in unsupervised graph anomaly detection,
these heterophily GNNs mentioned above are not directly
appropriate, due to the unknown neighborhood inconsistency
in attribute and topology under the unsupervised setting and
the overlook of the anomaly-specific design.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we present some key notations and definitions related to our target unsupervised graph anomaly
detection task. Note that we focus on node-level graph
anomaly detection in this article. For the convenience of

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

16843

Fig. 3. Overall architecture of G3AD guarding framework contains two major novel parts: 1) Guarding GNNs against encoding inconsistent information with
two auxiliary encoders with correlation constraints and 2) guarding GNNs against reconstructing abnormal graphs with adaptive information caching. Under
the two guards, we comprehensively consider both local reconstruction and global alignment to detect different types of anomalies.

readers, we list the main symbols used in this article in
Nomenclature.
Notations: Let G = (A, X) be a graph with the node set
V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } and the edge set E, where |V| = n.
A ∈ Rn×n denotes the graph adjacency matrix, for each
element Ai, j in A, Ai, j = 1 indicates that there is an edge
between node vi and node v j , and otherwise Ai, j = 0. X ∈ Rn×d
denotes the node attribute matrix, where the ith row vector
xi = X[i, :] ∈ Rd indicates the attribute vector of vi with
d-dimensional representation. Ni is the neighborhood set of
a central node vi in the graph G.
Definition 1 (Graph Neural Networks) In form, for an
L-layer GNN, the calculation process of each layer can be
expressed as the aggregation and updating operators. In the
aggregation phase, each central node aggregates the message
from its neighbor nodes
m(l+1)
= Aggregator({h(l)
i
j | j ∈ Ni })

(1)

where the function Aggregator(·) is the message aggregation
operator to aggregate information from nodes’ neighborhoods,
h(l)
j is the representation of node v j in the lth GNN layer,
and m(l+1)
is the aggregated message for node vi in the
i
(l + 1)th GNN layer. After obtaining the aggregated message,
in the updating phase, each central node adopts the aggregated
information to update and transform its own representations
(l+1)
h(l+1)
= Updater(h(l)
)
i
i , mi

(2)

where the function Updater(·) is the node representation
updating operator and hi(l+1) is the updated representation of
node vi .
Definition 2 (Graph Anomalies) Given an abnormal
attributed graph G = (A, X) containing n node instances,
and k of them are graph anomalies (k  n), whose attributes,
connections, or behaviors are different from most other normal
nodes. On a graph with anomalies, each node vi is associated
with an anomaly label yi ∈ Y, where Y denotes the anomaly

label set and each element yi ∈ {0, 1} denotes whether node vi
is an anomaly.
Definition 3 (Unsupervised Graph Anomaly Detection)
Given an abnormal graph as Definition 2, the target of
unsupervised graph anomaly detection is to learn a model
F(·) : Rn×n × Rn×d → Rn in an unsupervised manner that
outputs anomaly score vector S ∈ Rn to measure the degree
of abnormality of nodes. Specifically, the ith element si in the
score vector S indicates the abnormality of node vi , where a
larger score means a higher abnormality. Note that the anomaly
label set Y is invisible in the unsupervised setting.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the details of the guarding
GNN for unsupervised graph anomaly detection (G3AD). The
overall framework of G3AD is illustrated in Fig. 3. Generally,
G3AD follows a representative GNN-based anomaly detection
scheme where the GNNs learn the representations, and the
representations are optimized with unsupervised objectives and
measured for anomaly detection. Besides, G3AD introduces
two novel guarding strategies to the paradigm, namely guarding against encoding inconsistent information and guarding
against reconstructing abnormal graphs, so that the GNNs
can produce effective representations and boost the anomaly
detection ability. With carefully designed guarding strategies
and equipped anomaly detection tasks, G3AD can outperform
current GNN-based models. In the rest of this section, we
will introduce the details of these guarding strategies and how
G3AD serves unsupervised graph anomaly detection.
A. Guarding GNNs Against Encoding Inconsistent
Information
Motivation: As discussed in previous works, GNNs are
designed for capturing consistent information from neighborhoods [15]. However, in graphs with anomalies, the
anomaly-induced inconsistent patterns in unsupervised graph

16844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

anomaly detection have been largely overwhelmed and will
negatively disrupt the GNN performance. Therefore, G3AD
first introduces two auxiliary encoders with correlation constraints to design an encoding guarding strategy for GNNs.
Specifically, the auxiliary encoders are expected to encode
the inconsistent information from the attribute and topology
perspectives, and the GNNs are guarded against encoding
the inconsistent information under the correlation constraints
among the representations learned by the three encoders.
1) GNN Encoder: The GNN encoder is utilized for encoding the part of the information that satisfies the consistent
homophily assumption, which is shared by both attribute and
topology. To focus on the model architecture, we adopt a twolayer GAT [24] as the GNN encoder fgnn (·) for simplicity.
It is worth noting that any other GNNs can be directly applied
here. Given the input attributes xi and x j of node vi and its
neighbor v j , a GAT layer learns the input attributes with the
attention mechanism. The attention coefficient is computed as
ei, j = att(xi , x j ) = LeakyReLU(aT · [W enc xi ||W enc x j ])

(3)

where att(·) is a single-layer feedforward neural network,
0
0
parameterized by weight vector a ∈ R2d and W enc ∈ Rd ×d
0
with the transformed dimension d , || denotes the concatenate
operation. The attention coefficient αi, j is normalized as
αi, j = Softmax(ei, j ) = P

exp(ei, j )
k∈Ni exp(ei,k )

(4)

where Ni denotes the neighbor set of node vi . Then, the final
0
output feature hi ∈ Rd of node vi can be obtained as
X
hi =
αi, jW enc x j .
(5)

where fa (·) and ft (·) are two MLPs with learnable parameters
0
W a and W t , respectively, and H(a) , H(t) ∈ Rn×d are the
corresponding output matrices.
To ensure better guarding of the GNN encoder against
those inconsistent patterns, it is desired that the representations encoded from the GNN and the auxiliary encoders are
more independent of each other. Therefore, we impose the
correlation constraint on the embedding space of the encoded
representation to ensure all aspects of information H(a) , H(t) ,
and H(c) are well-disentangled encoding.
Specifically, the correlation constraint between each pair
of encoded representation aspects is designed as the absolute
correlation coefficient measurement. Minimizing the constraint
ensures the two paired vectors become more independent [55].
Take the constraint between H(a) and H(t) as an example, the
formal expression is as follows:
!
(a)
(t)
Cov(H
,
H
)
(7)
aCor(H(a) , H(t) ) = abs p
Var(H(a) ) · Var(H(t) )
where Cov(·) is the covariance between two matrices, and
Var(·) is a matrix’s own variance, and abs(·) is the absolute
value function. aCor(H(a) , H(c) ) and aCor(H(t) , H(c) ) can be
calculated in the same way. Cov(·) is insensitive to the order of
the two inputs. The overall regularization Lcc of all correlation
constraints can be presented as
Lcc = aCor(H(a) , H(c) ) + aCor(H(t) , H(c) )
+ aCor(H(a) , H(t) )

(8)

where the calculated Lcc is utilized as a correlation regularization loss during the model training stage.

j∈Ni
0

For convenience, we use H(c) ∈ Rn×d denote the output
representation of consistency encoder fgnn (·). Note that G3AD
can be generalized in different GNN backbones, and any other
graph message passing functions [21], [54] can also be adopted
here. We will discuss the generalization ability of G3AD in
Section V-D.
2) Auxiliary Encoders With Correlation Constraints: In
our G3AD, the attribute-auxiliary encoder and the topologyauxiliary encoder are further utilized for encoding the part of
information dependent on each information source (attribute
and topology) as well as the potential specific type of anomalies under the attribute/topology inconsistent situation.
Existing methods directly utilize GNNs to model the
attribute and topology simultaneously. However, in the part
where the consistency is destroyed by anomalies, message
passing in GNNs will introduce negative noise information,
even helping anomalies to camouflage when passing normal
messages to them [18]. Therefore, here we use two independent MLPs without graph message passing, rather than GNN
encoders based on neighborhood consistency, to better model
the inconsistent attribute/topology patterns and guard the GNN
encoder learning.
Specifically, the two independent MLPs fa (·) and ft (·) are
applied to encode the original attribute matrix X and the
adjacency matrix A, respectively,
H(a) = fa (X),

H(t) = ft ( A)

(6)

B. Guarding GNNs Against Reconstructing Abnormal Graph
Motivation: Graph anomalies have various types, including
attribute anomalies, topology anomalies, and mixed anomalies.
In unsupervised graph anomaly detection, we are unable to
know either anomaly labels or anomaly types. Thus, G3AD
aims to comprehensively detect different anomaly types in the
following ways.
1) Local Attribute Reconstruction: The attribute reconstruction errors distinguish sparse attribute anomalies from
the predominant normal nodes.
2) Local Topology Reconstruction: The topology reconstruction errors distinguish sparse topology anomalies
from the primary normal nodes.
3) Global Consistency Alignment: The alignment distance
between node representations simultaneously considering attribute and topology information encoded by the
GNN and the global graph consistency vector can further
be equipped for anomaly distinguishing.
Among these objectives, the graph reconstruction scheme has
been proved to be essential for both representation optimization and anomaly detection under the unsupervised setting
[38], [39], [56]. However, reconstruction targets are needed
to make GNN-encoded consistent representations to fit the
observed graph data with anomalies. The unknown anomalies
in the abnormal graph may provide a misleading objective
to GNNs for both tasks. Thus, G3AD further introduces AC

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

to guard the GNNs against reconstructing abnormal graphs
by cooperating with the auxiliary encoders that partake the
inconsistent anomaly patterns.
1) Adaptive Caching: From the consistent alignment perspective, since the consistent information encoded by the
GNN encoder has already been guarded, it should be directly
used for measuring the global consistency under a mixture of attribute and topology information. Yet from the
attribute/topology reconstruction perspective, due to the graph
to be reconstructed containing anomalies, it is necessary to further guard the GNN-encoded representations against directly
reconstructing and preserving the abnormal graph.
Therefore, we design an AC module to concurrently leverage the GNN-encoded representations for normal part reconstruction and auxiliary-encoded representations for inconsistent part reconstruction, avoiding the force of GNNs to
fit inconsistent anomaly patterns. It automatically selects
appropriate information for the reconstruction of normal and
abnormal parts from GNN representation and auxiliary representation under unsupervised conditions, through learnable
parameters. The general AC module can be formulated as
follows:
imp = Tanh(τ(H(1) ||H(2) ))

(9)

AC(H(1) , H(2) ) = imp[:n] · H(1) + imp[n:] · H(2)

(10)

where τ(·) is an MLP for information fusion, imp ∈ R2n is
the weight vector of each dimension of the input features, and
H(1) and H(2) denote two information sources, such as H(a) ,
H(t) , and H(c) .
The AC module is utilized to generate two types of representations for attribute and topology reconstruction
Z A = AC(H(a) , H(c) ),

Z T = AC(H(t) , H(c) )

(11)

where Z A and Z T are the cached attribute representation
and cached topology representation. Compared with vanilla
GNN-based representation, the caching of GNN-encoded and
attribute/topology-specific information automatically selects
helpful information and better alleviates anomalies’ impact on
the GNN-encoded representations.
2) Anomaly Detection Tasks: Given the GNN encoded
representation, cached attribute representation, and cached
topology representation, we aim to make full use of them
for anomaly scoring in an unsupervised setting. Therefore, as
the above definition of the three types of anomaly detection
objectives, the detection tasks can be unfolded as follows.
a) Local attribute reconstruction: The reconstruction-based
operator has been widely observed to be effective
for unsupervised anomaly detection [7], [38], [56].
Therefore, given the cached attribute representation
Z A , we utilize the node’s attribute reconstruction ability for attribute anomaly mining, benefiting from the
reconstruction target tending to fit the patterns of the
predominant nodes while the patterns of anomalies are
rare [38]. We use a two-layer GCN [20] as the attribute
reconstruction function ga (·) as follows:
R(l+1) = LeakyReLU( ÃR(l)W (l)
re )
−1

−1

(12)

where Ã = D̂ 2 A∗ D̂ 2 ∈ Rn×n is the normalized
adjacency matrix, D̂ ∈ Rn×n is the degree matrix of

16845

A∗ = A + I, where I is the identity matrix. R(l) and W (l)
re
are the input features and trainable parameters in the lth
layer, respectively.
For the cached attribute representation Z A , ga (·) reconstructs the attribute matrix X̂ ∈ Rn×d with corresponding
distance-based reconstruction loss Lattr , which can be
computed as
X̂ = ga (Z A , A)

(13)

Lattr = ||X − X̂||22

(14)

where || · ||22 is the Euclidean distance.
b) Local topology reconstruction: Similar to the perspective
of local attribute reconstruction, for the given cached
topology representation ZT , the topology reconstruction capability is also a factor for anomaly detection
due to topology anomalies’ rare and inconsistent local
topological patterns. The reconstruction function gt (·)
reconstructs the adjacency matrix from Z T with the
reconstruction loss Ltopo as follows:
Â = gt (Z T ) = Z T · Z 0T
Ltopo = ||A − Â||22

(15)
(16)

where gt (·) is designed as an inner product between Z T
and its self-transposition Z 0T to make the reconstruction
efficient.
c) Global consistency alignment: Given the GNN encoded
representation H(c) with both the attribute and topology
information by graph message passing to detect anomalies, a naive way for evaluation is to measure the distance
between node embeddings and their corresponding subgraph. However, the anomalies may occur as neighbors
of normal nodes under the neighborhood inconsistency.
Aligning the node with a noisy subgraph may be suboptimal. Thus, due to abnormal nodes making up only
a minority of the entire graph, we turn to measure each
node embedding with the graph summary vector for
global consistency measurement to reduce the negative
impact of neighborhood on the summary vectors.
Specifically, to conduct the alignment, we first read out the
consistent GNN-encoded representations of nodes into a graph
summary representation
Eg = Readout(H(c) )

(17)

where Readout(·) can be a kind of pooling operation (such as
min, max, mean, and weighted pooling [42]). Here, we use the
mean pooling as default for simplicity and Eg is the readout
representation of the graph.
Then, we conduct the global consistency alignment task
between each node’s GNN-encoded representation zc,i ∈ H(c)
and the graph summary vector Eg as follows:
1
0v
u n
uX
||zc,i − Eg ||22 + eA
(18)
Lcons = log @ t
i=1

where zc,i is the consistent representation of node vi and
constant e is used to limit the lower bound of the loss for
better balance Lcons ’s numerical relationship with other loss
terms.

16846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

C. Anomaly Scoring
With the three different anomaly detection tasks, we utilize
the above three anomaly detection tasks for the final anomaly
scoring. The normal nodes in the graph are expected to show
low discrepancies, while anomalies exhibit high discrepant
values due to their inconsistency, irregularity, and diversity.
Therefore, here we compute the anomaly score si of each
node vi in multiperspectives according to
si =

λ1 · ||xi − x̂i ||22
„ ƒ‚ …

Local Attribute Reconstruction

+ λ2 · log(
„

q

+ (1 − λ1 ) · ||ai − âi ||22
„
ƒ‚
…

Local Topology Reconstruction

||zc,i − Eg ||22 + e)
ƒ‚
…

(19)

Global Consistency Alignment

where λ1 is a hyperparameter to balance the attribute and
topology reconstruction and λ2 is also a hyperparameter that
measures the effect of the global consistency alignment. Nodes
with larger scores are more likely to be considered as anomalies, thus we can compute the ranking of anomalies according
to the nodes’ scores calculated as (19).
D. Joint Training Objective Function
Following previous works to optimize the model in the
absence of labels [38], [42], to jointly train different aspects of
anomaly scoring loss with the correlation constraint for GNN
guarding, the training objective function of G3AD
L = λ1 · Lattr + (1 − λ1 ) · Ltopo + λ2 · Lcons + Lcc

(20)

where the hyperparameters λ1 and λ2 are the same as mentioned in (19). In this way, G3AD is trained using the gradient
descent algorithm on the overall joint training objective
function.
Conclusively, the pseudocode of the overall procedure workflow of G3AD is described as the given Algorithm 1. In each
training epoch, G3AD first encodes three aspects of representations by the guarded GNN encoder along with the auxiliary
encoders. Furthermore, we adopt the correlation constraint
to minimize correlations between the three representations.
Before conducting the anomaly detection tasks, the AC module
is equipped for GNN representation guarding. Then, anomaly
detection tasks are conducted for anomaly scoring and joint
objective loss obtaining. A backpropagation is then executed
with a gradient descent algorithm to optimize the parameters
of G3AD. Finally, the anomaly scores are returned for each
node to evaluate their abnormality.
E. Complexity Analysis
In this subsection, we conduct the complexity analysis of G3AD. First, the time complexity of encoding is
max(O( fa (·), ft (·), fgnn (·))). The complexity of fa (·) and ft (·)
is O(|V|dF), and the complexity of fgnn (·) is O((|V| + |E|)dF),
where F is the summation of all feature maps across different layers. Therefore, the complexity of the encoding
guarding part is O((|V| + |E|)dF). Then, the complexity of
the AC(·) module is O(|V|dF), and the global consistency
alignment can be processed simultaneously with O(|V|dF).
Finally, the time complexity of the reconstruction modules is

Algorithm 1 Overall Procedure of G3AD
Input: An abnormal graph G = ( A, X); Training epochs T;
Balance parameters λ1 and λ2 .
Output: An anomaly score list for the nodes.
1: for epoch ∈ 1, 2, . . . T do
2:
Obtain the attribute-specific, topology-specific, and
consistency representation H(a) = fa (X), H(t) = ft ( A),
H(c) = fgnn (X, A), respectively.
3:
Calculate the correlation constraint loss Lcc between
any two of the three encoded representations (H(a) ,
H(t) , H(c) ) via Eq.(8).
4:
Obtain the cached attribute representation Z A =
AC(H(a) , H(c) );
5:
Reconstruct the attribute matrix X̂ = ga (Z A , A), and
calculate the reconstruction loss Lattr via Eq.(14);
6:
Obtain the cached structure representation Z T =
AC(H(t) , H(c) );
7:
Reconstruct the adjacency matrix Â = gt (Z T ), and
calculate the reconstruction loss Ltopo via Eq.(16);
8:
Conduct the global consistency alignment with consistency representation H(c) , and calculate the reconstruction loss Lcons via Eq.(18);
9:
Minimize the joint training loss L = λ1 · Lattr + (1 −
λ1 ) · Ltopo + λ2 · Lcons + Lcc ;
10:
Update model’s learnable parameters by using stochastic gradient descent;
11: end for
12: Compute anomaly scores of nodes in the attributed network G based on Eq.(19).

max(O(ga (·), gt (·))), where O(ga (·)) is O(|E|dF) and O(gt (·))
is O(|V|2 ). To sum up, the overall time complexity of G3AD
is O((|V| + |E|)dF + max(|E|dF, |V|2 )).
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments
and in-depth analysis to demonstrate the effectiveness of
G3AD. Specifically, we aim to answer the following research
questions: RQ1: How does G3AD perform compared with
state-of-the-art models? RQ2: How much do the architecture
and components of G3AD contribute? RQ3: Can G3AD
framework positively generalize in different GNN backbones?
RQ4: How well does G3AD disentangle encode the information in each encoder? How does G3AD perform on different
types of anomalies? And how to explain the anomaly scoring
effectiveness of G3AD? RQ5: How do key hyperparameters
impact G3AD’s anomaly detection performance?
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets: We adopt six graph anomaly detection datasets
on both synthetic and real-world scenarios that have been
widely used in previous research [18], [42], including four
synthetic datasets: Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed [57], and Flickr
[58], and two real-world datasets: Weibo [59] and Reddit [60].
The statistics are shown in Table I. The details of the datasets
are introduced as follows.

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE I
S TATISTICS OF THE E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

1) Cora1 [57] is a classical citation network consisting
of 2708 scientific publications (contains 150 injected
anomalies) along with 5429 links between them. The
text contents of each publication are treated as its
attributes.
2) Citeseer1 [57] is also a citation network consisting
of 3327 scientific publications (contains 150 injected
anomalies) with 4732 links. The node attribute in this
dataset is defined the same as in the Cora dataset.
3) Pubmed1 [57] is another citation network consisting
of 19717 scientific publications (contains 600 injected
anomalies) with 44338 links. The node attributes in this
dataset are also defined as in the Cora dataset.
4) Flickr2 [58] is a social network dataset acquired from the
image hosting and sharing website Flickr. In this dataset,
7575 nodes denote the users (contains 450 injected
anomalies), 239738 edges represent the following relationships between users, and node attributes of users are
defined by their specified tags that reflect their interests
on the website.
5) Weibo3 [59] is a user-posts-hashtag graph dataset from
the Tencent-Weibo platform, which collects information from 8405 platform users (contains 868 suspicious
users) with 61964 hashtags. The user-user graph provided by the author is used, which connects users who
used the same hashtag.
6) Reddit4 [60] is a user-subreddit graph extracted from
a social media platform, Reddit, which consists of one
month of user posts on subreddits. The 1000 most active
subreddits and the 10000 most active users (containing
366 banned users) are extracted as subreddit nodes and
user nodes, respectively. We convert it to a user-user
graph with 20744044 connections based on the cointeracted subreddit for our experiments.
For the five synthetic datasets, we adopted synthetic anomalies to validate models [38], [42]. Following the widely used
anomaly injection approach in previous advances [16], [17],
[42], [43], we inject a combined set of both topological and
attributed anomalies for each experimental synthetic dataset
with the following manner.
1) Injection of Topological Anomalies: To obtain topological anomalies, the topological structure of networks
1 https://linqs.soe.ucsc.edu/datac
2 http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/pages/datasets
3 https://github.com/zhao-tong/Graph-Anomaly-Loss
4 http://files.pushshift.io/reddit

16847

is perturbed by generating small cliques composed of
nodes that were originally not related. The insight is
that in a small clique, a small group of nodes is significantly more interconnected with each other than the
average, which can be considered a typical situation of
topological anomalies in real-world graphs. Specifically,
to create cliques, we begin by defining the clique size p
and the number of cliques q. When generating a clique,
we randomly select p nodes from the set of nodes V and
connect them fully. This implies that all the selected p
nodes are considered topological anomalies. To generate
q cliques, we repeat this process q times. This results
in a total of p × q topological anomalies. Following the
previous works, the value of p is fixed as 15, and the
value of q is set to 5, 5, 20, 20, 15 for Cora, Citeseer,
Pubmed, ACM, and Flickr, respectively.
2) Injection of Attributed Anomalies: We inject attributed
anomalies by disturbing the attributes of nodes.
To generate an attributed anomaly, a node vi is randomly selected as the target, and then another k nodes
(vc1 , . . . , vck ) are sampled as a candidate set V c . Next, we
compute the Euclidean distance between the attribute
vector xc of each vc ∈ V c and the attribute vector xi of
vi . We then select the node vcj ∈ V c that has the largest
Euclidean distance to vi and change xi to xcj . Following
the previous works, the value of k is set to 50 in this
article.
2) Compared Baselines: We compare our proposed G3AD
with 20 representative state-of-the-art models, which can be
categorized into five main categories.
a) Shallow detection methods:
i) SCAN [34] is a classic clustering method that can
be applied for anomaly detection, which clusters
vertices based on structural similarity to detect
anomalies.
ii) MLPAE [35] utilizes autoencoders on both anomalous and benign data with shallow nonlinear
dimensionality reduction on the node attribute.
b) Enhanced GNNs:
i) GAAN [36] is a generative adversarial framework
with a graph encoder to obtain real graph nodes’
representation and fake graph nodes’ representation and a discriminator to recognize whether two
connected nodes are from the real or fake graph.
ii) ALARM [37] is a multiview representation learning
framework with multiple graph encoders and a
well-designed aggregator between them.
iii) AAGNN [11] is an abnormality-aware GNN, which
utilizes subtractive aggregation to represent each
node as the deviation from its neighbors.
c) Graph autoencoder-based models:
i) GCNAE [61] is a classic variational graph autoencoder with the graph convolutional network as its
backbone and utilizes the reconstruction loss for
unsupervised anomaly detection.
ii) GATAE [24] is a graph autoencoder based on GATs
with the same architecture as GCNAE.

16848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

iii) Dominant [38] is a deep graph autoencoder-based
method with a shared encoder. It detects the
anomalies by computing the weighted sum of
reconstruction error terms of each node.
iv) AnomalyDAE [39] is a dual-graph autoencoder
method based on the GAT, and the cross-modality
interactions between network structure and node
attribute are asymmetrically introduced on the node
attribute reconstruction side.
v) ComGA [40] is a community-aware attributed
graph anomaly detection framework with a
designed tailored deep graph convolutional
network.
vi) CoCo [41] is a correlation-enhanced graph autoencoder with correlation analysis between the local
and global contexts of each node.
d) Graph contrastive learning methods:
i) CoLA [42] is a graph contrastive learning method.
It detects anomalies by evaluating the agreement
between each node and its neighboring subgraph
sampled by the random walk-based algorithm.
ii) ANEMONE [43] is a multiscale graph contrastive
learning method, which captures the anomaly pattern by learning the agreements between node
instances at the patch and context levels concurrently.
iii) SL-GAD [16] is a state-of-the-art anomaly detection model with generative and multiview contrastive perspectives, which captures the anomalies
from both the attribute and the structure space.
iv) Sub-CR [17] is a self-supervised learning method
that employs the graph diffusion-based multiview
contrastive learning along with attribute reconstruction.
v) NLGAD [6] is a multiscale graph contrastive learning network with a hybrid normality evaluation
strategy.
e) Heterophily GNNs:
i) MixHop [50] is a graph convolutional network
with the mixed aggregation of multihop neighbors
during a single message passing operation. We construct the unsupervised autoencoder architecture
for it and the rest heterophily models to fit the
unsupervised graph anomaly detections.
ii) H2GCN [51] is a heterophily GNN by the
separate encoding of ego and neighbor embeddings with higher-order neighbors and intermediate
representations.
iii) LINKX [52] is an MLP-based model for heterophily graph modeling, which separately embeds
the adjacency and node features with simple MLP
operations.
iv) GloGNN [53] is a method that considers both the
homophily and heterophily properties on the graph
with the combination of both low-pass and highpass filters over the whole node set.
3) Evaluation Metrics and Hyperparameter Settings: We
evaluate the models with area under the ROC curve

(ROC-AUC) and average precision (AP), two widely adopted
metrics in previous works [7], [38], [43], to comprehensively evaluate the anomaly detection performance in different
aspects. A higher AUC and AP value indicates better detection
performance. Note that we run all experiments five times with
different random seeds and report the average results with
standard deviation to prevent extreme cases.
4) Hyperparameter Settings: In the experiments on different datasets, the embedding size is fixed to 64, and the
embedding parameters are initialized with the Xavier method
[62]. The loss function is optimized with the Adam optimizer [63]. The learning rate of G3AD is searched from
[5×10{−2,−3,−4} , 2×10{−2,−3,−4} , 1×10{−2,−3,−4} ]. For the balance
parameter of G3AD, we first tune λ1 from [0, 1], then
once λ1 is determined, we select an appropriate λ2 based
on the fixed λ1 . For fair comparisons, all experiments are
conducted on the CentOS system equipped with NVIDIA
RTX-3090 GPUs.

B. Anomaly Detection Performance (RQ1)
We first compare the main performance results between
G3AD and the baseline models. The performance comparison
results on synthetic and real-world datasets are reported in
Tables II and III, respectively. From these results, we have the
following observations.
G3AD can achieve significant performance improvements
over state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, for AUC metrics,
G3AD achieves the best performance on all synthetic and
real-world datasets among all baselines. For AP metrics,
G3AD can also generally perform well and have the best
or second-best performance on half of the datasets. Overall,
G3AD has the top rank among all baselines on average in
two metrics. The superior performance verifies the guarding
schemes with correlation constraints, and the AC under the
local and global anomaly detection tasks can help improve
anomaly distinguishability.
Directly using the consistency GNNs or heterophily GNNs
has suboptimal detection performance. We can find from the
results that the performance of enhanced consistency-based
GNNs (the second category) and heterophily-based GNNs
(the fifth category) both have a certain gap with G3AD.
Thus, it further verifies that, under such a disrupted phenomenon induced by unknown anomalies, G3AD can provide
an effective way to guard the consistent homophily and utilize
discrepant heterophily patterns.
There are differences in the performance of baselines
between synthetic and real-world datasets. It can be found
from the table that the graph contrastive learning-based methods are the best-performed baselines on synthetic datasets
in general, while enhanced GNNs and graph autoencoders
achieve better results on real-world datasets. One possible
reason is that the contrastive objective function of these models
is related onefold, which is insufficient for directly applying
to the irregular real-world datasets, and then enhanced GNNs
and graph autoencoders.
Anomaly detection on real-world datasets is significantly
harder than on synthetic datasets. The performance gap in
real-world datasets between the models is large compared

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

16849

TABLE II
OVERALL U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON S YNTHETIC A NOMALY DATASETS (M EAN ± S TANDARD
D EVIATION IN P ERCENTAGE OVER FIVE T RIAL RUNS ). T HE B EST AND S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS IN E ACH C OLUMN
A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD F ONT AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE III
OVERALL U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION C OMPARISON
R ESULTS ON R EAL -W ORLD A NOMALY DATASETS

TABLE IV
C OMPONENT A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON G3AD

C. Ablation Study (RQ2)

to synthetic datasets, especially the graph contrastive learning methods. This shows that the widely used anomaly
injection scheme may lack diversity and be inadequate to
simulate irregular patterns in the real world, [64] also has
the same observation. Thus, we suggest that the model
effectiveness examination should be conducted on both
synthetic and real-world datasets for a more objective
evaluation.

In this subsection, we aim to conduct a fine-grained ablation
study to analyze the contribution of components and architecture of our G3AD.
1) Component Study: To verify the effectiveness of the
components, we conduct an ablation study on three variants:
G3AD-w/o AR, G3AD-w/o TR, G3AD-w/o CA, and their
combinations, which remove the local attribute reconstruction, local topology reconstruction, and global consistency
alignment, respectively. From the results in Table IV, we can
observe that G3AD notably outperforms all three variants and
three ablation combinations in general. Specifically, first, the
removal of attribute reconstruction and topology reconstruction has a greater impact, which shows that the modeling
of graph properties is important for anomaly discrimination.
Therefore, well-representing attributes and topology under
anomaly discrepancy are significant for anomaly detection.
Second, the effect of different modules varies from dataset,
which is related to the diversity of anomaly definitions in

16850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 4. Architecture ablation study results on G3AD.

Fig. 6. Visualization of the distribution of three aspects of embeddings after
G3AD encoding guarding. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer.

Fig. 5. Generalization study results of G3AD in different GNN backbones.
(a) Cora. (b) Citeseer.
Fig. 7. Posthoc analysis of anomaly score distribution predicted by G3AD.

different scenarios. Thus, the comprehensive consideration of
topology-specific, attribute-specific, and consistent patterns is
beneficial to the model.
2) Architecture Study: To study the effectiveness of
G3AD’s architecture, we further study the guarding architecture of G3AD with its two architecture variants:
1) G3AD-shared removes the auxiliary encoders and shares
all input information with a single GNN, which ignores the
guarding of anomalies for the GNN, and 2) G3AD-separated
replaces the three encoders with two parallel encoders without
any information sharing, which is the simplest way without
considering the consistent attribute-topology correlation that
remained in the major normal nodes. The results are shown in
Fig. 4. From the results, we have the following observations.
First, compared to G3AD-shared variant, G3AD gains significant improvements, which proves the necessity of auxiliary
guarding under abnormal graphs. Second, the improvements
over G3AD-separated demonstrate that simply separating
attribute and topology information will miss the consistent
patterns that remained in most normal nodes and lead to
suboptimal performance. Therefore, the guarding architecture
of G3AD is effective for unsupervised anomaly detection.
D. Generalization Study (RQ3)
To investigate the generalization ability of the proposed
G3AD framework in different GNN backbones, we evaluate
the improvements of G3AD (w/ G3AD) for different GNN
backbones (w/o G3AD). Specifically, we adopt the representative GCN [20], GAT [24], SAGE [21], and GIN [54] for
G3AD in the GNN encoder, respectively.
The generalization study results are illustrated in Fig. 5.
From the results, we can find that G3AD can stably bring
significant improvements across each GNN backbone. Specifically, equipped with our G3AD framework, the GNNs have

16.12% and 23.62% average AUC improvements on the Cora
and Citeseer datasets, respectively. Furthermore, the improvements are evident across all GNN backbones. It has achieved at
least a 10% gain on each GNN, with an average improvement
of 25.16% specifically on GCNs. These results highlight the
generalization capability of G3AD in improving various GNN
backbones across different datasets.
E. Case Study (RQ4)
In this subsection, we aim to conduct case studies on G3AD
with synthetic datasets to analyze the correlation-constrained
GNN encoding guarding via embedding visualization and analyze the performance of G3AD on different types of anomalies.
1) Embedding Visualization: We first conduct the distribution visualization of attribute-specific, topology-specific, and
consistent GNN embeddings after the correlation constrained
guarding from the attribute encoder fa (·), the topology encoder
ft (·), and the GNN encoder fgnn (·) by reducing their dimension
to two with the t-SNE [65] method. The visualization results
are illustrated in Fig. 6, which shows that the three aspects of
representations are well distinguished from each other in the
embedding space. Therefore, it illustrates that the three aspects
of representations have been well disentangled by G3AD to
guard the GNN encoding.
2) Performance on Different Anomaly Types: To further
analyze different types of induced anomalies, we conduct
a case study of G3AD compared with the overall top-3
performed baselines on two synthetic datasets. We report the
detection performance on synthetic attributed anomalies, synthetic structure anomalies, and synthetic mixed (both attribute
and structure perspectives) anomalies. The split performance
results are shown in Table V. From the results, we find
that the best baseline Sub-CR obviously tends to detect

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

16851

Fig. 8. Parameters study on G3AD with different learning rates. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.

Fig. 9. Parameters study on G3AD with different embedding dimensions. (a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.

TABLE V
C ASE S TUDY OF G3AD ON ATTRIBUTE -I NDUCED , T OPOLOGY-I NDUCED ,
AND M IXED A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE
W ITH T OP -3 P ERFORMED BASELINES

attribute anomalies, and the second-best performed model,
ANEMONE, has an inclination toward detecting topology
anomalies. Our G3AD can generally balance and achieve good
performance on all types of anomalies due to the explicit
guarding of representation learning, guarding of directly
abnormal graph reconstruction, and comprehensive consideration of different kinds of anomaly characteristics.
3) Anomaly Score Distribution: To provide an explanation
foundation for G3AD anomaly detection, we conduct a post
hoc analysis by visualizing the anomaly score distribution
predicted by G3AD. This distribution is crucial for both the
gradient descent training phase and the anomaly discrimination
process of the model. The visualization results are depicted in
Fig. 7 for nodes in the Cora and Citeseer datasets. In the
figure, we differentiate between normal nodes and anomalies using distinct colors: blue for normal nodes and red
for anomalies. Additionally, we indicate the mean anomaly

scores for both normal nodes and anomalies with dashed
lines. From the results, the distinct separation between the
normal and anomaly node distributions in both datasets shows
the effectiveness of G3AD in anomaly detection. The clear
distinction in anomaly scores allows for accurate identification
and discrimination of anomalies.
F. Parameter Analysis (RQ5)
In this subsection, we aim to study the impact of different
hyperparameters on G3AD with two synthetic datasets and two
real-world datasets, including the learning rate, the embedding
dimension, the balanced parameters λ1 and λ2 , and the readout
function in (17).
1) Effectiveness of Learning Rate: Then, the study of the
effectiveness of the learning rate can be found in Fig. 8. From
the results, we can find that the performance of G3AD on
synthetic datasets is less sensitive to changes in learning rate.
As long as the learning rate is not set too large, the model’s
performance is similar under relatively small learning rates.
For real-world datasets, the appropriate learning rate range
will be smaller than that of synthetic datasets, but a learning
rate value of around 0.005 can generally achieve relatively
good anomaly detection performance.
2) Effectiveness of Embedding Dimension: Furthermore,
we have also analyzed the impact of different embedding
dimensions on G3AD, as illustrated in Fig. 9. It can be seen
from the study results that, except for the Cora dataset, which
can achieve optimal performance on a smaller 16-D space,
the other three datasets can achieve optimal performance on a
64-D representation space in general, which is no need for us
to continue to increase the representation dimension to achieve
better performance.

16852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we study the problem of negative anomaly
impact on GNNs in unsupervised graph anomaly detection,
which is largely neglected by previous works. To address this
issue, we propose G3AD, a simple but effective framework to
guard GNNs against anomaly impacts in unsupervised settings.
Specifically, G3AD introduces two guarding strategies with
comprehensive anomaly detection perspectives. First, G3AD
guards the GNN encoder against encoding inconsistent information to enhance the node representation quality for anomaly
distinguishing. Then, we comprehensively include both local
reconstruction and global alignment as the objectives for better
detecting multiple anomalies. During this process, to guard the
GNN-encoded representations against directly reconstructing
the abnormal graph, G3AD further equips the representations
with AC. Extensive experiments demonstrate that G3AD outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.
R EFERENCES
[1]

Fig. 10. Parameters study results with different combinations of λ1 and λ2 .
(a) Cora. (b) Citeseer. (c) Weibo. (d) Reddit.

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON D IFFERENT R EADOUT F UNCTIONS
IN THE G LOBAL C ONSISTENCY A LIGNMENT

3) Effectiveness of Balanced Parameters: We first investigate the effect of the different combinations of key balanced
parameters λ1 (balances the effect between topology and
attribute reconstruction) and λ2 (tunes the impact of consistency alignment) on G3AD. The parameter study results are
shown in Fig. 10 on the Cora, Citeseer, Weibo, and Reddit
datasets. From the results, we can observe that the performance
of G3AD varies with respect to balanced parameters λ1 and
λ2 . More specifically, first, changes in parameter λ1 may bring
more volatility than parameter λ2 . This is explainable since the
consistency is related to both attribute and topology, which
is more robust and stable [66]. Furthermore, with a fixed
λ2 value, a relatively large value of λ1 can make G3AD
perform better, which means that the impact of the attribute
reconstruction needs more attention and consideration.
4) Effectiveness of Readout Function: We further discuss
the readout function selection of consistency alignment in (17),
which includes mean, min, max, and attention (scoring by an
MLP) pooling as in Table VI. From the results, we can find
that the simple nonparameter operation with mean pooling can
achieve relatively good performance. The possible reason is
that due to the unbalanced number of normal and anomalies,
simple mean pooling can reflect the global consistency from
the representations of the majority of normal nodes.

L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
and description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 626–688, 2015.
[2] T. Zhao, T. Jiang, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “A synergistic approach for
graph anomaly detection with pattern mining and feature learning,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2393–2405, Jun.
2022.
[3] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2021.
[4] S. Fakhraei, J. Foulds, M. Shashanka, and L. Getoor, “Collective
spammer detection in evolving multi-relational social networks,” in
Proc. 21st ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2015, pp. 1769–1778.
[5] D. Wang et al., “A semi-supervised graph attentive network for financial
fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Beijing,
China, Nov. 2019, pp. 598–607.
[6] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection
via multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2023, pp. 7502–7511.
[7] Y. Bei et al., “Reinforcement neighborhood selection for unsupervised
graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining
(ICDM), Dec. 2023, pp. 11–20.
[8] T. Kim, S. C. Suh, H. Kim, J. Kim, and J. Kim, “An encoding technique
for CNN-based network anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Big Data (Big Data), Jun. 2018, pp. 2960–2965.
[9] S. Carta, A. S. Podda, D. R. Recupero, and R. Saia, “A local feature
engineering strategy to improve network anomaly detection,” Future
Internet, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 177, Oct. 2020.
[10] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “GNNbased graph anomaly detection with graph anomaly loss,” in Proc. 2nd
Int. Workshop Deep Learn. Graphs: Methods Appl., 2020, pp. 1–7.
[11] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
[12] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
[13] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 415–444, Aug. 2001.
[14] Y. Ma, X. Liu, N. Shah, and J. Tang, “Is homophily a necessity for graph
neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021.
[15] L. Yang et al., “Graph neural networks beyond compromise between
attribute and topology,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 1127–1135.
[16] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233, Dec.
2021.

BEI et al.: GUARDING GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR UNSUPERVISED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION

[17] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
[18] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?,”
in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Vienna, Austria, Jul. 2022,
pp. 1945–1951.
[19] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2022,
pp. 21076–21089.
[20] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan.
2016.
[21] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan.
2017, pp. 1025–1035.
[22] Z. Zhang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Deep learning on graphs: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 249–270, Mar. 2020.
[23] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
[24] P. V. ković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan.
2017.
[25] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning and its
applications,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, May 2021, Art. no. 100379.
[26] S. Kumar, A. Mallik, A. Khetarpal, and B. S. Panda, “Influence maximization in social networks using graph embedding and graph neural
network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 607, pp. 1617–1636, Aug. 2022.
[27] L. Jain, R. Katarya, and S. Sachdeva, “Opinion leaders for information
diffusion using graph neural network in online social networks,” ACM
Trans. Web, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1–37, May 2023.
[28] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang,
“LightGCN: Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for
recommendation,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop.
Inf. Retr., Jul. 2020, pp. 639–648.
[29] H. Chen et al., “Macro graph neural networks for online billionscale recommender systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024,
pp. 3598–3608.
[30] X.-M. Zhang, L. Liang, L. Liu, and M.-J. Tang, “Graph neural networks
and their current applications in bioinformatics,” Frontiers Genet.,
vol. 12, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 690049.
[31] H.-C. Yi, Z.-H. You, D.-S. Huang, and C. K. Kwoh, “Graph representation learning in bioinformatics: Trends, methods and applications,”
Briefings Bioinf., vol. 23, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. bbab340.
[32] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2016.
[33] Y. Deldjoo, T. D. Noia, and F. A. Merra, “A survey on adversarial
recommender systems: From attack/defense strategies to generative
adversarial networks,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38,
Mar. 2021.
[34] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. J. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural
clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Min. (KDD), 2007, pp. 824–833.
[35] M. Sakurada and T. Yairi, “Anomaly detection using autoencoders with
nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. MLSDA 2nd Workshop
Mach. Learn. Sensory Data Anal., Dec. 2014, pp. 4–11.
[36] Z. Chen, B. Liu, M. Wang, P. Dai, J. Lv, and L. Bo, “Generative
adversarial attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., Oct. 2020, pp. 1989–1992.
[37] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multiview framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552,
Jun. 2022.
[38] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2019, pp. 594–602.
[39] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for
anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[40] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Feb.
2022, pp. 657–665.
[41] R. Wang et al., “Context correlation discrepancy analysis for graph
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 174–187, Jan. 2025.

16853

[42] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis,
“Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive selfsupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
no. 6, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[43] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[44] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE:
Graph anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure
awareness,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 18172–18185, Dec. 2024.
[45] T. Wang, D. Jin, R. Wang, D. He, and Y. Huang, “Powerful graph
convolutional networks with adaptive propagation mechanism for
homophily and heterophily,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2022,
pp. 4210–4218.
[46] H. Wang and J. Leskovec, “Combining graph convolutional neural
networks and label propagation,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 40, no. 4,
pp. 1–27, Oct. 2022.
[47] J. Zhu et al., “Graph neural networks with heterophily,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 11168–11176.
[48] L. Wu, H. Lin, Z. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, and S. Z. Li, “Homophilyenhanced self-supervision for graph structure learning: Insights and
directions,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9,
pp. 12358–12372, Sep. 2023.
[49] J. Chen, S. Chen, J. Gao, Z. Huang, J. Zhang, and J. Pu,
“Exploiting neighbor effect: Conv-agnostic gnn framework for graphs
with heterophily,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35,
no. 10, pp. 13383–13396, Oct. 2023.
[50] S. Abu-El-Haija et al., “MixHop: Higher-order graph convolutional
architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 21–29.
[51] J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhao, M. Heimann, L. Akoglu, and D. Koutra,
“Beyond homophily in graph neural networks: Current limitations and
effective designs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2020,
pp. 7793–7804.
[52] D. Lim et al., “Large scale learning on non-homophilous graphs: New
benchmarks and strong simple methods,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., Jan. 2021, pp. 20887–20902.
[53] X. Li et al., “Finding global homophily in graph neural networks when
meeting heterophily,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jan. 2022,
pp. 13242–13256.
[54] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Oct. 2018.
[55] A. G. Asuero, A. Sayago, and A. González, “The correlation coefficient:
An overview,” Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 41–59, 2006.
[56] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
reconstruction,” in Proc. 17th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
Mar. 2024, pp. 576–585.
[57] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. EliassiRad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag., vol. 29, no. 3,
p. 93, Sep. 2008.
[58] L. Tang and H. Liu, “Relational learning via latent social dimensions,”
in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Jun. 2009, pp. 817–826.
[59] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “Errorbounded graph anomaly loss for GNNs,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 1873–1882.
[60] S. Kumar, X. Zhang, and J. Leskovec, “Predicting dynamic embedding trajectory in temporal interaction networks,” in Proc. 25th
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019,
pp. 1269–1278.
[61] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” in Proc.
NIPS Workshop Bayesian Deep Learn., Jan. 2016.
[62] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
Statist., 2010, pp. 249–256.
[63] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[64] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. 36th Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, Jan. 2022, pp. 27021–27035.
[65] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008.
[66] J. Zhu, J. Jin, D. Loveland, M. T. Schaub, and D. Koutra, “How does
heterophily impact the robustness of graph neural networks? Theoretical
connections and practical implications,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, pp. 2637–2647.