IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

1827

Guest Editorial:
Introduction to the Special Section on Large Models
for Future Vehicles and Transportation
OMBINING Large Models (LMs) with Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies, edge computing and cloud
computing, can create a powerful synergy that addresses the
challenges and requirements of future vehicles and transportation systems. In light of this potential, this special section provides a venue to cover comprehensively algorithms, frameworks,
technologies, and applications of AI as well as LMs for future
vehicles and transportation. Based on the reviewers’ feedback,
as well as the evaluations of the editors, some good papers are
selected for this special section. These papers, which cover broad
topics, are introduced briefly as follow.
The paper “LLM Enhanced Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surface for Energy-Efficient and Reliable 6G IoV” leverages
the analytical capabilities of LLM, combined with key IoV data
such as channel status, vehicle movement patterns, and quality
of service requirements, to model and optimize RIS-based IoV
communication systems. This work justifies the significant
performance advantages of LLM-enhanced RIS, demonstrating
a viable technical pathway for the development of 6G IoV.
The paper “Large Model-assisted Federated Learning for
Object Detection of Autonomous Vehicles in Edge” proposes a
novel federated learning framework that combines the strengths
of both synchronous and asynchronous methods for object detection of autonomous vehicles in edge. Experimental results
demonstrate this proposed method significantly enhances the
model convergence and performance in object detection for
autonomous vehicles.
The paper “Optimization of Resource Allocation for V2X
Security Communication based on Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning” proposes a resource allocation optimization framework based on the multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm,
in which a large-scale neural network model is built to train the
vehicular to learn the optimal resource allocation strategy for
optimal communication performance and security performance.
Experimental results show that the load successful delivery rate
and confidentiality performance of the vehicular communication
network are effectively improved compared with some baselines
while ensuring link security.
The paper “Large Beamforming Models for Robust Wireless
Transmission in Generalized Scenes of RIS-aided Intelligent IoV
Network” formulates and integrates LMs to achieve excellent hybrid beamforming within IoV-based wireless communications
system which is aided by reconfigurable intelligent surfaces
and base stations to provide additional channels and coverage

C

Date of current version 14 February 2025.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3528618

gains. Experimental results have consistently confirmed that this
proposed LMs enabled hybrid beamforming for reconfigurable
intelligent surface aided IoVs outperforms traditional schemes
in the respect of system throughput and network coverage.
The paper “PPRU: A Privacy-Preserving Reputation Updating Scheme for Cloud-Assisted Vehicular Networks” proposes a
novel privacy-preserving reputation updating scheme for cloudassisted vehicular networks based on the elliptic curve cryptography and Paillier algorithms. Experimental results show this
proposed scheme can provide strong privacy preservation, strong
security, and robust reputation management with acceptable
computation and communication overheads.
The paper “Emerging Blockchain and Reputation Management in Federated Learning: Enhanced Security and Reliability
for Internet of Vehicles (IoV)” proposes a new reliable and secure
federated learning for IoVs based on decentralized blockchain
and reputation management. Moreover, this work uses the concept of the reputation of vehicles to select suitable participants
with reliability, ultimately improving accuracy. Security analysis
results, including comparisons with previous works, prove that
the scheme can address security concerns.
The paper “IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid Network Intrusion Detection System in IoV Using Large Language Models” introduces a
hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoVs using LLM,
denoted as IoV-BERT-IDS in IoVs. Experiments demonstrate
that the proposed IoV-BERT-IDS outperforms in several public
datasets and shows good generalization capabilities to in-vehicle
networks of different vehicles.
The paper “CFPC: The Curbed Fake Point Collector to
Pseudo-LiDAR-Based 3D Object Detection for Autonomous
Vehicles” proposes a curbed fake point collector to support 3D
object detection for autonomous vehicles. The effectiveness of
this proposed method is demonstrated on the public dataset. It
is superior to the baseline in most situations, particularly in the
categories of cars and riders.
The paper “Large Models for Cooperative Control of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles” proposes LMs-based approaches for cooperative control and coordination of connected
and autonomous vehicle (CAV) fleets. Experimental results
demonstrate enhanced traffic efficiency, safety, robustness, and
scalability using LMs for cooperative control of CAV.
The paper “Online Analytic Exemplar-Free Continual
Learning with Large Models for Imbalanced Autonomous
Driving Task” proposes an analytic exemplar-free online continual learning algorithm with LMs for imbalanced autonomous
driving task. Experimental results demonstrate that despite being

0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

an exemplar-free strategy, this proposed method outperforms
various methods on the autonomous driving.
The paper “An Efficient Division Method of Traffic Cell Based
on Improved K-means Clustering Algorithm for the Location
of Infrastructure in Vehicular Networks” proposes a systematic
clustering combined with genetic algorithm-K-means algorithm
for traffic cell delineation method. This proposed method is
validated through clustering experiments on real datasets, and its
clustering advantages are demonstrated by combining clustering
evaluation indicators.
The paper “Federated Learning-based Privacy-aware Location Prediction Model for Internet of Vehicular Things” proposes
an innovative approach that leverages machine learning and edge
computing techniques to predict vehicles’ subsequent locations
using large-scale data, concurrently prioritizing user privacy.
Furthermore, this work introduces an optimization method to
monitor vehicle speed and outlines a comprehensive attack
model, along with effective protection measures.
The paper “Federated Reinforcement Learning-Empowered
Task Offloading for Large Models in Vehicular Edge Computing”
proposes a federated learning framework to judiciously determine the proportion of resource allocation of auxiliary vehicles
through the implementation of inventive mechanisms. Experimental results validate this proposed method not only leads
to the improvement of key system performance indicators, but
also ensures the comprehensive exploitation of the computing
resources of mobile vehicles.
The paper “Integration of LLM and Human-AI Coordination
for Power Dispatching with Connected Electric Vehicles under
SAGVNs” proposes a framework LLM-D3PG, LLM-guided dual
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient, which empowers electric
vehicle drivers to articulate their expectations for AI-generated
dispatching strategies using natural language instructions. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework and show outperformance in comparison to some
existing methods for power dispatching tasks with the random
connection of electric vehicles in space-air-ground integrated
vehicular networks.
The paper “A Novel Design and Comparison for Connected
Autonomous Vehicle Enabled Signal-Free Intersection Control
Scheme” models the operations of three unconventional autonomous intersections and compare their operational performance with one conventional autonomous intersection. Results
show that unconventional vehicle crossing paths at intersections
are likely to reduce vehicle delay and fuel consumption compared with conventional intersections in most scenarios.
The paper “Superpixel Prior Cluster-level Contrastive Clustering Network for Large-scale Urban Hyperspectral Images
and Vehicle Detection” proposes a superpixel prior cluster-level
contrastive clustering network for large-scale hyperspectral image clustering tasks. Experimental results indicate this proposed
method performs well in both hyperspectral image clustering
and vehicle recognition tasks.
The paper “AACS: A Secure Attribute Based Data Access
Control for Cloud-aided Internet of Vehicles Using SGX” develops a pure cryptographic construction to enforce attribute-based
access control model in untrusted cloud for IoVs based on ciphertext policy-attribute based encryption and explore three limitations. Experimental results show this method can effectively

lower-bound the costs that would be incurred when using more
advanced and more expensive predicate encryption schemes.
The paper “Block-FeDL: Electric Vehicle Charging Load
Forecasting using Federated Learning and Blockchain” proposes Block-FeDL, a blockchain-based federated learning approach for electric vehicle charging load forecasting considering
the private and sensitive charging information of each user.
Experimental results show that the Block-FeDL outperforms
the second-best baseline method obviously in terms of mean
square error, mean absolute error, and root mean square error
for forecasting the electric vehicle charging load.
The paper “An Efficient 6G Federated Learning-enabled
Energy-Efficient Scheme for UAV Deployment” proposes a
multi-UAV energy efficient coverage deployment algorithm
based on a spatial adaptive play. Experimental results show this
proposed method outperforms all the state-of-the-art algorithms
by achieving an improved data rate and balanced SINR value.
The paper “Intelligent Prediction of Urban Road Network
Carrying Capacity and Traffic Flow Based on Deep Learning”
proposes a spatiotemporal dynamic deep network considering
the spatial characteristics of urban road networks and the temporal information of traffic speeds. Experimental results have
demonstrated the effectiveness and superiority of this proposed
model.
The paper “Learning-based Cooperative Cache Strategy Integrating Content Recommendation in IoV” proposes a clustering
caching model by considering constraints for tolerable delay of
tasks and the residence time of vehicles. Experimental results
demonstrate this proposed method has significant advantages in
saving task delay and system energy consumption compared to
other solutions.
The paper “PR-OppCL: Privacy-Preserving ReputationBased Opportunistic Federated Learning in Intelligent Transportation System” proposes an innovative framework for
privacy-preserving reputation-based opportunistic federated
learning to address privacy concerns in intelligent transportation
systems. Finally, experimental results demonstrate a significant
reduction in training rounds and total time, outperforming existing methods.
The paper “Electromagnetic Exposure Safety Assessment of
Medical Implants in the Human Body for Electric Vehicle
Wireless Power Transfer Considering Uncertainty” analyzes the
safety issues of human electromagnetic exposure containing
implants in the electric vehicle wireless power transfer. Experimental results show this scheme can obtain accurate results with
fewer training sets and have higher computational efficiency.
The paper “Reliable Computation Offloading of DAG Applications in Internet of Vehicles Based on Deep Reinforcement
Learning” proposes a partial offloading algorithm for DAG application via deep reinforcement learning in IoVs. Experimental
results show this proposed method achieves better comprehensive utility than the baseline algorithms.
The paper “Transportation Route Optimization of Municipal
Solid Waste based on Improved Ant Colony Algorithm in Internet
of Vehicles” proposes an enhanced ant colony optimization algorithm for transportation route optimization of municipal solid
waste in IoVs. Experimental findings reveal that, compared with
both separate and unified schemes, this proposed model yields
reductions in collection and transportation costs.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

The paper “Location Optimization Enhancement of Wireless
Sensor Networks in Intelligent Transportation System Based
on Reverse Elite Large Model” proposes a multi-objective
whale optimization algorithm based on reverse elite large model
for location optimization in intelligent transportation systems.
Experimental results show this proposed method can provide
higher-quality non-dominated solutions, select suitable node
locations, and optimize their performance metrics.
The paper “Digital Twin-Aided Vehicular Edge Network: A
Large-Scale Model Optimization by Quantum-DRL” introduces
a comprehensive model that integrates quantum computing with
a deep reinforcement learning model for a digital twin-aided vehicular edge network. Experimental results demonstrate notable
improvements in task offloading efficiency, highlighting the
model’s efficacy over conventional deep reinforcement learning
models.
The paper “Multimodal 3D Object Detection Based on Sparse
Interaction in Internet of Vehicles” proposes the multimodal grid
encoder with positional information, through positional information implicitly guiding and the transformer-based attention
mechanism for grid-level features, improves the perception of
detection scene context spatial information and enhances the
robustness of the algorithm. Experimental results demonstrate
this proposed algorithm has superior 3D object detection performance in Internet of Vehicles (IoVs).
The paper “Attribute-Consistency Reversible Pedestrian
De-Identification in Intelligent Transportation” proposes an
Attribute-Consistency Reversible Pedestrian De-Identification
(ACRPD) framework for intelligent transportation and pedestrian navigation scenarios. Experimental results conducted on
two datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
ACRPD method.
The paper “Intelligent Transportation Vehicle Road Collaboration and Task Scheduling Based on Deep Learning in Augmented Internet of Things” proposes an intelligent transportation
vehicle road collaboration and task scheduling method based on
deep learning in Internet of Things. Experimental results show
this proposed method can effectively reduce the overall cost of
edge cloud computing, and improve the safety and efficiency of
intelligent driving.
The paper “A New Edge Computing Method Based on Deep
Learning in Intelligent Transportation System”, combines deep
learning with edge computing to take traffic flow detection in
intelligent transportation system as the research base point. Finally, the effectiveness and superiority of this proposed method
are verified by comparison experiments with various prediction
models.
The paper “Adaptive Spatio-Temporal Relation based Transformer for Traffic Flow Prediction” introduces the ASTRformer,
an innovative approach to traffic flow prediction that emphasizes
the fusion of spatial and temporal information in historical data
through an adaptive spatiotemporal relation learning mechanism. Experimental results on six datasets demonstrate this proposed method effectively captures spatiotemporal dependencies,
achieving state-of-the-art performance across various prediction
metrics.

1829

The paper “Multiple Models-Based Fault Tolerant Control of
Levitation Module of Maglev Vehicles against Partial Actuator
Failures” proposes a fault-tolerant control strategy to solve the
problem of partial actuator failures in the levitation module
control system of maglev vehicles based on multi-models. The
effectiveness of this proposed method with actuator fault compensation technology for multiple-point levitation modules of
maglev vehicles is verified.
The paper “DMDAT: Diffusion Model-based Data Augmentation Technique for Vision-based Accident Detection in Vehicular
Networks” presents a diffusion model-based data augmentation
for enhanced vehicular network applications. This work uses a
vision-based accident detection dataset and a MobileNet-based
deep learning model to understand the efficacy of the proposed
data augmentation technique. Experimental results indicate this
proposed data augmentation technique improves the performance notably.
The paper “Intelligent Optimization Algorithm for Green IoV
Networks based on SSA” states power consumption optimization plays an important role in green IoVs. In this paper, the
author investigates the intelligent power allocation optimization
of green cooperative IoVs based on SSA. Experimental results
show this proposed method can achieve a shorter running time
and a good outage probability performance, thereby enhancing
the system’s efficiency.
All papers tackle different but extremely relevant domain
vectors of AI and LMs for future vehicles and transportation.
Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to all the authors
who submitted their research to this special section. We also
acknowledge the invaluable contributions of numerous field experts who participated in the review process and offered insightful suggestions to enhance the content and presentation. Special
thanks go to Professor Abbas Jamalipour, the Editor-in-Chief,
and the publishing team for their support and valuable feedback
during the final stages of completing this special section.
SHAHID MUMTAZ, Guest Editor
Nottingham Trent University
NG11 8NS Nottingham, U.K.
dr.shahid.mumtaz@ieee.org
BO AI, Guest Editor
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing 100044, China
boai@bjtu.edu.cn
IKRAM ASHRAF, Guest Editor
Nokia
90014 Oulu, Finland
ikram.ashraf@nokia-bell-labs.com
ANWER AL-DULAIMI, Guest Editor
EXFO Inc.
Québec City, G1M 2K2 Canada
anwer.al-dulaimi@exfo.com