Hawkeye: Diagnosing RDMA Network Performance Anomalies
with PFC Provenance
Shicheng Wang1 , Menghao Zhang2 , Xiao Li3 , Qiyang Peng2 , Haoyuan Yu3 , Zhiliang Wang1 ,
Mingwei Xu1 , Xiaohe Hu4 , Jiahai Yang1,5 , Xingang Shi1
1 Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2 School of Software, Beihang University
3 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4 Infrawaves

5 Quan Cheng Laboratory

Abstract

1

RDMA is becoming increasingly prevalent from private data centers
to public multi-tenant clouds, due to its remarkable performance improvement. However, its lossless traffic control, i.e., PFC, introduces
new complexities in network performance anomalies (NPAs) due to
its cascading congestion spreading property, which usually incurs
complaints from customers/applications about certain flows’ performance degradation. Existing studies fall short in fine-grained visibility of PFC impact and traceability of PFC causality, and are thus
ineffective in diagnosing the root causes for RDMA NPAs. In this
paper, we propose Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient RDMA NPA
diagnosis system based on PFC provenance. Hawkeye comprises
1) a fine-grained PFC-aware telemetry mechanism to record the
PFC impact on flows; 2) an in-network PFC causality analysis and
tracing mechanism to quickly and efficiently collect causal telemetry for diagnosis; and 3) a provenance-based diagnosis algorithm to
comprehensively present the anomaly breakdown, identifying the
anomaly type and root causes accurately. Through extensive evaluations on both NS-3 simulations and a Tofino testbed, Hawkeye
can quickly and accurately diagnose multiple RDMA NPAs with
over 90% precision and 1-4 orders of magnitude lower overhead
than baselines.

Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA) has become a pivotal technology for network applications to achieve ultra-low latency and
ultra-high throughput. With the advent of RoCEv2 (RDMA over
Converged Ethernet version 2) [29], RDMA has been increasingly
used for many distributed applications in industrial large-scale
data centers [6, 17, 20, 56, 80], especially in areas like distributed
deep learning training [9, 16, 30, 31, 51, 65, 69] and cloud storage [6, 11, 12, 15, 17, 32, 44, 70]. And currently it is becoming a
trend to expand RDMA from private data centers to public multitenant clouds [1, 5, 6, 56].
However, RDMA also introduces new complexity for network
performance anomalies (NPAs), especially under the trend of deployment in multi-tenant public clouds. In RDMA networks, Priority Flow Control (PFC) [28] is deployed to enable a loss-free network
and guarantee high performance. Nevertheless, PFC introduces several performance issues. Once one port becomes congested, PFC
spreads the congestion across multiple hops and imposes performance degradation on other flows that may even not traverse the
initial congested point. Therefore, various performance anomalies
can be raised, such as head-of-line blocking, unfairness, PFC storm
and even PFC deadlock [20, 26]. Even with fine-grained congestion control [36, 45, 80] and advanced load balance [52, 59], PFC
cannot be fully eliminated and still occurs frequently. Worse yet,
these mechanisms can in turn be misled by PFC to make wrong
decisions [25, 63]. As a result, when customers/applications complain about certain flows’ performance degradation, it is difficult
to diagnose the root causes for the RDMA NPAs, especially under
increasingly complex traffic in multi-tenant public clouds.
Current network performance anomaly diagnosis mechanisms
cannot diagnose RDMA NPAs and the root causes effectively and
efficiently. First, fine-grained PFC visibility is lacking in current
monitoring and diagnosis systems, making inaccurate congestion
identification. Existing NPA diagnosis studies, either on the host
side [19, 21, 41, 46] or the switch side [6, 17, 22, 24, 39, 47, 58, 66,
79], lack the monitoring capability for flow-level PFC impact, and
thus cannot distinguish PFC-related anomalies from direct flow
contention. Second, current monitoring and diagnosis systems fall
short in quickly and efficiently tracing PFC causality. Due to the
cascading property of PFC, the congestion may not occur within a
single queue independently. Therefore, tracing the PFC causality
requires collecting the related telemetry on the PFC spreading path
efficiently. However, existing approaches either fail to capture the
complete set of causal switches [22, 37, 47, 58, 66, 79] or suffer from
high overhead [24, 55]. Third, current diagnosis algorithms, which

CCS Concepts
• Networks → Programmable networks; Network monitoring;
Data center networks; Network performance analysis.

Keywords
RDMA Networks, Performance diagnosis, Programmable Networks,
Network Provenance
ACM Reference Format:
Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Xiao Li, Qiyang Peng, Haoyuan Yu,
Zhiliang Wang, Mingwei Xu, Xiaohe Hu, Jiahai Yang, Xingang Shi. 2025.
Hawkeye: Diagnosing RDMA Network Performance Anomalies with PFC
Provenance. In ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference (SIGCOMM ’25), September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750490

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
SIGCOMM ’25, Coimbra, Portugal
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1524-2/25/09
https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750490

481

Introduction

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

are mainly based on the flow-interaction paradigm [10, 37, 46, 66],
cannot support accurate root cause analysis on PFC anomalies.
They attribute the root cause to the flows contending with the
victim flow in the shared queue, instead of flows or hosts causing
PFC originally. Therefore, both why (the root cause flows or hosts
beyond the victim path) and how (the PFC spreading path) about
the anomaly are largely ignored by current diagnosis paradigms.
In this paper, we present Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient
RDMA NPA diagnosis system with PFC provenance. Hawkeye
detects the victim flow encountering performance anomalies, constructs the complete anomaly provenance and locate the root causes:
flows (e.g., problematic bursts) or hosts (e.g., host-side PFC injection), hence providing network operators with comprehensive understanding of the anomalies. The accuracy and efficiency of Hawkeye are derived from the following three key techniques. First,
Hawkeye augments telemetry systems by incorporating flow-level
PFC impact, delivers fine-grained PFC visibility and enables analysis
of PFC-induced effects beyond conventional intra-queue flow interaction. Second, Hawkeye supports accurate and efficient telemetry
information collection across the network. By line-rate analyzing
the victim flow path and the port-level PFC causality in the data
plane, Hawkeye quickly identifies the switches causally relevant
to the anomaly, and efficiently collects the telemetry data through
the switch CPU asynchronously. Third, Hawkeye constructs a
heterogeneous provenance graph describing causality relationship
between flows and ports. Hawkeye also proposes a signature-based
anomaly diagnosis algorithm to match the behaviors and locate the
root cause. We implement a prototype of Hawkeye at both Intel
Tofino hardware and NS-3, and make the code publicly available
at Github [62]. Extensive evaluations on simulations and testbed
demonstrate that Hawkeye is able to accurately and robustly diagnose multiple representative NPAs in RDMA networks, with >
90% average precision and ∼100% recall. Hawkeye also presents
high efficiency in telemetry collection and diagnosis, whose bandwidth and processing overhead are orders of magnitude lower than
baselines. Hawkeye also fits well in current switch hardware with
efficient resource usage.
Contributions. We analyze the complexity of diagnosing RDMA
NPAs (§2) and propose Hawkeye, an accurate and efficient RDMA
NPA diagnosis system with PFC provenance (§3). We implement
the prototype at both NS-3 simulation and Tofino hardware (§3.6).
Our evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
Hawkeye (§4).
Ethics: This work does not raise any ethical issues.

2

Polling
Packet

P2

P1

S1
F1
S2
F2

R1

SW3
P3
P1
P1 PAUSE P1
SW1
SW2 PAUSE SW4

R2

congested

F3-F6 A1 …… A4
(a) PFC backpressure by flow contention (e.g., incast micro-bursts).

F1

P1
H1

P1

PAUSE

SW1

PAUSE

H2

SW2

PAUSE

F2

P1

PAUSE

H3

SW3

PAUSE

(b) PFC storm by host injection.
F1
SW1
PAUSE

P1 F2
SW2
P2 Flow
Contention

F1
SW1
PAUSE

F5-F8

SW4

F4

SW3

F3

(c) Deadlock by flow contention.

SW4

P1 F2
SW2
P2 PFC
Injection

SW3

F4

F3
23

(d) Deadlock by PFC injection.

Figure 1: PFC introduces complexity in congestion.
spread congestion in a cascading manner, causing issues like headof-line blocking, unfairness, PFC storms, and even deadlock [20, 26].
To alleviate the side effect of PFC, conventional wisdom introduces
the end-to-end congestion control [36, 40, 45, 80] to mitigate the
congestion. However, PFC cannot be fully eliminated and still occurs frequently.

2.1

RDMA NPAs

Hawkeye focuses on the performance anomalies caused by switch
queue congestion in networks. However, these problem are challenging to diagnose in the context of RDMA. We here present
several typical cases of RDMA NPAs to illustrate their complexity.
PFC backpressure by flow contention. Flow contention, such as
incast traffic, micro-bursts or ECMP load imbalance, is frequent in
data center networks [6, 18, 20, 27, 59], which rarely occurs within
a single switch in isolation. It typically causes PFC and spread
congestion across multiple hops in RDMA networks. Therefore,
victim flows even without any queue sharing with the congestion culprit may get blocked, such as F1 in Figure 1(a). Besides, the
queue buildup caused by PFC falsifies the congestion signals such as
queue length [80] and queuing delay [36], which may mislead congestion control to make long-term rate degradation on these victim
flows [63]. PFC backpressure by flow contention can also be potentially exploited by attackers, such as LoRDMA attacks [63], thereby
leading to performance degradation of innocent flows covertly.
PFC storm. We define PFC storms as the cascading PFC backpressure that caused by continuous PFC injection by hosts (as shown in
Figure 1(b)), potentially leading to significant degradation of overall
network performance [6, 17, 20]. Host PFC injection may originate

Background and Motivation

RDMA requires a lossless network to achieve high transport performance1 . In particular, RoCEv2 deploys PFC [28], the hop-by-hop
flow control, to achieve the loss-free property. With PFC, when a
switch’s ingress queue exceeds a threshold (𝑋𝑜 𝑓 𝑓 ) due to congestion, it sends a "PAUSE" frame to stop upstream packet transmission,
and sends a "RESUME" frame when the queue drops below another
threshold (𝑋𝑜𝑛 ). While PFC prevents packet loss, it can potentially
1 Although lossy networks are becoming popular currently, whether lossless or lossy

networks are better is still an open question and lossless networks are still widely
deployed.

482

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

from diverse causes such as malfunctioning or buggy NICs, slow
receiver issues caused by buffer exhaustion on the NIC, or even
PCIe bottlenecks [20]. PFC storms thus present different durations
and the number of paused links. In such scenarios, even without
any flow contention, PFC injection can still lead to extensive or
even network-wide traffic blocking.
PFC deadlock. PFC deadlock occurs when the paused links form
into a cycle [20]. No packets in the deadlock links can be transmitted, and the flows will be stopped entirely until the packets in the
buffers are dropped manually. PFC deadlock requires cyclic buffer
dependency (CBD) [26, 27, 50, 55, 67] in the network, where each
buffer waits for the next to drain out. Even in tree-based topology
with loop-free routing normally, CBD can also be caused by problematic routing on single/multiple flows such as link failure, port
flaps and transient/persistent routing misconfigurations or routing
loops [20, 27, 67]. Once one of the ports in the CBD becomes congested, PFC pause frames will propagate and form into a cycle, i.e.,
deadlock. PFC deadlock can be categorized into two types based
on the initial congestion. The initiator-in-loop deadlock is caused
by the flow contention within the CBD. As shown in Figure 1(c),
SW2.P2 encounters micro-bursts and triggers PFC backpressure
along the CBD. The short-duration flow contention (<1ms) then
leads to a persistent deadlock. The initiator-out-of-loop deadlock is
caused by the PFC injection outside the CBD. SW2.P1 in Figure 1(d)
gets PFC frames injected and spreads congestion along the CBD,
resulting in a deadlock.

2.2

Current solutions fall short in fine-grained PFC visibility.
Current solutions in traditional TCP networks, either host-based [19,
21, 46] or network-based [22, 24, 39, 47, 58, 66, 79], lack the visibility
of PFC-related information, such as port status and the PFC impact
on each flow. As a result, it is challenging for host-based solutions
(even RDMA-specific solutions [20, 41]) to accurately determine
whether a flow has encountered PFC-related anomalies based solely
on end-to-end metrics (e.g., latency). Many traditional in-network
systems also have no capability of effective PFC telemetry monitoring, and thus are unable to detect PFC frames or PFC-related
anomalies. Although some emerging studies in RDMA networks
monitor the events such as PFC status [20], pause frames [79] and
NACK messages [17], fine-grained PFC visibility, including the PFC
status at per-packet level and PFC impact on each flow, is still lacking. For example, PFC watchdog [6, 17, 20], a typical industrial
monitoring tool, checks the PFC status of switch ports periodically.
However, the polling period is hundreds of milliseconds or even
seconds, which may miss massive transient PFC congestion. Besides, the port-level monitoring lacks fine-grained records of the
performance impact on each flow, and thus cannot help identify
the root causes for the victim flows.
Current solutions fall short in fast and efficient PFC causality
tracing. Current diagnosis mechanisms fall short in identifying the
PFC-relevant switch and collecting its telemetry. Some fine-grained
monitoring systems [22, 37, 47, 58, 79] mainly focus on the flows
within a single switch, which thus cannot find the PFC root cause
located hops away. A straw-man causality tracing method is to
collect the complete telemetry information from all switches in
the network [24] and analyze the PFC causality relationship for
the victim flow. However, full telemetry collection usually incurs
high overhead for both collection and diagnosis. Another method
is to collect the telemetry of the victim flow path’s switches, such
as SpiderMon [66]. Nevertheless, it may miss a part of the PFC
spreading path, especially the initiator node, since the PFC path
does not always overlap completely with the victim flow path.
Additionally, some solutions [20, 67] support loop detection on PFC
spreading paths. For example, PFC watchdog can only check the
port PFC status on a single switch, and the operator should analyze
the PFC spreading path by manually checking multiple switches.
Besides, ITSY [67] sends probing packets to the upstream PFC
causal ports to detect PFC deadlock, but it ignores non-loop PFC
backpressure and cannot diagnose the root cause of PFC anomalies.
Current solutions fall short in accurate anomaly diagnosis.
Currently, traditional diagnosis studies usually analyze the flow
contention within the switch queues on the victim flow path. They
find the main contributor by flow statistics [4, 22, 39, 46, 58, 60],
queue measurement [10, 37], or provenance [66, 68]. However, these
diagnosis solutions become less accurate in RDMA networks and
fail to completely describe the whole anomaly causality. First, the
diagnosis analyzer cannot identify whether congestion is caused
by local flow contention or remote PFC, and how badly the PFC
is pausing the victim flow due to the lack of PFC consideration
in diagnosis algorithms. Second, the diagnosis analyzer cannot
identify the true anomaly type due to the lack of PFC causality
understanding. For example, PFC deadlock will be misdiagnosed
if the loop is not recognized. Third, the diagnosis analyzer cannot
attribute the anomaly to the root-cause flow events, even with

Complexity of RDMA NPAs

There are two key complexities in RDMA NPA diagnosis.
Frequent and transient queue congestion. The traffic in RDMA
networks exhibits a wide and scattered pattern, especially the significant occurrence of bursty mice flows. Exacerbated by the prevalence of incast traffic patterns [18] and line-rate start of RDMA
congestion control [13, 57, 80], mice flows can easily overwhelm
the shallow buffers of switches quickly [20], resulting in frequent
and transient congestion. Worse yet, even with expensive emerging
switching hardware such as NVIDIA Spectrum-X [49], fine-grained
load balance is still challenging in large RDMA networks [59],
which further increases the possibility of congestion.
PFC complexity. PFC introduces a unique congestion pattern in
RDMA networks. Unlike traditional TCP networks where switch
queue congestion stems solely from local flow contention within
queues, PFC-induced congestion spreads from downstream nodes
independently of local queue conditions. This creates novel performance anomalies analyzed in §2.1. Worse yet, PFC invalidates
conventional diagnostic approaches based on local flow interaction
analysis [66], and such methods cannot identify root causes located
multiple hops away. As Figure 1(a) demonstrates, F1’s degradation
at SW1.P1 actually originates from the bursts at SW4.P1 (propagated via PFC). Only analyzing local contention between F1 and F2
would miss the true root cause at SW4.P1, which is hops away and
even out of F1’s path.

2.3

Problems of Current Work

In this subsection, we summarize why existing methods fall short
in accurately and efficiently diagnosing RDMA NPAs.

483

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

Anomaly: PFC Deadlock
Root Cause: {݂ଵ , … }

Switch CPU
Collector Agent
Switch ASIC

Poll

Notify

Infer Causality
Update
PFC
Read Status Update

Port
Traffic
Meter

InPort
OutPort

Operator

Infer

Port
Telemetry

Update

Flow
Telemetry

Analyzer

P2

F1

Anomaly Diagnosis
Provenance Construction

P3

F2
Report

InPort P

Port Status

0000

0000

0000

0000

ON

OutPort 2

1000

0000

0000

0000

ON

TESsdf
OutPort 3
sdfT

1000

0000

0000

0000

OFF

0000

0000

0000

0000

OFF

OutPort 1

Poll

P1

P3 is PFC

Port Meter causal
InPort
to 1 InPort 2 InPort 3

P5 F3 P4

...

SW

OutPort P

P1’s flow

…

PAUSE

Normal Packet
PFC Frame
Polling Packet

...

P3 is PFC causal to P1

Figure 3: Hawkeye PFC causality structure.
Figure 2: Hawkeye framework.

polling packets to them. Simultaneously, the switch notifies its CPU
to perform asynchronous telemetry collection without compromising packet forwarding. Third, Hawkeye runs a provenance-based
offline diagnosis algorithm (§3.5). The analyzer constructs a heterogeneous provenance graph describing the comprehensive anomaly
breakdown, including the flow victimization extents, PFC causality,
and each flow’s contribution to this anomaly. Then it conducts a
diagnosis procedure to trace the congestion causality and pinpoint
the root causes.

extensive flow interaction analysis in current switches. For the root
cause flows (e.g., bursts in SW4.P1 in Figure 1(a)) outside the victim
flow path (e.g., F1 in Figure 1(a)), the diagnoser can only attribute
the anomalies to flows sharing queues with the victim flow, and
cannot catch the real root causes correctly.

3 Hawkeye Design
3.1 Design Goal

3.3
Based on the above analysis, diagnosing RDMA network performance anomalies should fulfill the following goals: 1) It should provide fine-grained PFC visibility. The monitor should capture flow
victimization characteristics, distinguishing between PFC-induced
congestion and conventional flow contention while quantifying
respective victimization extents. 2) It should efficiently collect the
telemetry relevant to the victim flows. The system must quickly
and exactly identify all causally relevant switches on both the victim flow path and PFC spreading path, to comprehensively cover
the anomaly provenance while minimizing the size of collected
telemetry. 3) It should accurately identify the anomaly and the corresponding root cause. After collecting the telemetry, the analyzer
should comprehensively understand the anomaly, including the detailed anomaly scenario (e.g., PFC-related anomalies or normal flow
contention), how the PFC spreads (i.e., the PFC spreading path), and
where the anomaly originates (e.g., micro-bursts, load imbalance
or host PFC injection).

3.2

Telemetry Logging

Awareness of PFC visibility and causality. To support PFCrelated telemetry, Hawkeye sets up a PFC status register at the
egress pipeline for each port, as shown in the "Port Status" column
in Figure 3. When receiving a PFC frame at the ingress pipeline of
a specific port, Hawkeye passes the frame into the egress pipeline,
extracts the pause time encoded in the frame and updates the port
status and remaining pause time (refer to the red line in Figure 6)2 .
Accordingly, when a data packet enqueues during the paused status
of the port, it is regarded as a paused packet, and the corresponding
telemetry is updated correspondingly. Furthermore, to analyze PFC
causality, Hawkeye records the port-level traffic causality at the
egress pipeline, as shown in Figure 3. Specially, to monitor the
PFC spreading contribution between ports, Hawkeye sets up a
traffic meter for each port pair to record the traffic volume. This
is much finer grained than existing approaches like ITSY [67] that
uses only a single bit to note the presence of traffic between ports.
For example, as shown in Figure 3, although both P3 and P4 are
PFC congested, P4 is irrelevant to the PFC backpressure at P1 because there is no traffic sending from P1 to P4, and thus P4 does
not contribute to the packet accumulation at P1. Therefore, once
the upstream switch connected with P1 complains about its PFC
congestion, this switch can identify the causal ports relevant to the
PFC backpressure as P3.
Epoch-based multi-granularity telemetry. Hawkeye logs flowlevel and port-level telemetry in an epoch-based manner for finegrained monitoring, as shown in Figure 4. The switch maintains a
set of epochs in the egress pipeline as a ring buffer. To index the
epoch to which a packet belongs at line rate, we utilize the timestamp in the packet metadata. Specifically, programmable switches

Overview and Workflow

Figure 2 shows the overall framework of Hawkeye. First, Hawkeye
passively records the telemetry with PFC visibility and causality
awareness (§3.3). It enables packet-level port PFC status visibility to
record PFC impact, and logs PFC causality to trace PFC spreading.
It then aggregates the detailed flow and port telemetry information
augmented with PFC impact for comprehensive diagnosis. Second,
Hawkeye deploys fast in-data-plane PFC causality analysis and
CPU-based telemetry collection (§3.4). To start diagnosis and trigger
the PFC causality analysis, we set a host-based agent monitoring
the flow performance. Once performance degradation is detected,
the detection agent will send a "polling" packet with the victim
flow information encoded into the network. When a Hawkeye
switch receives the polling packet, it infers the causal neighboring
switches relevant to this anomaly at line rate and distributes the

2 To enable PFC awareness of Hawkeye on Tofino, we have to pass PFC frames into

P4 pipelines and record PFC status using extra registers, since Tofino does not support
the monitoring of certain PFC features natively, such as the real-time PFC status of
each port.

484

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Timestamp
…… 00000010

[݇ − ܿ: ݇)
Cycle ID

Epoch
Indexing

Epoch 0

Index

Data

……

Epoch 1

0

0110

1

1101

…

…

01
[݇: ݇ + ‫)ݓ‬
Epoch ID

Port Telemetry

Epoch 2

Packet

Epoch 3

Flow Telemetry

Packet Metadata

Index

Data

5-tuple Ingress Port Egress Port

0

1001

1

1100

…

…

Indexing by Hash

Table 1: Polling flag specifications.
Polling Flag Meaning
00
Useless tracing
01
(Default) Only trace along victim flow path
10
Only trace along PFC causality
11
Trace both of them
Egress Pipeline Pk
Traffic
Manager
PFC
PFC Status
Update
Pass Table
Read
Pass to Egress
Update
Normal Packet
Traffic meter
Forward Table Forward
Read
Update
Read
Polling Packet
Port
Forward Table
Telemetry
Yes
Read
Update
Multicast
Flow
Flag==1* ?
Telemetry
Yes
No
Unicast
Is Mirrored
Flag == 01 ?
Packet?

Ingress Pipeline Pi

Figure 4: Telemetry layout.
L2 Header
DST MAC

SRC MAC

Polling Packet Header Format
ETH TYPE

POLLING FLAG

Reserved
ETH TYPE

Indicating
Forwarding

EVENT ID

VIC FLOW 5-TUPLE

No
Is Pk on Victim
Flow path?
Yes
#Paused[Pk]>0?

Forward
No
#Paused[Pk]>0?
Yes
Meter[Pi][Pk]
>0?

Yes

No

Flag=11 Flag=01

Yes
Flag=10 Egress
Mirror

Yes, Send out (via CPU Port)

Figure 5: Hawkeye polling packet format.
assign each enqueued packet a unique 48-bit timestamp with nanosecond granularity, where the least significant bit corresponds to 1 ns.
Consequently, we can select several bits from this 48-bit timestamp to demarcate the epoch. For example, assuming that the
epoch size is 1 ms, which is approximately 220 ns, we can utilize timestamp[21:20] to identify indices of different epochs, as
shown in Figure 4. In addition, to distinguish the sequential order of
different epochs in the ring buffer, Hawkeye also records the 8 bits
preceding the epoch index as the epoch ID, e.g., timestamp[29:22].
Once the epoch ID in the incoming packet timestamp is newer than
that stored in the current epoch, which means a wrap-around, the
register value will be reset and start to count from zero.
For flow-level telemetry, Hawkeye records the flow 5-tuple,
packet count, and egress queuing depth, similar to existing work [22,
47]. Additionally, to enable fine-grained PFC visibility, Hawkeye
also records the number of packets paused by PFC for each flow.
For each incoming packet, Hawkeye first locates the right flow
telemetry table based on its epoch, and the slot in this table is indexed by the hash value of the packet’s 5-tuple. Then a bit-wise
XOR between the packet’s 5-tuple and the 5-tuple in the slot is
executed. The result 0 indicates this packet belongs to an existing
flow and the telemetry will be updated accordingly; the result 1
indicates this packet belongs to a new flow, and the existing entry
will be evicted and stored at the controller. Moreover, since PFC
spreads hop by hop, diagnosing the anomaly usually requires aggregating flow-level data into port level, requiring considerable
computation overhead on the data plane. We therefore record the
port-level telemetry in the egress pipeline, to avoid this expensive
computation. For each port, Hawkeye records the number of packets paused by PFC and egress queue depth. The port-level data is
indexed by the port number in each epoch, and is also updated by
each incoming packet, similar to the flow-level data.

3.4

Telemetry Collection

Anomaly-driven detection agent. Rather than monitoring anomalies on switches [66, 79], Hawkeye detects the NPA by deploying
a host-based detection agent. The detection agent monitors the

485

Figure 6: Hawkeye PFC causality analysis.
end-to-end performance of flows (e.g., RTT), and triggers an anomaly diagnosis event when the performance degradation exceeds
a threshold. This host-side triggering mechanism provides two
key advantages over switch-triggering approaches. First, host-side
triggering eliminates duplicated efforts of PFC tracing. Due to the
cascading property of PFC congestion, there are usually multiple
switches on a PFC path detecting the anomaly simultaneously and
initiating the procedure of PFC causality analysis. In contrast, by
sending polling packets from the source host and piggybacking
PFC tracing instructions, each switch forwards the extra control
packets only once to completely cover PFC causality. Second, innetwork monitoring cannot obtain some high-level performance
metrics, such as RTT [36, 45], flow completion time [72] or job
completion time [53], which usually require massive information
from host-side applications.
Once performance degradation is identified, the host-end detection agent generates a polling packet into the network, which is
assigned to a separate queue that is not paused by PFC, to further
trigger the telemetry collection and diagnosis. The polling packet
format is illustrated in Figure 5. By default, the polling flag is set to
01 (see Table 1), instructing switches to forward the packet along
the path of the victim flow, whose 5-tuple is encoded in the polling
header. Once PFC is detected on the victim flow path, it will also
be forwarded to the PFC spreading path to trace the causality (flag
1*), so that the complete anomaly causality is covered. To avoid
duplicate detection for a single flow, Hawkeye drops polling packets with the same 5-tuple within a certain time interval. All polling
packets are set to the same priority as control packets (e.g., CNP) to
avoid potential queuing delay. The forwarding of polling packets
is conducted exclusively by the switch data plane, as shown in the
gold dotted line Figure 6.
In-data-plane causality analysis. Hawkeye presents a line-rate
causality analysis mechanism that can accurately locate all causally
relevant switches on the paths of the victim flow and PFC spreading,
without covering unnecessary ones or introducing additional overhead. Specifically, each Hawkeye switch analyzes its PFC causality

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

and further forwards the polling packet to the causally relevant
switches. The causality analysis workflow of polling packets inside
a switch is demonstrated in Figure 6. First, when a switch on the
victim flow path receives a polling packet marked as 01 (e.g., SW1
in Figure 1(a)), the polling packet is unicasted to the same port
as the victim flow by extracting the IP address (in the 5-tuple) encoded in the packet. The switch then checks the number of paused
packets on the egress pipeline. If the victim flow is PFC paused, the
higher bit of the polling flag is set, notifying the next switch (from
which PFC frames spread) to analyze its PFC causality. The ingress
pipeline of the downstream switch (e.g., SW2), multicasts the 1*
polling packet to each egress port, so that every port analyze wether
it is related to the anomaly. They check the PFC causality structure
(maintained as Figure 3) and only emits the polling packets on
the ports causally relevant to this PFC congestion (e.g., SW2.P3).
Such PFC causality analysis procedure is conducted recursively hop
by hop, until the last switch whose egress port is connected to a
host or has no PFC paused packets, which respectively means the
PFC comes from host injection or the flow contention within this
queue. Note that, once receiving the polling packet, each switch
will also notify its controller through mirroring the polling packet
to the CPU port, triggering the asynchronous telemetry collection.
Consequently, all the telemetry data on the PFC spreading path
and victim flow path will be collected, and the polling packet is
transmitted at line rate without disrupting the collection.
Controller-assisted data collection. Upon receiving the polling
packet, the switch reports the telemetry it stored to the analyzer
server. Although programmable switches are able to generate packets and take telemetry data as the payload, it is cumbersome to
dump all the data fully using data plane packet generation. Since
each stage only allows one memory access, dumping the telemetry
for all flows requires numerous recirculations. Besides, due to the
limited PHV field size of programmable switches, a large number
of packets need to be generated to dump all the data. Consequently,
in-data-plane packet generation will impose a non-negligible overhead on traffic forwarding. To alleviate these problems, we design
a controller-assisted data collection mechanism that enables the
asynchronous telemetry collection without affecting the data plane
forwarding. Once receiving the mirrored polling packet, the controller then starts to read the telemetry register, filters out useless
telemetry such as zero-value data slots, and aggregates the data
into a large packet reporting to the analyzer. The packet size can
be as large as the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), thereby
reducing the number of telemetry packets. To prevent duplicate
data collection on one switch caused by multiple flows’ polling
packets (e.g., F1-F4 in Figure 1(c)), Hawkeye set a time interval
between two telemetry collections. Note that Hawkeye can easily
support multiple NPAs concurrently. If two NPAs do not have the
path overlap, their telemetry data can be collected and diagnosed
independently.

3.5

PFC at each hop and their corresponding impact extents; 2) how
PFC spreads to the victim flow path and which flow contributes to
this spreading; 3) where is the initial congestion point and what
is the root cause. Hawkeye addresses these challenges through: 1)
constructing a heterogeneous wait-for provenance graph to comprehensively describe the congestion causality(§3.5.1); 2) identifying
the anomaly case and locating the root causes by analyzing the
provenance and matching anomaly signatures (§3.5.2).
3.5.1 Provenance Graph Construction. The heterogeneous wait-for
provenance graph encodes the congestion causality between flows
and ports. Specifically, flows and ports are represented as the nodes
in the graph, and directed weighted edges between the nodes are
defined to present their wait-for relationship [76]. Hawkeye first
adds port-level edges presenting the PFC causality, then adds flowport edges demonstrating the PFC pausing impact on flows, and
finally adds port-flow edges indicating flow contention. The formal
procedure is described in Algorithm 1.
Port-level edges. We define the port-level provenance graph to
describe PFC causality including the spreading path and the initial
congestion point. For a port 𝑃𝑖 paused by PFC, it actually waits for
the downstream congested ports to drain out the queues. Therefore, we define a wait-for directed edge from a congested egress
port 𝑃𝑖 (e.g., SW2.P3 in Figure 1(a)) to each downstream congested
egress port 𝑃 𝑗 (e.g., SW4.P1 in Figure 1(a)). For 𝑃 𝑗 , its contribution to the PFC congestion at 𝑃𝑖 is determined by the traffic rate
between 𝑃𝑖 and 𝑃 𝑗 , 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃𝑖 ] [𝑃 𝑗 ], and the queue buildup of 𝑃 𝑗 ,
𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ]. Therefore, we define the edge weight from 𝑃𝑖 to 𝑃 𝑗 as
𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃 ] [𝑃 ]

𝑖
𝑗
𝑤𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑃𝑖 ] ∗ Í 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑃
∗𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ]. For 𝑃 𝑗 with
𝑖 ] [𝑃𝑘 ]
𝑘
𝑁 packets enqueuing over a period, 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑃 𝑗 ] can be calculated
as the average 𝑁1 ∗ Σ𝑘 ∈ [1,𝑁 ] 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 ).
Flow-port edges. We define flow-port edges to represent which
ports pause a certain flow and the corresponding severity. Specifically, for a flow 𝑓𝑖 which traverses through a PFC-paused port 𝑃 𝑗 ,
such as F1 in SW1.P1 in Figure 1(a), 𝑓𝑖 is waiting for 𝑃 𝑗 to restart
packet forwarding. We hence add an edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑃 𝑗 , and set
the weight as the number of paused packets for 𝑓𝑖 at 𝑃 𝑗 , denoted as
𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝑛𝑢𝑚(𝑓𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑗 ).
Port-flow edges. Conversely, for some ports encountering flow
contention, they are actually waiting for the flows to be drained
from their queues. We characterize the wait-for relationship from
a port to a flow using the flow’s contribution to the overall flow
contention in the port. When a packet 𝑝𝑘𝑡 of flow 𝑓𝑖 enqueues with
𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡), a flow-level wait-for edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑓 𝑗 can be defined
with the weight as the number of 𝑓 𝑗 ’s packets in 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝑝𝑘𝑡), denoted by 𝑥 𝑗 (𝑝𝑘𝑡). Therefore, the average wait-for edge from 𝑓𝑖 to 𝑓 𝑗
over a period can be calculated as 𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) = Σ𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 ∈ 𝑓𝑖 𝑥 𝑗 (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑘 )/𝑁𝑖 ,
where 𝑁𝑖 is the number of 𝑓𝑖 ’s packets in this period. This wait-for
weight is exactly the congestion contribution of flow 𝑓 𝑗 to 𝑓𝑖 . However, 𝑓 𝑗 ’s contribution to the overall flow contention can not be
described by directly aggregating the wait-for weights to 𝑓 𝑗 from
every 𝑓𝑖 , since 𝑓 𝑗 may also be blocked by other flows. For example,
a large flow blocked by short micro-bursts may have a high waitfor weight from other flows, although it is actually a victim [37].
Therefore, the wait-for weight from 𝑓 𝑗 to other flows should be
subtracted. We hence finally denote the port-flow wait-for weight
to 𝑓 𝑗 as Σ𝑖 𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) − Σ𝑘 𝑤 (𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓𝑘 ). Flows with positive and negative

Provenance-based Diagnosis

Hawkeye proposes a diagnosis paradigm that can completely analyze the anomaly causality. Due to the PFC complexity (§2.2),
diagnosing RDMA NPAs should answer the following questions:
1) whether the victim flow encounters normal flow contention or

486

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

including the root causes and PFC-spreading ones. The formal diagnosis procedure is shown in Algorithm 2. The supported signatures
can be extended if more anomalies are identified.

Algorithm 1: Provenance Construction Procedure.
Input: 𝑃 - Port list in reported telemetry; 𝐹 - Flow list in reported telemetry;
𝑇 - Epoch size; 𝑁 - Network topology
Output: 𝐺 - Provenance graph
1 # Construct port-level provenance
2 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do
3
𝐺 .AddVertex(𝑝𝑖 , 𝑃𝑂𝑅𝑇 𝐿𝐸𝑉 𝐸𝐿)
4
𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝𝑖 ] = 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝𝑖 ]/𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑝𝑖 ]
5
𝑠𝑢𝑚 _𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] = Σ𝑝 𝑗 ∈𝑝𝑖 .𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑟 _𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ]

Table 2: Representative signatures.
Anomaly

for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do
for 𝑝 𝑗 ∈ 𝑝𝑖 .𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑟 _𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ : 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ] > 0 do
8
𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 = 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[𝑝𝑖 ] ∗ 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ] [𝑝 𝑗 ] ∗
𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ[𝑝 𝑗 ]/𝑠𝑢𝑚 _𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟 [𝑝𝑖 ]
9
𝐺 .AddEdge( (𝑝𝑖 → 𝑝 𝑗 ), 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 )

Root Cause

6

7

Micro-bursts incast

Flow contention
(Micro-bursts)

∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : (∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 :
(out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 1

for 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 do
11
𝐺 .AddVertex(𝑓𝑖 , 𝐹 𝐿𝑂𝑊 𝐿𝐸𝑉 𝐸𝐿)

10

In-loop
deadlock

# Construct flow-port provenance
13 for (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐹 × 𝑃 : 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) > 0 do
14
𝐺 .AddEdge( ( 𝑓𝑖 → 𝑝 𝑗 ), 𝑝𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 𝑗 ) )
12

Flow contention

# Construct port-flow provenance
16 for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑃 do
17
𝑆𝑒𝑞 = ReplayQueue(𝑝𝑖 )
18
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 =Contribution(𝑆𝑒𝑞 )
19
for 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝐹 do
20
𝐺 .AddEdge( (𝑝𝑖 → 𝑓 𝑗 ), 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 [ 𝑓 𝑗 ] )

Out-of-loop
deadlock

∧ (∃𝑝 ′′ ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝑝 ′ :
(out-degP (𝑝) > 1
Flow contention

∧ ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : out-deg𝑃 (𝑝 ′ ) = 0
∧ (∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
(𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) > 0))

Out-of-loop
deadlock

Function ReplayQueue(p):
for 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 do
23
for 𝑗 ∈ 𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 ) do
24
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 = 𝑗 ∗ 𝑇 /𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑝 )
25
𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 + = (𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 , 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 )

21

Host PFC injection

22

27

∧ ∀𝑝 ′ : (𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 → 𝑝 ′ ∈ loop))
(𝑝 ′′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0)

15

26

Signatures
∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ :
(out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 0
∧ (∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
(𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹
∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0 ∧ burst-flow(𝑓 )))

∃𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝, ∃𝑝 ′ :
(out-degP (𝑝) > 1
∧ ∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ(𝑝, 𝑝 ′ ) ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 : out-deg𝑃 (𝑝 ′ ) = 0
∧ ∀𝑓 : (𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 → weight(𝑝 ′, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0)

Sort 𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 by ascending order of 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
return [𝑝𝑘𝑡 ∈ 𝑒𝑛𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ]

Function Contribution(Seq):
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 = { } 𝑊 = { {0} } 𝑤 = { {0} }
30
for 𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝑒𝑞 do
31
for 𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 ∈ 𝑞𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ) do
32
𝑊 [ 𝑓 (𝑝𝑘𝑡𝑖 ) ] [ 𝑓 (𝑝𝑘𝑡 𝑗 ) ]+ = 1

28

PFC storm

Host PFC injection

∃𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ ⊆ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ :
(out-deg𝑃 (𝑝) = 0
∧ ∀𝑓 : (𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 → weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0)

Normal flow
contention

Flow contention

(∀𝑢, 𝑣 ∈ 𝐺 𝑃 : 𝑢 ≠ 𝑣 → (𝑢, 𝑣) ∉ 𝐸𝑃 )
∧ (∃𝑝 ∈ 𝐺 𝑃 , ∃𝐹𝑐 ⊆ 𝐹, ∀𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑐 :
((𝑝, 𝑓 ) ∈ 𝐸𝑃 𝐹 ∧ weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0))

29

33
34
35
36
37
38

PFC backpressure by flow contention. This anomaly case is
characterized by 1) a high number of paused packets of the victim
flow, 2) a PFC path on the port-level sub-graph, and 3) flow contention at the initially congested port. As shown in Figure 12(a), F1
is paused at SW1.P1 by PFC instead of normal flow contention (the
dotted flow-port lines). And the initial node at the PFC path has
a large number of outgoing port-flow edges, remarking that the
root cause is flow contention. The major contributing flows are also
remarked by the positive weights (marked in red) directed to them.
The flow contention cause can be further analyzed. For example,
incast bursts can be identified by analyzing the contributing flows’
paths and throughput [46, 79], and load imbalance can be located
by calculating ECMP imbalance ratio. We omit these details orthogonal to our work which can be further integrated into Hawkeye.
Besides the root-cause flows, other anomaly-contributing flows can
be identified. For example, F2 is responsible for the PFC spreading
from SW2.P3 to SW1.P1, since it is paused at both ports.
PFC storm. Similarly, Hawkeye locates the initially congested port
node along the port-level edges in the provenance graph. However,
since PFC storm is usually caused by host PFC injection, the initial
port node has no flow contention, i.e., no positive outgoing portflow edges. Therefore, the root cause can be located as host issues,
as shown in Figure 12(b).
Initiator-in/out-of-loop deadlock. Hawkeye detects PFC deadlocks by searching for loops starting from the port pausing the
victim flow. Hawkeye further identifies the deadlock types and

for (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐹 × 𝐹 do
𝑤 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] [ 𝑓 𝑗 ] = 𝑊 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] [ 𝑓 𝑗 ]/𝑝𝑘𝑡 _𝑛𝑢𝑚[ 𝑓𝑖 ]
for 𝑓 𝑗 ∈ 𝐹 do
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏 [ 𝑓𝑖 ] = Σ𝑤 (𝑓𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 ) − Σ𝑤 (𝑓 𝑗 , 𝑓𝑖 )
return 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑏
return 𝐺

weights are contention contributors and victims, respectively. Note
that in real networks, the queue may experience PFC pause and
flow contention simultaneously. The packets in the queue may also
includes paused packets, which is not congested by local flow contention. In this case, the port-flow edge construction excludes the
paused packets in queues.
3.5.2 Anomaly Breakdown and Diagnosis. The provenance graph
provides a comprehensive breakdown for the anomaly causality,
including the victimization extent from flow contention and PFC
at each hop, the PFC spreading causality, and each flow’s contribution. We present the signatures of representative RDMA NPAs
mentioned in §2.1, describing the corresponding graph feature of
each anomaly. Their detailed formal definitions are shown in Table 2, and their example provenance graphs are demonstrated in
Figure 12. Hawkeye traverses the graph and matches the signatures
to identify the anomaly and locate the anomaly-contributing flows,

487

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

root causes by analyzing the port-port and port-flow edges. Specifically, on one hand, the initially congested queue may be located in
the port within the deadlock loop (i.e., initiator-in-loop deadlock),
which is usually caused by the accidental flow contention. In this
case, one of the port nodes in the loop will have multiple outgoing
positive edges to a set of flows, as shown in Figure 12(c). On the
other hand, PFC can be injected by a host or caused by flow contention in a port out of the loop (i.e., initiator-out-of-loop deadlock).
In this case, there will be a port node in the loop with multiple neighboring port nodes, which leads to a PFC path ending at the initial
congestion node, as shown in Figure 12(d). Analyzing the port-flow
edges on it can identify whether the root cause is flow contention
or PFC injection. The PFC spreading causality of Hawkeye also
enables analysis on circular buffer dependency (CBD) for deadlock
prevention and resolution [20, 27, 67]. As shown in Figure 12(c),
F1-F4 causes the PFC spreading loop. Further troubleshooting, such
as routing configuration checking [7] can be conducted.
Traditional congestion by flow contention. Although flow contention congestion in RDMA networks is almost impossible without
generating PFC, it can also be diagnosed by Hawkeye, which degenerates into a traditional congestion diagnosis. In this case, there is
no port-level edges because of no PFC spreading path. But there is a
set of port nodes containing port-flow edges with positive weights
which point to the contributors of flow contention.

Algorithm 2: Provenance Analysis Procedure.
Data: 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) - Neighboring flow nodes of port 𝑝 ; 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑃 (𝑝 ) Neighboring port nodes of port 𝑝 ; outdegP (𝑝 ) - Port-level outdegree
for port 𝑝
Input: 𝐺 - Provenance graph; 𝑁 - Network topology; 𝑓𝑣 - Victim flow
1 Function AnalyzeFlowContention(p):
2
# Flow contention analysis
3
if max 𝑓 ∈𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) ≤ 0 then
4
# No flow contention
5
check PFC injection from port 𝑝 ’s peer device
6

else
for 𝑓 ∈ 𝑁 𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝐹 (𝑝 ) : weight(𝑝, 𝑓 ) > 0 do
# check flow contention causes
check flow throughput
check flow priority
check ECMP imbalance ratio

7
8
9
10
11

Function DeadlockDiagnose(𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ):
# Root cause
14
if ∃𝑝 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 : outdeg𝑃 (𝑝 ) > 1 then
15
# Initial node out of loop
16
for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ Neibr𝑃 (𝑝 ) ∧ ¬𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 do
17
CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , [ ] )

12

13

18

else
# Initial node in loop
for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 do
AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝𝑖 )

19
20
21

22
23

# Buffer dependency analysis
print port-nodes in loops

Function CheckPortNode(𝑝, 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 ):
# DFS-based check port
26
check whether loop exists
27
if 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 contains loop then
28
# Deadlock
29
DeadlockDiagnose(𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 )

24

25

3.6

Implementation

We implement a prototype of Hawkeye at Intel Tofino hardware
using ∼2500 lines of P4 code and ∼3000 lines of C code. We also
implement an NS-3 version based on HPCC simulator [2]. The root
cause analyzer is implemented in Python. We implement a detection
agent prototype on NVIDIA BlueField-3 DPU. The source code is
publicly available at Github [62].
Host detection agent. The detection agent prototype is implemented on NVIDIA BlueField-3 DPU, based on PCC (Programmable
Congestion Control) in DOCA [48]. The agent monitors each flow’s
RTT on the data-path accelerator via PCC’s API. Once the RTT of a
specific flow exceeds the threshold, the agent sends a polling packet
encoding the victim flow 5-tuple and start a diagnosis. Note that,
we use RTT as an example performance metric, and more metrics
such as throughput, flow-completion time and even job-completion
time can be integrated to support flexible detection.
Enable PFC awareness for P4. In Tofino, PFC port control is
orthogonal to P4 application logic, and PFC frames are filtered out
by MAC without sending to the P4 pipeline by default, leading
to limited PFC visibility. To enable awareness of PFC status, we
set the filterpf bit to 0 in rxconfig register on MAC so that
PFC frames can be passed to the application logic. Once receiving a PFC frame at the ingress P4 pipeline, the PFC frame is then
passed to the egress pipeline so that the corresponding port status register can be updated. Then the PFC-related telemetry can
be maintained accordingly. Fortunately, emerging RDMA-native
switches support significantly enhanced monitoring capabilities
and expose interfaces for monitoring PFC status at switch ports,
eliminating the need for additional PFC frame processing, thereby
easing Hawkeye’s implementation.

30
31
32
33
34

if outdeg𝑃 (𝑝 ) == 0 then
# Initial nodes of PFC spreading
AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝 )
for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ Neibr𝑃 (𝑝 ) do
CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 _𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡 + 𝑝 )

for 𝑝𝑖 ∈ 𝑓𝑣 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ do
if weight(𝑓𝑣 , 𝑝𝑖 ) > 0 then
37
# check PFC causality
38
CheckPortNode(𝑝𝑖 , [ ] )

35

36

39
40
41

else
# normal flow contention
AnalyzeFlowContention(𝑝𝑖 )

Hawkeye in Tofino hardware. The polling packet forwarding
logic is implemented in the ingress pipeline to determine which
port(s) to forward the polling packet. The port status, the PFC
causality meter, and the telemetry are collectively implemented in
the egress pipeline. To accelerate the bulk register read performance
on CPU, we utilize the REGISTER_SYNC table operation provided by
BF_Runtime, the runtime library on the controller, which utilizes
DMA transfer to quickly synchronize the whole register array to
the control plane. Then the register value can be quickly read inside
the software.

4

Evaluation

We evaluate Hawkeye in both large-scale simulation and real
testbed experiments to answer the following questions:

488

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

• Can Hawkeye accurately diagnose RDMA NPAs (§4.2)?
• How efficiently does Hawkeye collect the telemetry and
diagnose the root cause (§4.3)?
• Can Hawkeye cover common RDMA NPAs (§4.4)?
• Can Hawkeye be efficiently implemented on current network hardware (§4.5)?

4.1

recall, since Hawkeye triggers diagnosis once RTT exceeds the
threshold, nearly all the anomalies can be reported and thus false
negativeness is rare.
Precision& recall v.s. baselines. We compare the precision and
recall between Hawkeye and other baselines in diagnosing PFCrelated anomalies and normal flow contention. We deploy SpiderMon [66] and NetSight [24] as the baselines from traditional networks. SpiderMon monitors the queuing delay of every packet and
reactively analyzes the flow interaction within the queues on the
victim flow path; NetSight collects per-packet postcards at each
switch across the network. Since traditional solutions cannot handle
RDMA NPAs well, we also propose another 2 baselines derived from
Hawkeye. The "full polling" method collects the complete telemetry
across all the switches in the network. The "victim-only" method
only polls the telemetry on the victim flow path without tracing
the switches on PFC spreading paths. As the sub-optimal results
of Hawkeye are already presented in Figure 7, we demonstrates
the upper bound of precision and recall each method presents over
different anomalies with its optimal parameters, as depicted in Figure 8. Hawkeye shows an upper bound of accuracy at the same
level as the full polling method, since it also covers the complete
causal telemetry. However, only collecting telemetry on the victim flows presents much lower precision, especially on deadlock
diagnosis, since the causality coverage is limited. Specifically, when
diagnosing burst-induced PFC backpressure, PFC storm, and normal flow contention, the victim flow triggering the diagnosis may
pass through the initial congestion point, which means the PFC
path is exactly the victim flow path. Therefore, the precision of
the victim-only method is closed to Hawkeye. In PFC deadlock
scenarios, each flow typically occupies only a part of the loop. As a
result, tracing only the victim flow path results in incomplete provenance graph and lower accuracy. Furthermore, since traditional
baselines do not have the visibility for PFC, they can hardly diagnose the PFC-related NPAs, despite high effectiveness on normal
flow contention.

Experimental Setup

Topology. We set up a Fat-Tree (K=4) topology [14] with 20 switches
on NS-3 simulation. The link bandwidth is 100 Gbps and the link
delay is 2 𝜇𝑠. Our hardware testbed partitions 2 pipelines of a Tofino
switch into 2 logical switches. The logical links between them are
emulated by directly attached cables. Two Dell PowerEdge R7525
servers are connected to each logical switch.
Workload. We set up an empirical RoCEv2 workload to evaluate
Hawkeye, which comes from an industrial operating data center
and displays a long-tailed flow size distribution [54]. Specifically,
< 80% of flows are smaller than 10 MB, < 90% of flows are smaller
than 100 MB, and about 10% flows are 100 MB ∼ 300 MB. The
arrival time of flows is based on a Poisson process, the arrival
rate of flows is varied based on the link load of the network, and
the source and destination of flows are selected randomly. For
each anomaly scenario, we craft 100 traffic traces following the
described traffic patterns with different link load. We inject a group
of synchronized short-lived bursts passing through the same link
to craft PFC backpressure by flow contention, configure a host
to continuously inject PFC frames and cause PFC storm. We also
simulate routing misconfigurations to trigger the initiator-in/outof-loop deadlocks.

4.2

Overall Effectiveness

In this subsection, we evaluate the effectiveness of Hawkeye. We
first evaluate Hawkeye’s diagnosis accuracy with different parameters, and compare the accuracy with other baselines using NS-3
simulation.
Precision & recall with different parameters. We define a true
positive result iff it identifies both the exact anomaly case (e.g., a
deadlock) and the corresponding root causes (e.g., the burst flows).
False positives mean incorrect anomaly cases or root causes are
reported, while false negatives occur when an existing anomaly is
not reported. We evaluate the precision and recall over different
PFC anomalies, as mentioned in §3.5.2, with different combinations
of parameters: detection threshold and epoch size. The threshold
is normalized as percentage of RTT (i.e., 200% ∼ 500% RTT), and
the epoch size varies from 100us to 2ms. As shown in Figure 7,
Hawkeye can achieve 100% precision and recall with correctly
configured parameters, and the precision is mainly affected by the
epoch size of the telemetry. Specifically, as the epoch increases,
the accuracy of flow contention identification decreases, thereby
reducing the locating precision of transient burst flows and the
diagnosis precision. Besides, a too long epoch may mistakenly
correlate two events and make wrong causality. For example, a
slight flow contention ending before the host PFC injection within
the same epoch maybe mistakenly regarded as one NPA. Then the
diagnosis may be misled into attributing the PFC causes to flow
contention, reducing the precision consequently. Considering the

4.3

Efficiency Breakdown

We evaluate the efficiency of each component in Hawkeye.
Telemetry logging effectiveness. Hawkeye logs port-level and
flow-level telemetry to construct complete causality and make finegrained diagnosis. We evaluate the effectiveness of the telemetry
at different granularity. We set up 2 baselines: 1) Port-level only
telemetry system, which only stores the port-level telemetry including the paused packet count at each port and the port-level
traffic meter. The port-only method still supports in-network PFC
causality analysis. 2) Flow-level only telemetry system, which only
stores the flow-level telemetry including the paused packet count
and queue depth for each flow. The flow-only method is thus unable to trace PFC due to the lack of port-level traffic causality.
Figure 10 demonstrates the precision and recall of different methods for monitoring traffic containing mixed different anomalies.
Two baselines present much lower performance, due to the lack
of complete causality. Specifically, the port-level method cannot
identify the flow contention and therefore misses the root causes,
although it can detect the PFC path. And the flow-level method can

489

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

(a) PFC backpressure by flow contention.

Shicheng Wang et al.

(b) PFC storm by host injection.

(c) Initiator-in-loop deadlock.

(d) Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock.

Figure 7: Precision & recall of typical anomaly cases over different epoch sizes and thresholds.

(a) Precision v.s. baselines.

Figure 10: Diagnosis effectiveness of different telemetry systems.

(b) Recall v.s. baselines.

Figure 8: Precision & recall upper bound v.s. baselines.

(a) Processing overhead.

Figure 11: Count of Collected switch & causal switch
coverage ratio.

very low bandwidth overhead. The victim-only method presents
approximately lower bandwidth overhead because the polling packets are only forwarded to the switches on the victim flow path. The
full polling method causes no extra bandwidth since it does not
need polling packets to trigger the telemetry collection on switches.
SpiderMon adds an extra 16-bit header field in every packet to
record the cumulative delay, leading to higher bandwidth overhead.
NetSight generates considerable per-packet additional bandwidth
overhead, with about 15 bytes per packet and per average hop count
due to the postcard for the packets at every switch.
Telemetry-collected switch. Hawkeye collects the telemetry on
the switches related to the anomaly via in-network PFC causality
analysis. We evaluate the collected switch count and the coverage
ratio of the causally relevant switches, as Figure 11 shows. Compared to full polling, Hawkeye collects a much smaller number of
switches while ensuring 100% coverage of causal switches. In contrast, the victim-only method exhibits low causality coverage due
to not tracing the PFC, despite a lower count of switches collected.
Therefore, the complete provenance cannot be constructed, and
the accuracy is thus lower. To summarize, through in-network PFC
causality analysis, Hawkeye efficiently collects the anomaly causal
switches with low collection scale.

(b) Bandwidth overhead.

Figure 9: Overhead v.s. baselines.
not identify PFC path, leading to wrong diagnosis, as analyzed in
§2.3.
Processing overhead. We compare the processing overhead using the size of the telemetry collected for diagnosis. As shown in
Figure 9(a), the full polling method collects the telemetry on all
switches, which includes a huge amount of irrelevant telemetry
data. The victim-only method merely collects the telemetry on the
victim flow path, showing much lower processing overhead despite
lower accuracy. Hawkeye collects the telemetry on the switches
along both victim flow paths and PFC spreading paths, thus exhibiting approximately higher processing overhead than the victim-only
method. SpiderMon collects the flow telemetry along the victim
flow path with 36 bytes per flow, showing similar telemetry amount
to the victim-only method. NetSight collects all the postcards for
every packet at each hop, and consequently results in significant
overhead.
Monitoring bandwidth overhead. We measure the additional
bandwidth overhead during the monitoring introduced by different methods in Figure 9(b). Hawkeye monitors and records the
telemetry passively without extra traffic, and it only generates additional polling packets to the switches on victim flow paths and PFC
spreading paths when an anomaly is detected. Therefore, it presents

4.4

Case Study

We demonstrate Hawkeye’s diagnosis effectiveness by constructing
the provenance graphs of the typical NPAs in §2.1.
PFC by incast micro-bursts. As shown in Figure 1(a), multiple
line-rate micro-burst flows are injected into SW4.P1 by devices
A1∼A4 and spread PFC to SW1.P1. As Figure 12(a) shows, the
victim flows F2 and F1 are paused at SW1.P1 and SW2.P3 by PFC
(dotted edges to port nodes), and the port-level graph indicates that
the initial congestion point is SW4.P1. Inside SW4.P1, the main

490

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

15

F1

19

SW1.
P1

SW2.
P3

SW4.
P1
-68

16

F2

F1

F3

18

F4
F5

F6

(a) PFC by incast micro-bursts.

F1

SW2.
P1

SW1.
P1

SW3.
P1

F5
24 14
20

F6
F7

SW1.
P1

SW2.
30
P2 -73 F8

SW4.
P4

SW3.
P3

F4

F2

F2

(b) PFC storm.

-15

F3

(c) Initiator-in-loop deadlock.

F1

SW2.
P1

SW1.
P1

SW2.
P2

SW4.
P4

SW3.
P3

F4

F2

F3

(d) Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock.

Figure 12: Provenance graphs for typical anomalies. Port-flow and port-level edge weights are omitted for simplicity.

(a) Resource usage summary.

(a) Telemetry size reduction.

(b) Resource usage with 2 & 4 epochs.

(b) Telemetry packet reduction.

Figure 13: Hardware resource usage.

Figure 14: CPU reduces telemetry collected.

contributor flows F3-F6 (connected with red edges) are identified
as root causes.
PFC storm. The PFC injection from H1 in Figure 1(b) causes PFC
storm in the network. Figure 12(b) demonstrates the PFC path from
SW1.P1 to SW2 and SW3. With no flow contention in SW1.P1, the
congestion is due to host PFC injection.
Initiator-in-loop deadlock. Figure 1(c) shows the PFC deadlock
caused by the flow contention in the loop. The provenance graph
in Figure 12(c) identifies the deadlock through a loop of port-level
edges. Since each port node has a port-level out-degree < 2, the
initial congestion point lies inside the loop. Analyzing the port-toflow edges for each port reveals the root cause of flow contention
at SW2.P2.
Initiator-out-of-loop deadlock. Figure 1(d) shows the PFC deadlock caused by PFC injection out of the loop. The provenance graph
in Figure 12(d) first identifies the deadlock through the loop. Among
the port nodes in the loop, SW1.P1 has another outgoing path
destined to SW2.P1 which has no flow contention, and the PFC
injection can be identified.

the data of 64 ports and 4096 flows. Since CPU polling and linerate polling packet forwarding are asynchronous, the telemetry
collection on multiple individual switches starts in parallel within
an end-to-end delay (∼ 𝜇𝑠). Therefore, the total time usage is approximately equal to the time of polling one switch, showing high
scalability with network scale.
We then evaluate the efficiency of the CPU poller. Compared
to fully dumping the telemetry using packet generation in the
data plane, the CPU can reduce the telemetry data size reported
to the analyzer significantly by excluding the useless telemetry
data such as zero values. As shown in Figure 14(a), in most cases,
the concurrent flow count in one epoch is much smaller than the
maximum flow count in data plane telemetry, thus the telemetry
size can be reduced by >80%. Besides, due to the limited PHV size
(around 200 bytes), exporting the complete flow telemetry on the
data plane requires a significant number of packets and incurs
a heavy communication overhead. However, the CPU can batch
the meaningful subset of the telemetry into a much larger packet
(e.g., the MTU of 1500 bytes), reducing the number of packets
considerably. As shown in Figure 14(b), the telemetry-reporting
packet count can be reduced by about 95% in most cases.

4.5

Real Testbed Evaluation

We implement Hawkeye at a real testbed, and validate its deployability and efficiency accordingly.
Switch resource usage. Figure 13(a) shows Hawkeye’s hardware
resource usage, which fits well on Tofino. Furthermore, Hawkeye’s
memory usage scales well with the epoch count monitored and
the maximum flow count per epoch. As shown in Figure 13(b), the
memory usage of PFC causality structure (Figure 3) and port-level
telemetry is small and constant, bounded by the number of switch
ports, while the flow-level telemetry increases with 𝑂 (#𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤).
CPU poller. We first measure the total time usage of polling the
telemetry from switches using the on-switch CPU. Polling full
telemetry from one switch, including 2 or 4 epochs, requires approximately 80 and 120 ms, respectively, with each epoch containing

5

Discussion

Operating scenarios of Hawkeye. Network operators can utilize Hawkeye in different ways by setting different triggering conditions. For example, the monitored performance metrics can be
extended to various definitions, such as flow throughput, co-flow
completion time, or even application-level metrics such as job completion time or algorithmic bandwidth. Besides on-demand diagnosis, when integrated with pingmesh-like probes [41], Hawkeye can
carry out periodic diagnosis for a more complete understanding
of the network. Furthermore, in multi-tenant networks, anomaly
diagnosis can be provided as a service to users by sharing client
performance information with operators.

491

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

Representativeness of covered anomalies. In this paper, we
propose a diagnosis method for a range of representative anomalies.
Although we do not claim that we cover the complete NPA space
in RDMA networks, the anomaly cases addressed in this paper
are sufficiently representative. Specifically, the proposed anomalies
cases (shown in Table 2) cover the existence of PFC, the different
PFC root causes (flow contention or host PFC injection) and the
shape of PFC spreading paths (whether a loop exists). We leave
more comprehensive NPA coverage and a more general diagnosis
algorithm as our future work.
Extensibility of Hawkeye telemetry. Our main focus in telemetry design is to enable PFC visibility and causality tracing, which
is orthogonal to flow-level information recording. Therefore, the
flow-level telemetry in Hawkeye can be further complemented by
numerous existing studies [22, 37, 47, 58] to provide more information such as flow features and queue evolution, enabling a more
in-depth understanding of flow interactions. However, integrating
fine-grained flow telemetry also incurs higher overhead especially
on switch resource usage.
Applicability of Hawkeye. Our Tofino implementation serves
as a readily available proof-of-concept. However, Hawkeye is not
tightly tied to Tofino, and is inexpensive to implement into nextgeneration switching ASICs. The real time PFC status of each port
is already supported by many RDMA switches. Hawkeye only
requires two additional components. First, the PFC causality data,
including the causality structure (Figure 3) and port-level telemetry,
requires additional registers with constant size, which is bounded
by the number of switch ports. Second, Hawkeye enhances the
flow-level telemetry with PFC-aware data, such as PFC impact
on each flow. Such modification only requires a new data field in
the telemetry recording system. As current switches are becoming
more plentiful in resource and embracing greater programmability,
especially considering the trend of white-box customized switches,
we believe that Hawkeye is fully implementable to next-generation
commodity switches.
Partial Deployment of Hawkeye. Hawkeye contains two core
components: 1) the PFC causality analysis mechanism to trace
the PFC spreading path; 2) the PFC-aware flow telemetry to analyze queue contention between flows and PFC impact on each
flow, both of which are crucial to locate the root causes. If only a
part of switches deploy Hawkeye, such as ToR switches, the PFC
tracing will be interrupted at a non-Hawkeye switch, making it
difficult to correlate victim flows with root causes even though
a certain switch’s telemetry may have recorded them. We give a
feasible partial deployment option. Assume that all switches support PFC causality analysis, but we only deploy flow telemetry
on some hot-spot switches, e.g., ToR switches, where a lot of flow
contention such as incast frequently occurs. In this case, the PFC
spreading causality can be completely traced, and a significant
percentage of the root causes located in ToR switches can also be
covered. However, diagnosis effectiveness is still inevitably compromised. For instance, some root causes like ECMP imbalance [66]
or routing problems [27, 67] occurring on leaf/spine switches, are
consequently uncovered.
Parameter setting on different network environment. Hawkeye empirically adjusts the parameters for different network workloads, to achieve a good trade-off between accuracy and overhead.

The major parameters in Hawkeye, as mentioned in §4.2, is the
epoch size and detection threshold. A shorter epoch size can capture flow interactions more accurately, helping to identify flow
contention and major contributors. However, too short epoch size
requires much more epochs to be maintained at the switch so that
the telemetry will not be flushed quickly, causing higher memory
usage and telemetry size. For detection threshold, taking latency as
an example metric, it is important to consider the network’s scale
and application requirements. Typically, for latency-sensitive applications, the detection threshold is usually 2-4 times the maximum
RTT (determined by the maximum hop count). A sensitive detection threshold can quickly trigger diagnosis, while causes higher
diagnosis frequency.

6

Related Work

Besides the most relevant works we discussed early, our work is
also inspired by the following topics.
Performance anomaly in intra-host networks. Many studies observe the intra-host network is becoming an RDMA performance bottleneck. Collie [35] explores the anomaly space to
find performance anomalies in intra-host networks. Husky [34]
presents a test suite to evaluate performance isolation in RNICs.
Hostping [42]diagnoses the performance bottleneck in intra-host
networks using loopback traffic. Lumina [71] proposes a test tool to
evaluate the performance of RNIC network stacks. However, there
are relatively fewer studies effectively diagnosing inter-host RDMA
NPAs, as analyzed in §2.3, and we bridges this gap via Hawkeye.
Programmable network. Programmable networks, represented
by programmable switches and SmartNICs, have been widely used
to accelerate various applications in network monitoring [22, 39,
47, 79], traffic analysis [58, 64, 73, 77], queue measurement [10, 37],
traffic control [3, 25, 38, 75], and security [33, 43, 74]. Inspired
by them, Hawkeye leverages programmable switches to support
PFC-aware telemetry logging, PFC causality tracing and telemetry
collection.
Provenance-based diagnosis. There is a body of studies that
leverage provenance to trace event causality relationship [8] and
diagnose security threats or performance issues. ForenGuard [61]
monitors the provenance of runtime activities in SDN. Unicorn [23]
leverages the provenance of system executions to detect APT (Advanced Persistent Threat). SpiderMon [66] and PrintQueue [37]
construct flow-level and packet-level provenance, respectively, to
identify queue contention contributors. DTaP [78] and Zeno [68]
construct time-aware event provenance and diagnose performance
issues in distributed systems. Hawkeye takes PFC causality into
provenance consideration to diagnose RDMA NPAs.

7

Conclusion

RDMA network performance anomalies present new complexities
due to the cascading congestion of PFC and make existing solutions
less effective. We propose Hawkeye to bridge the gap. It provides
fine-grained PFC visibility through a multi-granularity PFC-aware
telemetry system, a fast in-network PFC causality tracing mechanism to efficiently collect causal telemetry, and a precise diagnosis
algorithm based on the heterogeneous provenance graph. Our evaluations demonstrate Hawkeye can accurately detect and diagnose

492

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

RDMA network performance anomalies with low overhead. We
hope Hawkeye can inspire new paradigms for anomaly diagnosis
in RDMA networks.

[12] Yanzhe Chen, Xingda Wei, Jiaxin Shi, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2016. Fast
and general distributed transactions using RDMA and HTM. In Proceedings of
the Eleventh European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys ’16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 26, 17 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2901318.2901349
[13] Wenxue Cheng, Kun Qian, Wanchun Jiang, Tong Zhang, and Fengyuan Ren. 2020.
Re-architecting Congestion Management in Lossless Ethernet. In 17th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20). USENIX
Association, Santa Clara, CA, 19–36. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20
/presentation/cheng
[14] Charles Clos. 1953. A study of non-blocking switching networks. The Bell
System Technical Journal 32, 2 (1953), 406–424. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.15387305.1953.tb01433.x
[15] Aleksandar Dragojević, Dushyanth Narayanan, Miguel Castro, and Orion Hodson.
2014. FaRM: Fast Remote Memory. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14). USENIX Association, Seattle, WA,
401–414. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi14/technical-sessions/dragoje
vi
[16] Adithya Gangidi, Rui Miao, Shengbao Zheng, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Guilherme Goes,
Hany Morsy, Rohit Puri, Mohammad Riftadi, Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Jingyi
Yang, Shuqiang Zhang, Mikel Jimenez Fernandez, Shashidhar Gandham, and
Hongyi Zeng. 2024. RDMA over Ethernet for Distributed Training at Meta
Scale. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM
’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 57–70. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672233
[17] Yixiao Gao, Qiang Li, Lingbo Tang, Yongqing Xi, Pengcheng Zhang, Wenwen
Peng, Bo Li, Yaohui Wu, Shaozong Liu, Lei Yan, Fei Feng, Yan Zhuang, Fan
Liu, Pan Liu, Xingkui Liu, Zhongjie Wu, Junping Wu, Zheng Cao, Chen Tian,
Jinbo Wu, Jiaji Zhu, Haiyong Wang, Dennis Cai, and Jiesheng Wu. 2021. When
Cloud Storage Meets RDMA. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 21). USENIX Association, 519–533. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi21/presentation/gao
[18] Yixiao Gao, Yuchen Yang, Tian Chen, Jiaqi Zheng, Bing Mao, and Guihai Chen.
2018. DCQCN+: Taming Large-Scale Incast Congestion in RDMA over Ethernet
Networks. In 2018 IEEE 26th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP).
IEEE, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 110–120. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNP.2018.
00021
[19] Mojgan Ghasemi, Theophilus Benson, and Jennifer Rexford. 2017. Dapper: Data
Plane Performance Diagnosis of TCP. In Proceedings of the Symposium on SDN
Research (SOSR ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
61–74. https://doi.org/10.1145/3050220.3050228
[20] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Zhong Deng, Gaurav Soni, Jianxi Ye, Jitu Padhye,
and Marina Lipshteyn. 2016. RDMA over Commodity Ethernet at Scale. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference (SIGCOMM ’16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 202–215. https://doi.org/10.114
5/2934872.2934908
[21] Chuanxiong Guo, Lihua Yuan, Dong Xiang, Yingnong Dang, Ray Huang, Dave
Maltz, Zhaoyi Liu, Vin Wang, Bin Pang, Hua Chen, Zhi-Wei Lin, and Varugis
Kurien. 2015. Pingmesh: A Large-Scale System for Data Center Network Latency
Measurement and Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special
Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 139–152. https://doi.org/10.1145/2785956.27
87496
[22] Arpit Gupta, Rob Harrison, Marco Canini, Nick Feamster, Jennifer Rexford, and
Walter Willinger. 2018. Sonata: query-driven streaming network telemetry. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication (SIGCOMM ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 357–371. https://doi.org/10.1145/3230543.3230555
[23] Xueyuan Han, Thomas Pasquier, Adam Bates, James Mickens, and Margo Seltzer.
2020. Unicorn: Runtime Provenance-Based Detector for Advanced Persistent
Threats. In Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium 2020.
[24] Nikhil Handigol, Brandon Heller, Vimalkumar Jeyakumar, David Mazières, and
Nick McKeown. 2014. I Know What Your Packet Did Last Hop: Using Packet
Histories to Troubleshoot Networks. In 11th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 14). USENIX Association, Seattle, WA,
71–85.
[25] Jinbin Hu, Chaoliang Zeng, Zilong Wang, Junxue Zhang, Kun Guo, Hong Xu,
Jiawei Huang, and Kai Chen. 2023. Enabling Load Balancing for Lossless Datacenters. In 2023 IEEE 31st International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP).
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNP59255.2023.10355615
[26] Shuihai Hu, Yibo Zhu, Peng Cheng, Chuanxiong Guo, Kun Tan, Jitendra Padhye,
and Kai Chen. 2016. Deadlocks in Datacenter Networks: Why Do They Form,
and How to Avoid Them. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics
in Networks (HotNets ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 92–98. https://doi.org/10.1145/3005745.3005760
[27] Shuihai Hu, Yibo Zhu, Peng Cheng, Chuanxiong Guo, Kun Tan, Jitendra Padhye,
and Kai Chen. 2019. Tagger: Practical PFC Deadlock Prevention in Data Center
Networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 27, 2 (2019), 889.

Acknowledgment
We thank our shepherd, Costin Raiciu, and the anonymous SIGCOMM reviewers for their valuable comments. This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 62402025 and No.62221003), the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities and gifts from Huawei-BUAA Joint
Lab. Menghao Zhang and Zhiliang Wang are the corresponding
authors.

References
[1] Alibaba. 2024. Alibaba builds high-speed RDMA network for AI and scientific
computing. https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/alibaba-builds-high-speed-rd
ma-network-for-ai-and-scientific-computing_594895. (2024).
[2] Alibaba-edu. 2019. HPCC simulation. https://github.com/alibaba-edu/HighPrecision-Congestion-Control. (2019).
[3] Serhat Arslan, Yuliang Li, Gautam Kumar, and Nandita Dukkipati. 2023. Bolt:
Sub-RTT Congestion Control for Ultra-Low Latency. In 20th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association,
Boston, MA, 219–236. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/
arslan
[4] Behnaz Arzani, Selim Ciraci, Luiz Chamon, Yibo Zhu, Hongqiang (Harry) Liu, Jitu
Padhye, Boon Thau Loo, and Geoff Outhred. 2018. 007: Democratically Finding
the Cause of Packet Drops. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 18). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 419–435.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi18/presentation/arzani
[5] Azure. 2023. High performance computing VM sizes. https://learn.microsoft.co
m/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/sizes-hpc/. (2023).
[6] Wei Bai, Shanim Sainul Abdeen, Ankit Agrawal, Krishan Kumar Attre, Paramvir
Bahl, Ameya Bhagat, Gowri Bhaskara, Tanya Brokhman, Lei Cao, Ahmad Cheema,
Rebecca Chow, Jeff Cohen, Mahmoud Elhaddad, Vivek Ette, Igal Figlin, Daniel
Firestone, Mathew George, Ilya German, Lakhmeet Ghai, Eric Green, Albert
Greenberg, Manish Gupta, Randy Haagens, Matthew Hendel, Ridwan Howlader,
Neetha John, Julia Johnstone, Tom Jolly, Greg Kramer, David Kruse, Ankit
Kumar, Erica Lan, Ivan Lee, Avi Levy, Marina Lipshteyn, Xin Liu, Chen Liu,
Guohan Lu, Yuemin Lu, Xiakun Lu, Vadim Makhervaks, Ulad Malashanka,
David A. Maltz, Ilias Marinos, Rohan Mehta, Sharda Murthi, Anup Namdhari,
Aaron Ogus, Jitendra Padhye, Madhav Pandya, Douglas Phillips, Adrian Power,
Suraj Puri, Shachar Raindel, Jordan Rhee, Anthony Russo, Maneesh Sah, Ali
Sheriff, Chris Sparacino, Ashutosh Srivastava, Weixiang Sun, Nick Swanson,
Fuhou Tian, Lukasz Tomczyk, Vamsi Vadlamuri, Alec Wolman, Ying Xie, Joyce
Yom, Lihua Yuan, Yanzhao Zhang, and Brian Zill. 2023. Empowering Azure
Storage with RDMA. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 49–67.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/bai
[7] Ryan Beckett, Aarti Gupta, Ratul Mahajan, and David Walker. 2017. A General Approach to Network Configuration Verification. In Proceedings of the
Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 155–168.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3098822.3098834
[8] Peter Buneman, Sanjeev Khanna, and Tan Wang-Chiew. 2001. Why and Where:
A Characterization of Data Provenance. In Database Theory — ICDT 2001, Jan
Van den Bussche and Victor Vianu (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 316–330.
[9] Jiamin Cao, Yu Guan, Kun Qian, Jiaqi Gao, Wencong Xiao, Jianbo Dong, Binzhang
Fu, Dennis Cai, and Ennan Zhai. 2024. Crux: GPU-Efficient Communication
Scheduling for Deep Learning Training. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM
2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672239
[10] Xiaoqi Chen, Shir Landau Feibish, Yaron Koral, Jennifer Rexford, Ori Rottenstreich, Steven A Monetti, and Tzuu-Yi Wang. 2019. Fine-grained queue
measurement in the data plane. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments And Technologies (CoNEXT ’19).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 15–29. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3359989.3365408
[11] Youmin Chen, Youyou Lu, and Jiwu Shu. 2019. Scalable RDMA RPC on Reliable
Connection with Efficient Resource Sharing. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
EuroSys Conference 2019 (EuroSys ’19). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 19, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3302424.3303968

493

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

Shicheng Wang et al.

[43] Zaoxing Liu, Hun Namkung, Georgios Nikolaidis, Jeongkeun Lee, Changhoon
Kim, Xin Jin, Vladimir Braverman, Minlan Yu, and Vyas Sekar. 2021. Jaqen:
A High-Performance Switch-Native Approach for Detecting and Mitigating
Volumetric DDoS Attacks with Programmable Switches. In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). USENIX Association, 3829–3846. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/liu-zaoxing
[44] Youyou Lu, Jiwu Shu, Youmin Chen, and Tao Li. 2017. Octopus: an RDMA-enabled
Distributed Persistent Memory File System. In 2017 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC 17). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 773–785.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc17/technical-sessions/presentation/lu
[45] Radhika Mittal, Vinh The Lam, Nandita Dukkipati, Emily Blem, Hassan Wassel,
Monia Ghobadi, Amin Vahdat, Yaogong Wang, David Wetherall, and David Zats.
2015. TIMELY: RTT-based congestion control for the datacenter. ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review 45, 4 (2015), 537–550.
[46] Masoud Moshref, Minlan Yu, Ramesh Govindan, and Amin Vahdat. 2016. Trumpet:
Timely and Precise Triggers in Data Centers. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
SIGCOMM Conference (SIGCOMM ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 129–143. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2934879
[47] Srinivas Narayana, Anirudh Sivaraman, Vikram Nathan, Prateesh Goyal, Venkat
Arun, Mohammad Alizadeh, Vimalkumar Jeyakumar, and Changhoon Kim. 2017.
Language-Directed Hardware Design for Network Performance Monitoring. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 85–98. https://doi.org/10.1145/3098822.3098829
[48] NVIDIA. 2024. NVIDIA DOCA PCC Application Guide. https://docs.nvidia.com/
doca/sdk/nvidia+doca+pcc+application+guide/index.html. (2024).
[49] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA Spectrum-X Networking Platform. https://www.nvidia.c
om/en-us/networking/spectrumx/. (2025).
[50] Kun Qian, Wenxue Cheng, Tong Zhang, and Fengyuan Ren. 2019. Gentle flow control: avoiding deadlock in lossless networks. In Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 75–89. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341302.3342065
[51] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan, Binzhang
Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, Chao Wang, Peng Wang, Pengcheng
Zhang, Xianlong Zeng, Eddie Ruan, Zhiping Yao, Ennan Zhai, and Dennis Cai.
2024. Alibaba HPN: A Data Center Network for Large Language Model Training.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM ’24).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 691–706. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672265
[52] Mubashir Adnan Qureshi, Yuchung Cheng, Qianwen Yin, Qiaobin Fu, Gautam
Kumar, Masoud Moshref, Junhua Yan, Van Jacobson, David Wetherall, and Abdul
Kabbani. 2022. PLB: congestion signals are simple and effective for network
load balancing. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIGCOMM
’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 207–218. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544226
[53] Sudarsanan Rajasekaran, Manya Ghobadi, and Aditya Akella. 2024. CASSINI:
Network-Aware Job Scheduling in Machine Learning Clusters. In 21st USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24). USENIX
Association, Santa Clara, CA, 1403–1420. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ns
di24/presentation/rajasekaran
[54] Arjun Roy, Hongyi Zeng, Jasmeet Bagga, George Porter, and Alex C. Snoeren.
2015. Inside the Social Network’s (Datacenter) Network. In Proceedings of the 2015
ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM
’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 123–137. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2785956.2787472
[55] Alex Shpiner, Eitan Zahavi, Vladimir Zdornov, Tal Anker, and Matty Kadosh.
2016. Unlocking Credit Loop Deadlocks. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop
on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 85–91. https://doi.org/10.1145/3005745.3005768
[56] Arjun Singhvi, Aditya Akella, Dan Gibson, Thomas F. Wenisch, Monica WongChan, Sean Clark, Milo M. K. Martin, Moray McLaren, Prashant Chandra, Rob
Cauble, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Behnam Montazeri, Simon L. Sabato, Joel Scherpelz, and Amin Vahdat. 2020. 1RMA: Re-envisioning Remote Memory Access for Multi-tenant Datacenters. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the Applications,
Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIGCOMM ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 708–721.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3405897
[57] John Snyder, Alvin R Lebeck, and Danyang Zhuo. 2022. RDMA Congestion
Control: It Is Only for the Compliant. IEEE Micro 43, 1 (2022), 76–82.
[58] John Sonchack, Oliver Michel, Adam J. Aviv, Eric Keller, and Jonathan M. Smith.
2018. Scaling Hardware Accelerated Network Monitoring to Concurrent and
Dynamic Queries With *Flow. In 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 18). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 823–835. https://www.usen
ix.org/conference/atc18/presentation/sonchack
[59] Cha Hwan Song, Xin Zhe Khooi, Raj Joshi, Inho Choi, Jialin Li, and Mun Choon
Chan. 2023. Network Load Balancing with In-network Reordering Support for
RDMA. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference (ACM SIGCOMM

[28] IEEE. 2011. IEEE 802.1 Qbb - Priority-based Flow Control. https://1.ieee802.org/
dcb/802-1qbb/. (2011).
[29] InfiniBand Trade Association. 2020. InfiniBand Architecture Specification Release
1.4 Annex A17: RoCEv2. (2020).
[30] Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Chang Lan, Bairen Yi, Yong Cui, and Chuanxiong Guo.
2020. A Unified Architecture for Accelerating Distributed DNN Training in
Heterogeneous GPU/CPU Clusters. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 463–479.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/jiang
[31] Ziheng Jiang, Haibin Lin, Yinmin Zhong, Qi Huang, Yangrui Chen, Zhi Zhang,
Yanghua Peng, Xiang Li, Cong Xie, Shibiao Nong, Yulu Jia, Sun He, Hongmin
Chen, Zhihao Bai, Qi Hou, Shipeng Yan, Ding Zhou, Yiyao Sheng, Zhuo Jiang,
Haohan Xu, Haoran Wei, Zhang Zhang, Pengfei Nie, Leqi Zou, Sida Zhao, Liang
Xiang, Zherui Liu, Zhe Li, Xiaoying Jia, Jianxi Ye, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. 2024.
MegaScale: Scaling Large Language Model Training to More Than 10,000 GPUs.
In 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI 24). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 745–760. https://www.usenix.o
rg/conference/nsdi24/presentation/jiang-ziheng
[32] Anuj Kalia, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Andersen. 2016. FaSST: Fast, Scalable
and Simple Distributed Transactions with Two-Sided (RDMA) Datagram RPCs.
In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 16). USENIX Association, Savannah, GA, 185–201. https://www.usenix.o
rg/conference/osdi16/technical-sessions/presentation/kalia
[33] Qiao Kang, Lei Xue, Adam Morrison, Yuxin Tang, Ang Chen, and Xiapu Luo. 2020.
Programmable In-Network Security for Context-aware BYOD Policies. In 29th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 20). USENIX Association, 595–612.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/kang
[34] Xinhao Kong, Jingrong Chen, Wei Bai, Yechen Xu, Mahmoud Elhaddad, Shachar
Raindel, Jitendra Padhye, Alvin R. Lebeck, and Danyang Zhuo. 2023. Understanding RDMA Microarchitecture Resources for Performance Isolation. In 20th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23).
USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 31–48. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
nsdi23/presentation/kong
[35] Xinhao Kong, Yibo Zhu, Huaping Zhou, Zhuo Jiang, Jianxi Ye, Chuanxiong
Guo, and Danyang Zhuo. 2022. Collie: Finding Performance Anomalies in
RDMA Subsystems. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 22). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 287–305.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi22/presentation/kong
[36] Gautam Kumar, Nandita Dukkipati, Keon Jang, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Xian
Wu, Behnam Montazeri, Yaogong Wang, Kevin Springborn, Christopher Alfeld,
Michael Ryan, David Wetherall, and Amin Vahdat. 2020. Swift: Delay is Simple
and Effective for Congestion Control in the Datacenter. In Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on
the Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIGCOMM ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 514–528. https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3406591
[37] Yiran Lei, Liangcheng Yu, Vincent Liu, and Mingwei Xu. 2022. PrintQueue:
performance diagnosis via queue measurement in the data plane. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference (SIGCOMM ’22). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 516–529. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544
257
[38] Wenxue Li, Chaoliang Zeng, Jinbin Hu, and Kai Chen. 2023. Towards FineGrained and Practical Flow Control for Datacenter Networks. In 2023 IEEE 31st
International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP). 1–11. https://doi.org/10.110
9/ICNP59255.2023.10355582
[39] Yuliang Li, Rui Miao, Changhoon Kim, and Minlan Yu. 2016. FlowRadar: A Better
NetFlow for Data Centers. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 16). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA,
311–324. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi16/technical-sessions/present
ation/li-yuliang
[40] Yuliang Li, Rui Miao, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Yan Zhuang, Fei Feng, Lingbo Tang,
Zheng Cao, Ming Zhang, Frank Kelly, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Minlan Yu.
2019. HPCC: high precision congestion control. In Proceedings of the ACM
Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 44–58. https://doi.org/10.1145/3341
302.3342085
[41] Kefei Liu, Zhuo Jiang, Jiao Zhang, Shixian Guo, Xuan Zhang, Yangyang Bai,
Yongbin Dong, Feng Luo, Zhang Zhang, Lei Wang, Xiang Shi, Haohan Xu, Yang
Bai, Dongyang Song, Haoran Wei, Bo Li, Yongchen Pan, Tian Pan, and Tao
Huang. 2024. R-Pingmesh: A Service-Aware RoCE Network Monitoring and
Diagnostic System. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference (ACM
SIGCOMM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
554–567. https://doi.org/10.1145/3651890.3672264
[42] Kefei Liu, Zhuo Jiang, Jiao Zhang, Haoran Wei, Xiaolong Zhong, Lizhuang Tan,
Tian Pan, and Tao Huang. 2023. Hostping: Diagnosing Intra-host Network
Bottlenecks in RDMA Servers. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 15–29.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/liu-kefei

494

Hawkeye

SIGCOMM ’25, September 8–11, 2025, Coimbra, Portugal

’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 816–831. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604849
[60] Praveen Tammana, Rachit Agarwal, and Myungjin Lee. 2018. Distributed Network
Monitoring and Debugging with SwitchPointer. In 15th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 18). USENIX Association,
Renton, WA, 453–456. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi18/presentation/
tammana
[61] Haopei Wang, Guangliang Yang, Phakpoom Chinprutthiwong, Lei Xu, Yangyong
Zhang, and Guofei Gu. 2018. Towards Fine-grained Network Security Forensics
and Diagnosis in the SDN Era. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243749
[62] Shicheng Wang. 2025. Hawkeye. https://github.com/wangshicheng1225/Hawk
eye. (2025).
[63] Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Yuying Du, Ziteng Chen, Zhiliang Wang,
Mingwei Xu, Renjie Xie, and Jiahai Yang. 2024. LoRDMA: A New Low-Rate DoS
Attack in RDMA Networks. In NDSS 2024. San Diego, CA.
[64] Shicheng Wang, Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Chang Liu, Ying Liu, Xuya Jia,
and Mingwei Xu. 2021. Making Multi-String Pattern Matching Scalable and
Cost-Efficient with Programmable Switching ASICs. In IEEE INFOCOM 2021 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE Press, Virtual Event, 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488796
[65] Weiyang Wang, Moein Khazraee, Zhizhen Zhong, Manya Ghobadi, Zhihao Jia,
Dheevatsa Mudigere, Ying Zhang, and Anthony Kewitsch. 2023. TopoOpt:
Co-optimizing Network Topology and Parallelization Strategy for Distributed
Training Jobs. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 739–767. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/wang-weiyang
[66] Weitao Wang, Xinyu Crystal Wu, Praveen Tammana, Ang Chen, and T. S. Eugene Ng. 2022. Closed-loop Network Performance Monitoring and Diagnosis
with SpiderMon. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 22). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 267–285. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi22/presentation/wang-weitao-spidermon
[67] Xinyu Crystal Wu and T. S. Eugene Ng. 2022. Detecting and Resolving PFC
Deadlocks with ITSY Entirely in the Data Plane. In IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE Press, Virtual Event, 1928–1937.
https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM48880.2022.9796798
[68] Yang Wu, Ang Chen, and Linh Thi Xuan Phan. 2019. Zeno: Diagnosing Performance Problems with Temporal Provenance. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19). USENIX Association,
Boston, MA, 395–420. https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/
wu
[69] Jilong Xue, Youshan Miao, Cheng Chen, Ming Wu, Lintao Zhang, and Lidong
Zhou. 2019. Fast Distributed Deep Learning over RDMA. In Proceedings of the
Fourteenth EuroSys Conference 2019 (EuroSys ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 44, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/33
02424.3303975
[70] Jian Yang, Joseph Izraelevitz, and Steven Swanson. 2019. Orion: A Distributed
File System for Non-Volatile Main Memory and RDMA-Capable Networks. In
17th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 19). USENIX
Association, Boston, MA, 221–234. https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast19/p
resentation/yang
[71] Zhuolong Yu, Bowen Su, Wei Bai, Shachar Raindel, Vladimir Braverman, and Xin
Jin. 2023. Understanding the Micro-Behaviors of Hardware Offloaded Network
Stacks with Lumina. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference (ACM
SIGCOMM ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1074–1087. https://doi.org/10.1145/3603269.3604837
[72] David Zats, Tathagata Das, Prashanth Mohan, Dhruba Borthakur, and Randy
Katz. 2012. DeTail: reducing the flow completion time tail in datacenter networks. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2012 Conference on Applications,
Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIGCOMM ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 139–150.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2342356.2342390
[73] Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Cheng Guo, Renyu Yang, Shicheng Wang, Han Bao,
Xiao Li, Mingwei Xu, Tianyu Wo, and Chunming Hu. 2025. SuperFE: A Scalable
and Flexible Feature Extractor for ML-based Traffic Analysis Applications. In
EuroSys 2025. ACM, Rotterdam.
[74] Menghao Zhang, Guanyu Li, Shicheng Wang, Chang Liu, Ang Chen, Hongxin
Hu, Guofei Gu, Qianqian Li, Mingwei Xu, and Jianping Wu. 2020. Poseidon:
Mitigating volumetric ddos attacks with programmable switches. In the 27th
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2020).
[75] Yiran Zhang, Yifan Liu, Qingkai Meng, and Fengyuan Ren. 2021. Congestion
detection in lossless networks. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGCOMM 2021
Conference (SIGCOMM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 370–383. https://doi.org/10.1145/3452296.3472899
[76] Fang Zhou, Yifan Gan, Sixiang Ma, and Yang Wang. 2018. wPerf: Generic OffCPU Analysis to Identify Bottleneck Waiting Events. In 13th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18). USENIX Association,

Carlsbad, CA, 527–543. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentatio
n/zhou
[77] Guangmeng Zhou, Zhuotao Liu, Chuanpu Fu, Qi Li, and Ke Xu. 2023. An Efficient
Design of Intelligent Network Data Plane. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 23). USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA, 6203–6220. https://
www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/zhou-guangmeng
[78] Wenchao Zhou, Suyog Mapara, Yiqing Ren, Yang Li, Andreas Haeberlen, Zachary
Ives, Boon Thau Loo, and Micah Sherr. 2012. Distributed time-aware provenance.
VLDB Endowment 6, 2 (2012), 49–60.
[79] Yu Zhou, Chen Sun, Hongqiang Harry Liu, Rui Miao, Shi Bai, Bo Li, Zhilong Zheng, Lingjun Zhu, Zhen Shen, Yongqing Xi, Pengcheng Zhang, Dennis Cai, Ming Zhang, and Mingwei Xu. 2020. Flow Event Telemetry on Programmable Data Plane. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the ACM
Special Interest Group on Data Communication on the Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communication (SIGCOMM ’20).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 76–89. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3406214
[80] Yibo Zhu, Haggai Eran, Daniel Firestone, Chuanxiong Guo, Marina Lipshteyn,
Yehonatan Liron, Jitendra Padhye, Shachar Raindel, Mohamad Haj Yahia, and
Ming Zhang. 2015. Congestion Control for Large-Scale RDMA Deployments.
In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Special Interest Group on Data
Communication (SIGCOMM ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 523–536. https://doi.org/10.1145/2785956.2787484

495