Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Digital Communications and Networks
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/dcan

High-speed encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation by using payload features
Xinge Yan a,b , Liukun He c , Yifan Xu a , Jiuxin Cao a,∗ , Liangmin Wang a , Guyang Xie b
a
b
c

School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
Nanjing Huafei Data Technology Co., Ltd., Nanjing 210019, China
School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China

A R T I C L E

I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Traﬃc classiﬁcation
Flow analysis
Information entropy
Machine learning
Randomness test

Traﬃc encryption techniques facilitate cyberattackers to hide their presence and activities. Traﬃc classiﬁcation
is an important method to prevent network threats. However, due to the tremendous traﬃc volume and
limitations of computing, most existing traﬃc classiﬁcation techniques are inapplicable to the high-speed
network environment. In this paper, we propose a High-speed Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation (HETC) method
containing two stages. First, to eﬃciently detect whether traﬃc is encrypted, HETC focuses on randomly sampled
short ﬂows and extracts aggregation entropies with chi-square test features to measure the diﬀerent patterns of
the byte composition and distribution between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. Second, HETC introduces
binary features upon the previous features and performs ﬁne-grained traﬃc classiﬁcation by combining these
payload features with a Random Forest model. The experimental results show that HETC can achieve a 94%
F-measure in detecting encrypted ﬂows and a 85%–93% F-measure in classifying ﬁne-grained ﬂows for a 1-KB
ﬂow-length dataset, outperforming the state-of-the-art comparison methods. Meanwhile, HETC does not need to
wait for the end of the ﬂow and can extract mass computing features. The average time for HETC to process
each ﬂow is only 2 or 16 ms, which is lower than the ﬂow duration in most cases, making it a good candidate
for high-speed traﬃc classiﬁcation.

1. Introduction

curity assessment, accounting, and service diﬀerentiation [5]. For these
reasons, TC has gained attention from academia and industry in recent years due to the growth in the usage of encryption protocols. The
traditional payload-based TC method, namely Deep Packet Inspection
(DPI), accurately classiﬁes ﬂows by matching the string information
contained in the packet payload with the existing signatures in the
database. However, the widespread use of encryption protocols has
made DPI techniques ineﬀective. To compensate for this problem, existing payload-based TC methods focus on detecting the randomness
of the payload, as encryption can increase the randomness of the payload. Entropy is a standard metric for detecting the randomness of a
sequence [6] and is directly proportional to the randomness. So related
studies [7,8] identify whether a ﬂow is encrypted by analyzing the entropy of the payload byte sequence. However, a high entropy does not
always mean encryption. Unencrypted compressed ﬂows can also possess high entropies [9], so focusing only on the payload entropy cannot
wholly detect encrypted ﬂows from all ﬂows. We need to introduce
more representative features. In this scenario, Machine Learning (ML)based approaches prove to be the most suitable for modern TC, as they

With the rapid development of network communication technologies and protocols, network traﬃc has become more complex and diverse. Most communication networks use robust encryption algorithms
to secure data transmission and prevent privacy leakage [1]. However,
encryption also facilitates cyberattackers, who can use it to hide their
presence and activities. Encrypted traﬃc can hide malicious software
and other information, resulting in a series of viruses, worms, and Trojans. Consequently, how to classify encrypted traﬃc becomes an urgent
problem that needs to be solved [2].
Traﬃc Classiﬁcation (TC) is a foundational technology for identifying sensitive data patterns and categorizing clustered network traﬃc.TC
and its methodologies are of utmost importance in Internet traﬃc engineering, as they jointly support activities such as network monitoring
[3], anomaly detection [4], security assessment, accounting, and service diﬀerentiation of utmost importance in Internet traﬃc engineering,
along with related methodologies and tools, as they jointly support
activities such as network monitoring [3], anomaly detection [4], se-

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 230219449@seu.edu.cn (X. Yan), helk@stmail.ujs.edu.cn (L. He), xuyifan@seu.edu.cn (Y. Xu), jx.cao@seu.edu.cn (J. Cao),
liangmin@seu.edu.cn (L. Wang), mariomaurerm@163.com (G. Xie).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2024.02.003
Received 2 July 2022; Received in revised form 21 January 2024; Accepted 20 February 2024
Available online 28 February 2024
2352-8648/© 2024 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Fig. 1. Architecture of our methodology.

can be used to classify encrypted traﬃc using side-channel data and
eﬃcient ML models. However, their usage relies on acquiring many
statistical features. The authors of [2] ﬁltered hundreds of statistical
features from a large number of alternative features, and trained a Random Forest (RF) model to classify the encrypted ﬂows. The results show
a high classiﬁcation accuracy. In a high-speed network environment, we
can hardly acquire the entire ﬂow due to the continuous high volume
of network traﬃc, which makes most of the statistical features based
on the whole ﬂow unavailable. Therefore, it is imperative to propose
an eﬀective encrypted TC mechanism suitable for the high-speed network environment by utilizing the low feature requirement of PR-based
methods and the eﬀectiveness of ML models.
Two challenges make such TC mechanisms non-trivial. The ﬁrst
challenge is to extract eﬀective features besides entropy features. The
range of features we can study is narrow due to calculation limitations
and traﬃc obfuscations [10]. The second challenge is that the presented
method should have relatively high classiﬁcation accuracy for short
ﬂows. Short ﬂows contain less information and are more diﬃcult to
classify. Having the ability to classify short ﬂows allows a TC method to
process more samples per unit of time, which is the most critical ability
to realize high-speed encrypted TC.
This research proposes a High-speed Encrypted TC (HETC) method
using payload features. HETC focuses on analyzing randomly sampled
short ﬂows, and only extracts 4 features to identify the ﬂow types, reducing the classiﬁcation time. HETC also employs an online ﬂow table
to save the analysis results. When an identical ﬂow is captured again,
HETC can directly output the ﬂow type to realize high-speed TC. Fig. 1
illustrates the structure of HETC, which contains two stages. In the ﬁrst
stage, we analyze the diﬀerent patterns of the Byte Composition (BC)
and Byte Frequency Distribution (BFD) between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. Then we use the aggregation entropy and chi-square
test features to characterize this diﬀerence. Finally, we combine the
features with a semi-supervised clustering-based detection method to
eﬀectively detect encrypted ﬂows in all ﬂows, with an F-measure of
94%. In the second stage, we introduce binary features and design a RF
semi-automatic update method to distinguish ﬁne-grained ﬂows, such
as HTTPS ﬂows in encrypted ﬂows. Compared to other studies, we evaluate HETC on a larger dataset comprising 7 publicly available datasets,
covering 12 traﬃc types. It enables the models to obtain more stable
TC results and reduce overﬁtting. The results show that HETC correctly
classiﬁes 85%–93% of ﬁne-grained random ﬂows of size 1 KB, outperforming existing methods.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:

1) We propose HETC for randomly sampled short ﬂows. HETC can
discover the diﬀerent patterns between encrypted and unencrypted
ﬂows at the byte level, and use aggregation entropy with chi-square
test features to measure the patterns and distinguish whether the
traﬃc is encrypted.
2) By combining the aggregation entropy, chi-square test, binary features, and a RF model, HETC further performs ﬁne-grained TC for
reﬁned network management.
3) Experiments show that HETC can eﬀectively identify encrypted and
unencrypted traﬃc and achieve ﬁne-grained TC for 1 KB ﬂows,
providing support for network resource management and service
diﬀerentiation in high-speed networks.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the threat model and related work. Section 3 analyzes the diﬀerent patterns in BC and BFD between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows,
the features to measure such patterns, and the method to classify the
two types of ﬂows. Section 4 introduces the ﬁne-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation method, and Section 5 describes the experimental preparation,
results, and comparative analysis in detail. Finally, Section 6 provides
conclusions and future work.
2. Threat model and related work
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the threat model, review existing network TC methods, and divide them into 4 major categories: port-based
methods, payload-based methods, ML-based methods, and Deep Learning (DL)-based methods. The advantages and disadvantages of each
method are also discussed. As indicated in the introduction, encryption causes a change in the randomness of the packet payload, so we
detail one of the payload-based methods, namely the Payload Randomness (PR) method.
2.1. Threat model
In the threat model, we assume that the source and destination are
two nodes in the high-speed backbone network, passing encrypted or
unencrypted information through multiple routers. The intermediate
network managers can locate a bidirectional ﬂow by its IP address, port
number, transport layer protocol, and other information. Due to the
limitation of storage space and computing resources, it is impossible to
store the complete ﬂow and analyze the ﬂow type oﬄine. Network managers can only randomly capture a part of ﬂow fragments to analyze the
413

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

ﬂow type, use the online ﬂow table to record the ﬂow information, and
output the ﬂow label in real-time when the fragment from the same
ﬂow is captured again. The ﬂow table is updated every ﬁxed interval
(e.g., 300 s) to ensure that ﬂow records do not expire.

softmax classiﬁer. Regarding the baselines, SAM improves classiﬁcation
accuracy by 13% (traﬃc type classiﬁcation) and takes only 2 ms to classify a packet, proving that it can perform online TC at the packet level.
We will compare them with our method in the experimental section.

2.2. Traﬃc classiﬁcation methods

2.3. Payload randomness-based methods

Port-based methods [11] distinguish traﬃc by querying a list of
well-known ports provided by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), such as port 80 for HTTP and port 443 for SSL. However,
with the adoption of dynamic ports and port disguise techniques, the
accuracy of this type of method has decreased.
Payload-based methods [12] classify traﬃc by scanning information
contained in the packet payload, extracting signatures, and comparing
them with existing signatures in the database. According to the diﬀerent comparison rules, this paper divides them into two types. The ﬁrst
is DPI, which directly scans every byte of the packet payload and identiﬁes whether the payload contains a speciﬁc signature. However, these
methods are no longer applicable with the wide employment of encryption protocols such as Transport Layer Security/Secure Socket Layer
(TLS/SSL). The other is PR-based methods [13]. These methods do not
directly match the speciﬁc signature but use the statistical information
of the payload to distinguish diﬀerent types of traﬃc. PR-based methods can solve the problem that DPI cannot classify encrypted traﬃc. We
will detail this kind of method in the next section.
In recent years, researchers have paid more attention to ML-based
methods [14,15], which have high classiﬁcation accuracy and low resource consumption. Most of the studies extract some representative
features from the packets or ﬂows and combine them with ML models such as K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM),
or RF to classify the traﬃc. Anderson et al. [16] proposed supervised
learning models, abbreviated as Mal-l1 and Mal-SVM. The authors used
TLS handshake metadata, DNS contexts, and HTTP header information
as features to train the l1-logistic regression and SVM models to detect
malicious traﬃc. The results show that Mal-l1 can achieve a 99.978%
accuracy at the 0.00% False Discovery Rate (FDR). Dong et al. [17]
extracted 15 ﬂow-level features from NetFlow information, including
the average packet arrival time, bidirectional packet ratio, and ﬂow duration. They proposed a cost-sensitive SVM called CMSVM to identify
the application type of traﬃc with better classiﬁcation accuracy than
other methods. ML-based approaches extract high-dimensional statistical features from long packet sequences, while PR-based techniques
extract fewer features from the payloads of 128 B – 8 KB traﬃc (about
1 – 10 packets). Our HETC leverages the beneﬁts of PR-based methods. In addition, HETC achieves competitive classiﬁcation performance
by incorporating ML models to detect encrypted traﬃc with a 94% Fmeasure.
DL-based methods [18] do not require domain experts to select features, but automatically learn the complex patterns in traﬃc and extract
depth features. Zheng et al. [19] proposed an end-to-end encrypted TC
model, BGRUA, which utilized a bidirectional gated recurrent unit to
extra features from the raw byte sequences. They then used the attention mechanism to learn weights for the features automatically. BGRUA
outperformed multiple state-of-the-art methods. The DeepPacket [20]
framework takes raw byte streams as input and trains stacked autoencoders and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to classify network
traﬃc. DeepPacket-CNN has a recall of 94% in the TC tasks. However, most DL-based methods take raw bytes as input, which is timeconsuming and violates the limitations of high-speed TC [18]. As a
solution, Xie et al. [21] proposed a Self-Attention Method (SAM) for
TC. SAM consists of 4 main components: embedding, self-attention,
1D-CNN, and a classiﬁer. SAM uses embeddings to enrich the representation of the packet-level inputs. Then self-attention is leveraged to
assign diﬀerent attention weights to each input part to indicate the
importance. 1D-CNN is employed to extract further feature representations. Finally, SAM computes the predicted class probabilities using a

Most existing studies focus on classifying encrypted traﬃc. However, some communication systems still use plaintext traﬃc to deliver
sensitive information in their actual deployment, and therefore we must
ﬁrst distinguish whether the traﬃc is encrypted before using an encrypted TC method.
Encryption changes the randomness of the packet payload [22], and
most encrypted traﬃc has a higher degree of randomness than nonencrypted traﬃc. In information theory, entropy is a measure of data
randomness. Related studies ﬁrst determine whether the traﬃc is encrypted by calculating the packet payload’s entropy, and then analyze
the speciﬁc type of encrypted traﬃc.
Mamun et al. [23] ﬁrst extracted the Bintropy [24], the n-length
hexadecimal-encoded entropy, and multiple variants of both entropies
of the complete ﬂow. Then they selected the top 8–10 features using a
feature selection algorithm and combined the features with a supervised
learning model to achieve a classiﬁcation accuracy of 98.1%.
In high-speed network environments, it is inappropriate for us to
calculate the entropy of a complete ﬂow, as sometimes we must detect
the ﬂow content on-the-ﬂy. Khakpour et al. [7] proposed Iustitia, a fast
content-based ﬂow classiﬁer to leverage the observation that text ﬂows
have the lowest entropy, encrypted ﬂows have the highest entropy, and
binary ﬂows have intermediate entropies. The basic idea is to classify
ﬂows using ML techniques where a feature is the entropy of every speciﬁc number of consecutive bytes. Iustitia uses only the ﬁrst 1 KB of the
ﬂow to calculate the entropy and is suitable for high-speed TC environments, but does not consider the presence of compressed ﬂows, which
have the same high entropy as encrypted ﬂows.
Casino et al. [9] proposed HEDGE, a high-entropy classiﬁer, to distinguish between encrypted and compressed ﬁles. Speciﬁcally, if the
chi-square test value, the chi-square test percentage conﬁdence, and the
number of failed National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
randomness tests of a random ﬁle fragment pass all pre-deﬁned thresholds, HEDGE considers the ﬁle encrypted. The threshold-based strategy
makes it possible for HEDGE to classify a ﬁle using only 1 feature. However, HEDGE is evaluated on the ﬁle dataset, and may be inapplicable
to the encrypted TC task, since ﬁles are more uniform than the traﬃc
content. Some of the traﬃc contains both compression and encryption
components, such as TLS traﬃc, which splits the original message into
multiple fragments, compresses each fragment separately, and ﬁnally
encrypts it by the symmetric encryption algorithm. In addition, some
encryption protocols have plaintext handshake packets, which may lead
to misclassiﬁcations.
Doroud et al. [25] proposed an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN)
classiﬁer based on randomness tests. The ANN extracts 8 randomness
test features, such as the Approximate Entropy (AprEnt) test, from the
payload of the ﬁrst 5 packets to classify the ﬂow. Comparison results
show that although the randomness test classiﬁer does not perform best,
it achieves F1 values greater than 90% at diﬀerent levels of encrypted
traﬃc detection.
Saleh et al. [26] proposed two systems for classifying encrypted and
compressed traﬃc, namely Engineered Features Classiﬁcation (EFC)
and Raw Data and Engineered Features Classiﬁcation (RDEFC) systems. EFC extracts Shannon-entropy, chi-square, and Anderson-Darling
randomness test features to train a 1D-CNN for classiﬁcation. RDEFC
combines randomness features with load bytes based on EFC and extracts deep representations using 2 1D-CNNs. The results show that EFC
achieves a maximum veriﬁcation accuracy of 81.73%, while RDEFC
achieves a higher accuracy of 90.77%.
414

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Fig. 3. Comparison of aggregation entropies between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows.
Fig. 2. Encrypted ﬂow detection stage of our methodology.

Based on the previous work, we propose HETC, a high-speed encrypted TC method by using payload features. HETC extracts more
useful features by analyzing the diﬀerences in the BC, BFD, and binary
randomness of diﬀerent types of ﬂows, achieves higher classiﬁcation accuracy on short traﬃc ﬂow datasets, and improves the applicability of
PR-based and ML-based encrypted TC methods in high-speed network
environments. We detail HETC in the following sections.

Transformation Format-8 (UTF8) CT. Therefore, we utilize the encoded
information to extract aggregation entropy features based on existing
research. The speciﬁc process is as follows.
{
}
Given a ﬂow sequence 𝐵 = 𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝑢 , we ﬁrst calculate the
CT priority according to the ﬂow destination IP, then initially set the
number of consecutive aggregate bytes 𝑘 to 3. We regard every three
consecutive bytes 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏3 as an independent element, look up in the CT
by priority, and determine whether 𝑏1 𝑏2 𝑏3 corresponding to character
𝑐 exists in the table, such as ‘∖xe3∖x80∖x82’ corresponds to ‘◦’ in UTF8.
If it exists, character counter 𝑡𝑐 will be increased by 1, and we continue
the above procedure by sliding 𝑘 bytes backward in sequence 𝐵 . If it
does not exist, 𝑘 − 1 consecutive bytes will be regarded an independent
element and matched in CTs until 𝑘 = 1.
Then the aggregation entropy of sequence 𝐵 can be calculated according to

3. Feature analysis and encrypted ﬂow detection
This section describes the ﬁrst phase of HETC, which uses two key
features combined with a semi-supervised algorithm to detect encrypted
traﬃc. This strategy allows HETC to utilize many unlabeled samples to
assist classiﬁcation.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the ﬁrst stage. After the network probe
captures a short ﬂow, HETC computes the ﬂow’s quintuple hash to get
its ﬂow ID. The corresponding ﬂow label is output if the ﬂow ID appears
in the ﬂow table. For ﬂows with no record in the ﬂow table, HETC ﬁrst
strips the TCP or UDP header of each packet to get its transport layer
payload. Then HETC converts the payload into a hexadecimal sequence.
Subsequently, HETC extracts the aggregation entropy feature from the
hexadecimal sequences to classify ﬂows. However, the high-entropy
ﬂows contain both encrypted and unencrypted compressed ﬂows. Based
on previous work and our evaluation of the BFD of ﬂows, HETC selects
the chi-square test feature to distinguish these two high-entropy ﬂows.
Finally, HETC combines these two features to propose a semi-supervised
clustering-based traﬃc detection method for encrypted traﬃc by saving
the identiﬁcation records into the ﬂow table.

𝐻(𝐵) = 𝐸 (𝑃 ) = −

∑(
𝑐∈𝐶

(
)
)
𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log2 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿

(1)

where 𝐶 represents the characters existing in 𝐵 , 𝐿 denotes the total
number of characters, and normalization is performed to eliminate the
eﬀect of the length of 𝐵 on the aggregation entropy.

𝐷(𝐵) = 𝐻(𝐵)∕ log2 𝑚 =

∑(

)
1
𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log𝑢 (
)
∕𝐿
𝑡
𝑐
𝑐∈𝐶

(2)

The details are shown in Algorithm 1. To verify that high entropy
and low entropy ﬂows can be eﬀectively classiﬁed by the aggregation
entropy, we collect 100 encrypted ﬂows (containing 50 HTTPS ﬂows
and 50 Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) ﬂows) and 100 unencrypted
ﬂows (containing 50 text ﬂows and 50 compressed ﬂows). HTTPS and
VoIP ﬂows are derived from the typical encrypted traﬃc dataset ISCX
nonVPN. We generate text ﬁles by an automated script and compress
text ﬁles using the zip algorithm. To better simulate the network trafﬁc environment, we use the sender and receiver hosts on the Internet
to replay the encrypted traﬃc between them. Unencrypted traﬃc is obtained by fetching these ﬁles’ upload and download ﬂows. We extract
the payload and timestamp of each packet from the traﬃc and stitch the
packet payload according to the timestamp. We will detail the datasets
used in subsection 5.2. For each ﬂow, we intercept the ﬁrst 8 KB bytes to
calculate the aggregation entropy and use the tenfold cross-validation
method to prevent the inﬂuence of outliers. The results are shown in
Fig. 3. The HTTPS and compressed ﬂows have the highest aggregation
entropies, and the text ﬂows have the lowest entropy, satisfying our
expectations.

3.1. Aggregation entropy feature
According
to }
information theory, the entropy of a random sequence
{
∑
𝑆 = 𝑒1 , 𝑒2 , … 𝑒𝑛 is deﬁned as − 𝑛𝑖=1 𝑝𝑖 log 𝑝𝑖 , where 𝑝𝑖 represents the
frequency of the i-th element 𝑒𝑖 appearing in the whole sequence. The
entropy is a measure of the sequence randomness. The more random
the elements in sequence 𝑆 , the higher the entropy. When there is only
1 element in sequence 𝑆 , its randomness is minimized and the entropy
reaches a minimum value of zero.
In the ﬁeld of TC, researchers use entropy to distinguish whether the
traﬃc is encrypted. Most existing studies consider every 𝑛 consecutive
bytes in the ﬂow as an element and then calculate the entropy based on
the occurrence frequency of each element. However, the method loses
part of the encoded information carried by bytes in plaintext ﬂows,
as a character may consist of diﬀerent lengths of bytes given diﬀerent
code tables. For example, a Chinese character occupies two bytes in the
Unicode Code Table (CT), while it occupies three bytes in the Unicode
415

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Algorithm 1 Aggregation entropy feature extraction.
{
}
Input: Character counter 𝑡𝑐 , byte sequence 𝐵 = 𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , .., 𝑏𝑢 , code table 𝐶𝑇 ,
maximum bytes 𝑘
Output: Aggregation entropy 𝐷(𝐵)
1: 𝐶𝑇 ← 𝑃 𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝐶𝑇 , 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑝) , 𝑘 ← 3
2: for 𝜇 =1 to u do
3:
for 𝑙𝑐𝑡 in 𝐶𝑇 do
4:
if 𝑙𝑐𝑡(𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘))!=None then
5:
𝑐 ← 𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘)
6:
𝑡𝑐 ← 𝑡𝑐 + 1
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:

break
end if
end for
if 𝐵(ℎ, ℎ + 𝑘) not in 𝐶𝑇 then

𝑘←𝑘−1

12:
end if
13: end for
)
(
∑
1
)
14: 𝐷(𝐵) = 𝑐∈𝐶 𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿 log𝑚 (

Fig. 5. Comparison of byte frequency distributions between encrypted and compressed ﬂows.

𝑡𝑐 ∕𝐿

15: return 𝐷(𝐵)

{

𝑃 𝐹𝑔1 , 𝑃 𝐹𝑔2 , … , 𝑃 𝐹𝑔256

value.

𝑃𝐹 =

Fig. 4. Principle of the deﬂate algorithm.

{𝐺
∑
𝑔=1

𝑃 𝐹𝑔1 ∕256,

}

𝐺
∑
𝑔=1

of 256 bytes and ﬁnally take the average

𝑃 𝐹𝑔2 ∕256, … ,

𝐺
∑
𝑔=1

}
𝑃 𝐹𝑔256 ∕256

(3)

Fig. 5 shows a comparison of the BFD of encrypted and compressed
ﬂows. The results show that the frequency is uniformly distributed below 0.01 at all bytes in the encrypted ﬂows except zero-byte, where
the frequency is higher than 0.02. However, the BFD of the compressed
ﬂows is more uneven. For example, the frequency is signiﬁcantly higher
than 0.02 in the range of 100–118 and less than 0.005 from 50–100.
To measure the diﬀerence between encrypted and compressed ﬂows in
BFD, we use the chi-square test to value whether there is a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the observed and theoretical distributions. Previous work utilized the chi-square test feature to distinguish encrypted
data from unencrypted [28] or compressed data [9,29]. For example,
Wang et al. [29] used the chi-square test to distinguish encrypted data
from encoded (compressed) data to bypass Digital Rights Management
(DRM) protection
in streaming
{
} services. If the observed BFD of the ﬂow
is 𝐵𝐹 = 𝐵𝐹1 , 𝐵𝐹2 , … , 𝐵𝐹𝜆 , then its corresponding theoretical BFD

3.2. Chi-square test feature
Using the aggregation entropy, we can divide the ﬂows into two
types, high entropy ﬂows and low entropy ﬂows, which means we
can detect most unencrypted ﬂows. Still, it is impossible to distinguish
between encrypted and unencrypted compressed ﬂows, because compressed data can have high entropies and thus overlap with encrypted
data. To further distinguish encrypted ﬂows from compressed ﬂows,
we ﬁrst analyze the deﬂate algorithm [27], a lossless data compression
algorithm that uses both the LZ77 algorithm and Huﬀman encoding.
Deﬂate is the default algorithm for many standard compressed ﬁle formats like zip, gz, 7z, etc.
Fig. 4 represents the compression and encoding processes of the deﬂate algorithm. In the ﬁrst stage, deﬂate uses the LZ77 algorithm to
compress plaintext data by eliminating duplicate strings. Speciﬁcally,
LZ77 ﬁrst ﬁnds the identical string in the previous history for the current string 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟. Then LZ77 replaces 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟 with <DIS, LEN>, where DIS
indicates the distance of 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟 from the last repeated string, and LEN denotes the length of 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟. For example, string ‘ab’ is transformed into
<6,2> after compression. To reduce the computation of compressing,
LZ77 sets a sliding window with a ﬁxed size of 𝛾 KB, which limits the
search space for the duplicate string to the ﬁrst 𝛾 KB of data in the
current string. In the second stage, all DISs and LENs are processed
by Huﬀman encoding. The sliding window of 𝛾 KB theoretically has
𝛾 × 1024 types of DISs. In reality, the appearance of the repetition phenomenon is localized, and the shorter the DIS, the more frequently it
occurs. Therefore, short DISs can be ﬁnely encoded so that the code
and DIS can be mapped one by one. In contrast, the code for long DISs
can be relaxed appropriately, such as in the zip compression format,
DISs of 1, 2, 3, 4 are encoded as 0, 1, 2, 3 respectively. In contrast, DISs
greater than 769 and less than 1024 are uniformly encoded as 29. The
encoding process of LEN is the same. The deﬂate algorithm converts
these codes into binary sequences and stores them in the data to further
compress the data size.
We ﬁnd a certain number of binary sequence repetitions occurs in
compressed plaintext data, making some compressed data bytes appear more frequently than others. At the same time, this phenomenon
does not appear in encrypted data. We collect 50 TLS-encrypted and
50 zip-compressed ﬂows to verify this observation. For the g-th ﬂow,
we intercept the ﬁrst 8 KB, calculate the frequency distribution 𝑃 𝐹𝑔 =

is 𝑄 =

{

1 1
, , … , 𝜆1
𝜆 𝜆

}

. The formula of the chi-square test is shown as

follows:

𝑥2 =

𝜆
∑
(
)2
𝜆 𝐵𝐹𝛽 − 𝑄𝛽

(4)

𝛽=1

where 𝜆 represents the number of byte types that may appear in the
ﬂow. The smaller the chi-square test value is, the closer the BFD of
the ﬂow is to a uniform distribution, which means that the ﬂow has
a high possibility of belonging to encrypted ﬂows, and vice versa, i.e.,
belonging to compressed ﬂows.
3.3. Semi-supervised clustering-based method
Since our method runs in a high-speed network environment, we
cannot collect entire ﬂows. It is necessary to provide fast responses
for short ﬂows. HETC ﬁrst divides the input traﬃc into ﬁxed-length
short ﬂows according to the 5 tuples, calculates the hash values of the
5 tuples, and determines if there is a corresponding record in the ﬂow
table. If the record exists, HETC outputs the ﬂow label directly. If the
record does not exist, HETC extracts the aggregation entropy and chisquared test feature vectors from the labeled and unlabeled ﬂows to
create a sample set. Then it divides the samples into diﬀerent clusters
using multiple clustering algorithms. Due to the diﬀerent types of traﬃc
patterns and the diﬀerent cluster sizes, densities, and shapes of traﬃc
patterns, no single clustering algorithm can represent all data struc416

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

similarity measures to divide data points into diﬀerent subsets [32].
Data within the same subset have high similarity, and data between
subsets have low similarity. However, there are subtle diﬀerences in
the feature distribution of diﬀerent subclasses under the same broad
class, leading to increased similarity. Therefore, to eﬀectively distinguish diﬀerent subclasses, we design a RF multi-classiﬁcation model for
the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation of a given ﬂow. In addition to using the
aggregation entropy and chi-square test as input features, we also convert the hexadecimal sequence of the original payload into a binary
sequence, and extract two additional binary features from it to improve
the model’s classiﬁcation accuracy.
4.1. Binary-based features
4.1.1. Cumulative sum test feature
The NIST SP800-22 speciﬁcation [33] provides 15 distinct tests to
detect randomness in data sequences. These tests are usually used as
benchmarks to distinguish between compressed and encrypted data.
However, not all tests are suitable for ﬁne-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation
for two reasons. First, most tests cannot provide eﬀective results for
high entropy ﬂow classiﬁcation, and some require extensive calculations. Second, the ﬂow length is relatively short in the high-speed TC
environment, and most tests have restrictions on data length. We choose
the cumulative sum test as an additional feature for the aggregation entropy and chi-square test, due to its less restriction on data length. The
cumulative sum test ﬁrst replaces 0s with -1s in the binary data, then
accumulates from the ﬁrst to the last bit of the binary to generate 𝑞 cumulative sum values {𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … , 𝑧𝑞 }, and ﬁnally calculates 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒, the
oﬀset of the maximum cumulative sum 𝑧 with respect to 0. The closer
𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 is to 0, the greater the randomness of the sequence is. The mathematical deﬁnition of 𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 is as follows:

Fig. 6. Clustering result using the K-means algorithm.

tures. To improve the clustering results, HETC uses multiple clustering
algorithms that combine the information of a partition set through a
consensus function to obtain a more representative partition. Also, the
integration process increases the time complexity, so the number of algorithms needs to be considered skillfully. For each cluster containing
both labeled and unlabeled samples, HETC uses the label of the largest
proportion of samples as its label. Then HETC calculates the probability
𝑝𝑓 ,𝑚 ∈ [0, 1], 𝑓 = 1, … , 𝐹 ; 𝑚 = 1, … , 𝑀 that each type of ﬂow 𝑓 belongs
to a diﬀerent cluster 𝐶𝑅𝑚 , where 𝐹 and 𝑀 denote the total numbers of
unlabeled samples and clusters, respectively. Subsequently, the weights
of diﬀerent clusters [30] in each clustering result are calculated.

(
)
(
) )
𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑀
𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅1
,
…
,
(
)
(
) ×
∑𝑀
∑𝑀
𝑣=1
𝑗=1 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑗
𝑗=1 𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑗
(5)
(
|
|)
𝑀
∑
| (
)
(
)|
1
1 − ||𝐸𝑣 𝐶𝑅𝑚 −
𝐸 𝐶𝑅𝑗 ||
𝑀 𝑗=1 𝑣
|
|
|
|
where 𝐶𝑅𝑚 denotes the m-th cluster, 𝐸 :𝐶𝑅𝑚 → [0, 1] represents a mapping relationship, such as the ratio of the cluster size to the total size, 𝑉
is the optional mapping space, and 𝐻 denotes the entropy algorithm.
𝑤𝑚 =

𝑉
∑

(

𝐻

(

𝑐𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 = 1 −

⋯ 𝑝1,𝑀 × 𝑤𝑀 ⎤
⎥
⋱
⋮
⎥
⋯ 𝑝𝐹 ,𝑀 × 𝑤𝑀 ⎦

𝑚𝑓

𝑚𝑓1

𝑚𝑓𝐴

(
)
𝑜= −𝑞
+1 ∕4
𝑧

(4𝑜 + 1)𝑧
√
(𝑞)

Φ

)

[ (

𝑞
−3 ∕4
𝑧

(
)
−𝑞
𝑜= 𝑧 +1 ∕4

Φ

(4𝑜 + 3)𝑧
√
(𝑞)

(

)]

−Φ

(4𝑜 − 1)𝑧
√
(𝑞)

)

(
−Φ

+
)]

(8)

(4𝑜 + 1)𝑧
√
(𝑞)

where 𝑧 denotes the test statistics, i.e., the absolute value of the largest
partial sum divided by the square root of the sample size, and Φ is the
cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.

(6)

4.1.2. Bientropy
Bientropy is a simple entropy algorithm proposed in [34], where the
authors consider that the conventional entropy cannot detect periodic
binary data. For example, the entropies of binary strings 01011101 and
01010101 are both 1, which completely ignores the periodic nature of
the latter. To reﬂect the periodicity of the binary string, the authors use
a weighted average of the Shannon entropies of the string and all but
the last binary derivative of the string. When the binary length Θ is
lower than 32 bits, Bientropy can be expressed as

)

𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑓 = arg max arg max 𝑊 𝑃1 , … , arg max 𝑊 𝑃𝐴

)

[ (

∑

The unlabeled ﬂow sample 𝑓 is assigned a label according to the
maximum strategy.

(

∑

(

Finally, HETC calculates each clustering result’s dynamic weighted
probability combination matrix.

⎡ 𝑝1,1 × 𝑤1
⋮
𝑊 𝑃𝑎 = ⎢
⎢
⎣ 𝑝𝐹 ,1 × 𝑤1

)

𝑞
−1 ∕4
𝑧

(7)

where 𝐴 represents the number of clustering algorithms used, and 𝑚𝑓𝑎
represents the maximum weighted probability label calculated by the
a-th clustering algorithm.
Fig. 6 shows the clustering result of the K-means [31] algorithm.
The blue and green clusters in the ﬁgure represent encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. The diﬀerence between these two types of ﬂows is
slight on the vertical axis but more prominent on the horizontal axis,
which indicates that the aggregation entropy and chi-square test can
eﬀectively detect the encrypted ﬂows from all ﬂows.

( (
))
𝐵𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦 = 1∕ 2Θ−1 − 1 ×
(Θ−2
)
∑ ((
))
−𝑝(𝜃) log2 𝑝(𝜃) − (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) 2𝜃

(9)

𝜃=0

When the binary length 𝑛 is greater than 32 bits, Bientropy can be
reformulated as
(

4. Fine-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation

𝐵𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦 =
(Θ−2
∑(

There are multiple types of encrypted or unencrypted ﬂows in the
network. Network managers need to provide diﬀerent handling policies for diﬀerent kinds of ﬂows. Clustering algorithms usually adopt

𝜃=0

417

1∕

∑

Θ−2

)
log2 (𝜃 + 2) ×

𝜃=0

)

)
−𝑝(𝜃) log2 𝑝(𝜃) − (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (1 − 𝑝(𝜃)) log2 (𝜃 + 2)

(10)

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

4.2. Semi-automatic update method

4.2.3. Structural migration
After the uncertainty detection phase, the ﬂow dataset  =

{(

𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖(𝑝) =

𝑘=1

𝑝𝑘 (1 − 𝑝𝑘 ) = 1 −

𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥(𝐷, 𝑎) =

𝐵
∑
|𝐷𝑏 |
𝑏

|𝐷|

𝐾
∑

𝑝𝑘 2

(11)

𝐺𝑖𝑛𝑖(𝐷𝑏 )

(12)

𝑘=1

)}𝛿

∑ 1
1
(1 − 𝐹 𝑈 𝑁 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦))2
|𝑡𝑒 |
| | (𝑥,𝑦)∈𝑡𝑒 2

4.2.1. Preliminary classiﬁcation
RF [35] is a classical ML algorithm that integrates multiple decision trees. Suppose there are Ψ samples in the training set and Ω is
the feature dimension of a sample. HETC ﬁrst samples 𝜓(𝜓 < Ψ) times
from these Ψ samples with replacement and uses the 𝜓 samples for tree
building. After that, HETC selects 𝜔(𝜔 < Ω) features from the Ω features and chooses the best splitting points for 𝜔 features. The splitting
rule is the information gain ratio.
𝐾
∑

𝑥Δ , 𝑦Δ

may contain new types of ﬂows, so the original RF
Δ=1
model needs to be updated. Still, there is some similarity in the model
structure because the classiﬁcation problem remain the same. Instead
of retraining the model, we update the structure of the model partly
using the transfer learning concept. Speciﬁcally, we use 𝑡𝑟 ∈  as the
training set and the Gini index as the metric to extend each leaf node
of the tree down to a complete subtree based on the original structure,
so that it can identify the new ﬂow types in the target dataset. Then we
use te =  ∖𝑡𝑟 as the test set to prune the subtree from the bottom up,
i.e., we remove the subtree under each non-leaf node and calculate the
current generalization error of the model. If the error does not increase
with respect to the error before pruning, we prune the subtree vertically, and if the error grows, we continue to measure another subtree.
The generalization error is deﬁned as follows:

Considering that the ﬂows in multi-classiﬁcation tasks may contain
unknown types, the false positive rate will increase if the model fails to
handle unknown ﬂows. In this subsection, we design a semi-automatic
update method to enable the model to identify more types of ﬂows. It
includes 3 steps: preliminary classiﬁcation, uncertainty detection, and
structure migration. In the preliminary classiﬁcation stage, RF, which
has performed well in the ﬁeld of TC, is used as the base model to automatically extract the traﬃc ﬂow features and provide the preliminary
classiﬁcation probability. If the probability is lower than threshold 𝜎 ,
the model will assign uncertainty labels to the ﬂows and store them
locally. These uncertain ﬂows are then marked manually. Finally, the
model performs structural migration based on the manually labeled
dataset and reclassiﬁes newly collected ﬂows in the network. Each step
of the method is described in detail as follows.

(13)

where ||𝑡𝑒 || indicates the number of samples in test set te , and
𝐹 𝑈 𝑁 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦) denotes the diﬀerence between the predicted and actual label. If both labels are the same, the function will return a number
greater than 0; otherwise, it returns 0.

{
1 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥) = 𝑦)
𝐹 𝑈 𝑁(𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥), 𝑦) =
0 (𝑝𝑟𝑒(𝑥) ≠ 𝑦)

(14)

5. Experiment
In this section, we ﬁrst detail the process of traﬃc collection and
processing, followed by the experimental environment. Finally, we evaluate the classiﬁcation performance and time consumption of HETC.

where the proportion of samples in the k-th class is 𝑝𝑘 . Assume that a
discrete attribute 𝑎 has 𝐵 possible values 𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , ..., 𝑎𝐵 , and we use 𝑎 to
partition the sample set. In that case, 𝐵 branch nodes are generated,
where the b-th branch node contains all samples in 𝐷 that take value
𝑎𝑏 , denoted as 𝐷𝑏 . For a single node in the tree, the splitting will stop
when the number of samples in the node is less than a threshold, or the
Gini index is greater than a certain threshold, which helps to control
the depth of the decision tree and the number of nodes, thus reducing
the complexity of the algorithm.
For a newly collected ﬂow sample, each decision tree predicts its
type separately, and then RF uses a voting method to determine the ﬁnal
label. RF can run eﬀectively on large datasets and has higher accuracy
than other ML algorithms. Therefore, in the preliminary classiﬁcation
stage, we use labeled ﬂow samples to train an RF model to predict
unlabeled samples.

5.1. Description of baselines
To present a comprehensive understanding of the eﬀects of HETC,
we compare it with the most relevant works, which are summarized as
follows:
Three high-speed TC methods, that is Iustitia, HEDGE, and SAM.
Iustitia is a framework for identifying high-speed ﬂows, and it is primarily used to distinguish whether a ﬂow is textual, binary, or cryptographic. For Iustitia, we consider its variant using the RF model as a
classiﬁer, since the classiﬁer of the initial scheme does not perform as
well as RF. HEDGE is an eﬃcient high-entropy traﬃc classiﬁer to distinguish between compressed and encrypted traﬃc. SAM is a self-attentive
method for TC. It uses packets as inputs and outputs classiﬁcation
results through a neural network, thus fulﬁlling the requirements of
online classiﬁcation.
Two classical TC methods, namely Mal-SVM proposed in [16] and
DeepPacket-CNN proposed in [20]. The former extracts statistical ﬂow
features to train the SVM model, and the latter uses raw payload bytes
to train the CNN model to classify encrypted traﬃc.

4.2.2. Uncertainty detection
The uncertainty detection phase aims to ﬁlter out the ambiguous
ﬂows using the predicted probability given by the RF model. If the
probability is lower than threshold 𝜎 , the ﬂow has a high probability of
belonging to the unknown types. Therefore, our model ﬁrst marks it as
an uncertain type, stores it locally, and then hands it to human beings
for further marking. Although existing studies have proposed many DL
automated image labeling methods [36], such methods still adopt supervised learning concepts and cannot be employed to label unknown
types of ﬂows. In addition, the authors in [37] proposed an approach
based on unsupervised clustering to automatically label packets, which
performed well in a small dataset of unknown types of ﬂows. However,
due to its simple theoretical background, the clustering algorithm could
only eﬀectively mark some ﬂow samples in a massive traﬃc environment. For instance, K-means cannot determine the number of clusters
and is prone to local optima. Therefore, we adopt the manual labeling
strategy to ensure the trustworthiness of ﬂow labeling.

5.2. Dataset
5.2.1. Traﬃc collection
Although some encrypted traﬃc datasets are publicly available in
the ﬁeld of network TC, fewer publicly unencrypted traﬃc datasets are
currently available because the plaintext packet payload may contain
personal information about users, such as account passwords, communication messages, etc. To validate the eﬀectiveness of HETC, we must
ﬁrst collect a dataset containing a large amount of labeled traﬃc to
establish a high-speed TC scenario.
We ﬁrst obtain 5 types of unencrypted ﬁles from the Internet, including:
418

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation tasks with diﬀerent numbers of samples.

Fig. 8. Performance comparison of diﬀerent methods for encrypted traﬃc detection under diﬀerent ﬂow lengths.

1) Text, 15,000 random texts generated using automated scripts;
2) Images, 10,000 images obtained from the ImageNet [38] dataset;
3) Audio, 10,000 audio ﬁles obtained from the LibriTTS [39] dataset;
4) Video, 10,000 video ﬁles obtained from the UCF101 [40] dataset;
5) Compressed, 15,000 compressed ﬁles obtained by compressing text
ﬁles in the zip format.

Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK) and other related packet capture
libraries, which allows us to achieve 10 Gbps single-port real-time input
packet parsing. In addition to that, we use no other external dependency
libraries.

Since the actual traﬃc is obtained in a network environment, we
then use the FTP protocol to upload and download these ﬁles, and use
Wireshark to capture the traﬃc generated at the network export. As the
traﬃc ﬂows of the core node can provide comprehensive information
about the network [41], we also deploy a shunt device at the core of
the enterprise network to aggregate HTTP traﬃc in diﬀerent ﬁbers, and
forward it to local storage through mirroring technology.
For encrypted traﬃc, we integrate non-DoH normal HTTPS traﬃc
from public dataset DoHBrw-2020 [42] and non-VPN normal encrypted
traﬃc from ISCX VPN2016 [43].

We evaluate the performance of HETC in diﬀerent TC tasks and compare it with 5 baseline TC methods, to test how far HETC can shorten
the ﬂow length without signiﬁcantly degrading the performance.

5.4. Classiﬁcation performance on diﬀerent ﬂows

5.4.1. Encrypted ﬂow detection
In the parameter setting of the encrypted ﬂow detection phase, we
chose K-means and the Gaussian mixture model as the base clustering
algorithms. Fig. 8 shows the F-measure of HETC and other methods for
diﬀerent ﬂow lengths. All 3 methods achieve similar results with an
F-measure greater than 94% for long ﬂows (>2 KB). When the ﬂow
length is short (<1 KB), HETC still maintains a minimum F-measure
of 85%, which is signiﬁcantly better than Iustitia (≈5%) and HEDGE
(≈10%), making it easily applicable to scenarios that require fast classiﬁcation results such as Quality of Service (QoS) and intrusion detection.
The reason is that Iustitia only uses entropy as the criterion for judging
whether the ﬂow is encrypted. However, the high-entropy ﬂows contain encrypted and compressed ﬂows. Some image ﬂows also have high
entropies. HEDGE has the lowest F-measure among the 3 methods, because HEDGE sets a ﬁxed threshold range as the criteria to measure
whether the data is encrypted. When the randomness test value of a
ﬂow is not within the set range, the ﬂow is directly determined as encrypted. The advantage of using the threshold-based method is the fast
execution. However, the randomness test must meet certain constraints,
such as the cumulative sum test requiring the ﬂow length to be greater
than 100 bits. When the ﬂow length is short, the randomness test value
ﬂuctuates widely above and below the threshold, resulting in a high
false positive rate and a decreased F-measure. Therefore, in this paper, we use a combination of the entropy feature and chi-square test
to ﬁlter out the unencrypted compressed ﬂows further, improving the
F-measure and reducing the number of features, with 3 and 2 fewer
features compared to HEDGE and Iustitia, respectively.

5.2.2. Processing
As for the collected raw traﬃc, we ﬁrst remove the retransmission
packets caused by network delays, request failure packets caused by
server errors, and other damaged or non-artiﬁcially generated packets.
Then the original traﬃc is divided into bidirectional ﬂows according to
the 5 tuples. In addition, we also strip the handshake packets according
to the application layer protocol used. For example, we remove all packets before the second ChangeCipherSpec handshake packet when the
ﬂow is encrypted using the TLS protocol. Finally, we trim each ﬂow to
a 128 B–8 KB ﬂow fragment to construct 7 ﬁxed-length datasets. To ensure the fairness of the experiment, the numbers of samples of each type
of ﬂow are equal, and the ratio of the training set to the test set is 8:2. A
detailed description of the dataset is shown in Table 1. There is a data
imbalance in diﬀerent categories of traﬃc samples, which will lead to
the unstable feature distribution in types with small sample sizes, making it challenging to extract eﬀective patterns from them. To solve this
problem, we use the strategy of random downsampling, that is, a part of
data from the majority set is selected and recombined with the minority set to form a new dataset. In addition, Fig. 7 demonstrates that the
classiﬁcation performance of encrypted ﬂows is high when the number
of samples is 2 K and then tends to be stable under the same threshold,
while the classiﬁcation performance of unencrypted traﬃc is relatively
stable. Thus, we choose 2 K and 1 K as the numbers of encrypted and
unencrypted ﬂows, respectively.

5.4.2. Fine-grained ﬂow classiﬁcation
In this subsection, we test the performance of HETC under a ﬁner
granularity of ﬂows. Precisely, we classify encrypted ﬂows according
to the type of service, such as chat ﬂows, VoIP ﬂows, etc. We classify
unencrypted ﬂows according to the content type, such as text ﬂows,
compressed ﬂows, etc. Before performing ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation, we
ﬁrst evaluate the impact of the ﬂow length on the HETC structure. We

5.3. Experimental environment
HETC runs on a Linux server with Intel Xeon E5-2630 v3 @ 2.4 GHz
CPU and 12 GB RAM. The model is implemented in C++ and relies on
419

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Table 1
Properties of the dataset when the ﬂow splitting length is 1 KB.
Type

Source

Original size

Total number
of ﬂows(K)

Number of
selected
samples(K)

Label

HTTPS

DoHBrw-2020

9.4 GB

9626

2

Encrypted

Email

ISCX VPN2016

7.87 MB

8

2

Encrypted

Chat

ISCX VPN2016

28.1 MB

29

2

Encrypted

Streaming

ISCX VPN2016

884 MB

903

2

Encrypted

File Transfer

ISCX VPN2016

12 GB

12984

2

Encrypted

VoIP

ISCX VPN2016

770 MB

798

2

Encrypted

Text

Wireshark capture

220 MB

226

1

Unencrypted

Image

Wireshark capture

102 MB

105

1

Unencrypted

Audio

Wireshark capture

7.4 GB

7620

1

Unencrypted

Video

Wireshark capture

5.1 GB

5232

1

Unencrypted

Compressed

Wireshark capture

83 MB

85

1

Unencrypted

HTTP

Network aggregate

2 GB

2049

1

Unencrypted

Table 2
Comparison of decision tree depths and numbers of
nodes under diﬀerent ﬂow lengths.
Flow length

Tree depth

Tree nodes

128 B

39

410

256 B

30

399

512 B

26

404

1 KB

25

266

2 KB

19

242

4 KB

55

243

8 KB

56

301

ﬁnd that the shorter the ﬂow length, the deeper the depth of each decision tree in RF, as shown in Table 2. When the ﬂow length is 128 B,
the depth reaches a maximum of 39 layers. When the ﬂow length increases to 1 KB, the depth of the decision tree is generally about 25
layers. Compared to the 128 B ﬂow length, the number of leaf nodes at
1 KB is smaller, and the decision tree’s complexity is lower. However,
this trend is limited. When the ﬂow length exceeds 2 KB, the depth and
number of nodes gradually rise again. The RF model consists of multiple decision trees. The decision tree generation process generally starts
from the root node, which ﬁrst selects the corresponding features (e.g.,
aggregation entropy), followed by selecting splitting points (e.g., aggregation entropy <= 5.8 or aggregation entropy > 5.8) for the features.
Then it splits the parent node according to the splitting points (e.g., samples with aggregation entropy <= 5.8 are categorized in the left child
node, and the others are categorized in the right child node). The decision tree will stop splitting if the Gini index exceeds a certain value. As
the ﬂows get longer, the average depth of the tree gets smaller, which
indicates that the shorter the ﬂow, the more unstable the distribution
of extracted features is, resulting in more information provided by each
split. Therefore, the tree is deeper. When the ﬂow length exceeds 2 KB,
although the depth of the tree is increasing, the overall number of nodes
grows slowly, indicating that the distribution of the extracted features
is gradually stabilizing.
Considering that the ﬂow length is inversely proportional to the
complexity of the HETC model and positively proportional to the time
consumption of training and classiﬁcation, 1 KB is chosen as the ﬂow
length in this section, as the complexity and execution time of the model
are relatively balanced. Fig. 9 and Table 3 demonstrate the ﬁne-grained
ﬂow classiﬁcation performance when the ﬂow length is 1 KB. Fig. 9 reveals that the overall F-measure of HETC for unencrypted ﬂows is about
5.8% higher than the second-best Iustitia. Although the ﬁle structures of
the image and compressed ﬂows diﬀer, the F-measure is lower than that

Fig. 9. Unencrypted TC results on an integrated dataset.

on other unencrypted ﬂows. The reason may be that some image ﬁles
use the same encoding as standard compressed ﬁles, e.g., jpeg and zip
use Huﬀman encoding, and png and zip use deﬂate encoding, resulting
in these types of ﬂows having similar feature distributions.
Table 3 demonstrates the performance of diﬀerent methods for classifying encrypted traﬃc. The experimental data are obtained by our
reproduction experiments, except for DeepPacket, whose results are
derived from the original paper. HETC achieves the best TC performance in 3 types of encrypted ﬂows (email, HTTPS, and VoIP), with
an F-measure around 95%–99%. The TC performance can be further
improved with features extracted from the entire ﬂow, which will increase the execution time. SAM and DeepPacket-CNN achieve the best
performance on other ﬂow types. The performance gap is attributed to
various factors such as diﬀerences in DL platforms and better parameter tuning. Due to the dynamic and varied nature of encrypted traﬃc,
it is necessary to select appropriate models according to the application
scenarios.
5.4.3. Unknown type of ﬂow classiﬁcation
To further verify the classiﬁcation performance of HETC for unknown types of ﬂows, we select 1 KB as the ﬂow length and construct two new datasets, Denc_1kb and Dunenc_1kb. The training set of
Denc_1kb includes all types of encrypted ﬂows except HTTPS and email
ﬂow, and the validation and test sets contain all types of encrypted
ﬂows. The training set of Dunenc_1kb includes all types of unencrypted
ﬂows except text and compressed ﬂows, and the validation and test
sets contain all types of unencrypted ﬂows. The ratio of the number of
420

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Table 3
Encrypted TC results on ISCX VPN2016.
Type

Chat

Metrics

R. (%)

Email
P. (%)

F1. (%)

File Transfer

R. (%)

P. (%)

F1. (%)

R. (%)

P. (%)

F1. (%)

Mal-SVM

78

64

70

67

78

72

74

74

74

Iustitia-RF (1 KB)

59

68

63

57

64

60

58

88

70

HEDGE (1 KB)

25

42

31

16

42

23

60

72

65

DeepPacket-CNN

71

84

77

87

96

91

100

98

99

SAM

76

68

78

74

88

82

87

96

90

HETC (1 KB)

61

74

71

92

99

95

67

72

69

P. (%)

F1. (%)

R. (%)

P. (%)

F1. (%)

P. (%)

F1. (%)

Type

HTTPS

Metrics

R. (%)

Streaming

VoIP
R. (%)

Mal-SVM

96

99

98

86

72

79

83

77

80

Iustitia-RF (1 KB)

37

48

42

73

42

54

95

86

90

HEDGE (1 KB)

48

36

41

46

45

45

95

75

84

DeepPacket-CNN

-

-

-

87

92

90

88

63

74

SAM

99

99

99

99

99

98

67

91

83

HETC (1 KB)

99

99

99

82

79

80

98

99

99

Table 4
Comparison of classiﬁcation performance before and after model update.
Evaluation metric

Original

Updated

HETC_enc

HETC_unenc

HETC_enc

Accuracy (%)

87

86

84

HETC_unenc
83

Precision (%)

89

87

86

84

F-measure (%)

88

86

85

84

Number of ﬁltered ﬂows

182

181

13

15

out 95 HTTPS ﬂows and 87 email ﬂows, and HETC_unenc ﬁlters out
85 text ﬂows and 96 compressed ﬂows. These ﬂows are then manually
labeled, and RFenc and RFunenc are re-updated using the structure migration strategy provided in the semi-automatic update method. Finally,
we re-evaluate HETC utilizing the test set. We can notice that the overall classiﬁcation accuracy of the two updated models is slightly lower
than the original state. Nevertheless, most of unknown types of ﬂows
are correctly classiﬁed, which veriﬁes that HETC can classify unknown
types of ﬂows to some extent.
5.5. Time analysis
To verify that HETC can be applied in high-speed TC environments,
we compare the execution time of the 6 TC methods. We experiment
on a dataset containing 100,000 encrypted and 100,000 unencrypted
ﬂows, and use tenfold cross-validation to obtain stable results. Those
ﬂows include unknown types. The purpose of this experiment is mainly
to compare the time to process and classify samples by diﬀerent methods to verify the eﬃciency of the methods, and therefore HETC outputs
its prediction probability regardless of the ﬂow types. Table 5 shows
the time required for the methods to classify 1 KB samples. HETC
uses diﬀerent features in the encrypted ﬂow detection and ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation phases, within a classiﬁcation time of 2 ms and 16 ms, respectively. In the encrypted ﬂow detection phase, HETC has the same
highest speed as SAM, and its detection speed is lower than Iustitia and
SAM in the ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation. Nevertheless, HETC achieves a
comparable performance with the state-of-the-art methods, which allows it to run in a high-speed network environment.

Fig. 10. Relationship between F-measure, coverage, and threshold.

ﬂows in the training, validation, and test sets is 8:1:1. Fig. 10 illustrates
the relationship between the F-measure, coverage, and threshold. As
the threshold gradually increases, the performance also rises, and the
coverage gradually decreases. The F-measure growth rate is maximized
when the threshold is 0.7. Therefore, uncertainty detection threshold
𝜎 is set to 0.7. HETC_enc and HETC_unenc are trained using the training sets of Denc_1kb and Dunenc_1kb, respectively. The performance of
models is veriﬁed using the validation set.
Table 4 shows that the two original models have high classiﬁcation
accuracy overall. Due to uncertainty detection, most of the ﬂow types
that do not exist in the training set are ﬁltered out. HETC_enc ﬁlters
421

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.

Table 5
Comparison of the time required to classify a ﬂow
sample in milliseconds.
Method

Mean

[3] J. Gallego-Madrid, R. Sanchez-Iborra, P.M. Ruiz, A.F. Skarmeta, Machine learningbased zero-touch network and service management: a survey, Digit. Commun. Netw.
8 (2) (2021) 105–123.
[4] J. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Zhao, N. Sharma, M. Blumenstein, S. Yu, Fooling intrusion detection systems using adversarially autoencoder, Digit. Commun. Netw. 7 (3) (2021)
453–460.
[5] D. Aureli, A. Cianfrani, M. Listanti, M. Polverini, S. Secci, Augmenting diﬀserv operations with dynamically learned classes of services, Comput. Netw. 202 (2022)
108624.
[6] G.J. Klir, Uncertainty and information: foundations of generalized information theory, Kybernetes 35 (7) (2006) 1297–1299.
[7] A.R. Khakpour, A.X. Liu, An information-theoretical approach to high-speed ﬂow
nature identiﬁcation, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 21 (4) (2012) 1076–1089.
[8] Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Guo, S. Li, Using entropy to classify traﬃc more deeply, in:
2011 IEEE Sixth International Conference on Networking, Architecture, and Storage,
IEEE, 2011, pp. 45–52.
[9] F. Casino, K.-K.R. Choo, C. Patsakis, Hedge: eﬃcient traﬃc classiﬁcation of encrypted and compressed packets, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 14 (11) (2019)
2916–2926.
[10] T. Luo, L. Wang, S. Yin, H. Shentu, H. Zhao, Rbp: a website ﬁngerprinting obfuscation method against intelligent ﬁngerprinting attacks, J. Cloud Comput. 10 (1)
(2021) 1–14.
[11] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. De Donato, A. Pescapé, Portload: taking the best of two
worlds in traﬃc classiﬁcation, in: 2010 INFOCOM IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[12] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, K. Hanssgen, A survey of
payload-based traﬃc classiﬁcation approaches, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 16 (2)
(2013) 1135–1156.
[13] J. Zhao, X. Jing, Z. Yan, W. Pedrycz, Network traﬃc classiﬁcation for data fusion: a
survey, Inf. Fusion 72 (2021) 22–47.
[14] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, J. Aguilar, Towards the deployment
of machine learning solutions in network traﬃc classiﬁcation: a systematic survey,
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (2) (2018) 1988–2014.
[15] L. Wang, H. Mei, V.S. Sheng, Multilevel identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation analysis of tor on mobile and pc platforms, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 17 (2) (2020)
1079–1088.
[16] B. Anderson, D. McGrew, Identifying encrypted malware traﬃc with contextual ﬂow
data, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security, ACM, 2016, pp. 35–46.
[17] S. Dong, Multi class svm algorithm with active learning for network traﬃc classiﬁcation, Expert Syst. Appl. 176 (2021) 114885.
[18] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation: an overview,
IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81.
[19] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirectional gru networks for eﬃcient https traﬃc classiﬁcation, Inf. Sci. 541 (2020)
297–315.
[20] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, M. Saberian, Deep
packet: a novel approach for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning,
Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
[21] G. Xie, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, Self-attentive deep learning method for online traﬃc classiﬁcation and its interpretability, Comput. Netw. 196 (2021) 108267.
[22] L. Nian-Sheng, Pseudo-randomness and complexity of binary sequences generated
by the chaotic system, Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 16 (2) (2011)
761–768.
[23] M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, N. Stakhanova, An entropy based encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁer, in: International Conference on Information and Communications Security, Springer, 2015, pp. 282–294.
[24] R. Lyda, J. Hamrock, Using entropy analysis to ﬁnd encrypted and packed malware,
IEEE Secur. Priv. 5 (2) (2007) 40–45.
[25] H. Doroud, A. Alaswad, F. Dressler, Encrypted traﬃc detection: beyond the port
number era, in: 2022 IEEE 47th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN),
IEEE, 2022, pp. 198–204.
[26] M.M. Saleh, M. AlSlaiman, M.I. Salman, B. Wang, Combining raw data and engineered features for optimizing encrypted and compressed Internet of things traﬃc
classiﬁcation, Comput. Secur. 130 (2023) 103287.
[27] S. Oswal, A. Singh, K. Kumari, Deﬂate compression algorithm, Int. J. Eng. Res. Gen.
Sci. 4 (1) (2016) 430–436.
[28] P. Choudhury, K.P. Kumar, S. Nandi, G. Athithan, An empirical approach towards
characterization of encrypted and unencrypted voip traﬃc, Multimed. Tools Appl.
79 (1–2) (2020) 603–631.
[29] R. Wang, Y. Shoshitaishvili, C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, Steal this movie: automatically
bypassing drm protection in streaming media services, in: USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Association, 2013, pp. 687–702.
[30] S. Vega-Pons, J. Correa-Morris, J. Ruiz-Shulcloper, Weighted cluster ensemble using
a kernel consensus function, in: Iberoamerican Congress on Pattern Recognition,
Springer, 2008, pp. 195–202.
[31] J. MacQueen, et al., Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of multivariate observations, in: Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on
Mathematical Statistics and Probability, University of California Press, 1967,
pp. 281–297.

Std. dev

Mal-SVM

20

0.007

Iustitia-RF

10

0.006

HEDGE

135

0.008

DeepPacket-CNN

95

0.006

SAM

2

0.006

HETC

2 \ 16

0.004

6. Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we propose HETC, a high-speed encrypted TC method
by using payload features. Unlike existing methods, we do not rely on
feature selection algorithms to select some eﬀective features from a
wide range of alternative features, but consider the high-speed TC environment and comprehensively analyze the diﬀerent patterns in the BC
and BFD between encrypted and unencrypted ﬂows. HETC extracts a
few features from randomly sampled short ﬂows to distinguish whether
the ﬂow is encrypted and further identiﬁes the exact type it belongs to
(e.g., unencrypted text ﬂows, encrypted HTTPS ﬂows). Compared with
other methods, HETC has the characteristics of high F-measure (94%
for encrypted ﬂow detection, 85%–93% for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation)
and short execution time (about 2 or 16 ms).
In the future, we plan to investigate new methods in network environments with more traﬃc types and more heterogeneous traﬃc distributions, and improve the classiﬁcation accuracy.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xinge Yan: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review
& editing. Liukun He: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing. Yifan Xu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jiuxin Cao: Conceptualization, Data curation,
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Writing – original draft. Liangmin Wang:
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Resources, Visualization, Writing – original draft.
Guyang Xie: Data curation, Formal analysis, Resources, Software, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U1736216.
References
[1] J. Rauthan, K. Vaisla, Vrs-db: preserve conﬁdentiality of users’ data using encryption
approach, Digit. Commun. Netw. 7 (1) (2021) 62–71.
[2] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Optimizing feature selection for
eﬃcient encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation: a systematic approach, IEEE Netw. 34 (4)
(2020) 20–27.
422

Digital Communications and Networks 11 (2025) 412–423

X. Yan, L. He, Y. Xu et al.
[32] D.T. Nguyen, L. Chen, C.K. Chan, Clustering with multiviewpoint-based similarity
measure, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 24 (6) (2011) 988–1001.
[33] F. Pareschi, R. Rovatti, G. Setti, On statistical tests for randomness included in the
nist sp800-22 test suite and based on the binomial distribution, IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur. 7 (2) (2012) 491–505.
[34] G.J. Croll, BiEntropy – the measurement and algebras of order and disorder in ﬁnite
binary strings, in: Scientiﬁc Essays in Honor of H Pierre Noyes on the Occasion of
His 90th Birthday, World Scientiﬁc, 2013, pp. 48–64.
[35] G. Biau, E. Scornet, A random forest guided tour, Test 25 (2) (2016) 197–227.
[36] N. Das, S. Chaba, R. Wu, S. Gandhi, D.H. Chau, X. Chu, Goggles: automatic image labeling with aﬃnity coding, in: Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, ACM, 2020, pp. 1717–1732.
[37] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, H. Wu, Autonomous unknown-application ﬁltering and labeling for dl-based traﬃc classiﬁer update, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications, IEEE, 2020, pp. 397–405.
[38] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: a large-scale hierarchical image database, in: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, IEEE, 2009, pp. 248–255.

[39] H. Zen, V. Dang, R. Clark, Y. Zhang, R.J. Weiss, Y. Jia, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, LibriTTS:
a corpus derived from LibriSpeech for text-to-speech, in: Interspeech 2019, ISCA,
2019, pp. 1526–1530.
[40] U.C. for Research in Computer Vision, UCF101: a dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in the wild, https://www.crcv.ucf.edu/research/data-sets/
ucf101/ (Accessed 15 December 2023).
[41] L. Feng, Y. Yao, L. Wang, G. Min, Multi-timescale and multi-centrality layered node
selection for eﬃcient traﬃc monitoring in sdns, Comput. Netw. 198 (2021) 108381.
[42] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, A.H. Lashkari, Detection of doh tunnels using time-series classiﬁcation of encrypted traﬃc, in: 2020 IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl. Conf. on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl. Conf. on Cloud and Big Data Computing, Intl. Conf.
on Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 63–70.
[43] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization of encrypted and vpn traﬃc using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), SCITEPRESS,
2016, pp. 407–414.

423