IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

5079

HyperEye: A Lightweight Features Fusion Model
for Unknown Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
Xiaodong Zang , Zilong Zheng, Haosheng Zheng, Xuan Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
Muhammad Khurram Khan , Senior Member, IEEE, and Weiwei Jiang

Abstract—Recently, effectively identifying encrypted malicious
traffic without decryption in consumer applications relies heavily
on high-quality labeled traffic datasets. However, this harms
models for incorrect labeling and requires more efficient real-time
identification of encrypted unknown ones. This paper proposes
HyperEye, a real-time, unsupervised, encrypted malicious traffic
detection system. It can detect unknown traffic patterns by
analyzing the fused traffic features in-depth. Precisely, we
extract protocol-agnostic numerical and protocol-specific text
features and devise a cross-term fusion algorithm to obtain
a comprehensive traffic behavior description. We designed a
genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN (GA-DBSCAN) parameter
optimization algorithm to enhance the quality and stability in
identifying malicious traffic. Extensive experimental results with
open-world and real-world datasets demonstrate that our work
outperforms other state-of-the-art malware detection systems,
achieving an average 11.95% improvement in the F1-score.
Besides, experimental results with the real-world dataset demonstrate that our system applies to the dynamic nature of consumer
applications and can safeguard users’ data and privacy.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic, consumer
NetFlow, features fusion, threat detection.

applications,

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the increase of new networking paradigms, e.g.,
the Internet of Things (IoT), the Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), and 5G and 6G cellular networks, Internet traffic
has grown exponentially [1]. In order to ensure information
security and data privacy, encrypted traffic protocols have been
widely adopted, e.g., (SSL/TLS and HTTPS) [2]. However,
encryption-based techniques for such protection are doubleedged, as the attackers can also use them to conceal their
malicious behaviors, e.g., C&C communication. Therefore,

W

Received 8 December 2024; revised 9 February 2025; accepted 29
March 2025. Date of publication 8 April 2025; date of current version
14 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Project RSP2025R12; in part by the Yangzhou
Science and Technology Plan Project under Grant YZ2023200; and in part
by the Self-Developing Experimental Instrument and Equipment Project of
Yangzhou University under Grant zzyq2023zy06. (Corresponding authors:
Haosheng Zheng; Xiaodong Zang.)
Xiaodong Zang, Zilong Zheng, and Haosheng Zheng are with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu 273165,
China (e-mail: xdzang@qfnu.edu.cn; hszheng815@163.com).
Xuan Liu is with the College of Information Engineering (College of
Artificial Intelligence), Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225127, China.
Muhammad Khurram Khan is with the Center of Excellence in Information
Assurance, King Saud University, Riyadh 11653, Saudi Arabia.
Weiwei Jiang is with the School of Information and Communication
Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3558353

identifying malicious behavior accurately and quickly from
massive encryption traffic in consumer applications is one of
the keys to defending against cyber attacks [3], [4].
Many previous works applied machine learning, knowledgebased, and graph-based analysis methods for encrypted
malicious detection [1], [3]. The knowledge-based methods
used prior knowledge to accomplish traffic analysis tasks.
The machine learning-based methods need complex feature
engineering to obtain manually crafted features as input [5].
Both are inefficient in identifying unknown encrypted malicious
traffic due to the need for prior knowledge of known attacks.
The graph-based methods [6], [7], [8] are proposed to capture
the flow interaction patterns. However, the graph structure built
upon the traffic patterns requires much time, which makes it
challenging to build a graph for real-time detection.
After investigating these works, we find two challenges that
must be tackled: (1) Real-time detection, (2) Unknown malicious
traffic identification. We analyze the packet header information
and cooperate with existing on-path monitor tools to throttle
the detected malicious one after identifying it. We focus on
identifying active attacks caused by attackers without detecting
the passive ones (e.g., eavesdropping and intercept attacks) as
they do not cause apparent traffic variance in the backbone.
To achieve real-time detection, we devise a cross-term
fusion algorithm by analyzing the protocol-agnostic numerical and protocol-specific text features in-depth to capture
the behavioral footprints comprehensively. We convert the
protocol-agnostic numerical features into traffic maps and
use 2D-CNN to extract the traffic information to obtain the
high-level representation corresponding to the image. For
the protocol-specific features, we use TF-IDF to measure
the importance of the extracted text features and transform protocol-specific features into vector representations. To
achieve unknown malicious traffic identification, we designed
a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN parameter optimization
method to find the optimal parameter combination in ample
parameter space automatically. It reduces the complexity of
artificial parameter adjustment and improves the quality and
stability of identifying malicious traffic samples.
We conduct extensive experiments on two open-world and
two real-world datasets to evaluate the generalization ability.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) We devised a novel feature fusion model by analyzing
the protocol-agnostic numerical features and protocolspecific text features in-depth to obtain a comprehensive
behavior description of traffic behavior.

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

(2) We designed a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN method
to enhance the quality and stability of identifying malicious traffic samples.
(3) We conducted extensive evaluations and found that our
system’s overall detection rate is 99.8%, and its false
alarm rate is less than 0.05%, outperforming other stateof-the-art alternatives. We also applied it to IoT malicious
detection with State Grid traffic to verify that it is suitable
for the edge of the IoT environment.
Organization: In Section II, we survey the malware traffic
detection methods and give a detailed comparison. Section III
elaborates on our methodology. In Section IV, we conduct
extensive experiments with different datasets to verify the
superiority of our approach. Finally, we present the conclusion.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
In this section, we survey encrypted malicious traffic
detection works and broadly classify them into knowledge,
traditional machine learning, deep learning, and graph-based
detection methods.
A. Knowledge-Based Detection Methods
Knowledge-based detection methods contain the knowledge
base and the inference engine. They identify the malicious
traffic with prior knowledge. In the last few years, researchers
have used pre-established rules or similarity analysis [10] to
achieve traffic classification or malicious traffic identification.
For example, [10] proposed a maliciously encrypted traffic
detection framework with a causality explainable inference
engine. Their experimental results provide causal traceability
for malicious encrypted traffic. However, the completeness of
the knowledge base requires regular updates.
B. Traditional Machine Learning-Based Detection Methods
Traditional machine learning techniques are essentially
shallow learning. They require manual feature extraction and
selection [18], [19]. Reference [20] designed a tree-based
algorithm to identify malicious traffic with the extracted
statistical features, such as flow length and packet length.
Experimental results show that its detection rate reaches 90%.
Reference [11] used machine-learning models that could rely
on human expertise to extract valuable and informative features and identify encrypted malicious HTTP traffic. Although
traditional machine-learning techniques have high detection
accuracy, they must obtain complete statistical characteristics by collecting long-term streams, limiting their real-time
detection and generalization abilities.
C. Deep Learning-Based Detection Methods
Deep learning methods have recently been widely used
in encrypted traffic identification without decryption. Deep
learning techniques have automatic feature extraction ability,
which enables raw traffic representation as input [14], [21],
[22], [23]. For example, Lin et al. [15] devised a feature fusion
model that combines data timing, byte, and other statistical
features as valid information input. EETC [24] transformed the

Fig. 1.

Methodology of Flow Diagram.

extracted content and statistical information into three-channel
RGB images from encrypted traffic. Although it benefits
from the advantage of deep learning for encrypted traffic
analysis, it is an open issue of improving its interpretability
and understanding of the reasoning in anomaly detection [16].
D. Graph-Based Detection Methods
With increasing attention to the traffic flow interaction
patterns of encrypted traffic, graph structures are applied
to represent encrypted traffic data and devised different
graph algorithms for encrypted malicious traffic detection
[6], [7], [8]. For example, [6] designed a real-time unsupervised malicious traffic detection system by analyzing
the graph’s connectivity, sparsity, and statistical features.
Hong et al. [8] presented MalDiscovery by constructing an
attribute KNN graph. However, a more significant number
of graph edges brings a higher time cost, which makes it
challenging to deploy in large enterprise network environments
with high bandwidth and realize online detection.
We survey the state-of-the-art malware traffic detection
methods and compare them in Table I, where Y indicates the
corresponding column meets the conditions, N is unsatisfied,
and P is partially satisfied.
III. F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW
In this section, we introduce HyperEye, a lightweight
model for unknown encrypted malware traffic detection, which
mainly contains four parts: Data processing, Feature extraction, Feature fusion, and Traffic clustering, as illustrated in
Fig. 1.
A. Data Processing
Our original real traffic is pcap files. We clean data to
remove incomplete, invalid, or unnecessary packets, such
as traffic with no payload. Additionally, when processing
industrial data transmitted from the edge tier, there are often
consistency issues (e.g., signal loss or deviations in sensor
readings at specific points). We clean the industrial data by
eliminating infinite and ‘NaN’ values to address this. We use
randomness-testing for the unknown encrypted traffic to assess
their randomness and diversity [25]. The DNS traffic is not
filtered, as malware masters always use it to conceal their
C&C.

ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL

5081

TABLE I
C OMPARISONS OF THE R ELATED W ORKS

TABLE II
P ROTOCOL -AGNOSTIC F EATURES

B. Feature Extraction
Each pcap file corresponds to a specific application, a
traffic category, or an encryption technique. In the pcaps, there
are TCP-based features, UDP (QUIC, HTTP/3) based and
TLS 1.3. We split each pcap file to unidirectional a 5-tuple
flow (source IP, source port, destination IP, destination port,

TABLE III
P ROTOCOL -S PECIFIC F EATURES

protocol). We initially quantified the differences in features
by calculating the mean and standard deviations between normal and malicious traffic and subsequently removed features
with low variance. We utilize the Gradient Boosting Feature
Selection (GBFS) algorithm to experimentally select the top 33
protocol-agnostic numerical features and the top 25 protocolrelated features apart from five-tuple features, as shown in
Tables II and III. We put the extracted protocol-agnostic
numerical features (33 dimensions) in an IP flow and transform
these protocol-agnostic numerical features into images. Every
numerical feature becomes a pixel in the image.

5082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

1) CNN-Based Feature Extraction: We convert the numerical features to traffic maps and use 2D-CNN to capture
its latent relationships. We introduce flow-slicing and flow
cleaning to ensure the consistency and purity of the data.
(1) Flow slicing. We collected the real traffic at CERNET.
The timestamp is attached to the metadata at the time of its
collection. Namely, the timestamp information of the IP traffic
is located within the five-minute collection period. Considering
that a complete network traffic session contains a large amount
of data, it may be practical to process only some of it directly.
Therefore, each network traffic session is sliced according to a
fixed time window, and each slice is treated as an independent
processing unit. This step helps break up long sessions into
smaller pieces that are easier to manage and handle.
Slices = Slice(Session, Windowsize)

(1)

where Session represents a network traffic session, Windowsize
is a pre-defined time window size.
(2) Flow cleaning. Traffic cleaning is done after traffic slicing to remove redundant and irrelevant information that may
affect the classification effect, including removing protocol
header non-payload and potentially noisy data from traffic
data.
Cleaned − Slices = Clean(Slices)

(2)

We then transform the numerical features into grayscale
images to better learn the correlation between the features.
However, generating grayscale maps can result in a loss of
information. We adopt the hash function method to reduce this
loss, as it has good collision resistance.
We use the 2D-CNN model to extract features from
each processed image as it has been frequently used for
two-dimensional signal processing, such as image recognition
[26]. Assuming that the convolution kernel of the input
5*5*3 gray-scale images is W, the deviation is b, and the step
size is s, the output calculation formula for each position is
as follows:
Fij = σ

k−1 
k−1 
c−1


I(i∗s+u),(j∗s+v),d ∗ Wu,v,d + b

(3)

u=0 v=0 d=0

where Fij is the value at position (i, j) in the output feature
map of the convolution layer. σ is an activation function, such
as ReLU. I is the input grayscale images. k is the size of the
convolution kernel, and c is the number of channels of the
input grayscale images.
After each layer of convolution, a pooling layer is added.
To better distinguish the similarity of different protocols, we
adopt maximum pooling to help improve the most significant
features and add Dropout layers to prevent overfitting. We
chose maximum pooling because it more effectively retains
key features while ignoring irrelevant background noise.
The calculation formula for maximum pooling is shown in
Equation (4).


(4)
Oij = maxu,v I(i∗s+u),(j∗s+v)
where Oij is the value at position (i, j) in the output image
of the maximum pooling layer, namely, the value at this

position in the image obtained after pooling. (u, v) represents
the index in the pooled window, which is used to traverse
the elements in the pooled window. The input image is the
output of the previous convolutional layer. (i, j) indicates the
starting position in the input image for the region to which
the maximum pooling operation is applied. s is the step
length of the pooled window, which represents the distance
of each slide of the pooled window. We use the flatten layer
to transform multidimensional inputs X into one-dimensional
inputs and use the fully connected layers to learn the nonlinear
dependencies of the data.
Z =W ∗X+b

(5)

where Z is the output of the fully connected layer, W is the
weight matrix. X is the input vector (the flattened eigenvector),
and b is the offset.
2) TF-IDF-Based Feature Extraction: Traffic packets typically contain IP address, port number, MAC address,
handshake information, and other fields. Some fields may
directly affect the detection algorithms’ accuracy, while others
do not. After the feature engineering on the traffic data, the
digital form characteristics are input for the machine learning
model. As the extracted protocol-specific text features are not
quickly processed for the general machine learning method,
we use the TF-IDF model to transform the text features into
digital vectors.
TF-IDF is a commonly used method for feature extraction
of text data [27]. The main idea is that if a word has a high
frequency (TF) in the current document and a low frequency
(IDF) in the whole corpus, it is regarded as distinguishable
and suitable for text classification tasks. TF represents the
frequency of keywords appearing in the text, and IDF represents reverse file frequency. The calculation methods for TF
and IDF are as follows.
nij
(6)
TFij = 
k nkj
where nij is the number of occurrences of the word i in the
file j, and the denominator is the sum of occurrences of all
the words in the file j.
N
(7)
IDF(x) = log
N
where N represents the total number of texts in the corpus,
and N(x) represents the total number of texts containing the
word x in the corpus.
We use the TF-IDF model to transform the extracted top
25 text features into digital forms. To simplify, assuming that
the sampled dataset has 5,842 encrypted traffic data. After
converting, the resulting data set is a matrix of 5,842*25,
Fig. 2 shows the calculation process.
C. Feature Fusion
In the last section, we use 2D-CNN and TF-IDF to vectorize
the original traffic characteristics with different perspectives.
We design a cross-term fusion algorithm to obtain more
effective abstract features and their correlation. We enhance
the expressive ability of the model by combining crossgenerating new features to capture interactive information

ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL

5083

D. Traffic Clustering

Fig. 2.

Text information and reconstruct feature based on TF-IDF.

Algorithm 1 The Pseudocode of Cross-Term Fusion
Algorithm
Input: cnn_vector = {v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vn }
tfidf_vector = {v1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vm }
Output: merged_vector = cross_features + tfidf_vector
1: cross_features = []
2: for i = 1 to len(cnn_vector) do
3:
cross_feature = []
4:
if i > 0 then
5:
for j = 1 to len(tfidf_vector) do
6:
t_feature = cnn_vector[i] × tfidf_vector[j]
7:
cross_feature.append(t_feature)
8:
end for
9:
cross_features.append(Max(cross_feature))
10:
else
11:
for j = 1 to len(tfidf_vector) do
12:
t_feature = cnn_vector[i] + tfidf_vector[j]
13:
cross_feature.append(t_feature)
14:
end for
15:
cross_features.append(Min(cross_feature))
16:
end if
17: end for
18: return merged_vector

In this section, we enhance an unsupervised learning method
to tackle the limitation of detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real-time.
We employ the DBSCAN algorithm to capture the similarity
of fused traffic features to achieve unknown traffic identification in an unsupervised learning way. We chose the DBSCAN
algorithm because it does not need to determine how many
unknown protocols are in real traffic. However, in the realworld network, the data changes dynamically with time, and it
is challenging to select the initial parameter of neighborhood
radius “eps” and the minimum core number “MinPts” of
DBSCAN. We designed a genetic algorithm-based DBSCAN
(GA-DBSCAN) parameter optimization method to address this
challenge. Our optimized DBSCAN algorithm contains three
steps.
Firstly, we initialing the population. The population consists
of several individuals, each representing a set of DBSCAN
parameter combinations, namely “eps” and “MinPts.” The
initialization ranges for “eps” and “MinPts” in the genetic
algorithm were determined by analyzing the dataset’s statistical characteristics. The range for “eps” was set by examining
the distribution of distances between points in the dataset,
ensuring that the values captured typical clustering densities
without being overly restrictive or too loose. For “MinPts”,
we considered the average density of points in the dataset
to ensure that the genetic algorithm could effectively explore
the parameter space, converge efficiently, and produce robust
clustering results.
Then, we designed the fitness function to evaluate the merits
of each individual (i.e., each set of DBSCAN parameters).
We design a multi-objective fitness function f (xi ) using intracluster tightness (f1 ), inter-cluster separation (f2 ), and contour
coefficient (f3 ) to measure the clustering effect more comprehensively. Intra-cluster tightness measures the tightness of
samples within a cluster, inter-cluster separation measures
the separation degree between different clusters, and contour
coefficient comprehensively measures the tightness of points
within a cluster and the separation degree between clusters.
The equations are as follows.
f1 =

between features and promote the model to learn the correlation and nonlinear relationship between them.
Our cross-term fusion algorithm constructs a multidimensional representation of network behavior. It
comprehensively considers the traffic overview reflected
by numerical features and the protocol details in text
features. Through cross-term features, the algorithm can
trace the impact of original features on the model output,
identify key factors, and then clearly demonstrate the models
decision-making process by visualizing the weights of crossterm features, thus enhancing interpretability. Comprising
feature concatenation algorithm [15], it does not consider
the mutual influence or correlation between features. The
pseudocode of the cross-term fusion algorithm is shown as
follows.

k 


||x − μi ||

(8)

i=1 x∈Ci

where, Ci is the ith cluster, and μi is the center of it.


f2 = minμi − μj 
i=j

(9)

where, μi and μj is the center of cluster i and cluster j,
respectively.
(bi − ai )
(10)
max(ai , bi )
where, ai represents the average distance between sample i
and other samples in its cluster, and bi represents the average
distance between sample i and the sample in the nearest
cluster.
We combine the above indicators in a weighted way,
assuming that the weight of each indicator is w1 , w2 , and w3 ,
f3 =

5084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

and the summation of w1 , w2 , and w3 is one, respectively. We
get the final fitness function f (xi ) as follows.
fxi = w1 ∗ f1 + w2 ∗ f2 + w3 ∗ f3

(11)

Thirdly, we use selection, crossover, and variation to
optimize the population from generation to generation. The
selection operation is used to select individuals from the
current population as parents to generate the next generation
of individuals. Assuming the fitness of the ith individual is fxi ,
its probability of being selected is Pi .
fx
Pi = n i

j=1 fxi

(12)

We use cross-operation to combine the genes of two parents
to produce a new offspring. For DBSCAN parameters “eps”
and “MinPts”, we use a single-point crossover approach. If the
parent is x1 =(eps1 , MinPts1 ) and x2 =(eps2 ,MinPts2 ), then the
two children are y1 =(eps1 , MinPts2 ), y1 =(eps2 , MinPts1 ).
We use mutation operations to randomly adjust the gene
values of the offspring to prevent excessive perturbation.
Assuming that the offspring is yi =(epsi , MinPtsi ), and the
mutation operation can randomly change its parameter values,
epsi =epsi + eps, MinPtsi =MinPtsi +MinPts, where eps
and MinPts are small random perturbations, preventing
the algorithm from falling into local optimal solutions. The
pseudo-code of its optimization is shown in Algorithm 2.
IV. E VALUATIONS
We conduct our experiments on an Intel Xeon E5-2680
v4 CPU with a memory size of 64GB. We use opensource datasets(CICIDS 2017, CICDDoS 2019) and real-world
traffic(CERNET, State Grid) to verify the performance and
scalability of our work.
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
CICIDS 2017. University of New Brunswick released the
open-source datasets CICIDS 2017 and CICDDoS 2019 to
validate the performance of the designed intrusion detection
algorithms and research on the application of machine learning
algorithms in network traffic analysis and anomaly detection.
The dataset contains Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, DoS,
Heartbleed, Web Attack, Infiltration, Botnet, and DDoS. We
randomly selected 1.98GB of traffic in the experiment.
CICDDoS 2019. The CIC-DDoS 2019 dataset contains
benign traffic samples and the latest common DDoS attack
samples, covering reflective DDoS attack types such as
PortMap, MSSQL, UDP, SYN, NTP, etc. We collected 2.67GB
of network traffic and combined it with the detection results
of the tag-based network traffic analysis tool (CICFlowMeterV3).
The CERNET traffic. We collected the traffic at CERNET
from 10/1/2024 to 10/7/2024 [28]. During one week, we have
captured 4.12 TB packets. After preprocessing, we obtained
50.12 GB encrypted traffic, e.g., TLS traffic and Https traffic,
for the experiment. The topology of CERNET can be found
on Fig. 3.

Algorithm 2 The Pseudo-Code of Optimized DBSCAN Based
on Genetic Algorithm
Input: Dataset X, [epsmin , epsmax ], [MinPtsmin , MinPtsmax ],
Generationsmax G, Mutation rate rmut , Weights w1 , w2 , w3
Output: epsbest , MinPtsbest
1: Initialize population P of size N with random individuals
(eps, MinPts)
2: Initialize an empty list to store fitness scores S
3: for each generation g from 1 to G do
4:
for each individual (eps, MinPts) in population P do
5:
Run DBSCAN with (eps, MinPts) on dataset X
6:
Calculate the following metrics:
7:
Intra-cluster Compactness, f1
8:
Inter-cluster Separation, f2
9:
Silhouette Coefficient, f3
10:
Combine metrics using the weighted fitness function f (xi )
11:
Add f (xi ) to S
12:
end for
13:
Select parents based on fitness scores S using roulette
wheel selection
14:
Initialize an empty list Pnew for the next generation
15:
for each pair of selected parents (eps1 , MinPts1 ) and
(eps2 , MinPts2 ) do
16:
Perform crossover to produce offspring
(epsc 1, MinPtsc 1) and (epsc 2, MinPtsc 2)
17:
Apply mutation to offspring with mutation rate
rmut
18:
Add offspring to Pnew
19:
end for
20:
Update population P ← Pnew
21: end for
22: Find the best individual (epsbest , MinPtsbest ) with the
highest f (xi )
23: Return (epsbest , MinPtsbest )

The State Grid traffic. We collected traffic in the platform
tier control area of the distribution master station at the
State Grid in Jining City from 10/1/2024 to 10/7/2024. We
collected 2.39 TB packets in ten days. After preprocessing
the raw traffic, we obtained 29.73 GB of traffic. We also
injected eight types of attacks to simulate the real-world
scenario: Web vulnerability scanning, network scanning, SQL
injection, directory brute force, account discovery, account
brute force, backdoor attacks, and other forms of malicious
activity. We obtained the ground truth dataset with expert
analysts manually labeling it by identifying malicious activities
based on predefined indicators such as abnormal communication sequences, protocol misuse, and attack signatures.
The labeling results were cross-validated using the Maltrail
malicious traffic detection tool [29], which cross-referenced
malicious traces from publicly available blocklists, antivirus
reports, and custom user-defined lists, ensuring the accuracy
and reliability of the labels. Table IV shows the details of realworld datasets.

ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL

5085

TABLE IV
T HE D ETAILS OF R EAL -W ORLD DATASETS

Fig. 4.

The relative importance of each feature.

Purity refers to the percentage of correctly clustered samples
compared to all samples during the clustering process. TP, FP,
TN, and FN denote true positive, false positive, true negative,
and false negative, respectively.

Purity(W, C) =

k


1 
maxj ωi ∩ cj 
N

(15)

i=1

where W={ ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωk } is the set of clusters, C={ c1 , c2 ,
. . . , ck }is the set of classes, and N refers to the total number
of samples under clustering.
B. Performance Analysis of HyperEye

Fig. 3.

The overall architecture of CERNET.

We use Recall, Accuracy, Precision and F1-Score to evaluate
the performance and effectiveness of our algorithm. We also
introduce the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), the FowlkesMallows Index(FMI), and Purity as the evaluation criteria [30].
The ARI score is a similarity metric between two clusters,
which counts the number of data points correctly classified. A
higher ARI value indicates a higher similarity of the clusters.
ARI =

2 ∗ (TP ∗ TN − FN ∗ FP)
(TP + FN) ∗ (FN + TN) + (TP + FP) ∗ (FP + TN)
(13)

FMI is the geometric mean of precision and recall with
ranges from 0 to 1. It is a similarity metric between two
clusters considering the number of TP, FP, TN, and FN. A
higher score indicates a higher similarity between the clusters.
FMI =

√
Precision ∗ Reacll = √

TP
(TP + FP) ∗ (TP + FN)
(14)

We conduct extensive experiments for performance evaluation in the section, including different cluster algorithm
comparisons, feature subset selection, and system performance
analysis.
Firstly, we applied the GBFS algorithm on our dataset with
different tree values: 100, 500, 700, and 1000 to obtain the
most promising features. The different tree values can assess
how increasing the number of trees impacts feature importance
and model performance. Fig. 4 shows that most tree values’
top 58 features remained consistent.
Subsequently, we compared four classical optimization
algorithms, e.g., the genetic algorithm (GA), the simulated
annealing algorithm (SA), the ant colony optimization algorithm (ACO), and the particle swarm optimization algorithm
(PSO), respectively. After several iterations, we found that the
GA’s runtime is the lowest, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, we
chose GA to capture the best neighbourhood radius “eps” and
the minimum core number “MinPts” of DBSCAN.
Then, we compare different cluster algorithms, including
k-means, fuzzy c-means (FCM), spectral clustering (SC),
hierarchical clustering (HC), Gaussian mixture model (GMM)
models, DBSCAN, MCOSC [31], and our improved DBSCAN
algorithm(GA-DBSCAN) with the fused characteristics to
verify the superiority of our GA-DBSCAN. In k-means, a
suitable k value range can fully demonstrate its performance.
A low value of it will quickly assign different samples to the
same cluster. However, a high one will cause much larger

5086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE V
C LUSTERING M ODEL C OMPARISONS U NDER D IFFERENT DATASETS

Fig. 5.

The runtime of different optimization algorithms.

Fig. 7.

Fig. 6.

Clustering purity with different k values.

Fig. 8. Time consumption of different clustering algorithms under CERNET.

clusters than actually. Therefore, A low value will affect
the algorithm’s accuracy, while a high one will affect its
practicability.
Fig. 6 shows the purity of k-means under four different
datasets. When k increases, the clustering purity naturally
shows a steady growth trend. However, when it is above 153,
the purity curves under different datasets slows and becomes
stable. Therefore, we set the range of k ∈ [5,153] in the
following experiments. The reason why k is equal to 5 is that
we preconfigured five unknown traffic types.
After that, we compare our clustering model with the other
seven clustering algorithms to show its advantages under
different datasets. Table V shows each clustering algorithm’s
clustering purity, ARI score, FMI score, Overall Accuracy, and
F1-score. We find that SC and FCM cluster algorithms show
poor performance. The GA-DBSCAN algorithm obtains the
highest clustering accuracy, while others show close detection
accuracy.

Purity of different clustering algorithms under CERNET.

We also evaluate each clustering algorithm’s purity and
time consumption under the same number of clusters.
Fig.7 shows that with the increased number of clusters, our
improved DBSCAN algorithm obtains high clustering purity
and achieves a high value after the number of clusters exceeds
60.
In addition, Fig. 8 shows their time consumption. In
most cases, the clustering time increases with the number
of clustering numbers. K-means obtain less time than other
clustering algorithms. Although the time consumption of our
GA-DBSCAN algorithm is bigger than k-means, the gap
is insignificant. What is more, the purity, ARI score, FMI
score, Overall Accuracy, and F1-score of our algorithm are
better than it. Therefore, according to clustering purity and
time consumption, our cluster algorithm is superior to other
alternatives.
Finally, after evaluating our clustering algorithm, we verify
the superiority of our feature-fusing algorithm under four

ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL

5087

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS U NDER THE S TATE G RID
T RAFFIC

Fig. 9.

The evaluation of feature-fusing algorithm under different datasets.

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS U NDER THE CERNET
T RAFFIC

Fig. 10.

The training and testing time of detection models.

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION A FTER A DDING N OISE DATA U NDER THE
S TATE G RID T RAFFIC

data sets. We have verified five types of features: raw single
features extracted based on CNN (RawF-CNN), raw single
features extracted based on TF-IDF (RawF-TFIDF), concatenated features by concatenating RawF-CNN and RawF-CNN
(ConFeature), dimensionality reduction features based on PCA
(features-PCA), and our cross-term fusion features (Cross-TF).
We took them as input for our clustering algorithm in the
experiment. Fig.9 shows that the overall results of cross-TF
and features-PCA are better than others, which proves that
our cross-term fusion feature algorithm can effectively capture
critical information.
C. Comparative Experiments
We use ARI, FMI, Purity, Accuracy, and F1 to verify
the superiority and scalability of our model. State-of-theart research focuses on these metrics and is a significant
indicator of network traffic clustering. We use four datasets to
evaluate the state-of-the-art works and verify the superiority
of our model. They are [19], [23], [32], [33] and [15]. For
convenience, we use “A1”, “A2”, “A3”, “A4”, and “A5”
for short. Since their source code is not publicly available,
we replicate their methodology with real-world traffic for
normalization.
Since different parameters make it difficult to compare,
we compute the highest value of clustering purity under
different clustering numbers and choose the highest value
for evaluation. When the cluster numbers equal to 63(Ours),
42(A2), 38(A1), 44(A5), 42(A3), and 35(A4), our algorithm
outperforms other methods obviously, as shown in Tables VI
and VII.
We also evaluated the time consumption of the different
detection models. As the compared algorithms above used

different traffic traces, we replicated their methodology with
CERNET traffic for normalization. The results are shown
in Fig. 10. With the gradual balancing of data, there has
been improvement in the detection performance across various
methods. Although the training phase incurs some overhead,
making our training time not the shortest, our cross-term
fusion algorithm can reduce the feature dimensions by 32%,
which enables efficient filtering of malicious traffic. Therefore,
the memory overhead is significantly reduced.
Finally, we label-flip some of the malicious data as noise
data mixed into benign traffic to test the robustness of
our approach against evasion attacks. Table VIII shows the
detection accuracy of the different methods after adding the
noise data. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
can effectively filter noise data and has excellent detection
performance against evasion attacks.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose HyperEye, a lightweight, realtime, unsupervised, encrypted malicious traffic detection
algorithm that fuses the protocol-agnostic numerical and
protocol-specific text features to identify unknown encrypted
traffic. We convert protocol-agnostic numerical features to
grey-scale maps and use 2D-CNN to capture their latent relationships. We use TF-IDF to transform the protocol-specific

5088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

text features into vector representations and devise a crossterm fusion algorithm to obtain a comprehensive behavior
description of traffic behavior. Finally, we design a genetic
algorithm-based DBSCAN parameter optimization method to
find the optimal parameter combination of clustering results
automatically. We conducted extensive experiments, and the
results show that HyperEye has 99.8% precision and 99.4%
purity, outperforming other baseline methods.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar,
“Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network
traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019.
[2] M. Husák, M. Čermák, T. Jirsík, and P. Čeleda, “HTTPS traffic analysis
and client identification using passive ssl/tls fingerprinting,” EURASIP
J. Inf. Security, vol. 2016, pp. 1–14, Feb. 2016.
[3] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. Modelo-Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava,
“Hunting for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462,
Jan./Feb. 2023.
[4] Z. Deng, K. Chen, G. Meng, X. Zhang, K. Xu, and Y. Cheng,
“Understanding real-world threats to deep learning models in android
apps,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2022,
pp. 785–799.
[5] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF
beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and
classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic
classification,” Comput. Security, vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103000.
[6] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Mar. 2024.
[7] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
Defenses, 2022, pp. 495–509.
[8] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
[9] X. Yang, S. Ruan, Y. Yue, and B. Sun, “PETNet: Plaintext-aware
encrypted traffic detection network for identifying cobalt strike https
traffics,” Comput. Netw., vol. 238, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 110120.
[10] Z. Zeng, P. Xun, W. Peng, and B. Zhao, “Toward identifying malicious
encrypted traffic with a causality detection system,” J. Inf. Security Appl.,
vol. 80, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103644.
[11] A. S. Shekhawat, F. D. Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of
encrypted malicious traffic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141,
Jul. 2019.
[12] Z. Wang and V. L. Thing, “Feature mining for encrypted malicious traffic
detection with deep learning and other machine learning algorithms,”
Comput. Security, vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103143.
[13] Y. Javed, M. A. Khayat, A. A. Elghariani, and A. Ghafoor, “PRISM:
A hierarchical intrusion detection architecture for large-scale cyber
networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6,
pp. 5070–5086, Nov./Dec. 2023.
[14] “DISTILLER: Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask
deep learning,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021,
Art. no. 102985.
[15] K. Lin, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “MFFusion: A multi-level features fusion
model for malicious traffic detection based on deep learning,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 202, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108658.
[16] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-Transformer:
Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.
[17] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
[18] Z. Liu, L. F. Zhang, and Y. Tang, “Enhancing malware detection
for android apps: Detecting fine-granularity malicious components,”
in Proc. 38th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng. (ASE), 2023,
pp. 1212–1224.

[19] D.-J. Kim, N. G. B. Amma, and V. Sarveshwaran, “A novel split
learning-based consumer electronics network traffic anomaly detection
framework for smart city environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4197–4204, Feb. 2024.
[20] G. Dogan, “ProTru: A provenance-based trust architecture for wireless
sensor networks,” Int. J. Netw. Manag., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 131–151, Mar.
2016.
[21] G. D’Angelo, M. Ficco, and F. Palmieri, “Malware detection in mobile
environments based on autoencoders and API-images,” J. Parallel
Distrib. Comput., vol. 137, pp. 26–33, Mar. 2020.
[22] H. Ma et al., “Deep-learning–based app sensitive behavior surveillance for android powered cyber–physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5840–5850, Aug. 2021.
[23] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
Nov. 2023.
[24] X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei, Y. Jin, D. Gu, and R. Wang, “EETC: An
extended encrypted traffic classification algorithm based on variant
resnet network,” Comput. Security, vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103175.
[25] A. Rukhin et al., A Statistical Test Suite for Random and Pseudorandom
Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications, vol. 22, U.S. Dept.
Commerce, Technol. Admin., Washington, DC, USA, 2001.
[26] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in
industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
Jul./Aug. 2022.
[27] H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “Malicious encryption traffic
detection based on NLP,” Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–10,
Aug. 2021.
[28] X. Zang, J. Gong, M. Wang, P. Gao, and G. Zhang, “IP traffic behavior
characterization via semantic mining,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 213,
Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103603.
[29] “Malicious traffic detection tool.” Maltrail. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/stamparm/maltrail.
[30] S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Sang, “Towards unknown traffic identification
via embeddings and deep autoencoders,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf.
Telecommun. (ICT), 2019, pp. 85–89.
[31] L. Pan, Z. Han, Z. Shanshan, and W. Feng, “An optimal allocation
method for power distribution network partitions based on improved
spectral clustering algorithm,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, Aug.
2023, Art. no. 106497.
[32] J. Li, G. Cheng, Z. Chen, and P. Zhao, “Protocol clustering of unknown
traffic based on embedding of protocol specification,” Comput. Security,
vol. 136, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103575.
[33] Y. Fu, X. Li, X. Li, S. Zhao, and F. Wang, “Clustering unknown network
traffic with dual-path autoencoder,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 35,
pp. 8955–8966, Jan. 2023.

Xiaodong Zang received the Ph.D. degre from
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2020. He is
a Postdoctoral Fellow with the College of Electronic
Optical Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts
and Telecommunications University, Nanjing. He is
currently a Lecturer and a Master Supervisor with
the School of Cyber Science of Engineering, Qufu
Normal University. His research interests include
computer networks and security, intrusion detection,
network traffic, and host profiling.

Zilong Zheng received the B.S. degree in computer
software from Qufu Normal University, Qufu, China,
in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the M.D.
degree. His current research focuses on computer
networks and security and intrusion detection.

ZANG et al.: HyperEye: A LIGHTWEIGHT FEATURES FUSION MODEL

Haosheng Zheng received the B.S. degree in computer software from Qufu Normal University, Qufu,
China, in 2024, where he is currently pursuing the
M.D. degree. His current research focuses on computer networks and security, and intrusion detection.

Xuan Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineering
from Southeast University, China, and he is currently
a Lecturer and a Master Supervisor with the College
of Information Engineering (College of Artificial
Intelligence), Yangzhou University, China. His current research interests include network architecture,
in-network computing, and cyberspace endogenous
safety and security.

5089

Muhammad Khurram Khan (Senior Member,
IEEE) is currently working as a Professor of
Cybersecurity with the Center of Excellence in
Information Assurance, King Saud University, Saudi
Arabia. He is the Founder and the CEO of the
‘Global Foundation for Cyber Studies and Research,’
an independent and non-partisan cybersecurity thinktank in Washington, D.C, USA. His research areas
of interest are cybersecurity, digital authentication,
IoT security, biometrics, multimedia security, cloud
computing security, cyber policy, and technological
innovation management.

Weiwei Jiang received the B.Sc. degree in electronic
engineering and the Ph.D. degree in information and
communication engineering from the Department
of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, in 2013 and 2018, respectively. He
is currently an Assistant Professor with the School
of Information and Communication Engineering
and the Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless
Communications, Ministry of Education, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
current research interests include artificial intelligence, machine learning, big data, wireless communication, and edge
computing.