14610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

IIIM-SAM: Zero-Shot Texture Anomaly Detection
Without External Prompts
Zhe Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yuhang Zhou , Jiahe Yue, Runchu Zhang, and Jie Ma

Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial aspect in ensuring
the reliability of industrial products in smart manufacturing.
Despite employing unsupervised anomaly detection methods to
mitigate the challenges associated with obtaining defect data,
there remains the challenge of adapting anomaly detectors to
drift within normal data distributions, especially when there
are significant intra-class variations in normal samples. Consequently, zero-shot anomaly detection techniques, which do not
require training data and thus avoid interference from training
data, have emerged as a new research direction. Meanwhile, the
zero-shot segmentation capability demonstrated by the Segment
Anything Mode (SAM) visual foundation model has further
fueled our research enthusiasm. In this paper, we focus on texture
images and propose a no-external prompt SAM-based method for
zero-shot texture anomaly detection, called Image Internal Information Mining SAM (IIIM-SAM). We utilize the Image Internal
Information Mining Prompter to mine relationships between
internal regions of the image, identifying specific background
and potential defect points. The two types of prompt points are
fed into the SAM model in different stages, imparting the SAM
with incorporating category information segmentation capability.
Unlike current methods, our zero-shot texture anomaly detection
method requires no external prompts or expert knowledge,
and also avoids the uncertainty introduced by text prompts
necessary for CLIP-based approaches. Our experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of our zero-shot texture anomaly
detection method compared to other approaches. Specifically, in
the texture subset of MVTecAD/KolektorSDD2, our IIIM-SAM
achieves 99.2%/93.6% image-level AUROC and 98.6%/92.3%
pixel-level AUROC.
Note to Practitioners—The motivation of this paper arises
from a practical challenge in anomaly detection in smart flexible
manufacturing—customized customer demands lead to significant intra-class variations and even entirely different types of
products. Currently, most anomaly detection methods struggle
to adapt quickly to this challenge, severely impeding production
efficiency. This paper proposes a zero-shot texture anomaly
detection method based on SAM, which automatically generates
background and potential defect points through an image internal
information mining prompter. Compared to existing zero-shot
Received 3 July 2024; revised 26 September 2024, 21 November 2024,
and 19 February 2025; accepted 14 April 2025. Date of publication 17 April
2025; date of current version 2 May 2025. This article was recommended for
publication by Associate Editor X. Li and Editor J. Li upon evaluation of the
reviewers’ comments. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U1913602 and Grant 61991412 and
in part by the Foundation of Equipment Pre-Research Area under Grant
50911020603. (Corresponding author: Jie Ma.)
The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Science
and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing, School
of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
zhangzhe1997@hust.edu.cn;
zhouyuhang@hust.edu.cn;
yuejiahe2000@
hust.edu.cn; runchuzhang@hust.edu.cn; majie@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2025.3561776

anomaly detection algorithms based on foundation models, our
method’s most significant uniqueness is without any expert
knowledge and the absence of any external text prompts. Through
comparisons with four advanced methods on six instances using
two evaluation metrics, the results demonstrate the outstanding
anomaly detection capability of our approach.
Index Terms—Smart manufacturing, texture anomaly detection, prompt engineering, foundation model, SAM.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NDUSTRIAL anomaly detection aims to identify defects
on the surface of industrial products, which holds significant importance in ensuring product quality in industrial
production [1], [2]. In contrast to common computer vision
tasks, data for industrial anomaly detection is highly imbalanced and acquiring anomaly data is extremely challenging.
Even for normal (non-defective) data of the same product type,
significant intra-class variations often occur due to changes in
consumer demands. Furthermore, with the widespread adoption of intelligent dark factories and the implementation of
flexible manufacturing, there is a growing demand for anomaly
detection methods that can rapidly adapt to different types of
products. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, the automatic optical
inspection (AOI) system in flexible manufacturing requires
inspecting multiple types of industrial products on the same
production line without changing the algorithm of AOI.
Therefore, adaptation to different products with trainingfree has become a significant challenge in the current field
of anomaly detection. Specifically, there are three key points:
1) No need for repeated training according to different
products. 2) Effective anomaly detection capabilities across
multiple products. 3) Inference without the need for external
expert knowledge prompts. Clearly, both conventional supervised anomaly detection methods [3], [4] and the prevailing
unsupervised learning methods [5], [6], [7], [8], which fit probability distributions using normal samples, cannot meet the
requirements of the latest and challenging demands. Naturally,
zero-shot anomaly detection has piqued our research interest.
The cold-start characteristic of zero-shot anomaly detection
means it can be directly applied to surface inspection without
the need for retraining or target samples as references.
In recent years, some foundational vision models have
demonstrated surprising capabilities in detecting unknown
objects and out-of-distribution data. For instance, the visuallanguage models [9], [10] have demonstrated outstanding performance in zero-shot classification tasks. Through

1558-3783 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

Fig. 1. Zero-shot anomaly detection samples from automatic optical inspection (AOI) system deploying Image Internal Information Mining SAM
(IIIM-SAM).

large-scale learning from millions of image-text pairs, they
learned expressive representations capturing a wide range of
concepts. Such models exhibit remarkable zero-shot transfer
capabilities for downstream tasks, including image classification [11], object detection [12], and segmentation [13].
However, it should be noted that these models require
appropriate textual prompts including inspected categories,
inspected status, and more detailed description templates to
extract knowledge effectively, ensuring optimal performance
in downstream tasks. Numerous studies have indicated that
the performance of visual-language models varies significantly
depending on the different text prompts. However, using
appropriate text prompts to inject external expert knowledge
into the model increases the skill requirements for operators in
practical applications. It also significantly limits the methods’
ability to quickly adapt to the surface inspection across different products. Therefore, the problem we aim to address is
large-model-based zero-shot anomaly detection which is free
from the constraints of external prompts.
Segment Anything Model (SAM) is another open-source
foundational vision model, which exhibits exceptional generalization capability to segment any object in any image
without additional training [14]. This advancement provides
a new research foundation for zero-shot anomaly detection.
Nevertheless, when SAM is directly applied to anomaly detection, it exhibits two significant gaps: 1) SAM is an interactive
framework that requires predefined prompts such as points,
bounding boxes, or masks. This does not align with the zeroshot anomaly detection requirement in real-world scenarios,
where no external expert knowledge is available. 2) It is
a category-agnostic segmentation method, which prevents us
from clearly discerning whether the segmented result represents a defect or background local structure. Specifically, we
expect the SAM to perceive and segment the entire image as
defect-free after receiving background prompt points. However, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), even when we provide accurate
background prompt points (indicating no defect information),
the native SAM still segments out local regions in the defectfree image, resulting in false positives. These limitations make
SAM unsuitable for fully automatic comprehension of industrial product surface images. Additionally, we observe that

14611

background texture interference with distinct edges in anomaly
detection and the lack of well-defined defect edges pose
significant challenges to SAM’s segmentation capabilities, as
shown in Fig. 2 (b). Overall, the performance of SAM in
anomaly detection largely depends on the type, location, and
number of prompts.
In this paper, we focus on texture anomaly detection [15],
[16] and strive to achieve the first fully automated zeroshot anomaly detection without external prompts, as shown in
Fig. 3. To leverage SAM’s sensitive target perception ability
in anomaly detection and make it practically valuable, it
is necessary to investigate how to obtain accurate prompts
without external knowledge. Secondly, we design a suitable
anomaly detection framework based on SAM.
The motivation for our internal image information mining
prompt method is based on two observations regarding defect
features compared to defect-free features of the same image:
1) The inter-class relationship difference is greater than the
intra-class relationship difference. 2) Defect features are fewer
than defect-free features. We propose a prompter network for
internal information mining, which combines the advantages
of convolutional structures and transformer structures. By
dividing the input image into blocks, the network explores the
mutual relationships between blocks and judges defect-free
regions and potential anomaly regions based on the principles
of approximating the maximum and the strongest approximate
relationship. Thus, two types of prompts are provided. We
further design a two-stage mask decoder architecture based
on the difference in confidence levels between the two types
of prompts to achieve a more effective anomaly detection
framework. As an example, Figure 1 illustrates our approach
qualitative detection results for a few cases.
To summarize, our main contributions are:
1) Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection without External Prompts:
To the best of our knowledge, our proposed method is
the first large-model-based zero-shot anomaly detection
that does not require external textual prompts. Unlike
existing methods, our approach eliminates the reliance
on external prompts, does not require additional training,
and does not need defect samples as references. Therefore, our algorithm is more universal and generalizable.
2) Prompt Points Mining Principle: We propose a principle
for discriminating regions based on the relationships
between internal regions of the image. By jointly considering the strength of inter-region relationships and the
number of strong relationships, the principle determine
whether the area is the defect-free background or the
defective foreground. This principle allows for the mining of prompt points for downstream large models based
solely on the inspected input image.
3) Prompter Network Design: We design an internal
information mining prompter network (IIIM-prompter)
based on prompt points mining principle. IIIM-prompter
organically combines the advantages of convolutional
structures and transformer structures, and utilizes the
weight information of the attention mechanism to represent the interrelationships between regions. Through
the aforementioned design, the IIIM-prompter can more

14612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 2. The results of anomaly detection on the native SAM with manually provided point prompts for defect-free or anomalous regions, where the blue
boundaries represent the segmented regions. (a) For defect-free images, providing prompts with defect-free information can also achieve segmentation results
(False Positive Examples); (b) For defect images, the interference from background texture can severely impact the anomaly localization performance of the
native SAM (Mislocalization); (c) Our method can accurately locate defects without manual intervention.

Fig. 3. Characteristics comparison with different anomaly detection methods. (a) shows unsupervised anomaly detection method; (b) shows current
zero-shot anomaly detection method; (c) shows the features and unique
characteristics of our zero-shot method (IIIM-SAM).

accurately provide the SAM model with accurate
prompts containing category information without relying
on external knowledge or additional dataset training,
enabling it to be applied to specific texture defects.
4) Optimization of SAM Architecture for Anomaly Detection: We develop a two-stage mask decoder architecture
that processes the prompts in different stages, effectively
utilizing the category information embedded within
the prompts. This architecture significantly improves
the anomaly detection amidst complex backgrounds,
through bidirectional cross-validation of two different
types of information (anomaly and background). Experimental results indicate that our approach demonstrates
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Foundation Model
In recent years, the emergence of foundation models has
attracted the attention of almost all artificial intelligence
researchers. These models are trained on large amounts of data
and exhibit impressive “emergence capabilities” across various
scenarios, i.e. zero-shot generalization capabilities [10], [17],
such as chat-GPT [18], GPT-4 [19], CLIP [11].
Inspired by the tremendous success of foundation models in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP),
researchers have started building large-scale foundation models for computer vision and exploring the boundaries of
zero-shot capabilities of these models. The SAM model
[14] uniquely leverages an extensive collection of masks

(11 million images, including over a billion masks) and
demonstrates robust generalization capabilities. However, it is
a task-agnostic segmentation model that requires interactive
prompts, such as prior points, bounding boxes, or masks. This
characteristic makes it less conducive to end-to-end automatic
target segmentation. In this paper, we explore the potential
of harnessing SAM’s general segmentation capabilities for
detecting anomalous regions. Additionally, the proposed Image
Internal Information Mining Prompter can be extended to other
foundational vision models for other downstream tasks.
B. Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection Method
Zero-shot anomaly detection methods often rely on the
strong generalization capabilities of models to detect unseen
anomalies [16], [20]. Early research in zero-shot anomaly
detection was conducted based on CLIP, such as CLIP-AD
[21], ZOC [22]. WinCLIP [23] introduces a groundbreaking
work, which uses a large number of manually crafted text
prompts and involved forward passes for multiple image
blocks. Building on WinCLIP, the first-place method of VAND
competition [24] introduces a learnable linear projection technique to enhance the modeling of local visual semantics.
MVFA [25] is a multi-level feature adaptation and comparison
framework, which leverages a pre-trained vision-language
model to achieve generalizability in zero/few-shot medical
anomaly detection scenarios. However, these methods are
influenced by the lack of universally embedded text prompts,
reducing their performance in identifying anomalies related
to various unseen object semantics. Additionally, the use
of text prompts injects extra knowledge into the model.
Anomaly-Clip [26] is the most advanced zero-shot anomaly
detection method, which significantly improved the issue of
information leakage caused by manually preset text prompts
by introducing learnable text prompts. LTAD [27] is method
for long-tail anomaly detection, which also improves model
performance by learning learnable text embeddings. However,
these methods still require the presetting of hyperparameters such as the length of the learnable text prompts and
necessitates training the learnable part of the text prompts
on relatively similar domain data. MuSc [28] utilizes mutual
scoring of unlabeled images and designs an innovative zeroshot anomaly detection method. However, the drawback of
MuSc is that the inspected images must have a substantial

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

14613

Fig. 4. Overview of the Image Internal Information Mining SAM (IIIM-SAM) structure.

quantity and small intra-class variation to enable effective
mutual comparison. AnomalyGPT [29] is a parallel work
utilizing foundation model for anomaly detection, but it is
designed for unsupervised/few-shot anomaly detection with
manually crafted prompts. SAA+ [30] is a zero-shot anomaly
detection method based on the SAM foundation model, but
unfortunately, it inevitably requires the use of highly specialized external knowledge. In summary, current zero-shot
anomaly detection methods all necessitate the injection of
external information.

Fig. 5. Principle of internal information mining based on feature relationships.

III. BACKGROUND AND C ORE P RINCIPLE
A. Zeor-Shot Anomaly Detection Setting
In this paper, we want to emphasize a unique zeroshot anomaly detection task setting, where the products are
inspected without introducing any external expert knowledge. External expert knowledge includes rich predefined text
prompt templates, anomaly appearance description, and so on.
This task setting aligns more closely with the automation and
rapid production transition requirements in practical applications.

the anomaly detection problem can be viewed as an image
segmentation problem to distinguish between foreground and
background. Thus, as shown in Fig. 5 we partition the
inspected image, calculate the similarity between regions, and
rank them based on the degree and quantity of similarity. This
approach allows us to identify multiple definite background
regions and one most likely foreground region.
IV. I MAGE I NTERNAL I NFORMATION M INING S AM
A. Framework Overview

B. Discrimination of Internal Regions Based on Feature
Relationships
We recognize that anomalies on the surface of industrial
products often result from accidents during the manufacturing process or occasional events due to process instability.
Therefore, the number of pixels in anomalous regions is
relatively small compared to the anomaly-free regions (i.e.,
defect-free areas). Even though there may be variations in the
surface texture of the product, for a given detection image, the
dissimilarity between anomalous and non-anomalous regions
must be greater than the dissimilarity between non-anomalous
regions from feature statistics perspective. By treating anomalies as foreground and defect-free regions as background,

As shown in Fig. 4, Image Internal Information Mining
SAM (IIIM-SAM) consists of four main parts: the image
encoder, prompt encoder, mask decoder, and image internal
information mining prompter. The image encoder, prompt
encoder, and each mask decoder are components of the
open-source SAM model. The image is processed by the
image internal information mining prompter, which provides
three definite background prompt points and one potential
foreground prompt point based on the strength of region
relationships. Considering the varying reliability of information carried by background and foreground prompt points,
we design a two-stage mask decoder scheme to validate the
anomaly detection results. Finally, based on the segmentation

14614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 6. The detail structure of the image internal information mining prompter. The lower-left part illustrates the internal structure of low-level feature encoder;
the middle-bottom part shows the internal structure of global feature modeling, and the lower-right part depicts the internal structure of token-relation decoder.

results of the background and foreground, the decision is made
on whether the test image contains defects. The whole process
can be expressed as follows:
Fimg = fi−encoder (I),

(1)

Pb , P f = fIII M−prompter (I),

(2)

F prompter = f p−encoder (Pb , P f ),

(3)

Result = Det( fm−decoder (Fimg , F prompter )),

(4)

where I denotes the detected image, Fimg represents the image
features encoded by SAM image encoder, Pb , P f are sets
of prompt points mined by the IIIM-prompter. Pb represents
the determined background points, while P f represents the
potential foreground points. Furthermore, F prompter refers to
the representation extracted by the prompter encoder, and Det
refers to determining the presence of defects based on the
segmentation information obtained from the mask decoder.
B. Image Internal Information Mining Prompter
In this subsection, we will provide a detailed introduction
to the Image Internal Information Mining Prompter (IIIMprompter) constructed based on the principles of internal
region relationships discussed in Section III. In summary, we
first process the image by dividing it into patches and represent
the mutual relationships between patches through attention
weights in the network. Therefore, we choose the Transformer
architecture as the foundation of our prompter network. However, we also recognize that the texture information contained
in the defect carrier (non-defective background) often plays
a crucial role in discriminating anomaly features. Neglecting
the extraction of texture information would be a fatal flaw
for anomaly detection. The ability to extract low-level feature
(detailed texture information) is evidently a challenge for
the Transformer architecture. To address this, we design a
prompter network that combines the Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) with Transformer. We first fully utilize the

effectiveness of convolutional operations in extracting lowlevel features by performing feature encoding on the input
image to form the initial tokens. As shown in the upper
part of Fig. 6, the prompter consists of three main parts:
Low-level Feature Encoder, Global Feature Modeling, and
Token-Relation Decoder.
1) Low-Level Feature Encoder: In this stage, we focus
on the feature extraction of background texture information.
Numerous studies have demonstrated the inherent advantage of the CNN architecture in local information extraction
compared to the Transformer architecture [31], [32], [33].
Additionally, the translation invariance of convolutional networks contributes to improving generalization. Therefore, we
exclusively employ the CNN architecture in Low-level Feature
Encoder to utilize the local information extraction capability
and translation invariance characteristics of CNNs. To enhance
the representation of low-level features in the encoder’s output,
we adopt a design with residual skip connections. The specific
structure of the low-level feature encoder is illustrated in the
lower-left part of Fig. 6.
2) Global Feature Modeling: As shown in the detailed
structure in the lower part of Fig. 6, for the embedding of
low-level features, we further enhance the embedding channel
dimensions to increase the dimensions available for evaluating
features and facilitate the comparison of token relationships
in the next stage. Subsequently, the feature embedding is
processed into feature tokens through spatial attention, complemented by two layers of Transformer layers for advanced
semantic modeling of low-level features. It is worth noting
that, to maintain the stability of spatial positional information,
the generation of subsequent spatial attention weights is based
on the tokens before the first Transformer layer. The process
of Global Feature Modeling can be expressed as follows:
F = Conv( f ),

(5)

T 1 = S OFT MAXHW (F · A s (F)) · F,

(6)

T T = T rans f ormer(T 1 ),

(7)

T

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

Fig. 7. Visualization of normalized relationships between tokens. On the left
are segmented blocks, and on the right are pairwise relationships between
blocks converted into tokens. Specifically, each value represents the relationship between the token in the corresponding row and the token in the
corresponding column.

T 2 = S OFT MAXHW (T T · A s (T 1 ))T · T T ,

(8)

T out = T rans f ormer(T 2 ),

(9)

where f are the features extracted from Low-level Feature
Encoder, A s denotes the spatial attention weights. It is important to note that the sources of information for obtaining the
spatial attention weights in the two stages are different. The
first stage is sourced from F, while the second stage is sourced
from T 1 .
3) Token-Relation Decoder: After the patch of each image
region undergoes processing in the first two stages, it is
encoded into tokens corresponding to the number of blocks.
These tokens are then collectively fed into the Token-Relation
Decoder to distinguish whether each patch belongs to the
background or foreground of the image. Specifically, we
input the tokens into a standard self-attention layer to extract
attention weights Ai j between tokens. After normalization, the
final relation decoding is accomplished by sorting the relation
weights.
In Fig. 7, we present the visualization of normalized relationships between tokens. It is evident that there is a clear
distinction in the strength of relationships between regions
with and without defects, and strong mutual relationships
exist between regions without defects. This further validates
the correctness of the principle of distinguishing between
defective and background (defect-free) regions, demonstrating
the effectiveness of the image internal information mining
prompter designed based on this principle.
As formed as Equation 10, we assign equal importance
to the strength of relationships and the quantity of strong
relationships in the sorting process, aligning with the two
distinguishing principles stated in Section III.
!
!
Pn
j Ai j · wi j
Pn
Relation = sort
,
(10)
j wi j
i=1,2...,n

where n is the number of the tokens. The parameter wi j
is assigned different weight values based on the strength of
the relationship between tokens. Through the variation of this
parameter, tokens with higher similarity in relationships are
given greater attention.
In the end, after calculating and sorting the relationships
between tokens, the regions corresponding to the top three

14615

tokens are considered as three determined background regions.
The token at the bottom of the ranking is considered as the
potential foreground (defect) region.
4) IIIM-Prompter Training: We have designed a contrastive
learning training method that is more in line with the goals
of internal information mining. Unlike the common practice of applying data augmentation combinations to images
within a batch for contrastive learning, we aim to align the
information scale during the learning process with the task
objectives. Therefore, we propose a training approach, called
internal region contrastive learning. We divide an image into N
patches, p, and apply different data augmentation methods to
these patches to obtain p0 . Specifically, we selected the color
distortion, random rotation, and Gaussian noise as the data
augmentation methods in the training. We then input these
pairs (p, p0 ) into the previously mentioned IIIM-prompter.
Finally, we obtain a 2N ×2N relationship matrix. By selecting
the lower-left N × N matrix, we acquire the pairwise similarities between p and p0 . Each matrix’s diagonal position
represents the similarity between p and p0 , while the others
represent the similarity between p and N-1 negative examples.
For each row, we apply softmax classification, utilizing
cross-entropy loss as the loss function. Ultimately, the loss
for internal region contrastive learning is expressed as:
exp (sim (p, p0 ) /τ)
,
L p = − log PN
i=1 exp (sim (p, pi ) /τ)

(11)

where τ is the temperature in the loss.
C. Two-Stages Mask Decoder for Zero-Shot Anomaly
Detection
In this section, we will outline the observed segmentation
drawbacks of applying the original SAM model to anomaly
detection, as well as the design of a two-stage mask decoder
structure tailored to address the identified characteristics of the
original SAM.
1) The Segmentation Performance Characteristics of the
Original Sam: Firstly, we observed that SAM tends to struggle
in capturing the global background when faced with textures
with pronounced edges. It often gets trapped in local structural
textures, a phenomenon we refer to as “over-segmentation”,
as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, when dealing with textures
exhibiting clear and structured edges, a joint prompting of
multiple points is required.
Secondly, while joint prompting with multiple points effectively alleviates the “over-segmentation” issue in SAM, our
experiments revealed that certain types of defects without
disrupting the texture structure and only color changes, are
easily overlooked by SAM. Hence, we design a step that we
refer to as “retrospective checking” to mitigate instances of
false negatives.
2) Structural Detail: Due to the mentioned drawbacks
exhibited by the native SAM in texture anomaly detection,
we design a two-stage mask decoder structure, as shown in
Fig. 4. This structure cleverly combines the uncertainty of
background points and foreground prompting in its design.
Specifically, since the category of the three background points
are determined, the first-stage mask decoder only takes these

14616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 8. Qualitative comparison of anomaly detection results on different datasets. * indicates training with only one sample, and ** indicates zero-shot method
using simple text prompts, such as, “defective.” Our method is zero-shot without any external prompt.

three background point prompts as input. Subsequently, the
second-stage mask decoder, based on the results from the first
stage, introduces the potential foreground point prompt for a
defect-checking phase. The purpose of retrospective checking
is to further confirm the detection results from the first stage
of the model, avoiding missed detection of defect region
in the first-stage decoded mask. If the defect exists in the
image, the lowest-ranked area based on the interrelationship
scores within the image will definitely be a defect area. The
missed defect will be naturally detected. In cases where the
potential foreground point does not belong to the foreground
(defect) area, the retrospective check will not be affected
either. Because, the decoding process will return large and
scattered segmentation results when the proposed point is
from background region, which indicates that the image is

indeed defect-free. Ultimately, the judgment of the existence
of anomalies is based on the segmentation results verified by
the second-stage mask decoder.

D. Anomaly Decision and Segmentation
We summarize the anomaly decision and segmentation
pipeline of the proposed method with Pytorch-style pseudocode in Algorithm 1. For images without anomalies, our
IIIM-SAM will not segment out local regions and produce
the segmentation results without targets (the segmentation map
will be entirely black). For images with anomalies, our method
will segment out local regions after inputting prompts from
IIIM-prompter, and output the segmentation maps with targets.

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

Fig. 9. The comparison of removing low-level feature encoder and global
feature modeling. (a) is retaining the two components. (b) is removing the two
components and token features are extracted from the SAM image encoder.

Algorithm 1 Pseudo Code for IIIM-SAM

V. E XPERIMENTS
We conduct a series of comparative experiments to assess
the zero-shot anomaly detection performance of IIIM-SAM. In
addition, we compare the zero-shot IIIM-SAM with few-shot
anomaly detection methods that require additional training
and the state-of-the-art (SOTA) zero-shot anomaly detection
methods. We also perform extensive ablation studies to validate the individual effectiveness of the proposed components.
The detailed setups, e.g., datasets, metrics, introduction to
the compared methods, and other implementation details, are
given in this section.
A. Dataset Description and Evaluation Indicators
1) Dataset Description: We evaluate our approach in various real-world texture defect detection scenarios, including
MVTecAD [34], the whole KolektorSDD2 [35] and DAGM
[36] datasets. Both datasets contain high-resolution images.
The input resolution is 1024 × 1024 for MVTec-AD and
roughly 230 × 640 for KolektorSDD2 dataset. To ensure a
fair comparison, we maintain the same input resolution for
both our proposed method and the comparison methods in all
experiments.

14617

a) MVTecAD Dataset: MVTecAD dataset is the most
widely used and authoritative benchmark for anomaly detection. The dataset is divided into two major anomaly detection
categories: texture and object. In this study, we focus on
texture anomaly detection, consisting of sub-datasets for five
product classes, namely Grid, Leather, Tile, Carpet, and Wood.
The defects collected in the texture set include various sizes,
shapes, and categories, amounting to a total of 25 defect types.
Therefore, evaluating our IIIM-SAM and other methods on
this dataset provides a comprehensive assessment of algorithm
performance.
b) KolektorSDD2 Dataset: KolektorSDD2 defect dataset
is constructed from images of defected production items that
were provided and annotated by Kolektor Group. KolektorSDD2 dataset consists numerous types of defects and their
images including 356 images with defects and 2979 images
without defect. The images in this dataset are captured by
a visual inspection system in a controlled environment, and
they have similar dimensions. Defects vary in shape, size, and
color, ranging from small scratches and spots to large surface
defects. Experiments on KolektorSDD2 dataset demonstrate
that texture anomaly detection algorithms are not limited to
product types similar to those showcased in MVTecAD. Users
can capture surface images of industrial structural components
through a professional visual inspection system, enabling the
application of our IIIM-SAM method.
c) DAGM Dataset: The DAGM dataset is a classic
texture defect detection dataset widely used in the field of
anomaly detection. It includes a variety of material surfaces
and defect types. The defect regions are annotated using
segmentation masks in the dataset. Each image in the dataset
has a resolution of 512 × 512. The characteristics of the
DAGM dataset differ significantly from the two previously
mentioned datasets. Performance evaluation on DAGM allows
for a more comprehensive demonstration of our algorithm’s
generalization capability.
2) Evaluation Indicators: We consider that image-level
classification metrics are the primary aspect for evaluating the
method, because it is more crucial from a practical perspective.
After all, practitioners only need the detection system to
accurately identify images containing anomalies for automated
defective product removal. So, we use the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) at the image
level as the evaluation metric following the literature [37],
[38]. To observe potential data imbalance more clearly, we
also employ the F1-score at the optimal threshold (F1-max)
[39]. To more clearly and comprehensively demonstrate the
superiority of our IIIM-SAM, we also use pixel-level AUROC
and PRO metrics to evaluate its anomaly localization and
segmentation capabilities.
B. Introduction to the Compared Methods
We selected six of the latest and representative anomaly
detection methods for comparison with our proposed IIIMSAM, including PaDim [37] (2021), PatchCore [38] (2022),
ACR [20] (2024), WinClip [23] (2023), WinClip+ [23] (2023),
and Anomaly-Clip [26] (2024). Overall, PaDim, PatchCore,

14618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

and ACR are non-language-guided anomaly detection methods, while WinCLIP and AnomalyCLIP are language-guided
anomaly detection methods based on large vision-languagemodels. Specifically, PaDim and PatchCore are advanced
few-shot anomaly detection methods learning from defect-free
samples, but they lack zero-shot detection capabilities. ACR is
the current state-of-the-art non-vision-language-model-based
method for zero-shot anomaly detection. WinClip is the
first zero-shot anomaly detection method based on large
vision-language-model (VLM), marking a milestone in the
field. WinCLIP+ is an improved version of WinCLIP. This
method enhances detection capability by utilizing few-shot
normal samples, enabling more efficient defect localization.
Anomaly-CLIP is the latest state-of-the-art VLM-based zeroshot anomaly detection method. Therefore, the five selected
comparison methods provide a comprehensive performance
evaluation from different perspectives against our proposed
method. The comparison with these five methods fully demonstrates that our IIIM-SAM not only performs zero-shot
detection without the need for external expert knowledge, such
as text prompts, but also achieves optimal performance in zeroshot detection.
It is worth noting that, to compare more fairly with our
zero-shot method without external information prompts, we
only allow PaDim and PatchCore methods to be trained with
one and three defect-free images, respectively (i.e., 1-shot and
3-shot). For the zero-shot anomaly detection method WinClip,
we restrict the method to use rich information text prompts and
only allow WinClip to use simple and generic prompt texts,
such as “defect” or “anomaly”. The above settings apply to
all our experiments.
C. Implementation Details
We implement our models in Python 3.10 and PyTorch 1.13.
Experiments are run on 2 Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU on Ubuntu
18.04 Linux. For all experiments, we choose the sam-vit-h
weights as our pre-trained SAM. IIIM-prompter is trained on
the ImageNet dataset [40] and trained by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) optimizer with Nesterov momentum. We use an
initial learning rate of 0.01, a momentum of 0.9, and a weight
decay of 0.0001. We train for 150 epochs with the learning
rate multiplied by 0.1 at 90 and 120 epochs. For the attention
values greater than 0.5 in the Token-Relation Decoder, we set
wi j to 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively.
D. The Qualitative Anomaly Detection Results Comparison
on Different Datasets
We first present visualizations of anomaly detection using
four state-of-the-art methods on different datasets. As shown
in Fig. 8, we display detection cases for six product categories
on two datasets. The first five rows show cases from the
MVTecAD dataset, while the last row presents two cases from
the KolektorSDD2 dataset.
Qualitatively, it is evident that our zero-shot IIIM-SAM
method exhibits excellent generalization and anomaly detection capabilities. According to some failure cases in the four

TABLE I
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD
DATASET ON I MAGE -L EVEL . † I NDICATES THE ACCURACY R EPORTED
IN THE PAPER

TABLE II
F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD DATASET ON
I MAGE -L EVEL

comparative methods (Padim in Wood, Grid, Tile, KolektorSDD2; Patchcore in Grid; WinClip in KolektorSDD2), we
demonstrate a more sensitive anomaly detection capability.
Specifically, it can be observed that the PaDim and PatchCore methods experienced varying degrees of failure in
anomaly localization on the wood, grid, tile, and KolektorSDD2 datasets. This is because these methods require a
large amount of anomaly-free image samples for learning
and do not have inherent zero-shot detection capabilities. The
WinClip method, using a generic text prompt, showed some
anomaly response capability in the presented examples, with
only one case of anomaly response failure. However, it is
evident that the anomaly heatmaps of WinClip is weak and
diffused, making it difficult to distinguish from the background
response. This demonstrates that zero-shot anomaly detection
methods based on vision-language models, like WinClip, must
rely on injecting a large amount of matching expert knowledge
through text prompts to work effectively. In contrast, our IIIMSAM method eliminates the need for external prompts and
leverages the strong perception capabilities of the improved
SAM model. As a result, our method is more versatile. We
can accurately locate defects across different products, and
produces highly distinguishable anomaly response peaks (with
a clear distinction from background response).
E. The Quantitative Anomaly Detection Results
1) Results on MVTecAD: We first presented the quantitative anomaly detection results on the MVTecAD dataset.
Table I and Table II show the anomaly detection performance
measured using image-level AUROC and F1-MAX metrics,
respectively. We compared our method with other zero-shot
and one-normal-shot anomaly detection methods. The first
five rows represent the image-level metrics for five texture

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

TABLE III
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD
DATASET ON P IXEL -L EVEL . † I NDICATES THE ACCURACY R EPORTED
IN THE PAPER

14619

TABLE V
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2
DATASET ON I MAGE -L EVEL

TABLE VI
F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASET
ON I MAGE -L EVEL
TABLE IV
PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF MVT EC AD DATASET ON P IXEL L EVEL

TABLE VII
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2
DATASET ON P IXEL -L EVEL

subcategories, while the last row shows the average detection
results across all categories.
It can be observed that our IIIM-SAM method performs
exceptionally well, achieving superior average performance
under both evaluation metrics. Specifically, for the imagelevel AUROC metric, our method achieves detection scores
above 98% in all five categories, while other methods show
significant performance disadvantages in at least one category.
In terms of average performance, our method holds a clear
advantage, outperforming the WinClip method, which uses
simple prompts, by 19.9%. Even compared to AnomalyCLIP, which requires an auxiliary training set to optimize
text prompts, we achieve a 0.5% improvement. The balanced
performance of our method is even more evident under the
F1-MAX metric, which effectively avoids the evaluation bias
caused by unbalanced test data. For example, other comparison
methods show a significant performance drop in the wood
category. This further comprehensively validates the superior
anomaly detection performance of the IIIM-SAM method.
Next, we used pixel-level AUROC and PRO metrics to measure the anomaly region segmentation ability of our method
and the comparison methods. The anomaly segmentation
results of Table III and Table IV demonstrate the advantage of
our IIIM-SAM method for anomaly localization. Specifically,
we surpassed four categories in pixel-level AUROC, with
the highest lead of 3.3% compared to the next best method,
and an overall average lead of 1.4%. In terms of the pixellevel PRO metric, we achieved comprehensive superiority.
This reflects that once our method detects the presence of an
anomaly, it locates the anomaly region with high precision.
In contrast, even when other comparison methods correctly
detect anomalies, they exhibit more erroneous responses in
the anomaly regions. In other words, compared to other state-

TABLE VIII
PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASET ON
P IXEL -L EVEL

of-the-art methods, our approach offers higher interpretability
and reliability in determining defective samples.
2) Results on KolektorSDD2: The KolektorSDD2 dataset
includes more challenging samples for anomaly detection. The
defects in the KolektorSDD2 dataset are more complex and
less visually distinct from the background compared to other
datasets. This complexity makes it difficult for various methods
to accurately identify and detect defects. From Table V and
Table VI, we can observe severe performance degradation
in terms of AUROC and F1-max for the five compared
methods. Specifically, language-guided VLM-based zero-shot
anomaly detection methods struggle to adapt and effectively
detect anomalies because the morphology and semantics of
defects are more abstract and diverse, making it difficult
for text descriptions to provide effective prompts. However,
since our IIIM-SAM does not rely on external prompts and
includes a self-derived prompting method, our approach still
demonstrates competitive detection performance, consistently
maintaining evaluation results above 90%.
As shown in the Table VII and VIII, the advantage of mining
prompt information within the image is further reflected in
pixel-level metrics, which indicate anomaly localization and
segmentation capabilities. Compared to the next best zero-

14620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

TABLE IX
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET
ON I MAGE -L EVEL

TABLE XIII
T HE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT N ETWORK S TRUCTURE C ONFIGURATIONS ON
M INING I NTER -R EGIONAL R ELATIONSHIPS OF IIIM-P ROMPTER

TABLE X
F1-M AX IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET ON
I MAGE -L EVEL

TABLE XI
A REA U NDER ROC IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET
ON P IXEL -L EVEL

TABLE XII
PRO IN % FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION OF DAGM DATASET ON P IXEL L EVEL

shot method, IIIM-SAM outperforms with a 2.4% lead in
pixel-level AUROC and a 5.6% lead in PRO metric. The
experimental results on the challenging KolektorSDD2 dataset
further demonstrate the stability and generalization of our
method, showcasing its stronger zero-shot detection capabilities.
3) Results on DAGM: To further demonstrate that our
method’s anomaly detection capability is independent of product categories, we also conduct experiments on the DAGM
dataset. As shown in Table IX –XII, our method is superior
to other SOTA methods in terms of both anomaly detection and anomaly location capabilities. Specifically, compared
with the second-best method, our method achieves at least
1% improvement on the anomaly classification (image-level)
metric and more than 1.7% improvement on the anomaly
localization (pixel-level) metric. These results further highlight
the robustness and excellent generalization ability of our
approach for texture anomaly detection, attributed to the image
internal information mining mechanism without relying on
external information learning.
F. Ablation Studies
1) The Impact of Removing Low-Level Feature Encoder and
Global Feature Modeling: We excluded the Low-level Feature
Encoder and Global Feature Modeling from IIIM-prompter,
and instead directly used features extracted by the SAM image

encoder. Taking an example with Wood images containing
hole defects, Fig. 9 illustrates the visualization of token relationships for IIIM-prompter with retained Low-level Feature
Encoder and Global Feature Modeling (part a) and IIIMprompter with SAM’s image encoder as a replacement (part
b). It is evident that the IIIM-prompter with retained Lowlevel Feature Encoder and Global Feature Modeling (part a)
shows a more pronounced difference between defective tokens
and non-defective tokens. Specifically, the contrast degree of
defect token is 23.11% and the range of normalized crosscorrelation is from 0.47 to 0.89. Conversely, using SAM’s
image encoder to replace Low-level Feature Encoder and
Global Feature Modeling in IIIM-prompter (part b) exhibits
a less clear distinction in token relationships. Specifically, the
contrast degree of defect token is just 10.40% and the range of
normalized cross-correlation is from 0.82 to 0.91. Through this
ablation study, it is shown that our IIIM-prompter combining
Low-level Feature Encoder and Global Feature Modeling
module has a stronger ability to mine the interrelationships
within image regions.
2) The Impact of Different Network Structure Configurations on Mining Inter-Regional Relationships of IIIMPrompter: To further demonstrate the advantage of the
combined convolutional and Transformer structure on mining
internal image relationships, we conducted the ablation experiments on the IIIM-prompter using the MVTecAD dataset.
We compared the combined structure with networks using
either CNN or Transformer alone. The difference in regional
relationships was quantitatively represented by the contrast of
inter-class (anomaly and background) similarity to intra-class
(background and background) similarity. For the experimental
results, a higher value indicates a more pronounced difference. The average results of the experiments are shown in
Table XIII. Compared with the configurations of CNN or
Transformer only, the CNN union Transformer configuration
yields the highest value. Specifically, the configuration using
only CNN lacks the ability to model global relationships,
resulting in a 0.139 decrease in the similarity ratio. On
the other hand, using only the Transformer structure clearly
lacks the ability to extract local low-level features and spatial
invariance, leading to a similarity ratio lower than 0.1. This
indicates that there is almost no distinction between anomalies
and the background. By combining the strengths of both the
CNN and Transformer structures, our method can achieve a
clearer resolution of the anomaly regions.
3) The Impact of Background Prompt Point Number: We
investigated the impact of different numbers of background

ZHANG et al.: IIIM-SAM: ZERO-SHOT TEXTURE ANOMALY DETECTION WITHOUT EXTERNAL PROMPTS

TABLE XIV
T HE I MPACT OF BACKGROUND P ROMPT P OINT N UMBER ON A NOMALY
D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

TABLE XV
T HE I MPACT OF R EMOVING THE P OTENTIAL F OREGROUND P ROMPT
P OINT ON A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

14621

customer requirements. Ensuring that the nonwoven fabric is
free of defects is crucial for guaranteeing the medical protective performance of the produced masks. During a trial run
of the inspection line, a total of 1611 images were analyzed,
and our method achieved an accuracy of 98.94%, a missed
detection rate of 1.93%, and a false alarm rate of 0.84%.
The primary cause of missed detections was that certain oil
stains became indistinguishable from the background after
drying. In general, the detection performance of our method
has met the performance requirements of practical application
in nonwoven fabric inspection.
VI. C ONCLUSION

prompt points on the final detection performance. Table XIV
presents quantitative anomaly detection results for IIIM-SAM
on the MVTecAD and KolektorSDD2 datasets using three,
two, and one background prompt points. The results indicate
that, on the MVTecAD dataset, using two background prompt
points leads to a certain decrease in detection performance,
while using only one background prompt point results in a
more noticeable performance decline. The reason for this performance drop is that SAM’s segmentation performance tends
to be limited to local structure interference of the complex
backgrounds, and increasing the number of prompt points
encourages SAM to have a global perception of the tested
image. Since the KolektorSDD2 dataset’s texture background
lacks interference from local structures, changing the number
of background prompt points does not significantly impact the
detection results.
4) The Impact of Removing the Potential Foreground
Prompt Point: Table XV shows the impact of removing
potential foreground prompt points on the anomaly detection
capability of IIIM-SAM. On the MVTecAD and KolektorSDD2 datasets, both AUROC and F1-max indicators exhibit
a significant decrease in detection performance. The input
of potential foreground prompt points corresponds to the
second stage of the two-stage mask decoder in the IIIM-SAM
structure. The input of potential foreground prompt points is
designed to avoid SAM ignoring anomaly regions with complex backgrounds due to multiple background prompt points
and serves as a verification. Therefore, removing potential
foreground prompt points in IIIM-SAM makes it susceptible
to missing defects, such as color similar to the background or
light color on product surface, leading to an overall decrease
in detection performance.
G. Performance Evaluation in Real-World Industrial
Scenarios
We evaluated the performance of our method on a real
industrial nonwoven fabric inspection line, as shown in Fig. 1.
The factory often uses nonwoven fabric materials with different textured backgrounds for mask production based on

In this paper, we introduced a zero-shot texture anomaly
detection method using image internal information mining
prompt. The key uniqueness of this method is without relying on any external expert knowledge to zero-shot anomaly
detection, which effectively addresses the challenges of rapid
product changes and iterations in industrial production. The
convenience of our IIIM-SAM method is primarily reflected
in its usage after deployment, eliminating the need for external
prompts or expert intervention, thus making it more convenient
and scalable for industrial applications in the real world.
We began by presenting the principles of image internal
information mining, followed by the design of the Image
Internal Information Mining Prompter to operationalize these
principles. In addition, we discussed the limitations of the
native SAM model when applied to texture anomaly detection
and overcame these challenges by using multiple background
and foreground points for joint prompting through a two-stage
mask decoder. The experimental results indicate that our proposed IIIM-SAM outperforms current CLIP-based zero-shot
anomaly detection methods. Additionally, compared to SAM
with manually input defect and background location prompts,
there is only a localization performance difference of no more
than 0.5% in terms of pixel-level AUROC. In the test of
inference speed, our method achieves 2.2 FPS on the computer
with single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. In future deployment,
depending on the actual production requirement, the faster
SAM variants can be used to accelerate the computation speed.
In fact, we believe that large foundation models already
possess sufficient perceptual capabilities for the environment.
The reason they may not be directly applicable to specific tasks
lies in the lack of organized and inferred perceptual information for those tasks. Through the IIIM-SAM architecture, we
aim to showcase the true zero-shot anomaly detection capabilities of large foundation models. Of course, our IIIM-SAM
also has its limitations. Our method can only be effectively
applied to texture anomaly detection scenarios, such as fabric
manufacturing, wooden flooring, and steel rail inspection. The
primary limitation stems from the fact that our method relies
on internal relationships within the image to mine prompt
points. However, in object anomaly detection scenarios (e.g.,
defects in products with complex structural variations, such
as toothbrushes, cables or others with mechanical parts), the
method faces challenges. This is because objects often have
diverse local structures and internal components, which can

14622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

weaken the internal relationships between regions. Consequently, our method struggles to identify reliable background
and foreground prompt points, making it difficult to guide
SAM to accurately segment anomalous regions. The experiments on the object categories of the MVTecAD dataset also
show that our method’s average image-level AUROC is only
30.4%, which is 63.1% lower than the current SOTA method.
In future work, we will further explore potential strategies to
extend the applicability for zero-shot anomaly detection without introducing external knowledge. For example, introducing
more image preprocessing stages to transform object anomaly
detection into texture anomaly detection, and introducing more
feature information to accurately mine the prompt points in
complex object structures.
R EFERENCES
[1]

W. Luo, H. Yao, W. Yu, and Z. Li, “AMI-net: Adaptive mask inpainting
network for industrial anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 22, pp. 1591–1605, 2025.
[2] C. Wang et al., “Real-IAD: A real-world multi-view dataset for benchmarking versatile industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comp. Vis. Patt. Recogn., vol. 35, Jun. 2024, pp. 22883–22892.
[3] Y. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Gao, and X. Li, “A graph guided convolutional
neural network for surface defect recognition,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1392–1404, Jul. 2022.
[4] Q. Xie, D. Li, J. Xu, Z. Yu, and J. Wang, “Automatic detection
and classification of sewer defects via hierarchical deep learning,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1836–1847,
Oct. 2019.
[5] X. Dong, C. J. Taylor, and T. F. Cootes, “Defect classification and
detection using a multitask deep one-class CNN,” IEEE Trans. Automat.
Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1719–1730, Jul. 2022.
[6] H. Yao et al., “Dual-attention transformer and discriminative flow for
industrial visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 6126–6140, Oct. 2024.
[7] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger,
“Beyond dents and scratches: Logical constraints in unsupervised
anomaly detection and localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 4,
pp. 947–969, Apr. 2022.
[8] X. Li et al., “PromptAD: Learning prompts with only normal samples
for few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 16848–16858.
[9] J.-B. Alayrac et al., “Flamingo: A visual language model for fewshot learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 23716–23736.
[10] C. Jia et al., “Scaling up visual and vision-language representation
learning with noisy text supervision,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., vol. 139, 2021, pp. 4904–4916.
[11] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021,
pp. 8748–8763.
[12] X. Gu, T.-Y. Lin, W. Kuo, and Y. Cui, “Open-vocabulary object detection
via vision and language knowledge distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021.
[13] M. Xu et al., “A simple baseline for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with pre-trained vision-language model,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Tel Aviv, Israel, Oct. 2022, pp. 736–753.
[14] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[15] H. Yang, Y. Chen, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “Multiscale feature-clusteringbased fully convolutional autoencoder for fast accurate visual inspection
of texture surface defects,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 1450–1467, Jul. 2019.
[16] T. Aota, L. T. T. Tong, and T. Okatani, “Zero-shot versus many-shot:
Unsupervised texture anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 5564–5572.

[17] H. Nori, N. King, S. M. McKinney, D. Carignan, and E. Horvitz,
“Capabilities of GPT-4 on medical challenge problems,” 2023,
arXiv:2303.13375.
[18] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 27730–27744.
[19] J. Achiam et al., “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774.
[20] A. Li, C. Qiu, M. Kloft, P. Smyth, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Zeroshot anomaly detection via batch normalization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2023, pp. 40963–40993.
[21] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, K.-R. Müller,
and M. Kloft, “Exposing outlier exposure: What can be learned from
few, one, and zero outlier images,” 2022, arXiv:2205.11474.
[22] S. Esmaeilpour, B. Liu, E. Robertson, and L. Shu, “Zero-shot out-ofdistribution detection based on the pre-trained model CLIP,” in Proc.
Conf. AAAI, Jun. 2022, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 6568–6576.
[23] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer,
“WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 19606–19616.
[24] X. Chen, Y. Han, and J. Zhang, “A zero-/few-shot anomaly classification
and segmentation method for CVPR 2023 and workshop challenge tracks
1&2: 1st place on zero-shot ad and 4th place on few-shot ad,” 2023,
arXiv:2305.17382.
[25] C. Huang, A. Jiang, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and Y. Wang,
“Adapting visual-language models for generalizable anomaly detection
in medical images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 11375–11385.
[26] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Objectagnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2023.
[27] C.-H. Ho, K.-C. Peng, and N. Vasconcelos, “Long-tailed anomaly
detection with learnable class names,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 12435–12446.
[28] X. Li, Z. Huang, F. Xue, and Y. Zhou, “MuSc: Zero-shot industrial
anomaly classification and segmentation with mutual scoring of the
unlabeled images,” 2024, arXiv:2401.16753.
[29] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT:
Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,” in
Proc. Conf. AAAI, Mar. 2024, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1932–1940.
[30] Y. Cao et al., “Segment any anomaly without training via hybrid prompt
regularization,” 2023, arXiv:2305.10724.
[31] Z. Dai et al., “CoAtNet: Marrying convolution and attention for all
data sizes,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2021,
pp. 3965–3977.
[32] J. Guo et al., “CMT: Convolutional neural networks meet vision
transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2022, pp. 12175–12185.
[33] J. Li et al., “Next-ViT: Next generation vision transformer for efficient
deployment in realistic industrial scenarios,” 2022, arXiv:2207.05501.
[34] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[35] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedefect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.
[36] M. Wieler and T. Hahn, “Weakly supervised learning for industrial
optical inspection,” in Proc. DAGM Symp., vol. 6, 2007, p. 11.
[37] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
[38] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 14318–14328.
[39] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
[40] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.