IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

8205

Integrating ML and Blockchain for
Consumer-Centric Approaches in Securing
Data Transmission on IoT Networks
Bo Yuan

and Faguo Wu

Abstract—Data security and privacy are becoming more
essential due to the quick expansion of “Internet of Things
(IoT)”, particularly in consumer-focused applications. To improve
the security of data transmission in IoT networks, this study
provides a novel architecture that combines Blockchain with
Machine Learning (ML) to address critical security threats like
data integrity breaches, unauthorised access and cyber-attacks.
The suggested solution uses a hybrid blockchain paradigm that
combines public and private blockchain capabilities to ensure
data integrity and safe access management. Machine learning
algorithms, including anomaly detection and classification techniques, are utilised to quickly monitor and analyse network
traffic, identify possible risks, and enhance the system’s resilience
against cyber-attacks. The platform also uses neural networks
based on transfer learning for dynamic trust validation and
IP rotation using moving target defense (MTD) mechanisms
to reduce attacks and strengthen the security. Also, optimised
resource management techniques are used to improve stability
and reduce computational complexities. Combining these technologies strengthens data security while giving users more control
over their data. This method offers a workable solution for the
safe implementation of IoT networks in consumer applications
by addressing the issues of scalability, latency, and energy
efficiency.
Index Terms—Blockchain, data transmission, Internet of
Things, anomaly detection, machine learning, security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE TOTAL automation of the communication system
without the need for outside engagement has been made
possible by technological modernization as a smooth and
effective means of enhancing human comfort. IoT technologies
also aid in the creation of an enduring urban model and
the maintenance of superior quality of life by providing
secure and efficient data exchange [1]. These technologies
include trackers, actuators, sensors, alarms, and sirens that
offer dependable, two-way energy transfer and data sharing

T

Received 13 August 2024; revised 13 March 2025 and 5 May 2025;
accepted 14 June 2025. Date of publication 20 June 2025; date of current version 7 November 2025. This work was supported by the Beijing
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing.
(Corresponding author: Bo Yuan.)
Bo Yuan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, the
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, and the Beijing
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: boyuan@buaa.edu.cn).
Faguo Wu is with the Key Laboratory of Mathematics, Informatics and
Behavioral Semantics, the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and the Beijing
Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: faguo@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3581570

between suppliers and customers, creating a more sophisticated, efficient system with higher service quality and
financial advantages [2]. As IoT networks get expand, the
security and privacy of transmitted data become complex,
so it requires effective protection mechanisms to address
the cyber threats and unauthorized access. As all of this is
going on, artificial intelligence (AI) enables these consumer
devices to become increasingly sophisticated and capable of
making judgments on their own by learning from the data
they gather [3]. Machine Learning (ML), particularly anomaly
detection and classification models plays important role in
monitoring IoT network traffic and helps to reduce the possible
threats in real time. Though these methods have advanced
but, they also have disadvantages, particularly in handling
large scale security challenges. For instance, traditional centralized security mechanisms struggle with scalability and
dynamic access control in IoT networks. To address these
concerns blockchain technology acts as an important role [4],
which is crucial to consumer electronics because it increases
efficiency, security, and transparency. One of its essential
applications is making sure Internet of Things (IoT) devices
are secure. Manufacturers may use blockchain technology to
create tamper-resistant systems that lower the possibility of
unauthorized access or manipulation [5]. Moreover, blockchain
provides control over personal data and improves privacy due
to decentralized Manufacturers may use blockchain technology
to create tamper-resistant identity verification [6]. It reduces
processing complexity and communication overhead compared
to the traditional centralized method [7]. Hybrid blockchain
models combines public and private blockchain abilities which
improves both security and computational efficiency. Again,
the edge caching considerably enhances end users’ overall
service experience by utilizing edge nodes’ caching and data
processing capabilities to deliver lower latency and more
robust services [8]. The fundamentals of digital money and
the viability analysis of intelligent operating systems are only
two sectors in which blockchain technology’s three functions
have expanded its frontiers. Conversely, safety is ensured
by blockchain technology [9]. A communal data structure
called a blockchain was created to hold every transaction.
The references between the blocks from the chain. We refer
to the first blockchain as genesis. The three components of
every block are the transaction, block subtitle, and operation counter [10]. It functions as a dispersed structure
for data storage. Blockchain security is predicated on the

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

8206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

concept of “proof of work (PoW)”, whereby communication
is deemed valid as long as the system can demonstrate
that approved nodes complete sufficient computing tasks.
The miner, responsible for creating blocks, continuously uses
hash calculations to try and solve cryptographic problems or
proof of work [11]. Blockchain requires expensive storage for
massive numbers of data. However, it works well to store
data hashes in the ledger rather than the actual data [12].
Therefore, we combine Blockchain and Machine Learning to
provide Consumer-Centric Solutions for Safe Data Transfer
on IoT Networks. By considering the decentralized ability,
transparency and secure data transferring ability we chosen the
blockchain technology specifically in this study. Apart from
the advantage that blockchain is not sufficient individually
to fully secure the IoT networks. It requires complementary
security strategies to reduce attack surfaces and improve
system resilience. Therefore, we integrate the machine learning
techniques to address the need for intelligent decision making
such as anomaly detection, pattern recognition and adaptive
optimization in resource constrained and dynamic IoT environments.
A. Motivation
Despite the significant challenges of implementing
blockchain technology, many previous studies have contributed
to cloud computing security through various technologies,
including “machine learning (ML)” and blockchain. However,
the problems associated with cloud computing security have
not yet been resolved. The primary issue that these studies
have addressed is as follows:
Data Security and Privacy Concerns: Data transmission
and storage volumes have risen dramatically with the increase
in the Internet of Things strategy. This data is a prominent
target for cyberattacks as it frequently contains sensitive personal information. It is tough to ensure the privacy, accuracy,
and accessibility of this data.
• Ineffective and Exposable Access Control Systems:
Because they are frequently centralised and based on preestablished rules, traditional access control solutions do
not quickly adapt to the dynamic nature of the Internet
of Things settings. These systems lack the flexibility to
accommodate a wide range of user needs and responsibilities and may be open to unwanted access.
• Problems with Scalability in Blockchain-Based Systems:
Blockchain technology presents substantial scaling issues
despite its high-security characteristics, such as transparency and immutability. Large-scale IoT networks may
find it difficult to use public blockchains because of their
high latency and low throughput.
• Complexity of Identifying and Reacting to Anomalies: The
massive volume of data generated by IoT devices and
their diverse nature makes it more challenging to identify
irregularities and security concerns. Current machine
learning techniques may need a lot of resources and may
not function well, particularly in contexts with limited
resources.
• Absence of Consumer Data Control: Customers’ control
over their data, including its collection, storage, and

sharing, is often restricted in IoT devices. This lack of
transparency and control may impact consumer adoption
and acceptability of IoT technology, which may give rise
to problems with trust and worries about data exploitation.
B. Research Contribution
The innovative points offered for safe cloud computing security services are mentioned. The following are the
research’s principal contributions:
• The hybrid blockchain architecture presented by this
research combines the advantages of private and public blockchains. Cloud Service Providers (CIP) play an
important role in the approach, the paradigm addresses
scalability challenges and improves data security and
integrity, making it appropriate for managing the Internet
of Things network’s high throughput and low latency
strain.
• The paper presents a unique access control approach
that dynamically manages policies by leveraging machine
learning methods like Fuzzy Inference Systems (FIS),
which allows the system to make more accurate and
efficient access control decisions based on the fuzzy
logic. Role-based and attribute-based access controls are
supported by this framework, ensuring flexible and secure
data access according to specific user requirements and
network roles.
• The application of advanced machine learning methods
to track and examine IoT network traffic, such as neural
networks and anomaly detection algorithms, is a significant addition. Due to this integration, the system can
instantly identify and react to security threats, enhancing
the network’s overall resilience.
• The proposed model integrates MTD mechanisms of
dynamic IP rotation to reduce attack surfaces and prevent
adversaries from exploiting static network risks. By utilizing a Domain Name System (DNS) pool, the system
continuously rotates the service IP address to avoid
potential attackers.
• The study uses optimisation techniques to improve
resource management and allocation effectiveness in the
Internet of Things environment. Proof of Work (PoW)
mechanisms are involved to provide a layer of security.
One example is using machine learning-based techniques
to minimise computational overhead and energy consumption in feature selection and decision-making.
• By integrating blockchain’s immutability and transparency properties, the proposed system improves
customer control over their data. Through Cloud Service
Providers (CSP) users obtain better control over the
collection, storage, and sharing of information. It builds
confidence and promotes the wider use of IoT technology
by allowing users to control permissions and monitor how
their data is used.
C. Paper Organization
The outstanding section of this work are approved as
follows: Section II presents an overview of previous research

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

gaps and works on service allocation and intrusion detection
in cloud and IoT environments; Section III offers a detailed
clarification of the suggested work, complete with equations
and an appropriate diagram; Section IV describes the simulation setup of the recommended work, the reproduction tool
and its simulation parameters; Section V provides an overall
summary of the proposed work and compares it to existing
works. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. R ELATED W ORK
This section covers a study of the literature on blockchainbased secure data transfer on IoT networks and machine
learning. Blockchain-based IoT cloud platforms are employed
for security and privacy in innovative healthcare, according
to this article’s proposal for a secure architecture supported
by federated learning and blockchain [13]. Scalable machine
learning applications, such as healthcare, use federated learning technologies. In this paper, they propose to use blockchain
technology to defend FL technologies running in the “Internet
of Things (IoT)” strategy from assault. Securing the integrity
of the trained models is made possible by integrating FL with
Blockchain, hence averting model poisoning incidents [14].
With this research, extensive data analytics services that are
safe and maintain privacy may be obtained by integrating
Blockchain technology with FL. Fuzzy hashing is our suggested method to recognise variation and irregularity in the
FL-trained model against poisoning attempts, safeguarding
the truthfulness of user data and the qualified model. They
tell a wireless sensing framework that supports CIoT devices
by utilising semantic capabilities [15], [16]. CIoT devices
can reduce energy usage by transmitting just the small-sized
retrieved information taken from raw data, allowing for the
extraction of semantically meaningful information. They have
also created a multi-dimensional contract incentive mechanism
that, considering the existence of information asymmetry,
provides suitable incentives for various categories of CIoT
devices based on their computation and communication costs.
The secure architecture for the DTs’ cooperation in consumer electronics is provided in this work [17]. Then, using a
consensus model that integrates blockchain, digital twins, and
real-time consumer device monitoring, they have developed an
access control mechanism. Blockchain technology is employed
in the proposed framework to enable consumer electronics
products based on digital twins. They specifically developed
a cooperative blockchain architecture that prioritises real-time
access control and a distributed chain code model based on
manufacturer, merchant, and device users. To shield the healthcare sector against phishing attempts, a suggested machine
learning (ML) technique was trained on a sizable dataset to
identify the traits that separate phishing from non-phishing
URLs [18], [19]. The model was trained using the characteristics extracted from the URLs. Individuals and businesses can
take proactive steps to safeguard themselves from the harmful
impacts of phishing assaults by recognising phishing URLs in
real time. This paper suggests [20] BeRout, a unique messageforwarding technique, for consumer-centric IoT opportunistic

8207

networks. The proposed system is predicated on nodes’ altruistic actions. BeRout, to node’s previous behaviour and actions,
to achieve a high delivery ratio in IoT opportunistic network
scenarios. A buffer management method has been presented to
effectively and efficiently use buffer space [21]. In this study,
they propose a revolutionary method to ensure transparent and
safe communication in consumer electronics. To improve the
security and precision of the system, they provide a weighted
product model and a multi-criterion decision-making model
named TOPSIS. The research [22] presents a novel security
architecture for intelligent healthcare that uses blockchain
technology to identify and counteract ransomware threats,
which we call BSFR-SH. The consequences of the security
learning exhibit that the suggested BSFR-SH is secure from
ransomware assaults.
In this research [23], they introduce a novel two-level
privacy-preserving system. They choose this structure above
other approaches like differential privacy and completely
homomorphic encryption because it synergises “federated
learning” with incompletely homomorphic encryption. They
suggested the AI-enabled deep learning model-based zero
trust security (AIDL-XTS) architecture for device, user, and
application authentication and verification at each access
request stage. They employ a Deep CNN-BiLSTM network
to authenticate users based on smartphone sensor data. In
addition, they suggested using a trust score based on the Bayes
theorem to assess the security of zero trust [24], [25]. All
users, devices, and apps are assumed to be untrusted in this
proposed architecture, necessitating verification and authentication for each access request, irrespective of the user’s device
or location. They suggest a methodology called Auditable
Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning (AP2FL), specifically
designed for medical device use [26]. Data leakage concerns
are successfully mitigated by AP2FL, which uses Trusted
Execution Environments (TEE) to enable safe preparation and
aggregation operations on the consumer and server sides. In
the suggested system, batch normalisation (BN) approaches
are applied to find data similarities and condense user updates,
and the “Active Personalized Federated Learning (ActPerFL)”
model is used to manage non-IID data. Furthermore, they
provide audit technology in AP2FL that exposes each client’s
input to the FL procedure, allowing the universal representation to be updated across various data distributions and
kinds. They provide a safe fitness framework built on an
Internet of Things-enabled blockchain network and machinelearning techniques [27]. The proposed architecture consists of
two modules: an enhanced relationship and inference engine
enabled by smart contracts to extract meaningful information
and hidden insights from IoT and user device network data
and an IoT network established by blockchain to provide
security and integrity to sensing data. The upgraded smart
contract aims to give consumers practical applications by
providing simple access, control, real-time monitoring, and
immutable logs of devices dispersed across different domains.
The inference engine module looks for important information
and underlying patterns in data gathered from IoT settings to
provide simple services and enable effective decision-making.
They describe intrusion detection estimation-enabled private

8208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

Integration of blockchain and machine learning techniques.

blockchain-based smart home network architecture for the
Fused Real-Time Sequential Deep Extreme Learning Machine
(RTS-DELM) system model [28]. This research examines the
RTS-DELM approach used in blockchain-established elegant
homes to look for potentially harmful activities. The decisionlevel and data fusion techniques are also applied to improve
accuracy.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The most important objective of the suggested study is
to secure data transfer on “Internet of Things networks” by
integrating blockchain knowledge and “machine learning’. The
integration of both these technologies provides a secure and
intelligent framework. Where blockchain ensure data integrity,
and machine learning helps to enhance the system adaptability
in real-time conditions. The planned work’s general architecture is seen in Fig. 1 and the integration of blockchain and
machine learning is shown Fig. 2.
A. Imagine Authentication With a Password
The secure agent gives a four-digit number based on a
picture for authentication. Every user first registers with the
secure agent with their login credentials, which include their
user ID, password, role, and fingerprint. Services then register
their credentials with the secure agent, providing their service
ID, name, location, and service categories. After the registration procedure is finished, the authentication process starts.
Throughout the login procedure, users enter their password
visually. One hundred pictures are in a 10*10 image grid on
the login page. There are three copies of each picture, and
users must specify a password consisting of four numbers
that they can choose from the photos by clicking on the
picture grid. The secure agent identifies the user as valid if

Overall architecture of the suggested design.

the password is accurate; authentication is unsuccessful. The
IAES method generates a long-term secret key for examination
verification, which the protected representative supplies. The
password, secret key, and user and examine recommendations
are encrypted and stored in the Cloud Chain to improve
security. The exclusive step of the method is similar, but the
alteration is occurring, as shown in the following phases.
The algorithm is connected through supplemental key creation and adds key steps.
Step 1: Using the registered credentials, generate the key.
Step 2: A 256-bit key matrix is produced using an 8-bit
LSFR based on registered IDs.
Step 3: 8-bit linear feedback squelch with maximum duration G8 + G8 + G8 + G8 + 1, that produces 28 − 1 = 2558-bit
FSR is a maximum length feedback polynomial with random
outputs.
Step 4: Using LFSR, which indicates the key from the key
matrix, create a random integer at each round.
Step 5: The XOR operation processes the registered credentials, m1 and m2, at the addition round key phase.
Step 6: Reduce the number of rounds to half of the initial
round. Based on the random number, select one key from the
key array.
The master key M, which is a 256-bit key in key expansion,
is used by the AES algorithm to secure itself as it generates
a key schedule using an essential expansion routine. Ti: The
first sub-key generated by the key expansion is the initial
key, which yields an 11-sub-key array with a 16-length that
is functional for the digits. An identically sized sub-key is
generated for each encryption round. A substitution table is
used as input to carry out a one-by-one byte value replacement
process utilizing the nonlinear and invertible S-box. Table I
displays the parameters for the AES algorithm.

B. User Demand Exploration
Following verification, the gateway looks into userexamined requirements to make sure the CSP isn’t being
hacked. The gateway first verifies whether an incoming request

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

where ψ0 a threshold for is classifying these examples with
strong confidence in their lesson
nt,m is the predicted
 
 tags;
t is the collection
ω nt,1 and N
label of nt,m that results from 
of pseudo-labelled information examples that come from Nt ,
with Ft being the conforming quasi labels. Tasters who satisfy
disease are not part of or related to the data. The quasi-labels
associated with this data are appended to 
Ft .
Consider using these anticipated labels to tell the database,
for instance, about the exceptional tasters of Nt . Thus
employing these instances in advance to obtain dishonourable
information.

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for Encryption
Input: Registered credentials
Output:
Begin
State = Initstate-run (pictxt, secretM)
Add key (state, sk0 )
For j=1 to ge -1 do
Sub Bytes (state)
Shift Dins (state)
Mix Columns (state)
Add key (state, mj )
Sub bytes (state)
Shift Rows (state)
Add Key (state, mtj−1 )
End for
End

R (nt,m )
ϕ2R (nt,m ) = R 2 j
j=1 2 (nt,m )

t ← N
t ∪
if(
Ft,m = arg(ϕ2u (nt,m ))) then((N
Ft ← 
Ft ∪ {
nt,m }))
{nt,m }; 

is valid or fraudulent. Based on parameters like examining innovation rate, discussing needs, and time trudge, the
suggested work uses a fuzzy presumption organization to
validate the arriving packets. The used FIS comprises two
self-organized evolving FIS and a conclusion producer that,
when combined, provide better accuracy and computational
efficiency when making judgments based on user requests.
The fraudulent requests are discarded in this step, and only
authentic requests are submitted for service classification.
A coarser semi-supervised learning process is necessary for
healthy models to perform equally well as supervised and
semi-supervised models. However, the optimal configuration
may be troublesome in rural areas.
During this step, the supervised and semi-supervised
deuce sub-models are certified using the information
chunks N1 , N2 , . . . , NT with the associated tag values
F1 , F1 , . . . , , FT The following stage and twitch to be trained
from unlabeled data hunk come after the algorithm process
labeled with tagged data.
At this point, the information base is being advanced
by quasi-classification of the unlabeled pieces. If we
have a new information hunk Nt (t > T), we may crop
ωt =
   grades to get
 an example of Nt . 
the confidence
ω nt,2 , . . . , 
ω(ntPt, ) in support of dishonorable

ω nt,1 , 
supplementary information.
max

i−=1,2,...R

The process and customer demand resolution that enabled
illogical assumptions about the objective and the development
of the most recent wisdom judgment, as well as the assignment
of partial tasks along with copies, allowed for route junction
and learned reproductions, which in turn started the expectation of the administrative lecture and amenity assortment
manner for fulfilling employee wish cares.
The gateway itself additionally categorises the valid requests
as responsive and non-sensitive queries. The suggested work
uses an improved machine learning technique called SCSVM,
which was established in the examiner category to carry out
efficient, valid request categorization. Using SCSVM instead
of traditional SVM is justified because it reduces undesired
computation and does not require a model training procedure.
Examples of standard datasets are allowed to be L =
[1 , 2 , .., t ] ∈ IH×F and the hyperplane for aim resolution be
G() = ψϑ() − δ = 0. we make the following assumption and
break down the hard optimization:
H

ζj − δ

min

(1)

(3)

When nt,m is included in complaint number 3, it might be
utilised to indicate that the parties involved are unable to agree
on the period label for nt,m . Because of this, mmust be handed
down and cannot be used to mount embarrassment.
The current knowledge series is completed to the method
t and 
Ft have been eliminated, and if the location of
after N
the mass statistics is available, it is (t ← t + 1).
This integrates the idea that every unlabelled trial at the
policymaking stage should have a fresh, well-read awareness
from the unlabeled data into the resolution-making course
label t. This accepts the possibility that both copies have been
prepared.

ωR (n)
ϕ2R (n) + 
∗
∗

(4)
F = R ; R = argmax
2
R=1,2....R

1
1
ψ2 +
H
HE
ψ∈G,ζ ∈J ,δ∈J 2

t ← N
t ∪
(
ω(nt,m )) ≥ ψ0 ) then (N

{nt,m }; 
Ft ← 
Ft ∪ {
nt,m })

(2)

The sickness 7 score assesses whether the samples match
the quasi-code tags based on surety ratings.

TABLE I
IAES A LGORITHM PARAMETERS

if (

8209

j=1

s.t. ψϑ(j ) ≥ δ − ζj , ζj ≥ 0

(5)

8210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

For the overhead equality, H stands for the keep-fit dataset
charity, E for the regularisation constraint, ζj for the floppy
flexible agreement to any dataset, δ for the decision flat outside
that possibly will be evident by distribution, and ϑ for the
way of spatial mapping the statistics. By making known to
multipliers ζj ≥ 0 as well as λj ≥ 0 and interpreting the
Lagrange balances, the classic is decoded eventually.
F(ψ, ζ, ς, λ) =

1
1
ψ2 +
2
HE

H

H

ζj − δ
j=1

H

ςj [ψϑ(Lj − δ + ζj ] −

−
j=1

λ j ζj

(6)

j=1

Utilizing the fractional discrepancy of the variables in the
comparison beyond, one may acquire the pairwise custom of
the optimization unruly [7]:
min ς Yς

(7)

ς

1
,
HE

s.t. ≤ ςj ≤

H

ςj = 1

(8)

j=1

Y is found inside the kernel matrix of Yji and Yji can be
uttered as:
Yji = P(j , i ) = ϑ(j )ϑ(i)

(9)

 
In this gaussian and genuine kernel principle, P j , i is
the kernel collecting. For the RBF essential part purpose,
for instance, the organised diagram is presented with the
kernel function’s adjacent unique parameter, ω, continuously
indicating the RBF kernel function’s width.
−j ,i 2

P(j , i ) = M 2ω2

(10)

It is possible to solve ς and multiply ψ and δ separately
by figuring out the excessive quadratic indoctrination trick:
H

ψ=

ςj ϑ(j )

(11)

ςj ϑ(j , i )

(12)

j=1
H

δ=
j=1

From the disentangled ψ and δ, an overexcited resolution
plane in the astronomical article may be established. 
It is customary to organize the test sample G Qp ( =
0, 1, .., E) in support of the exercise setQ = [Q1 , . . . ., QE ] ∈
IE×F using an assessment job H(Pq)(q = 0, 1, . . . , F) based
on the detachment of Euclid.
G(Qp ) = sigt(ϑψ(Qp ) − δ)

C. Secure and Optimal Service Selection
After legitimate requests are classified as sensitive or nonsensitive, the recommended work is to perform the best and
safest service selection for the sensitive and non-sensitive
requests, respectively. More specifically, a request from a
sensitive user in the CSP is matched with the best and safest
sensitive service, and a request from a non-sensitive user
is matched with the best and safest non-sensitive service.
Ant colonies are optimised based on service availability, trust
ratings, QoS, and user input to achieve the best and safest
possible service allocation. These metrics offer weight values
and rankings to collect responsive and non-sensitive services in
the CSPs. A sensitive request from the ranking set is assigned
to the highest-rated sensitive service, while a non-sensitive
request is assigned to the highest-ranked non-sensitive service.
In the end, the suggested work implements the “Moving
Target Defence (MTD) mechanism”, which involves the MTD
representative, a blockchain-deployed agent switching service
IP addresses based on gateway data to prevent external
attackers’ attacks on the services provided by cloud service providers. The MTD agent dynamically rotates the IP
addresses of the services from the pool of “IP addresses in the
Domain Name Server (DNS). Through MTD, attacker costs
can grow without affecting user quality of service (QoS) in
CSPs”.
Often employed as a metaheuristic to solve combinatorial
optimisation issues such as the Optimal Path Problem or
the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), the “Ant Colony
Optimization (ACO)” approach is inspired by the foraging
behaviour of ants. Applying ACO typically entails stating the
problem, graph-spatializing it, initialising pheromone levels,
using virtual ants to build solutions, evaluating the quality of
the solution, updating pheromone levels, iterating, coming to
an end based on a stopping criterion, and optionally postprocessing the work. The ACO algorithm’s steps are listed in
the following order. Here, we use pheromone trail matrix in
ACO denotes the accumulated pheromone levels on the edges
of a search space, which guides the ants to reach the better
solution. ACO is applied to improve service allocation by
simulating the foraging behavior of ants. This can efficiently
matching the sensitive and non-sensitive request based on QoS.
Startup: Configure the early pheromone following a template, the number of iterations, and the number of ants. The
pheromone trail matrix stores the quantity of pheromone on
every border of the grid.
2. Creation of candidate solutions: Using a grouping of the
pheromone follow and the reserve between the present node
and the subsequent node, each ant repeatedly chooses which
node to visit next to generate candidates. The primary goal
of probabilistic rules is to assess the chance of occurrences
or outcomes established on existing facts and make wellinformed predictions or judgments in undecided situations. A
probabilistic rule, provided by:, is used to make the selection.

(13)

The trial illustration Qp ’s supervisory role G(Qp ) is private
as a positive session, and it is arranged by arranging the circumstances of Qp concerning the pronouncement hyperplane.

Qji = 

[τji ]α .[ηji ]β
α
β
m∈Vunvisite [τjm ] .[ηjm ]

(14)

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

The pheromone following on the border (j, i) is represented
by τ j, i, and Qj, i is the likelihood of selecting node i, known
that the ant is presently at node i. The reserve among nodes
i and j is reciprocal and is represented by the ηji . α is
the pheromone follow significance feature, β represents the
collection of unvisited nodes, where unvisited is the heuristic
information significance factor. It refers to the influence of
additional problem specific information, which helps ants to
make more informed decisions.
3. Pheromone trails are updated based on the efficacy of
the remedies found once the ants have finished their journeys.
Higher pheromone trails are given to reasonable solutions,
whereas lower pheromone trails are given to wrong solutions.
As stated by the updated rule
τji = (1 − ρ)τji + τji

(15)

The measure of pheromone stored on the border (j, i) is
represented by τji , whereas ρ represents the evaporation rate.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 as needed until the stopping criterion
is met. The number of iterations, the longest time restriction,
or the calibre of the answers discovered can all be used as the
stopping criteria.
5. Pick the optimal course of action: The tour’s duration or
other objective function is used to determine the best outcome.
The ACO optimisation technique employs a pheromone
trail to direct an ant colony toward optimal solutions. The
pheromone trail, which is modified by the algorithm according
to the calibre of the solutions found, impacts the ants’
choice of the subsequent terminal. The applicability of the
technique is well suited to large search regions. While they
are distinct algorithms used in artificial intelligence and optimisation, Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) techniques have
many similarities. These parallels include the capacity to be
applied to intricate issues, the ability to balance exploration
and exploitation, the potential for distributed and parallel
processing, iterative improvement, and stochastic optimisation.
Relatively tiny jumps indicate the tomtit moment. Using
a phase scope f, one may achieve this solution by adding
numerically. If some people arrange success in terms of
education, then the group leader should be positioned at this
boundary, and the followers should be placed first to get the
best outcome.
D. Adaptive Access Control and Dual Revocation
We first allocate the services to the right users and then create a new access control mechanism based on role, trust, and
attribute in that sequence. Service type and user roles are taken
into account. The user’s attributes are displayed, including
user ID, role, password, and biometrics. The Recurrent Neural
Networks technique may be used to define trust based on the
characteristics and roles of the users. The suggested access
control system uses RNN to build dynamic access restrictions
that take into account the users’ current status. RNN are used
for detecting anomalies in incoming request. Based on the
dynamic policies, we also create an access control map. Illegal
access may be quickly identified by creating an access control
map, and it can be lessened by reversing two times. Revocation

8211

in two flavours: hybrid IDS-based user revocation and attribute
revocation.
Because a vast quantity of data comes from many sources,
the RNN autoencoder compresses the input data. Therefore,
adopting data compression to save hardware storage is crucial.
Increased communication bandwidth may also benefit the
system’s performance.
In addition, the decoder uses the compressed input data
to synthesize new data. Assume for the moment that the
malicious contents from the link to be written as follows were
extracted ω using the auto-encoder β. $$ = 1 2 , . . . , k !!.
For each link, k represents the total amount of harmful
materials.
After eliminating the hidden harmful contents from the link ,
the auto-encoder βe deduces the malicious contents Dk , which
is then formulated as βe : → ω. Meanwhile, the decoder
βc rebuilds the link and writes βe : ω→ after that. In the
case of the auto-encoder and auto-decoder, where ω: content
illustration for the connection.
After being taught, the RNN autoencoder βe Fig. out how
likely it is to identify harmful connections. The RNN may
trigger the link’s whole, harmful content and involves the
hidden state Vg . Thus, every time step n, computed by –18,
updates the input and output hidden states of the RNN.
Vg (n) = f (βe)(Zj • Vg (n − 1) × n )
f (n) = f (o)(Zo • Vg (n − 1) × n )

(16)
(17)

Once the link has been accessed, the final hidden state of
the RNN is applied as a content illustration ω for the link.
GRU is used in conjunction with RNN to reduce computational
complexity, enhance memory capacity, facilitate successful
model training, and provide early observation if a situation
arises that calls for early observation in order to make future
predictions.
To ascertain the likelihood of harmful information, an
automated encoder βe obtains the input link J(n) from the
GRU. The input to the subsequent hidden state, Vg (n) − 1,
is processed using the sigmoid function. Until the output
decision βe(n)O about the harmful contents from the provided
link is achieved, this procedure keeps going. To identify any
potentially harmful information in the following URL, the
encoder is reset. The encoder has updated features Eβe(n) that
are necessary for updating the subsequent layer. Furthermore,
Bβe(n) the process can be activated by the encoder.
The following is the formula for content detection using
automated encoding with the GRU: In this case, at first for
n = 0 and βe(n)O = 0, Therefore, it may be ascertained as:
Eβe(n) = σsigmoid {(∀ρ.Eβe(n, )
+(∀ ∪ .Eβe(n, Vg (n − 1) )+∀.Eβe(n)}

(18)

Rβe(n) = σsigmoid {(∀ρ.Rβe(n).l)
+(∀ ∪ .Rβe(n).Vg (n − 1)+∀.Rβe(n)}

(19)

Bβe(n) = ϕg{(βe(n)O.l)(∀B ∪ .Bβe(n)×(Rβe(n)
⊕Vg (n − 1) )+∀.Vg }

(20)

βe(n)O = {(1 − Eβe(n))
⊕(βe(n)O − 1)+(Eβe(n)⊕Bβe(n))}

(21)

8212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

where Vg (n)ϕg is the hyperbolic tangent and σsigmoid is the
sigmoid
The auto-encoder’s parameters, ∀ρ, ∀∪, and ∀, are utilized
to aid in the detection of malicious data.
ω = βe(n, ∀ρ)

(22)

One crucial component that takes the ω as an input to
start the construction process is the decoder. To generate the
malicious output content sequence, another
RNN is utilized
in


the construction of the decoder βc. j = j1 , j2 , . . . , jk With
every time step n, the decoder’s concealed state is triggered.
Vg (n) = f (βe)(Zj • Vg − 1, j )
n

(23)

The total likelihood of creating the malicious output
sequence that generates the input link is
k

(j(|;θc |) =

(jn |jn − 1|, jn − 2, . . . j1 , ω, θc )

(24)

j=1

where θc : the decoder’s argument
To lessen the negative impact of the probability p for all of
the malicious contents of the connection, the auto-encoder’s
components mutually train with each other.

input data is added to the memory information stream at each
iteration. This is how the procedure is expressed:
j = σ (Zn .[gn−1 , yn ] + j )

(28)

A potential value for the memory unit in the present Dn is
determined by:
Dn = tang(Zd .[gn−1 , yn ] + d )

(29)

where in tang (·), the hyperbolic tangent function, has values
between –1 and 1.
e − e−
(30)
e + e−
To manage the material transferred to the following
iteration, or the memory unit’s output state value, the LSTM
model employs an output gate. An output gate’s calculation is
as follows:
tang () =

on = σ (Zo .[gn−1 , yn ] + o )

(31)

The corresponding bias vector of the affine transformation
is
is o , and Zo is the output gate’s weight matrix. When
used as the point multiplication operation, the memory unit’s
state value is modified as follows:
D n = fn

Dn−1 + jn

Dn

(32)

k
k

log (jn |n ;ρ, ∀∪, ∀,θc )

(∀ρ, ∀∪, ∀,θc ) = −

(25)

Ultimately, the value of the output is computed by:

n=1

gn = on .tang(Dn )

The trust model may forecast each node’s trust if the normalized trust complies with the input data for the LSTM
architecture-based trust modeling.
A recurrent neural structure makes up the LSTM model.
Cell states, which preserve context from previous observations to more accurately forecast future states, compose its
fundamental structure. Give the input and output data at time
n, yn and gn , respectively. Three gating mechanisms make
up the model: j, f , and o stand for contribution gateway,
not remember gate, and output gate, correspondingly. Dn
represents the memory cell’s state value at time n. The
following steps comprise the updating process of an LSTM
unit:
The forget gate is utilized by the LSTM layer to ascertain
the information required to discard the input Ytn at the current
step, as well as gn−1 from the previous iteration. The impact of
past data on the current memory unit’s state value is managed
by the forget gate. The procedure’s purpose is:
fn = σ (Zf .[gn−1 , yn ] + f )

(26)

where the forget gate’s bias vector is denoted by f and its
weight matrix is represented by Zf . With a range of 0 to 1, σ (·)
represents the logistic sigmoid commencement purpose. Total
memory is represent by a value of 1, and zero signifies that
all data should be discarded.
1
(27)
σ () =
1 + e−
Using the input gate, which regulates how the current input
affects the memory unit’s state value, the LSTM chooses what

(33)

Furthermore, infectious strictures were excisioned covertly.
Consequently, the contrastive model’s knowledge route
becomes less necessary to accomplish firm mining, causing
the exercise duration to slow down.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this part, we offer the suggested consumer-centric
approaches to data transmission security on IoT networks,
which integrate blockchain technology and machine learning.
There are three subsections in this experimental study: comparative analysis, simulation setup, and explicit. As may be
seen from the results section, the suggested work performs
better than earlier efforts.
A. Simulation Setup
The NS-3.26 network simulator is used to implement the
simulation result of this suggested work with IoT simulation,
which enhances the performance of this study. Our approach
produces higher performance, as demonstrated by comparing
the suggested framework with other performance indicators.
The setup of the system is shown in Table II.
B. Comparative Analysis
In this segment, we presented the comparative study of
two current works, AP2FL and Cloud-IoT, with the suggested
ML and Blockchain for Consumer-Centric Approaches in
safeguarding Data transmission over IoT Networks. The most
important objective of this research is to develop an access

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

8213

TABLE II
S YSTEM PARAMETER

control organization based on safe cloud security services.
In terms of attack detection rate, overhead, unauthorized
access, throughput, traffic rate, and latency, the suggested work
performed better.
Impact of attack detection rate: The rate at which attacks
are detected in cloud security services is estimated using this
KPI. This may be described as follows: the ratio of detected
attacks to the growing number of users is commonly used to
depict this.
Uo =

ϕh
G

xeu
JWh

Attack detection rate.

Fig. 4.

Overhead.

(34)

where Uo indicates how often the assault is detected. This
indicates the ever-increasing number of users that the system
with a high detection rate may reach to obtain a safe cloud
security service. It also explains the assaults detected G . The
assessment of the uncovering rate and numeral of requirements
for both the suggested and current mechanism is shown in
Fig. (3). Compared to previous work on AP2FL and CloudIoT, the evaluation result shows that the suggested has a higher
recognition rate. Our approach involves photo verification of
the pictures by the protected agent to verify that together, the
consumer and the examiner are real. This helps to decrease
harmful traffic in the network by excluding illegitimate users.
In addition to avoiding traffic in the network, which raises
transfer masses and results in inefficient load balancing, the
current approach pays little attention to legitimate users.
However, some environment users may be sending fraudulent
traffic over the network.
When comparing the suggested Integrating ML and
Blockchain approach to the shortened 52, where the
performance of the outgoing works is 40, and the AP2FL is 35,
the show aggression recognition rate is raised. The suggested
work’s average attack detection rate for 500 requests is 96,
indicating that it outperforms previous work like AP2FL’s 85
and Cloud-IoT’s 70. The numerical data displayed in the graph
suggest that our suggested approach outperforms the current
work.
Impact of overhead: The overhead refers to the ratio
of lost bandwidth needed to transfer the payload. The extra
information given to the packet header above the payload
ensures that a packet reaches its intended recipient.
OG =

Fig. 3.

(35)

where JW represents the sent packet, and xeu shows the overhead packets that are sent during overhead. Fig. (4) compares
the number of requests and overhead for the proposed and
completed works. The comparative analysis reveals that the
proposed approach has achieved lower overhead compared to
the ongoing work on AP2FL and Cloud-IoT. We carry out
the optimum service selection by the secure choice for the
sensitive and non-sensitive services in the CSP for a nonsensitive user request to obtain the optimal secure service
allocation using those metrics. We assign weight values and
rank the set of sensitive and non-sensitive items. While
determining the cloud service allocation characteristic, the
current work assigns services by considering less the service
selection values of the ideal metrics that may be allocated to
low features of determinants of the optimal features allocation.
When comparing the suggested technique to the shortened
7, where the existing work performs 12 and Cloud-IoT does
14, the overhead is decreased. The average overhead of the
proposed work for 500 requests is 15, indicating that we
outperform existing work, with scores of 23 for AP2FL and
28 for Cloud-IoT. The graph’s numerical results show that our
recommended task performs better than the existing endeavour.

8214

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Throughputs.

Fig. 6.

Impact of throughput: The quantity of data packets that
are successfully transferred during a specific amount of time
is known as throughput, and it may be expressed as,
NQ =

sucx ∗avgxe
× 100%
o

(36)

where sucx the packet stands for the successful packets, o for
the average packet size, and t for the entire amount of time
was transmitted. The throughput and number of requests for
both the proposed and current works are compared in Fig.
(5). The comparative result shows that, when compared to
the previous work on Cloud-IoT and AP2FL, the suggested
has achieved reduced overhead. To effectively decide, we
utilize FIS, composed of two self-organised developed FIS
and a decision maker, based on user demands, which offer
enhanced accuracy and computing efficiency, respectively.
Genuine requests are submitted for service categorisation in
this phase, with the fraudulent requests being rejected. Valid
requests are also divided into sensitive and non-sensitive
categories by the gateway. The current method investigates
user requests with less attention to user requests. It makes
decisions on user requests that consider limited features,
which offers less accuracy and throughput while using a basic
machine learning algorithm that varies slightly from the userassigned process of that work. It is not yet possible to classify
a user who may be inadequately supplying packet services
based on their valid requests to get the users’ access to the
resources.
The throughput of the suggested technique is higher than
the existing works’ 32 and 28 when compared to the truncated
50. We surpass the present work, which is 290 for Cloud-IoT
and 310 for AP2FL, with an average throughput of 342 for 500
requests in the proposed work. The numerical data displayed
in the graph suggest that our suggested approach outperforms
the current work.
Impact of delay: The stoppage indicates how long it took
for the suggested employment to upload and download the
services, respectively, and the user request. The delay time
needs to be reduced as much as feasible to enhance the data

Delay.

rate.

N
D=

i=1 (Treceived,i − Tsent,i )

N

(37)

The comparison between the number of requirements for
both planned and accessible mechanisms and the delay is
shown in Fig. 6. The comparative result shows that the
suggested has reduced overhead compared to the current work
on Cloud-IoT and AP2FL. Our approach involves thwarting
external attackers’ attacks on cloud service providers’ services.
The system we propose to implement does this by randomly
assigning service IP addresses based on gateway information.
The IP addresses of the services are dynamically rearranged by
the agents from the DNS pool of IP addresses. By using CSP
services, the attacker’s expenses rise without compromising
the users’ quality of service. Attacks on the services that were
provided, as well as the providers’ disregard for the network
attacker, cloud service comparison, and the attackers’ provided
quantity of the environment’s structural and functional capabilities of the delay procedures of the identified attackers’ cloud
services, were conducted in the work that has already been
done.
In contrast to the shorter 110, where the current works do
125 and 135 jobs, the proposed approach reduces delay in
task completion. Based on the average delay of the proposed
work for ten requests, which is 150, we surpass existing work,
such as AP2FL, which is 180, and Cloud-IoT, which is 192.
The numerical results shown in the graph indicate that our
proposed method performs better than past efforts.
Impact of unauthorized access: Processing a storage
request involves using technology to compute and store data.
A computer’s storage system allows it to store data for a
temporary or permanent period.
The contrast between the amount of requests for both
proposed and current works and illegal access is shown in
Fig. (6). The comparative result shows that the suggested has
reduced overhead compared to the current work on CloudIoT and AP2FL. At work, we employ an access control
map that shows odd versions for a given value if a user’s
attribute expires before the time stamp that is set. Rather

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

Fig. 9.
Fig. 7.

8215

Comparative analysis with state of art methods.

Unauthorized access.

Fig. 10. Comparison of pheromone trails and heuristic information in service
selection using ACO algorithm.
Fig. 8.

RNN based trust mechanism.

than penalizing, the proposed work informed that attribute
variation performs attribute updating. Furthermore, a virtual
firewall, a hybrid intrusion detection system, is installed in
the cloud environment to monitor user storage request traffic
and differentiate between safe and dangerous requests. The
suggested work’s qualities and distribution are used for user
identification in the current work, which improves power
distribution and preserves the work’s determinacies.
When compared to the shortened 15, wherever the exit
mechanism performs 25 and 35, the proposed technique
performs illegal access lowered. Our work outperforms prior
work such as AP2FL, which has an attack detection rate of
65, and Cloud-IoT, which has an attack detection rate of 85,
with an average of 35 for 250 storage requests. Our suggested
work outperforms previous work, according to the numerical
findings displayed in the graph.
Figure 8 shows trust score based on the changes in user
behavior. Initially, the trust score is set at the base level,finally
it fluctuates based on the user interactions.
Figure 9 shows the overall comparison analysis with the
state of art methods of Ant Colony optimization with Multi
Kernel Support Vector (ACOMKSVM) [29], Ant colony

optimization (ACO) [30], miner revenue optimization algorithm (MROA) [31], Genetic Algorithm based ant Lion
Optimization Energy Efficient Multipath routing protocol
(GALOEEM) [32]. When compared with these models the
suggested model outperforms with the existing model in terms
of security, QoS, and resource efficiency.
Figure 10 shows the service selection process based on
ACO algorithm which illustrates the selection frequency
and attractiveness of services like A) authentication service, B) Encryption service C) Request verification service
D) Service classification service E) MTD service over 100
iterations.
V. C ONCLUSION
This study presents a comprehensive approach to enhance
data security and privacy in Internet of Things networks
through the combination of Blockchain and Machine Learning
technologies. Key issues with data integrity and safe access
control are addressed by the suggested hybrid blockchain
approach, which combines public and private blockchain
functionality. The system can promptly identify and address
possible security risks by utilizing machine learning algorithms that incorporate sophisticated anomaly detection and

8216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

classification methods. To further ensure that the system
adjusts to changing security situations and offers strong
defense against cyberattacks, neural networks based on transfer learning are used for dynamic trust validation. The
integration of hybrid blockchain models ensures that the
security mechanisms scale efficiently when the IoT networks
expand. With the ability to handle large volumes of data and
devices, the system can maintain high throughput by reducing
latency. Also, the use of machine learning algorithms, allows
the system to continuously respond to user behavior and attack
patterns, which ensures continuous security in a changing environment. Incorporating advanced optimization methods for
resource management balances scalability, latency, and energy
consumption concerns while simultaneously increasing system
performance. Also, proposed model effectively protects against
DDoS, man-in-the middle and data manipulation issues.
All things considered, this research provides a workable
and novel approach to IoT network security, especially for
consumer-focused applications. It increases the overall reliability of IoT devices and gives consumers more control over
their data. The results of this study open the door for a
wider acceptance and implementation of IoT technologies in
numerous consumer and industrial applications by supporting
the continuous efforts to create more secure, effective, and
user-friendly IoT environments. Future research could focus on
enhancing these technologies and investigating their potential
integration into intricate and expansive IoT networks.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, C. T. Calafate, and M. S. Halimi,
“SecureBlock: An ML-blockchain consumer-centric sustainable solution
for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 1452–1462, Feb. 2024.
[2] M. F. Ayub, X. Li, K. Mahmood, S. Shamshad, M. A. Saleem, and
M. Omar, “Secure consumer-centric demand response management
in resilient smart grid as industry 5.0 application with blockchainbased authentication,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 1370–1379, Feb. 2024.
[3] Y. Li, J. Shen, P. Vijayakumar, C.-F. Lai, A. Sivaraman, and
P. K. Sharma, “Next-generation consumer electronics data auditing
scheme towards cloud-edge distributed and resilient machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2244–2256,
Feb. 2024.
[4] S. Bhardwaj, S. Harit, and A. Yadav, “Towards a software-defined
networking model for consumer-centric content delivery network for
IoT,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 35, no. 1, 2024,
Art. no. e4903.
[5] P. Tiwari, A. Lakhan, R. H. Jhaveri, and T.-M. Grønli, “Consumercentric Internet of Medical Things for cyborg applications based on
federated reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 756–764, Nov. 2023.
[6] J. K. Mudhar, J. Malhotra, and S. Rani, “Blockchain-based decentralized access control framework for enhanced security and privacy for
consumer electronic devices,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 6944–6951, Nov. 2024.
[7] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola,
and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in
consumer-centric Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, Feb. 2024.
[8] G. Liu, G. Bao, M. Bilal, A. Jones, Z. Jing, and X. Xu, “Edge data
caching with consumer-centric service prediction in resilient industry
5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1482–1492,
Feb. 2024.
[9] A. Shankar and C. Maple, “Securing the Internet of Things-enabled
smart city infrastructure using a hybrid framework,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 205, pp. 127–135, May 2023.

[10] O. A. Alzubi, J. A. Alzubi, K. Shankar, and D. Gupta, “Blockchain
and artificial intelligence enabled privacy-preserving medical data transmission in Internet of Things,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol.,
vol. 32, no. 12, 2021, Art. no. e4360.
[11] H. Vargas, C. Lozano-Garzon, G. A. Montoya, and Y. Donoso,
“Detection of security attacks in industrial IoT networks: A blockchain
and machine learning approach,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 21, p. 2662,
2021.
[12] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framework using blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart
cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341,
Jul.–Sep. 2021.
[13] S. Singh, S. Rathore, O. Alfarraj, A. Tolba, and B. Yoon, “A framework
for privacy-preservation of IoT healthcare data using federated learning
and blockchain technology,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 129,
pp. 380–388, Apr. 2022.
[14] D. Unal, M. Hammoudeh, M. A. Khan, A. Abuarqoub, G. Epiphaniou,
and R. Hamila, “Integration of federated machine learning and
blockchain for the provision of secure big data analytics for Internet of
Things,” Comput. Secur., vol. 109, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 102393.
[15] D. Ye, X. Huang, G. Cheng, and M. S. Hossain, “Multi-dimensional
contract design for energy-efficient wireless sensing in consumer-centric
E-commerce systems,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4,
pp. 6883–6891, Nov. 2024.
[16] S.
Sathesh,
S.
Maheswaran,
P.
Mohanavenkatesan,
M. Mohammed Azarudeen, K. Sowmitha, and S. Subash, “Allowance
of driving based on drowsiness detection using audio and video
processing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Intell. Data Sci., 2022,
pp. 235–250.
[17] A. Sasikumar, L. Ravi, M. Devarajan, S. Vairavasundaram, K. Kotecha,
and N. Herencsar, “Sustainable Electronics: A blockchain-empowered
digital twin based governance system for consumer electronic products,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4968–4975,
May 2024.
[18] P. K. Roy, A. Kumar, and A. Singh, “Advanced learning for phishing
URLs detection to secure consumer-centric applications,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5756–5763, Aug. 2024.
[19] S. Sathesh et al., “Smart medicine kit using embedded IoT for visually
and hearing-impaired patients,” Nat. Volatiles Essent. Oils J., vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 127–138, 2021.
[20] P. Kumar, N. Chauhan, N. Chaurasia, K. K. Agarwal, A. Vidyarthi, and
D. Gupta, “Benevolence behavior based message forwarding scheme
for consumer-centric IoT opportunistic networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 6892–6900, Nov. 2024.
[21] A. Kumar, G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, M. Bilal, and T. R. Gadekallu,
“A secure architectural model using blockchain and estimated trust
mechanism in electronic consumers,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 996–1004, Nov. 2023.
[22] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchain-enabled
security framework against ransomware attacks for smart healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
Feb. 20223.
[23] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
“Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
[24] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. S. Thangakrishnan, T. V. Ramana,
A. K. Bashir, and A. A. AlZubi, “Artificial intelligence based zero
trust security approach for consumer industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5411–5418, Aug. 2024.
[25] M. Shanmugam, I. Natarajan, V. Balasubramaniam, R. D. Gomathi, and
S. Shanmugam, “Smart lights for smart city,” in Smart Cities: Concepts,
Practices, and Applications, 1st ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2022, pp. 223–243.
[26] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “AP2FL:
Auditable privacy-preserving federated learning framework for electronics in healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 2527–2535, Feb. 2024.
[27] F. Jamil, H. K. Kahng, S. Kim, and D.-H. Kim, “Towards secure fitness
framework based on IoT-enabled blockchain network integrated with
machine learning algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 1640, 2021.
[28] M. S. Farooq, S. Khan, A. Rehman, S. Abbas, M. A. Khan, and
S. O. Hwang, “Blockchain-based smart home networks security empowered with fused machine learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 12, p. 4522,
2022.

YUAN AND WU: INTEGRATING ML AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR CONSUMER-CENTRIC APPROACHES

[29] B. Le Nguyen et al., “Privacy preserving blockchain technique to achieve
secure and reliable sharing of IoT data,” Comput., Mater. Continua,
vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 87–107, 2020.
[30] C. Zhou and Z. Jiang, “Computer network communication
security encryption system based on ant colony optimization
algorithm,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 228, pp. 38–46, Nov. 2023.
[31] Y Chen et al., “Miner revenue optimization algorithm based on Pareto
artificial bee colony in blockchain network,” EURASIP J. Wireless
Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, p. 146, Dec. 2021.
[32] A. R. Ponjothi and P. Parwekar, “Bidirectional blockchainbased secure
data transfer using GALOEEM routing protocol in WSN,” J. Comput.
Sci., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 964–976, 2023.

Bo Yuan is currently pursuing the Doctoral degree
with the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing, where he
is a Senior Engineer. His research interests include:
blockchain, information security, and computing
network.

8217

Faguo Wu born in Anqing, Anhui, China. He
received the Ph.D. degree. He is an Associate
Professor. His research direction is anti quantum
computing, artificial intelligence, blockchain, and
information security.