IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

12157

Knowledge Distillation for Lightweight and
Explainable Intrusion Detection in
Resource-Constrained Consumer Devices
Muhammad Umair , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Shahbaz Khan , Member, IEEE,
Wajdan Al Malwi, Fatima Asiri , Ibtehal Nafea , Faisal Saeed , and Jawad Ahmad , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The growing demand for deploying deep learning
(DL) models for cyber-attack detection on consumer devices
is constrained by their limited memory and computational
resources. High-performing DL models are often too resourceintensive for on-device deployment. Knowledge distillation (KD)
offers an alternative by transferring knowledge from a complex
teacher model to a smaller, lightweight student model, reducing
model size and inference time with minimal accuracy loss. In
this paper, a KD-based framework is utilized to design and train
both teacher and student models for intrusion detection using
the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets. The student model
achieves comparable performance to the teacher, with accuracies
of 99.87% and 98.71% on the utilized datasets. It maintains
accurate classification across various attack classes, achieving
F1-scores above 0.98, while reducing computational complexity
from 263k to 120k trainable parameters, model size from 1.00
MB to 471.67 KB, and inference time from 48 ms to 34 ms.
Moreover, SHAP-based explainable AI techniques are employed
to interpret both models, demonstrating that the distilled student
model retains key feature attributions of the teacher model.
Index Terms—Knowledge distillation, deep learning, consumer
electronics, IoT attacks, SHAP, teacher model, student model.

Received 17 January 2025; revised 11 March 2025 and 3 May 2025;
accepted 15 August 2025. Date of publication 21 August 2025; date of
current version 8 December 2025. The authors extend their appreciation to
the Deanship of Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University
for funding this work through Large Research Project under grant number
RGP2/337/46. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Shahbaz Khan.)
Muhammad Umair is with the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia
University, Cyberjaya 63100, Malaysia, and also with the Department of
Electrical Engineering, HITEC University, Taxila 47080, Pakistan (e-mail:
17-ee-112@student.hitecuni.edu.pk).
Muhammad Shahbaz Khan is with the School of Computing, Engineering
and the Built Environment, Edinburgh Napier University, EH10 5DT
Edinburgh, U.K. (e-mail: muhammadshahbaz.khan@napier.ac.uk).
Wajdan Al Malwi and Fatima Asiri are with the Informatics and
Computer Systems Department, College of Computer Science, King Khalid
University, Abha 61421, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: Wmoalwy@kku.edu.sa;
Falmalye@kku.edu.sa).
Ibtehal Nafea is with the College of Computer Science and Engineering,
Taibah University, Madinah 41477, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: inafea@
taibahu.edu.sa).
Faisal Saeed is with the Computer Science Department, Birmingham City
University, B47XG Birmingham, U.K. (e-mail: faisal.saeed@bcu.ac.uk).
Jawad Ahmad is with the Cybersecurity Center, Prince Mohammad
Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 34754, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: jahmad@
pmu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3601183

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE RAPID advancement in technology has resulted in
the widespread development and adoption of consumer
devices [1]. Consumer Internet of Things (IoT) technologies,
including smart home systems, wearables, healthcare monitors,
and connected appliances, play a key role in bridging the
digital and physical worlds [2]. Recently, IoT devices have
been transitioning toward the Artificial-Intelligence-of-Things
(AIoT), where AI enables intelligent decision-making locally
on these devices [3]. However, integrating AI functionality
directly onto devices introduces new security vulnerabilities [4]. Hackers can exploit these devices to steal sensitive
data, causing security issues for users.
Advanced deep learning (DL) algorithms are essential for
detecting evolving threats due to their ability to learn complex
patterns and update dynamically. However, their high computational cost limits edge deployment, necessitating lightweight
alternatives [5]. To address this challenge, researchers have
developed several techniques for building lightweight DL
models. A promising solution is Knowledge Distillation (KD),
in which a large and complex teacher model is trained on the
dataset to achieve high accuracy [6]. A smaller student model
then learns from the teacher by mimicking its outputs and
refining its parameters using the dataset’s labels. This process
transfers the knowledge from the teacher to the student,
resulting in a lightweight model that retains the same accuracy
as the teacher model.
Recent studies have explored various lightweight models
for intrusion detection and IoT attacks in consumer electronics. Most of the works [7], [8], [9] utilize DL and ML
to reduce computational complexity while maintaining DL
model performance. While some of the proposed DL-based
approaches [7], [9], [10], [11] exhibit strong performance
but most of these require large training datasets and highspecification hardware, which limits their suitability for
deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. To address
these issues, KD [6], [12], [13], [14] has therefore emerged as
an alternative solution for reducing model size while retaining
accuracy. These KD-based solutions highlight the potential of
distillation methods in intrusion and attack detection. However,
most of the studies are not tailored to consumer electronics
and edge devices.
The key challenge addressed in this paper is developing a
DL-based intrusion detection model that is both lightweight

T

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

12158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

for resource-constrained consumer devices and explainable for
improved interpretability. Conventional DL models generally
exhibit high computational complexity involving complex
decision-making processes, making them unsuitable for ondevice deployment in sensitive IoT environments.
II. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, the methodology and processes employed
in the study are presented. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
overall workflow comprises several main stages: (1) Dataset
selection, including N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023; (2) Data
Preprocessing, encompassing outlier removal, data balancing,
standardization, and splitting; (3) Knowledge Distillation and
(4) Evaluation and Detection, in which the trained models are
assessed for intrusion detection performance. These stages are
discussed in detail in the following subsections.

B. Knowledge Distillation
The overall KD workflow for training both teacher and
student models on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets is
shown in Fig. 3. Each model receives the same input samples
and produces a set of logits, denoted by zT for the teacher and
zS for the student. A softmax function converts these logits
into class probabilities is given in (2):
exp(zi )
p̂i = C
 ,
j=1 exp zj

where zi ∈ z corresponds to the i-th logit, and C is the total
number of classes.
The student model learns directly from ground-truth labels
by minimizing the following cross-entropy (hard) loss as given
in (3).
Lhard = −

A. Dataset

C


 
yi log p̂S,i ,

(3)

i=1

This study utilizes two datasets, N-BaIoT [15], [16] and
CIC-IDS 2023 [17], [18], to capture a wide range of IoT
attacks and everyday consumer electronics usage. N-BaIoT
provides authentic traffic data from multiple commercial IoT
devices compromised by botnets. CIC-IDS 2023, on the other
hand, includes various attack scenarios across an extensive
IoT topology with diverse devices acting as both attackers and
victims.
1) Dataset Preprocessing: The N-BaIoT dataset comprised
7,062,606 rows×116 columns, and 11 classes, whereas
the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset contained 46,686,579 rows×47
columns, and 34 classes. However, in the CIC-IDS 2023
dataset, several classes represented attacks that belonged to
the same category, and some classes had very few samples.
To address these issues, such classes were merged into
their respective attack categories, resulting in a total of 6
aggregated classes. Thus, for the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset,
a total of 85,915 samples among 6 classes were utilized
for this study. The raw data files were first converted into
unified DataFrames for each dataset. Then, a standard scaler
was applied to normalize the features, ensuring consistent
ranges across all variables and enhancing compatibility for DL
models. Furthermore, outliers were removed using IQR-based
filtering, and missing values were discarded to ensure quality
data input. Only data points that satisfy (1) are retained, which
reduces noise without compromising the dataset’s structure.
Q1 − 1.5 × IQR ≤ X ≤ Q3 + 1.5 × IQR

(2)

(1)

Feature selection has been performed using correlation
analysis, random forest feature importance, and principal
component analysis (PCA). Top-ranking features identified
by the aforementioned techniques undergo a majority vote,
i.e., a feature was retained if it appeared among the highestranked features in at least two out of the three selection
methods. A radar (spider) chart, shown in Fig. 2(d), compares
the normalized feature importance scores from each technique.
This visualization highlights both the overlap and divergence
among selected features during the selection process.

where yi is 1 for the correct class and 0 otherwise, and p̂S,i =
σ (zS )i is the student’s softmax output for class i.
In addition to the hard loss, the student receives guidance
from the teacher’s softened outputs via the distillation loss
LKD . Let p̂T,i = σ (zT /T)i and p̂S,i = σ (zS /T)i be the teacher’s
and student’s probabilities at temperature T. Mathematically
it is given in (4).
  
(4)
LKD = α Lhard + (1 − α) T 2 KL p̂T  p̂S ,
where KL(·, ·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence [19], and
α balances the weight between the hard loss and the teacher–
student alignment term. The factor T 2 scales the divergence
when T > 1.
As shown in Fig. 3, both the teacher and student models
take the same inputs from the dataset. The student’s logits
zS produce probabilities p̂S,i used in the hard loss Lhard
and the teacher’s logits zT generate soft probabilities p̂T,i .
The student mimics these distributions through the distillation
loss LKD . Only the student receives gradients from LKD ,
creating a smaller model with competitive performance at
reduced computational cost. By combining standard crossentropy (ground-truth labels) with the soft-label guidance from
the teacher, the distilled student model preserves much of
the teacher’s predictive power while operating with lower
resource requirements. The utilized KD pipeline is given in
Algorithm 1.
1) The Teacher Model: The teacher model in KD is typically more complex and larger, allowing it to learn complex
representations from the data. In this study, the teacher
model’s architecture, shown in Fig. 4, comprises multiple
convolutional blocks, each containing two 1D convolutional
(1D-CNN) layers. The first convolutional block utilizes 32
filters with ReLU activation, while the second has 64 filters.
Both use a kernel size of 2 × 2 and a max-pooling operation
with a 2 × 2 window. Following these convolutional blocks,
two LSTM layers with 64 units each form the LSTM block.
Finally, two dense layers provide the final classification: the
first dense layer has 32 units, and the output layer has as many

UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 1.

Overview of the utilized methodology.

Fig. 2.

Feature importance score for selected features. (a) N-BaIoT dataset. (b) CIC IDS 2023 dataset.

units as the number of classes (11 for N-BaIoT and 6 for
CIC-IDS 2023).
2) The Student Model: The student model (as shown in
Fig. 4) adopts a similar structure but in a lighter configuration.
It includes only one 1D-CNN layer in the convolutional block
and a single LSTM layer in the LSTM block, along with batch
normalization and max-pooling. This design reduces the number of parameters significantly, resulting in a more compact
model suitable for resource-constrained edge deployment in
consumer electronics.
C. Evaluation Metrics
This section describes the metrics used to evaluate classification performance and model reliability.

12159

1) Classification Metrics: The metrics utilized in this study
to evaluate the classification performance of the proposed
model are: precision, recall, F1-score, and Accuracy. These
metrics compare the predicted labels with ground-truth
labels, where TP, TN, FP, and FN denote true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives,
respectively.
2) Reliability Metrics: In addition to standard metrics,
this paper reports Cohen’s Kappa and Matthews Correlation
Coefficient (MCC). Both are particularly useful in scenarios
with imbalanced data: Cohen’s Kappa accounts for the possibility of agreement between predicted and true labels, while
MCC measures the correlation between observed and predicted
classifications, providing a more informative assessment than
raw accuracy when class distribution is skewed.

12160

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

The knowledge distillation workflow illustrating teacher–student model interaction.

Algorithm 1 The Utilized Knowledge Distillation Pipeline
DATA PREPARATION(D)
Clean and remove outliers in D
Balance classes (under-sampling)
Standardize features
Dtrain , Dtest ← Split(D, ρ)

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE T EACHER M ODEL ON N-BA I OT
DATASET

TEACHER TRAINING(Mteach )
Mteach ← arg min LCE (Mteach , Dtrain )
return Mteach
DISTILLATION(M
teach , Mstud , α, T)
 
p̂T ← σ  zTT  (teacher probabilities)
(student probabilities)
p̂S ← σ zTS


LKD = α Lhard + (1 − α) T 2 KL p̂T p̂S
Mstud ← arg min LKD (Mstud , Dtrain )
return Mstud
EVALUATION(Mteach , Mstud , Dtest )
Evaluate both models on Dtest (ACC, F1, etc.)
return Performance metrics

3) Model Complexity: Model complexity is evaluated
based on the following criteria: number of parameters, where
fewer parameters reduce computational overhead; memory
footprint, as a smaller size enables deployment on resourceconstrained devices; and inference time, since faster inference
is crucial for real-time environments.
4) Explainable AI: DL models are often complex and uninterpretable, making it challenging to understand and interpret
their behavior. To address this, SHapley Additive Explanations
(SHAP) have been utilized in this study. SHAP facilitates the
interpretation of the knowledge transfer process from a larger
“teacher” model to a smaller “student” model.

III. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, the results are presented for the teacher and
student models. Both models are trained on 50 epochs with
the Adam optimizer (learning rate 10−4 ) and a batch size
of 32. These parameters are selected via Keras Tuner, which
automates hyperparameter optimization. Fig. 5(d) depicts the
training curves for both models over epochs.
A. Performance Evaluation
The teacher model, as shown in Table I, achieves an overall
accuracy of 99.88%, and its confusion matrix is shown in
Fig. 6(a), which shows the numbers of correctly predicted
samples. Its macro-average precision, recall, and F1-score
values indicate balanced performance across all attack classes,
including benign traffic. The results of Cohen’s Kappa (0.98)
and MCC (0.98) exhibit an overall best performance between
predicted and true labels, highlighting model’s reliability and
validates its performance on unseen data. In comparison,
the student Model (as given in Table II) shows a minor

UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 4.

Deep learning model architecture for teacher and student frameworks.

Fig. 5.

Training and validation curves for utilized DL models. (a) Teacher Model. (b) Student Model.

12161

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE S TUDENT M ODEL ON N-BA I OT
DATASET

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE T EACHER M ODEL ON CIC-IDS 2023
DATASET

difference in accuracy (i.e., 99.87%) compared to the teacher
model, confirming that much of the trained teacher model
knowledge has been transferred effectively through the KD
process. The corresponding confusion matrix is shown in
Fig. 6(b).
Whereas, for the CIC IDS 2023 dataset, the teacher model
achieves an overall accuracy of 98.95% (as given in Table III)

across five classes: DDoS, DoS, Benign, Other Attacks,
and Reconnaissance. Table III indicates better scores for
precision, recall, and F1-scores among all classes, with most
values exceeding 0.98. Benign and Reconnaissance categories
demonstrate especially strong performance, each surpassing
0.99 in precision, recall, and F1-score. Its confusion matrix
has been shown in Fig. 6(c). However, the student model (as
given in Table IV) achieves an overall accuracy of 98.71%
with precision and F1-scores generally ranging from 0.98
to 0.99. Despite a reduced architecture, Cohen’s Kappa and
MCC values, both at 0.97, further indicate best performance

12162

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Confusion matrices of teacher and student models on N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 test sets.

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF THE S TUDENT M ODEL ON CIC-IDS 2023
DATASET

of model between the predicted and true labels, confirming
the model’s reliability. Its confusion matrix has been shown
in Fig. 6(d).

To demonstrate the statistical reliability of obtained results,
confidence intervals (CIs) of the trained models with 95%
CIs have been computed. For the N-BaIoT dataset (22,000
test samples), the teacher model achieved a CI of [99.86%,
99.90%], while the student model achieved [99.85%, 99.89%].
On the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset (85,915 test samples), the
teacher model yielded a CI of [98.88%, 99.03%], whereas
the student model attained [98.63%, 98.79%]. These intervals
reflect the reliability due to large sample sizes and support the
robustness of reported performance metrics.
Moreover, to assess the model’s generalizability, a 5-fold
cross-validation on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS2023 datasets
has been performed. Across all folds, the teacher model
achieved an average accuracy of 99.89% ± 0.02% ±0.07% on
N-BaIoT and 98.94% ± 0.10% ± 0.21% on CIC-IDS2023;

UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION

TABLE V
L AYER -W ISE I NFERENCE T IMES OF T EACHER AND S TUDENT M ODELS

12163

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ODEL (N O KD) AND KD S TUDENT M ODEL
(∼ 120K PARAMETERS )

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON W ITH E XISTING S TUDIES

TABLE VI
M ODEL S IZES AND PARAMETER C OUNTS OF T EACHER
AND S TUDENT M ODELS

D. Comparative Analysis

the student model maintained competitive results of 99.85% ±
0.02% ± 0.05% and 98.70% ± 0.12% ± 0.09%, respectively.
To evaluate robustness against unseen threats, small test set
(not utilized in the training folds) has been used. Both models
demonstrated an accuracy over (over 98%), with only a
marginal performance drop.

To further highlight the advantages of utilized KD approach
beyond mere complexity reduction, we conducted additional
experiments comparing the utilized KD student model to a
tuned baseline model of similar size (i.e., approximately 120k
parameters). The baseline model was trained from scratch
without teacher logits. Both models were assessed using
the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets, under identical
training conditions. Table VII summarizes the key results
and shows that the student model outperformed the baseline
model. Furthermore, the comparison Table VIII shows that
KD yields a compact student network that attains 99.88%
and 99.87% accuracy on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023
datasets, respectively, overtaking earlier architectures such as
SkipGateNet, Deep Forest, and Deep Stack.
E. Computational Complexity on Edge Device

B. Model Size
Ensuring a lightweight architecture is important for deploying DL models on consumer electronics. Table VI highlights
the parameter counts and layer configurations for both the
teacher and student models. Despite sharing similar architectural components, the student model reduces the total number
of parameters from approximately 263k to 120k and the model
size from 1.00 MB to 471.67 KB. This parameter reduction
enables faster inference and lower resource consumption.

To illustrate real-world feasibility, both the teacher and
student models have been deployed on a mobile device
having 2 GB of RAM, a Snapdragon680 octa-core processor
(max 2.40 GHz), and OS version 1.0.8.0.TGCMIXM. Using a
TensorFlow Lite (TFLite) application for on-device inference,
it has been observed that the teacher model required an average
of 48 ms per inference and occupied 1.00 MB of storage.
In contrast, the distilled student model achieved a reduced
inference time of 34 ms and consumed a size of only 471.67
KB. This reduction in latency and memory highlights the
student model’s suitability for resource-constrained scenarios.

C. Inference Time
The teacher model takes a total of 48.42 ms for a single
forward pass, which averages to 3.72 ms per layer. Whereas,
the student model exhibits a reduced inference times of
34.39 ms with an average of 3.44 ms per layer. Table V
presents the inference times for both models, reflecting the
impact of model complexity.

F. Explainable AI
In order to provide interpretability for both the teacher and
student models, the SHAP technique has been utilized. Fig. 7
shows the resulting SHAP summary plots for the student
model on the N-BaIoT dataset. Each horizontal “violin” corresponds to one feature, with the width of the violin indicating

12164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 7. SHAP summary plot for the student model. The color gradient from
blue (low) to red (high) reflects each feature’s original value range.

how the SHAP values are distributed across all test samples.
A positive SHAP value indicates that the feature increases the
predicted probability of the target class, whereas a negative
value decreases it. The farther from zero, the stronger the
influence on the prediction.
IV. C ONCLUSION
This study demonstrated and proposed a Knowledge
Distillation (KD)-based lightweight and efficient deep learning
(DL) model for cyberattack detection in consumer electronics.
The distilled student model achieved high performance, with
accuracies of 99.87% on the N-BaIoT dataset and 98.71%
on the CIC-IDS 2023 dataset, and F1-scores exceeding 0.98
across multiple attack classes. The model significantly reduced
the architectural complexity, lowering the number of trainable
parameters from approximately 263k to 120k, decreasing
model size from 1.00 MB to 471.67 KB, and reducing
average inference time from around 48 ms to 34 ms. For
interpretability, SHAP-based explainable AI technique was
utilized, revealing that the student model preserved key feature
attributions learned by the teacher model. This balance of
high accuracy, reduced computational cost, and interpretability
highlights the effectiveness and scalability of KD for secure
and practical intrusion detection in resource-constrained edge
environments.

[4] M. Umair, W.-H. Tan, and Y.-L. Foo, “Dynamic federated learning
aggregation for enhanced intrusion detection in IoT attacks,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2024, pp. 524–529.
[5] G. ALMahadin et al., “VANET network traffic anomaly detection using
GRU-based deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4548–4555, Feb. 2024.
[6] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[7] M. S. Alshehri, J. Ahmad, S. Almakdi, M. A. Qathrady, Y. Y. Ghadi,
and W. J. Buchanan, “SkipGateNet: A lightweight CNN-LSTM hybrid
model with learnable skip connections for efficient botnet attack detection in IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 35521–35538, 2024.
[8] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
Nov. 2023.
[9] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep
forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for
consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2,
pp. 4976–4987, May 2024.
[10] J. K. Samriya, S. Kumar, M. Kumar, H. Wu, and S. S. Gill, “Machine
learning-based network intrusion detection optimization for cloud computing environments,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4,
pp. 7449–7460, Nov. 2024.
[11] F. Ullah, G. Srivastava, S. Ullah, K. Yoshigoe, and Y. Zhao, “NIDS-VSB:
Network intrusion detection system for VANET using spark-based big
data optimization and transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1798–1809, Feb. 2024.
[12] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-f. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion
detection model based on CNN and knowledge distillation,” Appl. Soft
Comput., vol. 165, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 112118.
[13] M. A. Yagiz, P. MohajerAnsari, M. D. Pesé, and P. Goktas,
“Transforming in-vehicle network intrusion detection: VAE-based
knowledge distillation meets explainable AI,” in Proc. 6th Workshop
CPS&IoT Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 93–103.
[14] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, J. Prieto, A. G. Arrieta, and J. M. Corchado,
“Unleashing the potential of knowledge distillation for IoT traffic
classification,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw., vol. 2,
pp. 221–239, 2024.
[15] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018.
[16] Y. Meidan et al., 2018, “Detection_of_IoT_botnet_attacks_N_BaIoT,”
Dataset, UCI Mach. Learn. Reposit., doi: 10.24432/C5RC8J.
[Online].
Available:
https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/442/
detection+of+iot+botnet+attacks+n+baiot
[17] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time Dataset and benchmark for
large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, p. 5941,
2023.
[18] (Can. Inst. Cybersecur., Fredericton, NB, Canada). CIC IoT Dataset.
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iotdataset2023.html
[19] Y. Gu, L. Dong, F. Wei, and M. Huang, “MiniLLM: Knowledge
distillation of large language models,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2024, pp. 1–24. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=5h0qf7IBZZ

R EFERENCES
[1] S. Gnanavendan et al., “Challenges, solutions and future trends in EVtechnology: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 17242–17260, 2024.
[2] M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. P. Singh, and A. K. Sinha, “Digital economy to
improve the culture of industry 4.0: A study on features, implementation
and challenges,” Green Technol. Sustainabil., vol. 2, no. 2, 2024,
Art. no. 100083.
[3] D. Muhammed, E. Ahvar, S. Ahvar, M. Trocan, M.-J. Montpetit, and
R. Ehsani, “Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) for smart agriculture:
A review of architectures, technologies and solutions,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 228, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103905.

Muhammad Umair (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from HITEC University, Taxila, Pakistan,
and the master’s degree from Multimedia University,
Malaysia. He received the Graduate Research
Assistantship with Multimedia University, for his
master’s degree. His research interests include
machine learning, deep learning, and federated
learning.

UMAIR et al.: KD FOR LIGHTWEIGHT AND EXPLAINABLE INTRUSION DETECTION

Muhammad Shahbaz Khan (Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in electronics and electrical
engineering from NFC IET, Multan, in 2011, and the
M.S. degree in electronics and electrical engineering
from HITEC University, Taxila, Pakistan, in 2015.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyber
security and artificial intelligence with the School of
Computing, Engineering and the Built Environment,
Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, U.K. He
is an experienced academic and researcher with
more than ten years of experience in teaching and
research. He has served as a Lecturer with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, HITEC University for more than eight years. His research
interests include chaotic systems, chaotic image encryption, post-quantum
cryptography, intrusion detection, and AI for cyber security and healthcare.
Wajdan Al Malwi received the B.S. degree in information systems from King
Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia, in 2011, the M.S. degree in computer
science and information systems from the University of Michigan, Flint, USA,
in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree in computing science with concentration on
human computer interaction from the University of Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K.,
in 2024. Her areas of interest are human computer interaction, privacy, and
information security.

12165

Faisal Saeed received the B.Sc. degree in computers (information technology) from Cairo University,
Egypt, in 2005, and the M.Sc. degree in information
technology management and the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia (UTM), Malaysia, in 2010 and 2013,
respectively. He is an Associate Professor with
the Computer Science Department, Birmingham
City University. He is leading the M.Sc. Artificial
Intelligence course, Research Summer School, and
AI Research Cluster the Department. Previously, he
worked as an Assistant and an Associate Professor with the Information
Systems Department, Taibah University, Saudi Arabia, from 2017 to 2021,
and as a Senior Lecturer with the Information Systems Department, Faculty of
Computing, UTM from 2014 to 2017. His research interests include data mining, artificial intelligence, machine learning, information retrieval, and health
informatics. He has an outstanding publication record in prestigious, high–
impact journals and has presented papers at several international conferences.
Moreover, he has secured several research funds from different funders in
Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, and U.K. He served as the General Chair of IRICT,
ICACIN, ICOICE, and ICOTEN International Conferences, and a guest editor
of several indexed Journals.

Fatima Asiri received the bachelor’s degree in information systems from King
Khalid University, Saudi Arabia, the master’s degree in information systems
from the University of Michigan, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Southampton, U.K., in 2021. She is currently
an Assistant Professor with the College of Computer Science and Information
Systems, King Khalid University. Her research interests include information
security, information privacy, Internet of Things, data analytics, and human–
computer interaction.
Ibtehal Nafea received the B.Sc. degree in computer science from the
Department of Computer Science, King Abdul-Aziz University, Saudi Arabia,
Jeddah, in 2002, the M.Sc. degree in software engineering from the School
of Computing, Informatics and Media, University of Bradford, Bradford,
U.K., in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the School of
Computing, Informatics and Media, University of Bradford in 2012. She is
an Associate Professor with the Computer Science Department, College of
Computer Science and Engineering, Taibah University. Her work has been
published in Journal of Network and Computer Applications and International
Journal of Parallel Programming. She is also a reviewer of Advances in
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, the Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience Special Issue, and the Journal of
Systems and Software. She is a member of artificial intelligent research
group and scientific research unit in Taibah University. She was a Technical
Committee Member in WiDS Medina 2020 and IRICT 2020. She participated
in many other conferences.

Jawad Ahmad (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
an experienced researcher with more than ten years
of cutting-edge research and teaching experience in
prestigious institutes, including Edinburgh Napier
University, U.K.; Glasgow Caledonian University,
U.K.; Hongik University, South Korea; and HITEC
University Taxila, Pakistan. He has taught various
courses both at undergraduate and postgraduate
levels during his career. He has coauthored more
than 100 research papers in international journals
and peer-reviewed international conference proceedings. His research interests include cybersecurity, multimedia encryption,
and machine learning. He regularly organizes timely special sessions and
workshops for several flagship IEEE conferences. He is an invited reviewer
of numerous world-leading high-impact journals (reviewed more than 100
journal articles to date).