16648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Learning to Detect Industrial Time-Series
Anomalies From Imputation Consistency
With Sparse Observations
Zhen Zhang , Yongming Han , Member, IEEE, and Zhiqiang Geng

Abstract—Time-series anomaly detection plays an important
role in ensuring industrial safety. Currently, many anomaly detection methods mainly target complete time series and ignore the
widespread problem of data missing in the real world. Therefore,
this article proposes a novel anomaly detection method for time
series with sparse observations based on imputation consistency
using a mixture of patch information inference network (MoPIN).
Due to the robustness of the imputation method modeling to
the random mask, different imputed series of the same normal
time series with different random masks should have consistency.
Then, a novel imputation consistency is used to detect anomalies
in sparse observation series. Moreover, the MoPIN imputes series
by a two-step imputation and multiscale modeling of patch
information. Meanwhile, the similarity of imputed series under
different masks is used to measure imputation consistency, which
well constructs the relationship between sparse observation series
and anomaly scores. Finally, the MoPIN can accurately detect
anomalies while imputing series. Extensive experiments on four
real-world benchmarks in different domains of imputation and
anomaly detection tasks and a real fluid catalytic cracking
(FCC) process case demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Specifically, the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mean
absolute error (MAE) relative improvement in imputation and
3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly detection.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, patch, process industry,
sparse observation, time series.

Abbreviation
X, T , and C
X o and X m
∆, O, and L
l, s, and n
S , S t , and S s

N OMENCLATURE
Expansion
Time series and its length and
dimension.
Sets of observed values and missing
values of X.
Sampling interval, observation, and
delay matrix, respectively.
Length, step size, and the number of
patches, respectively.
Input series of the PIML and its trend
and seasonal components, respectively.

Received 24 August 2024; revised 19 January 2025; accepted 3 May 2025.
Date of publication 21 May 2025; date of current version 4 September 2025.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62422303 and Grant 62373035. (Corresponding authors:
Yongming Han; Zhiqiang Geng.)
The authors are with the College of Information Science and Technology,
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China, and also
with the Engineering Research Center of Intelligent PSE, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: zhang zhen@buct.edu.cn;
hanym@mail.buct.edu.cn; gengzhiqiang@mail.buct.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3568019

W and b
d and h
Ȟ, Ĥ, H́, and H̀
Ž, Ẑ, Ź, and Z̀
Z̄
U and V
θ
R, X R , OR , and LR
C I and λ
X Imp and X Rec
LStage1 and LStage2

Weight matrix and bias vector,
respectively.
Embedding and encoder dimension,
respectively.
Input of encoders.
Output of encoders.
Spatiotemporal mixture feature.
Output of PIML and PIMM,
respectively.
All parameters of the MoPIN.
Random mask matrix and time series
and its corresponding observation and
delay matrix.
Imputation consistency constraint and
coefficient.
Imputation and reconstruction series,
respectively.
Optimization target of two stages.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the development of industrial technologies, the
number of industrial devices is increasing. The occurrence of device anomalies poses a serious threat to industrial
safety [1]. Accurate status monitoring of these devices plays
an important role in ensuring industrial production safety
and improving production efficiency [2]. However, with a
large number of devices, it is difficult to monitor manually.
Therefore, it is of practical significance to achieve accurate
and timely status monitoring through anomaly detection algorithms. Time series exist in various industrial scenarios and are
widely used in industrial anomaly detection, including process
industries, spacecrafts, and industrial servers. However, due to
the rarity of actual anomalies and the professional nature of
identification, labeling data are time-consuming and difficult.
Therefore, unsupervised time-series anomaly detection is an
active research topic [3].
Currently, promising progress has been made in unsupervised time-series anomaly detection, including traditional
methods and deep learning-based methods [4]. Traditional
methods identify anomalies through spatial projection and
iterative partitioning. Deep learning-based methods use their
powerful feature extraction capabilities to distinguish anomalies [5]. However, traditional methods ignore the inherent
time dependencies, making it difficult to achieve accurate
anomaly detection. Therefore, deep learning-based methods

W

2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

have been widely studied, which are divided into predictionbased methods and reconstruction-based methods [1]. The
anomaly data are difficult to accurately predict or reconstruct by the model modeled by normal data, so time-series
anomaly detection methods based on recurrent neural network
(RNN) [6], graph neural network (GNN) [1], Transformer
[7], and many other basic neural networks have been
proposed to realize data representation and anomaly discovery through feature extraction of different dimensions and
capabilities.
However, current anomaly detection methods are all used
for complete time series, but in real industrial scenarios,
data missing due to reasons such as communication interruption and nonuniform sampling is very common [8].
At present, anomaly detection methods for time series with
sparse observations often adopt a two-stage approach, which
use imputation methods to impute series and then use anomaly
detection methods to detect anomalies [9]. Obviously, the
above approach breaks the connection between the data and the
target of anomaly detection, hindering to accurately identify
anomalies.
Benefiting from the advantages of deep learning methods
in deep modeling of time series, deep learning-based timeseries imputation methods have also achieved remarkable
results [10]. Therefore, deep learning methods are used to
jointly perform two tasks of imputation and anomaly detection
to achieve single-stage anomaly detection for sparse observation series. Time-series imputation methods use random
masking to train models since the imputation model should
be robust to random masks. Moreover, due to factors such as
the inherent time dependence and dimensional dependence in
time series, different random mask positions in a series will
not cause significant changes in its imputed series. Combined
with the idea of unsupervised time-series anomaly detection,
when only normal samples are used for modeling, anomaly
series are difficult to be accurately reconstructed or predicted.
Meanwhile, for normal time series, the imputed time series
with different masks should have consistency. And when the
series contains anomalies, since the model itself lacks the
ability to recover the anomaly data, it is difficult to achieve
robust imputation under different masks. Therefore, series with
anomalies will have lower imputation consistency than normal
series, which can be used to combine imputation and anomaly
detection tasks to achieve anomaly detection of time series
with sparse observations.
In addition, patch-based approach is used to implement
series modeling, which is mainly due to its powerful localglobal modeling capabilities [11]. In the field of time-series
analysis, the patch-based approach provides the time-series
model with partial frequency domain information at the input
level, enabling it to achieve better information extraction
and utilization [12]. Most recent patch-based works use the
channel-independence approach for series modeling, achieving
better results than channel-mixture modeling. However, this
approach ignores the feature relationship between channels
[13]. Therefore, this article will adopt the hybrid modeling
approach for patch information, integrating the advantages of
channel-independence modeling and mixture spatiotemporal
modeling.

16649

In summary, this article introduces a patch-based approach
to time-series anomaly detection with sparse observations and
proposes a mixture of patch information inference network
(MoPIN) for imputation consistency learning. Specifically, a
hybrid modeling approach based on channel independence and
mixture for patch information is proposed. In addition, a twostep time-series imputation framework is designed to achieve
accurate imputation. Furthermore, the imputation consistency
of different mask series is proposed and exploited for detecting anomalies. In particular, despite the complex design, all
branches of the MoPIN are implemented by simple multilayer
perceptions (MLPs). Finally, the MoPIN can fully integrate the
tasks of time-series imputation and anomaly detection, and
thus realize anomaly monitoring of time series with sparse
observations while performing imputation. The contributions
are summarized as follows.
1) This article proposes a novel MoPIN to realize timeseries modeling by making full use of the information
of time-series patches.
2) The MoPIN not only accurately imputes series, but
also uses the imputation consistency to achieve anomaly
detection of time series with sparse observations, thus
avoiding the separation between data and tasks.
3) Extensive experiments on four real-world benchmarks in
different fields of series imputation and anomaly detection and a real chemical production application case
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Specifically, the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mean
square error (mse) relative improvement in imputation and 3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly
detection.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
reviews the related work. Section III introduces the proposed
MoPIN method. Section IV analyzes the performance of the
MoPIN through extensive experiments. Section V verifies the
application effect of the MoPIN using an actual industrial case.
Section VI draws the conclusions of this article.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section reviews recent related works of time-series
anomaly detection and imputation. And also, the patch-based
time-series modeling methods are reviewed.
A. Unsupervised Time-Series Anomaly Detection
Due to the scarcity of data labels, traditional unsupervised
methods often score data points at a timestamp based on
density or distance. The typical method, principal component
analysis (PCA) [14], achieves anomaly identification by projecting data points into a low-dimensional space and using
statistics as its distance measure [15]. The isolation forest (IF)
[5] divided the data space through iterative partitioning and
calculated the local density of data points to identify anomalies. The recent copula-based outlier detection (COPOD)
method [16] and the empirical cumulative distribution-based
outlier detection (ECOD) method [17] determined the anomalies by calculating the probability density of data points.
However, although traditional methods can achieve data
anomaly detection faster, they only consider the information of

16650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

data points at a single timestamp and ignore the inherent timedependent characteristics, which hinders accurate anomaly
detection.
Benefiting from the powerful feature extraction capability
of deep learning, Zong et al. [18] combined the traditional
density-based method with the deep model and proposed
the deep autoencoder Gaussian mixture model (DAGMM).
However, it still does not consider the data characteristics
in the time dimension. Recent deep learning-based methods
further take the characteristics of the time dimension into
consideration and achieve anomaly detection through series
prediction or reconstruction errors. In terms of predictionbased methods, Hundman et al. [6] used a long-short term
memory (LSTM) network to build a time-series model and
detected anomalies through prediction errors. Chen et al. [3]
and Zhang et al. [1] used the GNN to construct the graph
structure with a Transformer for anomaly detection (GTA)
and the graph structure change-based anomaly detection
method (GSC-MAD), and also used prediction errors to
detect and locate anomalies. Meanwhile, reconstructionbased methods have also been fully developed. Based on
the widely used autoencoder, Audibert et al. [19] and
Tuli et al. [7] adopted adversarial training to construct the
unsupervised anomaly detection (USAD) method and the
Transformer-based anomaly detection (TranAD) method,
respectively. Wu et al. [20] transformed the series into
two dimensions and used a typical network framework for
processing 2-D data to extract the frequency-periodic features
of the data, reconstructed the series, and used the error to
detect anomalies. In addition, Han et al. [21] proposed a selfsupervised memory enhanced deep clustering (SMEL) method
combining temporal dimension information autoencoder and
clustering idea to detect anomalies in an actual wastewater
treatment process. Zhou et al. [22] also detected anomalies
using clustering idea and temporal information extraction
based on dynamic graph and entity-aware normalizing
technologies.
However, the above methods are all studied for complete
series. For series with missing values, these methods need to
fill in the series before detection, which makes it impossible to
directly connect the data and the task, and the performance of
anomaly detection is directly affected by the performance of
imputation, which hinders the performance of anomaly detection [9]. Recently, Xiao and Fan [23] integrated imputation
and anomaly detection process using an end-to-end framework (ImAD) to impute incomplete anomaly data and detect
anomalies based on well-designed pseudo-abnormal samples.
Different from the above method, this article is characterized
by a novel imputation consistency-based anomaly detection
condition, which jointly designs the time-series model for
anomaly detection and imputation tasks to learn a direct
connection between data and anomaly scores.
B. Time-Series Imputation
In real-world scenarios, data missing is a common problem and can be solved by the imputation method, which
is divided into traditional methods and deep learning-based
methods [24]. Traditional methods impute missing values by
copying the observation around it or using statistical indicators

of series [25]. The classic mean imputation method uses the
mean of the series to fill in the missing values. In addition, some works adopt the iterative calculation approaches
including soft threshold singular value decomposition, matrix
decomposition, and random forest to propose imputation
methods such as soft imputation (SoftImpute) [26], matrix factorization imputation (MatrixFactorization) [27], and missing
forest (MissForest) [28]. However, the above methods have the
problem of strong assumptions about missing values, which
introduces strong biases in imputed series.
Recently, deep learning-based imputation methods have
achieved promising progress, which automatically mines the
inherent information in series through deep representation
and data recovery, without considering the strong assumptions
required by traditional methods. Some researchers used bidirectional RNN and hidden layer state propagation to propose
a bidirectional recurrent imputation method for time series
(BRITS) [29] and multidirectional RNN (M-RNN) [30] to fill
in missing values, respectively. Marisca et al. [31] proposed
a novel GNN-based method with the spatiotemporal point
inference network (SPIN), which imputed missing values by
learning the spatiotemporal graph representation of sparse
data. In addition, the TimesNet [20] was a general timeseries analysis tool that used convolutional neural networks
to extract the period-frequency information of series and
impute in missing values. Du et al. [10] adopted the diagonal mask self-attention mechanism and combined it with
weighted combination design to propose a two-step selfattention mechanism-based imputation method for time series
(SAITS). Yuan et al. [8] proposed the attention-based interval
aided network (AIA-Net) combining the self-attention mechanism with the RNN, which was used for soft measurement of a
hydrocracking process. Pan et al. [32] combined data statistics
and autoencoders to design an adaptive learning strategy for
proposing the adaptive-learned median-filled deep autoencoder
(AM-DAE) in the soft sensor of a hydrocracking device.
The above methods are all designed for imputation, which is
subject to achieve better downstream tasks such as classification and prediction. However, as aforementioned, this two-step
approach leads to a gap between the data and downstream
tasks, making the performance of downstream tasks directly
affected by imputation. In order to improve the performance of
downstream tasks, Che et al. [33] used gated recurrent units to
extract features of series with missing values, while allowing
the network to directly participate in the calculation of classification task, thereby improving the accuracy of classification
tasks. Miao et al. [24] introduced additional classifiers in the
generative adversarial network (GAN) used for data imputation, and improved the classification performance of time
series with missing values through semi-supervised learning.
Different from the above methods, this article uses inherent
imputation consistency in the time-series imputation task to
detect anomalies and closely links the relationship between
data and anomaly detection task in the joint optimization of
the two tasks.
C. Patch-Based Time-Series Method
Recently, patch-based methods have shown great capabilities in the field of time-series analysis. Motivated by

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

16651

Fig. 1. Time series with complete and sparse observations.

natural language processing, Nie et al. [11] divided time
series into patches, arguing that each patch could be treated
as a word, and proposed the patch time-series Transformer
method (PatchTST) for long-term time-series forecasting.
Subsequently, a wide range of patch-based methods were
proposed. Chen et al. [12] extracted interpatch and intrapatch
features based on patch segmentation, combined temporal
resolution and distance information for multiscale modeling,
and proposed multiscale Transformers with adaptive pathway
(Pathformer) for long-term series forecasting. In time-series
anomaly detection, Yang et al. [4] proposed a dual-branch
attention structure based on patchwise and in-patch to learn the
permutation invariant representation of series, and learned the
dual-branch difference representation under the constraint of
contrastive loss to perform anomaly detection. However, under
the advantage of channel independence modeling, the above
methods ignore the relationship between series channels.
Unlike the previous usage of patches, the proposed MoPIN
utilizes different advantages of channel independence modeling and spatiotemporal mixture modeling after time-series
patching, and constructs a time-series model by independent
modeling and result fusion to achieve full utilization of
information.
III. M ETHOD
For ease of understanding, this section describes the problem definition. Then, the patch information mixture module
(PIMM), which is the core module of the MoPIN is introduced.
Furthermore, the overall design of the MoPIN is described.
Finally, imputation consistency and optimization objectives are
detailed.
A. Problem Definition
For a system with C variables uniformly sampled over time,
the observation series X ∈ RT ×C over a time period of length
T is a full observation time series. If values of a variable
are not observed within time T, the observation series X =
{X o , X m } is a time series with sparse observations, where X o
and X m denote the sets of observed values and missing values,
respectively. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of a time series of
complete and sparse observations containing four variables.
In the modeling of time series with sparse observations, two
auxiliary matrices are introduced to utilize the information
contained in the data. The first is the observation matrix
O ∈ RT ×C , which indicates whether the observation is missing
at a timestamp t, and the second is the delay matrix L ∈ RT ×C ,

Fig. 2. Architecture of the PIMM.

which indicates the time interval between the time of the
latest historical observation and the current time t. Suppose
sampling interval is ∆, matrices O and L can be calculated by
the following equations:
(
1, if xt,c is not missing
Ot,c =
(1)
0, otherwise
8
ˆ
if t = 1
<0,
Lt,c = ∆,
(2)
if t > 1 and Ot−1,c = 1
ˆ
:L
+
∆,
if
t
>
1
and
O
=
0.
t−1,c
t−1,c
And the USAD for time series with sparse observations
is to use {X, O, L} to determine whether the system status at
timestamp t is anomalous or not without labels.
B. Patch Information Mixture Module
1) Multiscale Modeling: The effectiveness of multiscale
modeling in time-series analysis has been widely verified [20].
Therefore, multiscale modeling is introduced based on the
patch size in the PIMM, as shown in Fig. 2, which consists of
N independent patch information mixture layers (PIMLs), each
of which uses patch information of different scales. Finally, the
output of the PIMM is obtained by weighting the calculation
results of each layer.
Specifically, given the patch size l and the step size s,
a time series can be divided into different overlapping or
nonoverlapping patch series, as shown in Fig. 3. In this way,
the information about different scales of the original series
can be extracted from different patch series. In particular, after
multiscale patch division, the positional relationship between
missing values and observations in the series can be wellconnected. Therefore, the MoPIN can impute missing values
well through utilizing local information around them.
In each PIML, patch division is performed on the input
series S and the corresponding delay matrix L. The dimension
size of S and L after division is Rl×n×C , where n = d((T −
l)/s)e + 1 denotes the number of the patch in each channel.

16652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. Multiscale patch division.

where W1 ∈ Rd×h and W2 ∈ Rh×d are the weights, b1 ∈ Rh×1
and b2 ∈ Rd×1 are the bias terms, and H and Z with the
same dimension denote the input and output of the encoder,
respectively. And d and h denote the embedding dimension and
the hidden layer dimension of the MLP, respectively. By transforming the dimension of the input series S, the interpatch,
intrapatch, temporal, and spatial encoders can extract the
corresponding information Z = {Ž, Ẑ, Ź, Z̀} from the embedding H = {Ȟ, Ĥ, H́, H̀} with dimensions of RC×l×d , RC×n×d ,
Rn×l×d , and Rn×C×d . In addition, for the spatiotemporal mixture encoding, spatiotemporal mixture feature Z̄ ∈ RC×n×l can
be calculated by the following equation:
Z̄ = Transpose(Z̀ × Ź T )

(4)

where Transpose(·) is the dimension permutation operation.
Then, Ź, Z̀, and Z̄ are decoded and the output of the nth PIML
Un ∈ RC×T can be calculated by the following equation:
Un = Ž × W̌D + Ẑ × ŴD + Z̄ × W̄D

Fig. 4. MLP encoder.

Then, the PIML encodes S and L by channel-independence
encoding and channel-mixture encoding, respectively.
2) Channel Independence and Mixture Encoding: In previous works, both channel-independence modeling [11] and
channel-mixture spatiotemporal modeling [1] were found to be
beneficial for time-series analysis. And some proposed serial
modeling approaches [13] using both of above approaches may
lead to information leakage between channels during channelwise modeling. Therefore, the MoPIN blends the advantages of
the two modeling approaches in a parallel manner. In addition,
the MoPIN directly decodes the results encoded by each
encoder and then fuses them, so the MoPIN can fully utilize
the advantages of both modeling approaches. Specifically:
1) Channel independence encoding. This encoding module
encodes the information within the patch (intrapatch)
and between patches (interpatch) separately. Among
them, the interpatch encoder encodes the global granularity information between different patches, and the
intrapatch encoder encodes the temporal fine-grained
information between different timestamps in the patch
of a single channel.
2) Channel mixture encoding. This encoding module
encodes the temporal and spatial information of the
patch separately and fuses them. In detail, the temporal
and spatial encoders encode the relationships between
the time and channel dimensions of the patch, separately.
All of the four encoders are achieved by the MLPs with the
same structure as shown in Fig. 4 and calculated in different
dimensions to extract the multiscale information, which can
be calculated by the following equation:
Z = LayerNorm(Dropout(LeakyReLU(H × W1 + b1 )
× W2 + b2 ))
(3)

(5)

where W̌D ∈ Rl×d×T , ŴD ∈ Rn×d×T , and W̄D ∈ Rn×l×T are
the weights of the decoder.
3) Embedding: For different encoders, the inputs with different dimensions are embedded into the same dimension for
calculation via linear projection. Meanwhile, the delay matrix
as auxiliary information is embedded to assist imputation.
Different from previous methods that also use delay information, the MoPIN embeds it through learnable parameters rather
than using it by concatenation. In this way, the delay matrix
can make the model pay attention to its neighboring local
observations during imputation and avoid mutations caused by
concatenation. In addition, for the two encoders that extract
temporal granularity information, the positional encoding of
the series is also embedded. Therefore, in addition to the
positional encoding, the embedding H can be calculated by
the following equation:
H = Transpose(S ) × WS + Transpose(L) × WL

(6)

where WS and WL are the weights of the embedding
calculation.
4) Adaptive Aggregate: Motivated by the TimesNet [19],
it can be believed that patches of different scales can better
extract different frequency-period features of the series. Therefore, the frequency amplitude calculated by the fast Fourier
transform is used as the weight of the scale corresponding
to different patch sizes, and performs adaptive aggregation
on the output of the PIML. For N PIMLs, the patch size
set P = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lN } and the output set of PIMLs U =
{U1 , U2 , . . . , U N }, the output of the PIMM V can be calculated
by the following equations:
A = |FFT(S )|
˚
WA = w1A , w2A , . . . , wNA = AP
V = U × WA

(7)
(8)
(9)

where FFT(·) denotes the fast Fourier transform and WA ∈
RN×1 is the weight vector.

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

16653

the following equation:
X

Rm

P Ro
X :, j
.
i, j = P R
O :, j

(11)

Compared with zero-imputation, this can better utilize the
statistical information in series and avoid meaningless mutations caused by zero-imputation, which is very important for
anomaly detection tasks. In addition, the series decomposition
module uses global average pooling to extract the trend component, and the rest is considered as the seasonal component,
which can be calculated by the following equations:
Fig. 5. (a) Overview of the MoPIN. (b) Structure of the imputed module.

S t = AvgPool(Pad(S ))
Ss = S − St

(12)
(13)

where S, S t , and S s denote the input series, trend, and seasonal
component, respectively. The AvgPool(·) and Pad(·) are the
global average pooling and padding operations, respectively.

C. MoPIN
Fig. 5(a) shows the overall structure of the MoPIN. Overall,
the MoPIN achieves anomaly detection while imputing time
series. Different from the current two-stage anomaly detection
method for time series with sparse observations, the two stages
of the MoPIN are the two stages of model construction.
In the first stage, the pretrained model F(X; θpre ) with
parameters θpre is obtained through a two-step imputation
only with the constraint of the imputation task. Specifically,
the second-step imputation is a modification of the first-step
imputation result by the same imputation module with shared
parameters. In the second stage, the imputation consistency
is used to constrain the model and the model F(X; θtune ) with
updated parameters θtune is trained, which is suitable for the
anomaly detection task. Through the two-stage design, the
MoPIN closely links the imputation and anomaly detection
tasks, while directly calculate anomaly scores during the
imputation process without the need for additional anomaly
detection methods.
In both stages, the MoPIN performs a random mask operation on time series to facilitate the training of the imputation
and the calculation of imputation consistency. The random
mask operation can be calculated as
XR = O

(1 − R)

X

(10)

where R ∈ RT ×C = {0, 1} denotes the random mask matrix, in
m
o
which 1 means the value is masked. And X R = {X R , X R } is
the masked series and the corresponding observation matrix
OR and delay matrix LR are calculated by (1) and (2), respectively. And the is the elementwise multiply. The mask ratio
is r = (kRk1 /(T × C)).
At any stage, the imputed module contains all the forward
propagation calculations, and its overall structure is shown in
Fig. 5(b). It decomposes the series into trend and seasonal
components through a series decomposition module and uses,
respectively, two different PIMMs to build decomposed series
models, and then merged their results to achieve imputation
and reconstruction. Here, imputation and reconstruction corm
o
respond to missing values X R and observed values X R ,
respectively. In addition, in the first step, the mean of the
o
series is used to initialize X R , which can be calculated by

D. Imputation Consistency
As analyzed in the Introduction, the training of imputation models is often achieved through the recovery of
random masked values. For a robust imputation model, different random masks usually do not cause huge changes in
imputed values, which is also the premise of imputation model
training. However, referring to the idea of unsupervised timeseries anomaly detection, intuitively, when the series contains
anomalies, different random masks will lead to large differences between the imputed series. This is because anomalies
destroy the robustness of the proposed model. Therefore, the
MoPIN exploits this to detect anomalies.
Specifically, the MoPIN measures the imputation consistency of two imputed series by the mse and distribution
similarity between them. On the one hand, the mse is an
intuitive measure of the consistency of the imputation results.
On the other hand, according to the work of Miao et al.
[24], even with a small mse, the distribution of the imputed
series may be significantly different from the original series.
Therefore, the distributional similarity of the two imputed
series is incorporated as a constraint. Assume that the two
random mask series of the time series X are X̃ and Ẍ, and the
corresponding imputed series are X̃ Imp and Ẍ Imp . Then, the
imputation consistency C I is defined as follows:
2

C I = (1 − λ) X̃ Imp − Ẍ Imp 2

1
(14)
+ λ DKL (X̃ Imp kẌ Imp ) + DKL Ẍ Imp kX̃ Imp
2
P
where DKL (pkq) = − p ln(p/q) denotes the KullbackLeibler divergence, which is used to measure the distribution similarity of two series. And λ denotes the balance
hyperparameter. The MoPIN uses the calculated imputation
consistency as the anomaly score and compares it with a
predefined threshold for anomaly detection.
E. Optimization
According to different objectives of the two stages of the
MoPIN, different optimization functions are designed.
Stage 1: The goal of the first stage is to enable the MoPIN
to effectively impute missing values. Therefore, according to

16654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

TABLE I
D ETAILS OF B ENCHMARKS

the two-step imputation process, the following optimization
function is designed. Suppose that the output of the imputation
module is Y, then for observed values and missing values, the
imputed series X Imp and the reconstructed sequence X Rec can
be obtained, respectively,
X Imp = Y
X

Rec

=Y

(1 − OR ) + X R

OR

(15)

O .
R

(16)

Then, for the first step, the MoPIN uses L2 loss to optimize
both reconstruction and imputation tasks, and its optimization
1
target LStage1
is shown in the following equation:
1
LStage1
=



Imp

X1

−X



2

R

2

2

+ X1Rec − X R 2

(17)

Imp

where X1 and X1Rec are the imputed and reconstructed series
for the first step. Then, for the second step, only the imputed
2
series is constrained, and the optimization target LStage1
is
shown in the following equation:


2
Imp
2
LStage1
= X2 − X
R
(18)
2

Imp
where X2 is the second imputed series. Hence, the optimization target of the first stage is shown in the following equation:
1
2
LStage1 = LStage1
+ LStage1
.

(19)

Stage 2: For the second stage, the imputation consistency
is directly used as the optimization objective LStage2
LStage2 = C I .

(20)

Therefore, the MoPIN can achieve two tasks: imputation
and anomaly detection. For the imputation, the MoPIN is
optimized through the LStage1 . For the anomaly detection, the
MoPIN uses LStage1 as the target and optimizes it a certain
number of times, and then uses LStage2 to continue optimizing
and the imputation consistency is used as the anomaly score
to detect anomalies. In general, the two stages of the MoPIN
can be expressed as
X Imp = F(X; θpre ), s.t. LStage1
AnomalyScore = F(X; θtune ), s.t. LStage2 .

(21)
(22)

IV. E XPERIMENT
This section verifies the imputation and anomaly detection
performance of the MoPIN through multiple real-world benchmarks and illustrates its effectiveness through comparative
experiments, ablation, and efficiency analysis.

A. Benchmarks and Evaluation Metrics
1) Benchmark: The MoPIN is validated on four real-world
benchmarks of two typical time-series tasks, and the details
are shown in Table I: 1) electricity transformer temperature
(ETT); 2) Beijing Multi-Site Air-Quality (Air); 3) Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) and Soil Moisture Active Passive
(SMAP); and 4) Pooled Server Metrics (PSM). Specifically,
in order to verify the performance of the MoPIN on time
series with sparse observations, 10% of the observations in
the benchmarks are randomly masked. And on the validation
set and test set, these 10% mask observations are used as
ground truth to evaluate. In addition, for the MSL and the
SMAP [6], only three nontrivial subsets A-4, C-2, and T-1
are used because the rest of the subsets are mostly trivial
series [7]. Furthermore, for fairness in evaluation, the length of
all series is set to 96, and all benchmarks are preprocessed by
standardization. And following the protocol of previous works
[10], the benchmarks are split into training, validation, and test
sets chronologically by the ratio of 6:2:2 for the ETTh1 and
7:1:2 for the Air. For the anomaly detection task, the training
data are split into training and validation sets according to the
ratio of 3:1 [1].
2) Evaluation Metrics: The standard metrics are
utilized for evaluation. For imputation task, the mse
(mse = (1/kRk1 )k(X Imp − X) Rk22 ), the mean absolute error
Imp
(MAE = (1/kRk1 )k(X
− X) Rk1 ), and the root-mean-square
√
error (RMSE = MSE) are used. For anomaly detection,
precision [P = (TP/(TP + FP))], recall [R = (TP/(TP + FN))],
and F1 score [F1 = (2×P × R)/(P + R)] are used, where
TP and FP denote the correctly and incorrectly detected
anomalies, respectively, and TN and FN denote the correctly
and incorrectly labeled normal, respectively. Specifically,
due to different prediction or reconstruction performances
between different anomaly detection methods, the previous
evaluation protocol is used, which is that the best thresholds
for all methods are selected through grid search, and the best
performances for them are reported for all experiments [3].
Moreover, the point adjust strategy is used [34].
B. Baselines
For the imputation task, the MoPIN is compared with
12 baselines, including four tranditional methods with the
Mean, the MissForest [28], the SoftImpute [26], and the
MatrixFactorization [27], and eight latest deep learning-based
methods with the AMDAE [32], the BRITS [29], the MRNN
[30], the AIA-GRU [8], the SPIN [31], the TimesNet [20],
the PatchTST [11], and the SAITS [10]. Among them, the
TimesNet is the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) method.

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

16655

TABLE II
I MPUTATION P ERFORMANCE

Fig. 6. Critical difference diagram of the metric 1/mse.

For the anomaly detection task, the MoPIN is compared
with ten baselines, including tranditional methods with the
KPCA [14], the IF [5], the COPOD [16], the ECOD [17],
and deep learning-based methods with the DAGMM [18],
the OmniAnomaly [34], the USAD [19], the CAE M [35],
the DCDetector [4], the TimesNet [20], and the ImAD [23].
Among them, the DCDetector and the ImAD are the current
SOTA methods for time series without and with missing
values. In particular, all the baselines except the ImAD use the
TimesNet to impute missing values before detect anomalies.
C. Implementation Details
We implement the MoPIN, its variants, and all baselines
in PyTorch version 1.8.2 with CUDA 10.2. All experiments
are conducted on a server with Intel1 Xeon2 Silver 4210 CPU
at 2.20 GHz and a single NVIDIA TITAN V 12-GB GPU.
For fairness, the consistent hyperparameters are used for all
experiments. The random mask ratio r is set to 0.1, and the
number of the PIMLs N is set to 2. Hence, patch sizes are
set to {16, 24}, and related strides are set to {8, 12}. Moreover,
the embedding and encoder dimensions d and h are set to
16 and 8, respectively. And for the imputation consistency C I ,
λ is set to 0.5. All models are trained using the Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 1 × 10−3 , L2 regularization weight of
5 × 10−4 , and hyperparameters β1 and β2 as 0.9 and 0.99,
respectively. For imputation task, training iterates 300 times
and the early stop strategy is used with patience of 10. For
anomaly detection task, training iterates 8 times on stage 1
and 30 times on stage 2 with a patience of 5. The batch size
for all experiments is set to 128.
D. Results and Discussion
1) Imputation: The imputation performance is reported in
Table II, and the related visualization of the critical difference
diagram based on the Wilcoxon pairwise signed-rank test after
rejecting the null hypothesis using the Friedman test of the
metric 1/mse is shown in Fig. 6. Compared with all baselines,
the MoPIN achieves the best performance. Specifically, the
MoPIN outperforms the SOTA baseline by relative 22.17%
(0.083 → 0.065), 8.05% (0.189 → 0.174), and 11.81%
(0.288 → 0.254) on the mse, the MAE, and the RMSE on
the ETTh1. And on the Air, it outperforms the SOTA baseline
by relative 23.21% (0.321 → 0.247), 30.36% (0.228 → 0.159),
and 19.44% (0.501 → 0.404) on the mse, the MAE, and
the RMSE.
It is worth noting that since deep learning-based methods consider more information in series modeling, all deep
learning-based methods outperform traditional methods on
1 Registered trademark.
2 Registered trademark.

Fig. 7. Imputation result visualization on ETTh1.

both benchmarks. In addition, it is found that the performance
of the SoftImpute and the MatrixFactorization methods far
exceeds the Mean and the MissingForest, which is because
these two methods gradually impute in an iterative manner and
achieve higher accuracy in the process of gradual correction.
This also provides indirect motivation support for the twostep imputation design of the MoPIN. However, this iterative
approach brings a huge amount of time consumption while
achieving high precision. Therefore, the MoPIN improves the
performance by only two-step imputation without multiple
iterations, making it advantageous in both accuracy and time
consumption.
Meanwhile, among the deep learning-based methods, except
for the PatchTST and the TimesNet, which are time-series
analysis methods, the rest are ad hoc methods specially
designed for imputation. However, except the SAITS, the other
methods cannot outperform the PatchTST and the TimesNet.
From the perspective of method design, this can be attributed
to the powerful ability of series information extraction based
on the patch. In addition, the SAITS significantly outperforms
the PatchTST on ETTh1 and has similar performance on Air,
which is because unlike other deep learning-based methods,
the SAITS is also designed with a multistep imputation
approach, which provides it with excellent performance.
In addition, for the MoPIN, compared with the TimesNet
and the PatchTST, the design of multiscale PIMM of the
MoPIN makes it more advantageous in extracting series information. And combined with the MoPIN proprietary imputation
design, it achieves the best performance on both benchmarks.
In order to clearly demonstrate the performance of multiple
methods, Fig. 7 visualizes the results of the MoPIN and the
other four best baselines on ETTh1.
Furthermore, the imputation performance of the MoPIN
under different missing rates is verified on ETTh1. Specifically,
the imputation results of the MoPIN are compared with several

16656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Imputation performance under different missing rates on ETTh1.

Fig. 9. Critical difference diagram of the metric F1.
TABLE III
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%)

baselines at missing rates of 0.1–0.9 by random masking. The
experimental results are shown in Fig. 8. It can be seen that
when the missing rate is between 0.1 and 0.4, the MoPIN has
a significant advantage. When the missing rate is between 0.5
and 0.9, the MoPIN still has a slight advantage over the best
baseline. In general, the MoPIN can adapt to impute in low
and extreme missing rate scenarios.
2) Anomaly Detection: The anomaly detection performance
is reported in Table III, and the related visualization of the
critical difference diagram of the metric F1 is shown in
Fig. 9. Compared with all baselines, the MoPIN achieves the
best performance. Specifically, the MoPIN outperforms the
SOTA baseline by relative 3.74% (92.45 → 95.91) and 5.01%
(89.45 → 93.93) on PSM and Spacecraft on F1 metric.
For anomaly detection in series with sparse observations,
all baselines require prior imputation, which makes them
highly dependent on the performance of the imputation model.
Although the SOTA imputation baseline the TimesNet in
experiments is used, this still hinders anomaly detection
performance because the imputed series may introduce additional information different from the original series. This

Fig. 10.
on PSM.

Anomaly detection performance under different missing rates

extra information is intolerable for the anomaly detection
task, as it goes against the core idea of USAD. Therefore,
the SOTA baseline DCDetector on complete series cannot
achieve good anomaly detection on a sparse series. Although
the baseline ImAD avoids preimputation problem, it does
not fully use the information containing in data, while the
MoPIN can achieve better performance because of its mixture
of information modeling approach. In addition, the TimesNet
is the best-performing baseline. On the one hand, this is
due to the patch-based method design. On the other hand,
the TimesNet is also used as the imputation method before
anomaly detection and has the same model structure in both
tasks, which gives it an advantage in task transfer. However,
it is still a two-stage anomaly detection method. The MoPIN
uses imputation consistency to avoid the gap between sparse
series and anomaly detection, which is the core of achieving
the best anomaly detection performance.
Furthermore, the anomaly detection performance of the
MoPIN under different missing rates is verified on PSM.
Specifically, the anomaly detection results of the MoPIN are
compared with several baselines at miss rates ranging from
0.1 to 0.9 by random masking. The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 10. From the results, it can be seen that although
the TimesNet has a performance close to the MoPIN at a
low missing rate, the performance of the TimesNet decreases
rapidly as the missing rate increases. For the ImAD, it does
not need a preimputation step, so it performs better on high
missing rate compared with other baselines, which further
shows the advantage of a single-step detection strategy for
sparse series. Overall, the TimesNet is the SOTA baseline,
benefiting from its unified model for imputation and anomaly
detection. However, the performance degradation at high
missing rate shows that the two-stage anomaly detection is
not beneficial for sparse series. The MoPIN well unifies the
relationship between anomaly detection and imputation, can
adapt to anomaly detection task in low and extreme missing
rate environments, and has better universality than baselines.
Overall, the above experimental results and analysis demonstrate the effectiveness of the MoPIN in time-series imputation
and anomaly detection.
E. Ablation Study
To verify the motivation of the MoPIN, ablation experiments
are conducted on the three main components of the MoPIN.
And the results are shown in Table IV.

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

16657

TABLE IV
A BLATION R ESULTS

1) PIMM: The effectiveness of the PIMM is verified through four variants of the MoPIN: 1) the MoPIN
without channel independence encoding (w/o C-I); 2) the
MoPIN without channel mixture encoding (w/o C-M);
3) the MoPIN without adaptive aggregating (w/o A-A); and
4) the MoPIN without multiscale modeling (w/o M-S). The
experimental results show that in both tasks, the performance
of the variants w/o C-I and w/o C-M has a significant decrease,
which shows that both channel independence and mixture
modeling play an important role in the MoPIN. In addition,
compared with the MoPIN, the performance of w/o A-A and
w/o M-S has declined to a certain extent, which shows that
multiscale modeling contributes to the MoPIN. Therefore, the
ablation experiments of the above four variants verify the role
of the PIMM module in the MoPIN.
2) Two-Step Imputation: From the comparative experimental analysis, it can be seen that iterative imputation contributes
to the imputation performance. Therefore, the MoPIN without
two-step imputation (w/o T-S) is used to verify its effectiveness
on imputation and anomaly detection. From the experimental
results, it can be seen that the two-step imputation contributes
to the performance of the MoPIN (0.065 → 0.093 on mse
and 95.91%→ 92.30% on F1). In particular, since the twostep imputation can achieve better imputation performance,
it enables it to have better anomaly detection performance
for the MoPIN, which detects anomalies using imputation
consistency.
3) Imputation Consistency: Imputation consistency consists
of two parts: the mse and distribution similarity of two
imputed series. The effectiveness of imputation consistency
is verified through two variants of the MoPIN: 1) the MoPIN
without distribution consistency (w/o D-C) uses imputation
error between two imputed series to detect anomalies and
2) the MoPIN without imputation consistency (w/o I-C) uses
reconstruction error between the reconstructed series and original series to conduct anomaly detection, which is the same
as baselines. From the experimental results, without using
imputation consistency, the F1 metric of the variant w/o I-C
using the two-stage anomaly detection strategy drops from
95.91% to 93.99% compared with the MoPIN, which validates
the role of imputation consistency in anomaly detection for
time series with sparse observations. In addition, relative to the
MoPIN, the F1 of the variant w/o D-C drops from 95.91% to
94.37%, which shows the importance of adding a distribution
consistency constraint.

Fig. 11. Ablation analysis in anomaly detection (↑) and imputation (←). For
variants w/o D-C and w/o I-C, the mse is set to be the same as the MoPIN.

Fig. 12. Relationships between the anomaly detection performance and model
efficiency on (a) parameters and (b) FLOPs.

For intuitiveness, Fig. 11 summarizes the performances
of the above variants in two tasks, which shows that every
component contributes to the MoPIN. In summary, the above
results and analysis prove the correctness of the motivation of
the MoPIN.

F. Efficiency Analysis
The number of parameters and the floating point operations
(FLOPs) [36] are used to evaluate the memory and computational cost of the MoPIN. Specifically, the above metrics
are calculated using the experimental settings on the PSM
dataset detailed in Sections IV-A and IV-B, and all parameters
in the anomaly detection process are counted. The results are
shown in Fig. 12. A higher F1-score means a better anomaly
detection performance, a lower FLOPs means the less amount
of computation required by the model with better computation
efficiency, and fewer parameters means better memory cost.
1) Memory Cost: From Fig. 12(a), the MoPIN achieves the
best anomaly detection performance, but has a high parameter
amount with 25.98M. However, in practical applications, the
memory cost of the MoPIN is still scarce since monitoring
algorithms are usually deployed on servers. In addition, for
fair comparison, the number of parameters of the MoPIN is
adjusted to keep basically consistent with the baselines. Specifically, the embedding and encoder dimensions d and h are set
to 3 and 4. Under this condition, the MoPIN with 10.95M
parameters achieves an anomaly detection performance on F1
of 93.53%, which means that the performance of the MoPIN
has a significant advantage under the condition of the same
memory cost.

16658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 13. Relationships between the anomaly detection performance and
efficiency of variants of the MoPIN on (a) parameters and (b) FLOPs.

2) Computation Cost: From Fig. 12(b), the MoPIN and
the TimesNet have relatively high FLOPs while achieving
significant detection performance. However, for the actual
training process, they can complete the training process in
3 min, which is little time consumption for offline modeling
and online detection methods. Similarly, after reducing the
number of parameters, the computational efficiency of the
MoPIN has also been significantly improved while maintaining
well anomaly detection performance. In addition, all models
can predict a single sample in less than 1 ms, which is fully
sufficient for actual industrial applications.
In summary, the MoPIN can achieve a well anomaly
detection performance while maintaining the same memory
consumption as the baselines. Moreover, by reducing certain
efficiency conditions, the MoPIN can achieve better performance. In actual application scenarios, detection accuracy is
usually more important, so tradeoffs can be made based on
the performance of the monitoring server.
3) Component Overhead: In addition, in order to deeply
analyze the source of the overhead of the MoPIN, the overhead
contribution of each component in the ablation study is analyzed, and the results are shown in Fig. 13. Intuitively, the main
memory overhead source of the MoPIN is from the PIMM,
especially the channel independence encoding and multiscale
modeling components. And the imputation consistency can
significantly improve anomaly detection performance without requiring additional memory overhead. For computation
overhead, almost all components contribute, and the most
significant computation overhead still comes from channel
independence encoding and multiscale modeling. In addition,
both imputation consistency and two-step imputation strategies
do not require memory overhead, but both have relatively
large computation overhead. However, their improvement in
anomaly detection performance is very significant. In practical
applications, the parameters of each component can be traded
based on the above analysis to achieve a balance between
efficiency and detection performance.
V. VALIDATION ON A R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO
The fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) process is one of the
most important conversion processes in petroleum refining and
is widely used to produce gasoline, diesel, olefin gas, and
other products. In actual industrial applications, it is of great
significance to ensure the safe and stable operation of the FCC.
Considering the principle and complexity of the FCC, actual
monitoring of the FCC process is often carried out on the
three systems that constitute it: reaction regeneration, absorption stabilization, and fractionation system. Among them, the

Fig. 14. Simplified diagram of the RRS.

TABLE V
K EY VARIABLES OF THE RRS

reaction regeneration system (RRS) including the reaction and
regeneration process is the core of the FCC. A simplified
diagram of the RRS is shown in Fig. 14. In this section, a case
of the RRS of the FCC in a petrochemical plant is provided
for verification of the MoPIN.
According to the RRS process of the plant, Table V lists
14 key variables that can effectively reflect the operating status
of the RRS. And the status monitoring of the RRS is implemented based on these 14 variables. The experimental dataset
FCC-RRS with an average missing rate 12.8% was collected
from the distribution control system of the petrochemical plant
with a sampling period of 3 min from May to August in 2019.
Two tasks are conducted on the FCC-RRS. For imputation,
29811 consecutive sampled series without anomalies are split
into training, validation, and test sets with 15655/5155/8905
and 10% random masks on observations are applied as label
data for evaluation. For anomaly detection, 2589 consecutive
sampled series without anomalies are used for modeling and
are split into training and validation sets with 1869/624, 24882
consecutive sampled series containing anomalies are used to
test, and the anomaly ratio is 2.03%.

ZHANG et al.: LEARNING TO DETECT INDUSTRIAL TIME-SERIES ANOMALIES FROM IMPUTATION CONSISTENCY

TABLE VI
I MPUTATION AND A NOMALY D ETECTION
P ERFORMANCE ON THE FCC-RRS

16659

MoPIN can impute missing values well, which is beneficial
for further anomaly detection. And Fig. 16 shows the anomaly
detection comparison performance of several methods by
visualizing their anomaly scores. It can be seen that for most
anomalies, the MoPIN has the largest anomaly score difference
between normal and anomaly data, which can ensure both
a high anomaly detection rate and low false alarm rate.
In addition, it can be found that this advantage is weakened
when not using imputation consistency, which further demonstrates its advantage.
In summary, the experimental results and analysis on the
actual FCC process verify the effectiveness of the MoPIN and
show that it has practical significance in ensuring industrial
safety and avoiding economic losses.
VI. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 15. Imputation visualization of the MoPIN on FCC-RRS.

Fig. 16. Anomaly score comparison visualization on FCC-RRS.

The experimental result is shown in Table VI. For both
tasks, the MoPIN achieves the SOTA performance compared with baselines. Specifically, the MoPIN outperforms
the SOTA baseline by relative 10.38% (0.266 → 0.238),
12.43% (0.351 → 0.307), and 5.97% (0.511 → 0.482) on
the mse, the MAE, and the RMSE. And for the anomaly
detection task, it outperforms the SOTA baseline by a relative
3.49% (95.61 → 98.94) on F1. Moreover, compared with
the TimesNet and the DAGMM, the MoPIN can detect all
anomalies while ensuring a low false alarm rate, which is
crucial for an actual industrial process.
In addition, for intuitiveness, Fig. 15 visualizes the imputation results of three key variables. It can be seen that the

This article proposes a novel anomaly detection method
for sparsely observed time series. Patch information mixture
modeling is suggested to fully exploit the information of
time series for accurate imputation and anomaly detection.
In addition, a novel imputation consistency is proposed to
achieve a single-stage anomaly detection directly from sparse
series to anomaly scores. Extensive experiments on four
real-world benchmarks in different domains demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. Compared with baselines, the SOTA performance is achieved in both imputation
and anomaly detection tasks. In addition, a real chemical plant
FCC process application case is provided to verify the practical
application significance of the proposed method. Specifically,
the MoPIN achieved at least 8.05% mse relative improvement
in imputation and 3.74% F1 relative improvement in anomaly
detection.
Furthermore, although the performance of the MoPIN has
been verified by relatively comprehensive experiments, it is
still lack of theory and cannot provide a good interpretation
for detected anomalies, which is also the same as current many
famous works. Therefore, in the future, we will concentrate
on theoretical analysis of the MoPIN and research on interpretable anomaly detection method for industrial time series.
In addition, the MoPIN has relatively high computation cost,
but if reducing parameters to keep basically consistence with
baselines, it can still achieve better performance. Meanwhile,
how to tradeoff the efficiency and performance in a real
application is a practical problem. And refer to current works,
a well tradeoff strategy can be made based on hardware
performance and experiences.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
K. Zhu, P. Song, and C. Zhao, “Fuzzy state-driven cross-time spatial
dependence learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 4532–4544,
Mar. 2025.
Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.

16660

[4]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[5] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[6] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2018,
pp. 387–395.
[7] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[8] X. Yuan et al., “Attention-based interval aided networks for data modeling of heterogeneous sampling sequences with missing values in process
industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5253–5262,
Apr. 2024.
[9] Y. Zheng et al., “Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time
series anomaly detection with missing values,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 106,
Jun. 2024, Art. no. 102255.
[10] W. Du, D. Côté, and Y. Liu, “SAITS: Self-attention-based imputation for
time series,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 219, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 119619.
[11] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–24.
[12] P. Chen et al., “Pathformer: Multi-scale transformers with adaptive pathways for time series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), 2024, pp. 1–19.
[13] S. Zhong, S. Song, W. Zhuo, G. Li, Y. Liu, and S.-H.-G. Chan, “A
multi-scale decomposition MLP-mixer for time series analysis,” Proc.
VLDB Endowment, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1723–1736, Mar. 2024.
[14] M. L. Shyu, S. C. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. Chang, “A novel
anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in
Proc. IEEE Found. New Directions Data Mining Workshop. Piscataway,
NJ, USA: IEEE Press, Nov. 2003, pp. 172–179.
[15] T. Li, Y. Han, Y. Wang, and Z. Geng, “A self-attention mechanism
integrating adaptive double subspace for fault detection in industrial
processes,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 55, no. 1,
pp. 540–549, Jan. 2025.
[16] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copulabased outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123.
[17] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. Chen, “ECOD:
Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution functions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 12181–12193, Dec. 2023.
[18] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
2018, pp. 1–19.
[19] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[20] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet:
Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in
Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–23.
[21] H. Han, M. Sun, F. Li, Z. Liu, and C. Wang, “Self-supervised deep
clustering method for detecting abnormal data of wastewater treatment
process,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1155–1166,
Feb. 2024.
[22] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024.
[23] F. Xiao and J. Fan, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in the presence of
missing values,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2024, pp. 1–33.
[24] X. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Mao, and J. Yin, “Generative semisupervised learning for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 8983–8991.
[25] S. Yang, M. Dong, Y. Wang, and C. Xu, “Adversarial recurrent time
series imputation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34,
no. 4, pp. 1639–1650, Apr. 2023.
[26] R. Mazumder, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, “Spectral regularization
algorithms for learning large incomplete matrices,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 11, no. 80, pp. 2287–2322, Aug. 2010.

[27] Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, “Matrix factorization techniques
for recommender systems,” Computer, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30–37, Aug.
2009.
[28] D. J. Stekhoven and P. Bühlmann, “MissForest—Non-parametric missing value imputation for mixed-type data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 112–118, Jan. 2012.
[29] W. Cao, D. Wang, J. Li, H. Zhou, L. Li, and Y. Li, “BRITS: Bidirectional
recurrent imputation for time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 31, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates, 2018, pp. 1–11.
[30] J. Yoon, W. R. Zame, and M. van der Schaar, “Estimating missing
data in temporal data streams using multi-directional recurrent neural
networks,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1477–1490,
May 2019.
[31] I. Marisca, A. Cini, and C. Alippi, “Learning to reconstruct missing
data from spatiotemporal graphs with sparse observations,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates, 2022, pp. 32069–32082.
[32] Z. Pan, Y. Wang, K. Wang, H. Chen, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Imputation
of missing values in time series using an adaptive-learned median-filled
deep autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 695–706,
Feb. 2023.
[33] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent
neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values,” Sci.
Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 6085, Apr. 2018.
[34] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[35] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[36] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference,” in Proc.
5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2017, pp. 1–17.
Zhen Zhang received the B.S. degree in
measurement and control technology and
instrumentation and the M.S. degree in control
science and engineering from Beijing University
of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2018
and 2021, respectively, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science and
engineering.
His research interests include time-series anomaly
detection, forecasting, and industrial process
monitoring.

Yongming Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2009 and 2014,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the College of
Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His current research
interests include power system modeling, neural
networks, intelligent computing, data mining, and
intrusion detection.

Zhiqiang Geng received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
China, in 1997 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from the College of Information Science
and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing, China, in 2005.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Information Science and Technology, Beijing
University of Chemical Technology. His research
interests include neural networks, intelligent computing, data mining, knowledge management, and
process modeling.