IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

2347

Lightweight Fuzzy-Driven Intrusion Detection for
Consumer Life-Tech Applications
Ahamed Aljuhani , Abdulelah Alamri, and Alireza Jolfaei , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Consumer life-tech applications have significantly
benefited from the rapid advancement of cutting-edge technologies, enabling the delivery of intelligent, cost-effective, reliable,
and sustainable solutions. As consumer life-tech applications
are being extensively embedded in innovative technologies, a
key challenge is balancing security and resource efficiency in
resource-constrained consumer devices. In this paper, we propose
a lightweight fuzzy-driven intrusion detection framework to
address these constraints by combining four key techniques:
knowledge distillation, fuzzy logic integration, structured pruning, and quantization. We employ knowledge distillation to
transfer decision-making capabilities from a large teacher model
to a smaller student model. A fuzzy logic layer is further introduced to improve interpretability and robustness to uncertainties,
while structured pruning and quantization are used to greatly
reduce the model’s computational and memory requirements.
Our method achieves over 98% detection accuracy while greatly
reducing model size and resource usage. This work offers a
practical, interpretable, and high-performing intrusion detection
solution for deployment in resource-constrained consumer lifetech ecosystems.
Index Terms—Cybersecurity, fuzzy neural network, intrusion
detection, IoMT, knowledge distillation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE RAPID advancement of innovative technologies has
transformed consumer life-tech applications, delivering
intelligent, cost-effective, autonomous, and sustainable solutions. Additionally, the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
is a key consumer technology that has been widely used in
the health-care sector. However, security in consumer healthcare technology remain a significant challenge. For example,
a hospital may use a smart health-care system to remotely
monitor patients. IoMT devices, such as wearable electrocardiogram (ECG) monitors and glucose trackers, continuously
transmit vital data to central systems. A cyberattack targeting
these devices can compromise sensitive patient information
and disrupt the monitoring process. In such a situation, healthcare providers lose access to the critical data they need
to make timely decisions, putting patients’ lives at risk.
To make matters worse, the attack depletes these devices’
limited resources, leaving them inoperable and putting patients
and caregivers in a difficult position. Unfortunately, existing

T

Received 18 November 2024; revised 16 February 2025; accepted 11 May
2025. Date of publication 14 May 2025; date of current version 12 June 2025.
(Corresponding author: Ahamed Aljuhani.)
Ahamed Aljuhani and Abdulelah Alamri are with the College of Computing
and Information Technology, University of Tabuk, Tabuk 71491, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: A_Aljuhani@ut.edu.sa; 421000544@stu.ut.edu.sa).
Alireza Jolfaei is with the College of Science and Engineering,
Flinders
University,
Adelaide,
SA
5042,
Australia
(e-mail:
alireza.jolfaei@flinders.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3569886

security solutions often fail in these scenarios. Their high computational demands overwhelm resource-constrained devices,
leading to significant performance issues. High false positive
rates and overly complex algorithms further complicate the
problem, making effective intrusion detection a considerable
challenge. These challenges highlight the urgent need for a
lightweight, efficient, and accurate intrusion detection mechanism that can safeguard consumer health-care technologies
without straining their limited resources.
To address this need, this article proposes a novel approach
that synergizes knowledge distillation, fuzzy logic integration,
structured pruning, and quantization to create an efficient,
robust, and lightweight intrusion detection system (IDS)
for resource-constrained consumer technology. Transferring
decision-making capabilities from large, high-performing models to smaller, resource-efficient ones ensures high detection
accuracy with reduced computational and memory demands.
The integration of fuzzy logic through a fuzzy layer handles
uncertainties in network traffic by transforming input features
into compact and informative representations. Structured
pruning eliminates less significant neurons and connections to
lower computational overheads, whereas quantization reduces
the memory footprint by converting model weights into lowerbit representations. This comprehensive approach enhances
performance on resource-constrained devices such as IoMT
gadgets and smart appliances, and improves interpretability
through fuzzy logic, fostering user trust.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Several studies have proposed different mitigation techniques for consumer technology. Zabeehullah et al. [1]
developed an intelligent deep-learning-based model for detecting anomalies in IoMT networks, combining an autoencoder
with deep learning models and achieving an improved accuracy. Narasimhan et al. [2] proposed an unsupervised deep
learning approach for IDS, using an autoencoder for feature
extraction and Gaussian mixture model for clustering into
normal and attacks. Kalaria et al. [3] proposed the IoTPredictor
for classifying attacks in smart devices, using hidden Markov
models to detect cyberattacks and obtaining 88.6% accuracy.
Alzubi et al. [4] proposed a deep learning approach for IoMT
using a hybrid technique with convolutional neural network
(CNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM) to identify
attacks in consumer health-care networks. Rajesh et al. [5]
proposed a threat detection model for IoT in health-care
systems, selecting features with sigmoid cosine and pigeoninspired techniques and using a hybrid ensemble model
for attack classifications. Azimjonov and Kim [6] proposed

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2348

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Proposed architecture of fuzzy logic-knowledge distillation for IDS in resource-constrained consumer technology.

an intrusion detection model for detecting cyberattacks in
IoT networks, using an importance coefficient for feature
selection and stochastic gradient descent for IoT health-care.
Singh et al. [7] proposed a SecureFlow detection framework
using SNORT and support vector machine (SVM) to provide
alerts of anomalies in IoT networks, demonstrating effectiveness in mitigating attacks. Some obstacles have been observed.
First, consumer health-care technology’s resource constraints
pose challenges to ensuring effective mitigation of cyberattacks on consumer IoMT devices. Second, complexity and
computational overheads lead to resource exhaustion, disrupting intrusion detection operations. Third, high false positive
rates consume processing power and resources. Fourth, high
data dimensionality affects detection performance, potentially
causing overfitting and poor classifications. These issues
highlight the need for robust intrusion detection mechanisms
suitable for consumer health-care technologies. In the following, we aim to address these concerns.
III. P ROPOSED F UZZY L OGIC -D RIVEN K NOWLEDGE
D ISTILLATION FOR IDS IN C ONSUMER T ECHNOLOGY
Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed fuzzy logic-driven knowledge distillation workflow for IDS in resource-constrained
consumer technology. Data pre-processing and dimensionality
reduction are performed using principal component analysis
(PCA), retaining 95% of the variance. The data is then
shuffled, split into training/testing sets, and converted to
PyTorch tensors. A teacher-student framework is adopted,
where the teacher trains a five-layer neural network from
labeled data, while the simpler three-layer student model learns
via knowledge distillation. A fuzzy student model further
enhances decision-making and interpretability by incorporating a fuzzy layer. This layer transforms raw inputs into
linguistic membership degrees (e.g., “low”, “medium”, “high”)
via a Gaussian membership function


(x − c)2
,
(1)
μ(x) = exp −
2σ 2

where x is the input, c the center, and σ determines the
width. Fuzzified data is processed via learnable fuzzy rules,
enriching features with interpretable patterns for further classification. Further, the fuzzified data are processed by a set
of fuzzy rules, which are represented as learnable weights
that combine the membership degrees to meaningful outputs,
which in turn are fed into successive layers of the student
model for further processing through linear transformations
and activation functions, yielding a binary classification decision. By embedding fuzzy logic, it may allow the student
model to make sense of inputs in a more human-like reasoning manner, such as discussing events of probabilities,
like the network packet being given classifications such as
“medium” or “high” risk, in order to modify and improve
both the interpretability of its decisions and its ability to
adapt to complex input patterns. This allows the fuzzy student
model to classify more knowledgeably and transparently,
balancing accuracy, efficiency, and explainability. The loss
function LKD due to distillation is a combination of crossentropy loss and KL-divergence loss between the teacher and
the student models on their softened probabilities. This is
represented as
LKD = α · CE(ys , ytrue )

 z 

z 
t
s
, Softmax
, (2)
+ (1 − α) · T 2 · KL Softmax
T
T

where α balances direct supervision and distillation guidance.
T is the temperature for the softening probabilities. ytrue is
the ground truth label from dataset, ys is the prediction output
from student model. zs and zt are final layer output of student
and teacher models, respectively.
The cross-entropy loss is defined as

pi log(qi ),
CE(p, q) = −
(3)
i

where i indexes the class labels, and pi and qi are the
target and predicted probabilities for class i. The probability
softening is controlled through a temperature parameter T = 3
and the relative weighting of the teaching guidance against

ALJUHANI et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT FUZZY-DRIVEN INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER LIFE-TECH APPLICATIONS

2349

TABLE I
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS FOR T EACHER M ODEL , F UZZY S TUDENT M ODEL , AND P RUNED & Q UANTIZED F UZZY S TUDENT M ODEL

direct supervision is given by the weighting factor α =
0.5 to provide a balanced trade-off between learning from
the teacher’s soft labels and aligning with the true labels,
yielding robust performance in our experiments. Advanced
optimization techniques improve efficiency by applying L2norm structured pruning, which removes 20% of the neurons
from weight matrices to reduce model size and computational
cost. Additionally, efficiency is enhanced through quantization,
where floating-point weights are converted to 8-bit integers.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We assumed a deployment scenario where model training is
carried out on an edge or cloud-enabled device, and the trained
model is then transferred to a resource-constrained device
for inference. We used the RT-IoT2022 dataset, introduced
by Sharmila and Nagapadma in 2023 (Cybersecurity). Our
training and testing were conducted on our lab machine with
12 logical core CPU to simulate the training and deployment
phases under controlled conditions. We considered various
performance metrics, including the number of parameters,
model size, accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, testing time,
and CPU and memory usage during the training phase. Our
results are reported in Table I, showing where improvements
have been achieved. Fig. 2 illustrates the training time and total
CPU utilization (across 12 logical cores) for all models under
study. Our proposed model offers substantial improvements in
terms of model size, memory usage, and inference speed, making it highly suitable for deployment on resource-constrained
devices. While there are minor compromises in accuracy
and precision, the overall detection performance remains
strong and comparable to the teacher model. Overall, the
proposed model achieves competitive detection performance
while reducing the algorithm complexity and its computation
time for resource-constrained consumer devices.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a fuzzy-logic-driven knowledge
distillation framework for intrusion detection in resourcelimited consumer technologies. By combining knowledge
distillation, fuzzy logic, structured pruning, and quantization, we achieved over 98% detection accuracy while
greatly reducing model size and resource usage. Further,
the fuzzy membership functions made the system more
interpretable. Our proposed model is especially beneficial

Fig. 2.

Training time and CPU utilization for models under study.

for consumer life-tech devices, which often have limited
storage and processing power. In future work, we plan to
explore adaptive fuzzy memberships, multi-class detection,
and privacy-preserving methods to further strengthen security
for a wide range of consumer applications.
R EFERENCES
[1] Zabeehullah, F. Arif, N. A. Khan, Q. M. U. Haq, M. Asim, and S. Ahmad,
“An SDN-AI-based approach for detecting anomalies in imbalance data
within a network of smart medical devices,” IEEE Consum. Electron.
Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 28–36, Nov. 2024.
[2] H. Narasimhan, V. Ravi, and N. Mohammad, “Unsupervised
deep learning approach for in-vehicle intrusion detection system,”
IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 103–108,
Jan. 2023.
[3] R. Kalaria, A. Kayes, W. Rahayu, E. Pardede, and A. Salehi,
“IoTpredictor: A security framework for predicting IoT device behaviours
and detecting malicious devices against cyber attacks,” Comput. Security,
vol. 146, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104037.
[4] J. A. Alzubi, O. A. Alzubi, I. Qiqieh, and A. Singh, “A blended deep
learning intrusion detection framework for consumable edge-centric IoMT
industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2049–2057,
Feb. 2024.
[5] R. Rajesh, S. Hemalatha, S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. Omar,
and A. K. Bashir, “Threat detection and mitigation for tactile Internet
driven consumer IoT-healthcare system,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4249–4257, Feb. 2024.
[6] J. Azimjonov and T. Kim, “Stochastic gradient descent classifierbased lightweight intrusion detection systems using the efficient
feature subsets of datasets,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 237, Mar. 2024,
Art. no. 121493.
[7] A. Singh, P. K. Chouhan, and G. S. Aujla, “SecureFlow: Knowledge
and data-driven ensemble for intrusion detection and dynamic rule
configuration in software-defined IoT environment,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
vol. 156, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103404.