IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5403518

Low-Light and Infrared Multimodal Remote
Sensing in Nighttime Rescue Mission: A Review
of Anomaly Detection Methods
Yuting Wan , Member, IEEE, Haoyu Yao, Jiawei Liu, Chen Sun , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Ailong Ma , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yanfei Zhong , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— When facing natural disasters such as sudden floods
at night, due to sudden natural disasters, high timeliness of
rescue information, and complexity and diversity of rescue
environment, it is difficult for ground personnel to perform
rescue operations in disaster area in time. Remote sensing
uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) technology plays an escalating
role in disaster relief due to fast response and high flexibility
advantages. However, with low nighttime visibility level, complex
post-disaster environment, and numerous obstructions, traditional UAV’s visible light remote sensing struggles to achieve
accurate rescue detection at night. Therefore, the multimodal
detection methods are investigated using low-light and infrared
modalities, exploring the integration of data fusion and detection
in night rescue applications, and examining the advantages
and disadvantages of different anomaly detection methods here.
This article provides the following contributions: 1) a fullyannotated low-light infrared co-observation multimodal remote
sensing image dataset for nighttime emergency rescue detection,
termed MRSI-NERD; 2) a benchmark test for most state-ofthe-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods to thoroughly
explore their capability in extracting useful information from
normal samples; and 3) a low-light infrared bimodal fusion
method based on frequency-domain feature decomposition, which
enhances the performance of detectors. The performance of eight
types of traditional or deep learning-based detection methods
on the MRSI-NERD dataset is reported, including metrics such
as receiver operating characteristic (ROC)-area under the curve
(AUC), false positive rate (FPR), and true positive rate (TPR).
Additionally, a comprehensive analysis of the principles and
performance of each category of detection methods is provided.
Received 4 September 2024; revised 31 December 2024 and 9 April 2025;
accepted 6 May 2025. Date of publication 9 May 2025; date of current
version 21 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3903404,
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
42301418 and Grant 42325105, in part by China National Postdoctoral
Program for Innovative Talents under Grant BX20230275, and in part by
Hubei Provincial Science and Technology Innovation Talent Program under
Grant 2024DJA020. (Yuting Wan and Haoyu Yao contributed equally to this
work.) (Corresponding author: Yanfei Zhong.)
Yuting Wan, Chen Sun, Ailong Ma, and Yanfei Zhong are with the
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing and the Collaborative Innovation Center of
Geospatial Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail:
wanyuting@whu.edu.cn; sunchen@whu.edu.cn; maailong007@whu.edu.cn;
zhongyanfei@whu.edu.cn).
Haoyu Yao is with the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China (e-mail: yaohaoyu@
whu.edu.cn).
Jiawei Liu is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China (e-mail: 2021302181179@
whu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3568456

Index Terms— Anomaly detection, image fusion, low-light and
infrared images, multimodal remote sensing, nighttime emergency rescue.

I. I NTRODUCTION

N

IGHT emergency rescue scenarios pose great challenges
for first responders and rescue teams due to the suddenness of natural disasters [1], the high timeliness of rescue
information [2], and the complex diversity of rescue environments [3]. Efficient and accurate rescue operations during the
night require advanced technologies that can provide real-time
situational awareness, aid in the detection and localization
of the disaster targets in low-light and complicated environments [4].
With the continuous development of computer vision, object
recognition and detection algorithms based on deep neural
networks (DNNs) are being applied in emergency rescue
scenarios [5], providing a viable solution to address issues such
as the limitation of timeliness in disaster rescue [6]. The role
of remote sensing uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) technology
equipped with deep convolutional neural networks in rescue
and disaster relief operations is increasingly significant [7].
In the context of remote sensing and emergency rescue
and search scenarios, low-light remote sensing technology and
thermal infrared remote sensing technology are two widely
applied and mature image recognition methods in the field
of traditional image recognition [8]. They exhibit good complementarity and integration [9]. The fusion of low-light and
thermal infrared images has become the forefront of the current discipline’s development [10]. However, traditional offline
remote sensing image recognition methods face challenges in
achieving precise detection of rescue targets under extreme
conditions such as low nighttime light intensity and complex
post-disaster terrain [11].
Low-light and infrared images fusion is a branch of image
fusion that has significant applications in remote sensing image
recognition [9]. In the context of nighttime emergency rescue,
low-light imagery is highly sensitive to lighting conditions [12]
but can capture spatial information, texture details more effectively [13]; infrared imagery exhibits prominent targets and is
less affected by lighting conditions [14], but it typically has
lower image resolution and blurry target backgrounds [15].
The fusion of the above two can effectively combine the

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5403518

advantages of both [16], increase the amount of information,
and thus improve nighttime rescue operations [17]. The fusion
algorithms include traditional fusion algorithms based on
spatial or transform domains [18], as well as autoencoder (AE)
algorithms [19], convolutional neural network algorithms [20],
and adversarial neural network algorithms [21] based on deep
learning. Recently, many innovative approaches have emerged
in the field of image fusion. For example, the color-aware
fusion technique [22] effectively improves the recognizability
of targets in low-light environments by preserving the color
information and the thermal features. In addition, a hierarchical guided fusion network based on Laplace pyramid [23]
enhances the complementarity of cross-modal information
while preserving image details through multiscale feature
decomposition and hierarchical fusion strategies. Besides, the
transformer-based large-scale models for multimodal infrared
and visible image fusion have also attracted significant attention. These approaches [24], [25], [26], [27], [28] leverage
self-attention mechanisms to effectively integrate complementary features across different modalities. Notably, SwinFusion [24] implements a hierarchical attention framework
based on Swin Transformer [25], establishing dual-stream
attention modules for cross-domain feature alignment. Furthermore, DATfusion [26] is proposed to preserve important
features and global information through the interaction of
dual attention with transformer blocks, thereby achieving
multimodal image fusion. In addition, recent studies have
also proposed a semantic-driven fusion framework [27], which
further improves the fusion quality in complex scenes by introducing semantic prior knowledge to guide the feature fusion
and provides richer semantic information for target detection.
PromptFusion [28] further explores a prompt-based method
for guiding image fusion from vision-language models, which
aims to enhance target identification and fusion quality by
leveraging semantic prompts. Although these fusion methods
have achieved remarkable performance in recent decades [29],
the existing algorithms still have limitations when it comes to
the specific scenario of nighttime emergency rescue [30].
Anomaly detection refers to distinguishing the identification
and localization of anomalies in limited or even absence of
prior knowledge [31]. Anomaly detection and target detection based on high-resolution remote sensing images can
effectively utilize the existing spectral information in the
images to accurately locate rescue targets without the need
for a large amount of prior information specifically tailored
to the targets [32], [33]. This approach better meets the
requirements of high timeliness and accuracy in emergency
rescue missions [6]. Unsupervised anomaly detection mainly
includes methods such as sample reconstruction, pseudo
anomaly augmentation, and knowledge distillation [34], [35],
[36]. Specifically in nighttime emergency rescue scenarios, the
complexity of background information [37], the diversity of
anomalous samples [38], and the presence of weak target information pose challenges for the deployment and application of
existing anomaly detection algorithms [39].
Considering the aforementioned issues, this article establishes a synchronized low-light and infrared coaxial imaging
system and collects a dataset that simulates nighttime

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

emergency rescue scenarios. Furthermore, some advanced
unsupervised anomaly detection methods were evaluated on
the proposed low-light and infrared datasets. This contributes
to the development of a nighttime remote sensing emergency
rescue system designed for low visible light conditions. The
main contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
1) A Dataset of Multimodal Infrared and Low-Light Remote
Sensing Images Simulating Emergency Rescue Scenarios: To address the lack of remote sensing image datasets
for nighttime emergency rescue scenarios, a highly
realistic low-light infrared multimodal nighttime dataset
is proposed, termed MRSRI-NERD. It includes various
defects such as hypothermia [40], occlusion [41], and
fallen rescue targets [42] and is fully annotated to
simulate real-world scenarios accurately [44]. To the
knowledge, this is currently the only available remote
sensing multimodal dataset specifically designed for
nighttime emergency rescue scenarios.
2) A Benchmark for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Models in Emergency Rescue Datasets: In this article,
a survey of unsupervised image segmentation methods in
the existing literature was conducted, identifying challenges and outlining future research directions. In the
multimodal remote sensing image dataset for nighttime
emergency rescue detection (MRSI-NERD) dataset, four
categories of traditional detectors and four categories of
deep detectors were comprehensively evaluated, reporting metrics such as area under the curve (AUC) score,
false positive rate (FPR), and true positive rate (TPR),
to provide a benchmark for extensive research on unsupervised nighttime multimodal detection.
3) A Dual-Stream Low-Light and Infrared Modality Fusion
Network Based on Frequency-Domain Feature Decomposition: The dual-stream fusion network is predicated
on frequency-domain feature decomposition with a
Transformer–CNN framework. This enables the extraction and fusion of global and local features, ensuring
a more accurate reflection of modality-specific and
modality-shared features. Specifically, the work introduces the innovative utilization of invertible residual
neural network (IRNN) and Lite-transformer blocks for
optimizing the balance between fusion quality and computational cost. The superiority of the proposed fusion
method compared to existing algorithms was comprehensively validated through metrics such as entropy
(EN), standard deviation (SD), spatial frequency (SF),
mutual information (MI), sum of correlation differences
(SCDs), and structural similarity index measure (SSIM).
Improvements in the AUC metric are reported across
multiple downstream anomaly detection algorithms, validating the effectiveness of the approach in the nighttime
emergency rescue mission.
II. C ONSTRUCTION OF M ULTIMODAL DATASET
FOR N IGHTTIME S CENARIOS
Research in the field of night rescue using multimodal
low-light and infrared remote sensing has undergone a remarkable evolution. Initially, the focus was primarily on the

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

5403518

Fig. 1. Construction of the MRSI-NERD dataset. The overall process is comprised of three distinct steps: data fetching, data preprocessing, and annotation.
Initially, the original low-light and infrared images were obtained from the device in four different real scenarios. For the preprocessing step, the denoised
images were then obtained by subtracting the infrared dark image (solely containing thermal noise) from the original infrared image [51]. Subsequently, the
infrared images were subjected to a process of cropping, whereby the dark edges were removed. The RIFT algorithm [52] was then employed to facilitate
the alignment of the low-light and infrared images during the registration process. Finally, the synchronized low-light and infrared images, which contained
targets, were fully annotated.

stand-alone application of low-light and infrared remote sensing technologies. Low-light remote sensing was explored for
its ability to capture spatial and textural detail, although it is
highly sensitive to lighting conditions. Infrared remote sensing,
on the other hand, was recognized for its ability to detect
prominent targets with less dependence on ambient light,
although it suffered from issues such as lower resolution and
blurred backgrounds.
As the field progressed, the concept of fusing these two
modalities emerged. Early attempts involved traditional fusion
algorithms based on spatial or transform domains. These
aimed to combine the complementary features of low-light and
infrared images to enhance the overall information content.
However, with the advent of deep learning, more advanced
fusion algorithms such as AE, convolutional neural network,
and adversarial neural network were proposed. These methods
showed promise in improving the quality of fused images and
extracting more meaningful features.
Nevertheless, the development of deep and statistical-based
image recognition algorithm relies on training on a large
amount of valid data [43], but traditional single-modal visible
light data are limited by daylight conditions and cannot meet
the requirements of nighttime rescue [44]. There is a lack of
image data for nighttime emergency rescue scenarios. Thus,
in this article, a fully annotated MRSI-NERD was constructed,
to address the issue of data scarcity, as shown in Fig. 1.
Basically, a total of 4087 frames of video stream data were
collected, where 4044 of them are images containing targets,
and the remaining 43 frames are background reference images
without anomalies, used for training the anomaly detection
model. The collected data were divided into four categories
of detection tasks: “Fallen And Hypothermic,” “Fallen And
Normothermic,” “Obstructed And Hypothermic,” and “Standing,” abbreviated as “FAH,” “FAN,” “OAH,” and “STD,”
respectively.
1) FAH: It represents the scenario where the rescue target
has fallen and is hypothermic. This situation is common

in emergency rescue scenarios, where the target is in
an urgent state due to hypothermia [45], but at the
same time, it interferes with the detection of infrared
detectors, posing a certain level of difficulty. Obtaining images of hypothermic individuals is not a viable
option, so this condition was simulated using insulating
foil boards, which were cropped into the shape of a
person [46].
2) FAN: It refers to the scenario where the rescue target
has fallen and cannot stand up but still maintains a
normal body temperature. In comparison to FAH, the
infrared detector can detect the target, but the low-light
detector may not effectively capture information about
the target [47]. The FAN rescue scenario is designed to
simulate real-life conditions [48].
3) OAH: Scenario refers to the scenario where the target is
obstructed and cannot be detected. In this situation, the
infrared detector becomes ineffective due to the thick
obstructive material providing thermal insulation. This
scenario is commonly encountered in emergency rescue
situations, where detecting obstructed rescue targets
beyond obstacles is a persistent challenge in the field of
emergency rescue. OAH is also widely present in actual
emergency rescue scenarios [49].
4) STD: It is a more general rescue scenario where the
target can still stand and has a normal body temperature,
showing a significant contrast with the surrounding
environment. In this situation, the detector should exhibit
high performance, serving as a criterion to verify the
effectiveness of the detector.
A low-light and infrared co-calibrated imaging device [50]
was applied to capture data from the aforementioned scenarios, which were processed and annotated appropriately.
The data processing workflow is illustrated in Fig. 1. First,
raw data were captured from the device. The resolution of
low-light images is 2048 × 2048, while the infrared images are
640 × 512. The original infrared images have thermal noise,

5403518

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Architecture of the proposed dual-stream multimodal fusion model based on frequency-domain feature decomposition.

which must be eliminated through a process of denoising.
By deactivating the infrared sensor in an environment devoid
of light exposure, an infrared dark image could be obtained
with solely thermal noise. The denoised images were then
obtained by subtracting the infrared dark image (thermal
noise) from the original infrared image [51]. Afterward, the
resulting infrared images have dark edges that need to be
cropped out. Additionally, although the low-light and infrared
images are aligned at the center, they have different fields of
view, resulting in varying degrees of distortion at the image
edges. Therefore, the RIFT algorithm [52] was employed for
registration. Finally, the synchronized low-light and infrared
images were obtained.
III. D UAL -S TREAM M ULTIMODAL F USION M ODEL
In this section, a dual-stream low-light and infrared modality
fusion network is introduced, as shown in Fig. 2, based on
frequency-domain feature decomposition, which leverages the
complementary information from visible light and infrared
modalities to enhance the detection performance [53].
A. Method Overview
The model contains four components:
1) an encoder–decoder module for high-fidelity reconstruction;
2) a low-frequency extractor for extracting global features;
3) a high-frequency extractor for extracting local detailed
features;
4) a dual-stream feature fusion module.
The overall workflow is illustrated in Fig. 2, and the network
achieves excellent performance on the low-light and infrared
fusion task.
B. Multimodal Feature Encoder
For the low-light and infrared inputs, a shared feature backbone encoder was applied to help the subsequent
frequency-domain feature extractor for further processing.
Initially, the input pair of low-light and infrared images Ivis

and Iir was fed into the encoder, respectively, represented as
follows:
Xvis = E(Ivis ),

Xir = E(Iir )

(1)

where E( ) is the encoder and Xvis and Xir are the shared
features extracted from low-light images and infrared images,
respectively.
For the encoder, the global, regional, and local (GRL) [54]
block, a state-of-the-art method adopted in the field of image
restoration, is selected. The reason is that GRL can efficiently
and explicitly extract high-resolution image features and perform restoration, which is beneficial for improving the quality
of image fusion [55].
∗

C. Frequency-Based Feature Extractor
Then, the aforementioned shallow features Xvis and Xir
were fed into a low-frequency extractor and a high-frequency
extractor, respectively, obtaining the corresponding frequencydomain features, represented as follows:
fvis = 8(Xvis ), ψvis = 9(Xvis )
fir = 8(Xir ), ψir = 9(Xir )

(2)
(3)

where 8(∗ ) represents the low-frequency extractor; 9(∗ )
represents the high-frequency extractor; and fvis and fir are
the extracted low-frequency features of low-light and infrared
inputs, respectively. Similarly, ψvis and ψir are the extracted
high-frequency features of low-light and infrared inputs,
respectively.
A Lite-transformer-based low-frequency extractor was
applied because it can improve the speed of inference [56].
The lightweight transformer module allows it to obtain more
long-range information [57], corresponding to high-frequency
information [58], while its ability to extract short-range information is reduced. This symbolizes a weaker low-frequency
information extraction capability. For the high-frequency
extractor, an invertible residual neural network [59] was used.
The convolutional structure of CNN is effective in extracting
short-range information [60], corresponding to high-frequency
components [61]. Invertible neural networks have the theoretical capability of lossless information compression [62],
enabling the preservation of high-frequency information.

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

D. Frequency-Based Fusion Layer
The low-frequency features fvis and fir were first concatenated and then fed into the low-frequency fusion layer, while
the high-frequency features ψvis and ψir underwent the same
operation but were fed into the high-frequency fusion layer.
This procession can be described as follows:
X low = Flow (CAT(fvis , fir ))
X high = Fhigh (CAT(ψvis , ψir ))

(4)

where Flow (∗ ) is the low-frequency fusion layer, Fhigh (∗ )
is the high-frequency fusion layer, X low is the fused lowfrequency feature, X high is the fused high-frequency feature,
and CAT(∗ , ∗ ) is the channel concatenation operation.
The low-frequency fusion layer consists of the Litetransformer-based block, while the high-frequency fusion layer
consists of the IRNN block, which aims to fuse low/high
frequency features, respectively.
E. Fused Feature Decoder
The fused feature decoder is comprised of the GRL blocks.
The frequency-based fused features X low and X high were
concatenated and reduced in dimension, respectively. They
were then fed into the fused feature decoder to generate the
final fused image, given as follows:
X low , X high ))
Ifused = D(CAT(X

(5)

where D(∗ ) is the decoder, Ifused is the final fused image, and
CAT(∗ , ∗ ) is the channel concatenation operation.
F. Loss Function
To achieve a high-fidelity output that combines features
from both modalities, the network was trained in two stages.
In the first stage, the network’s ability was trained to
reconstruct images for each modality. This is attained by concatenating high- and low-frequency features and then feeding
them into the GRL decoder. The loss function is described as
follows:
L 1 = α1 L vis + α2 L ir + α3 L indep
s.t. α1 + α2 + α3 = 1

(6)

where L vis and L ir are the reconstruction errors for low-light
and infrared images, respectively, and L indep represents the
loss that quantifies the independence of low-frequency representations from high-frequency features. α1 –α3 are the tuning
parameters, with the constraint condition of α1 + α2 + α3 = 1.
For the reconstruction loss L vis , which is similar to L ir in
calculation, it is conducted by mse [64], namely, (7). Among
them, Ivis is the reconstructed low-light image and Ivis is
the original image, consistent with the previous definition
mentioned above, where µ is the tuning parameter
L vis = ||Ivis − Ivis ||22 + (1 − µ)MSE(Ivis , Ivis ).

(7)

For the independence loss, assuming that each pixel of
image Ivis is denoted by xi and each pixel of infrared image Iir
is denoted by yi , the calculation of L indep can be given in (8).

5403518

It specifies that the independence loss is computed using the
cosine distance [63]
Pxi yi
(8)
L indep = q 2iq 2 .
Pxi P yi
i

i

In the second stage, the network was trained for multimodal
image fusion and feature extraction. The paired low-light and
infrared images {Ivis , Iir } were fed into a well-trained GRL
encoder to obtain the shallow features {Xvis , Xir }. Then, the
low-frequency extractor and the high-frequency extractor were
applied to obtain the decoupled features {fvis , ψvis , fir , ψir }.
Through the fusion layer, {fmi , fir } and {ψmi , ψir } were combined, obtaining the aggregated low-frequency feature X low
and high-frequency feature X high , and these combined features
were then fed into the GRL decoder to produce the final fused
image Ifused .
During this stage, the loss function is defined as follows,
which is comprised of intensity loss, gradient loss, and independent loss:
L 2 = λ1 L VISint + λ2 L IRint + λ3 L VISgrad + λ4 L IRgrad + λ5 L indep .
(9)
The intensity loss L VISint , which is similar to L IRint in
calculation, is described as follows:
1
||Ifused − Ivis ||22
(10)
HW
where H and W are the height and width of the image,
respectively.
The gradient loss L VISgrad , which is similar to L IRgrad in
calculation, is described as follows:
L VISint =

1
||∇Ifused − ∇Ivis ||22
(11)
HW
where ∇ represents the Sobel gradient operator and H and W
are the height and width of the image, respectively.
L VISgrad =

IV. A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS IN E MERGENCY
R ESCUE S ITUATIONS
The typical goal of anomaly detection is to identify anomalies that differ from normal samples through unsupervised or
semi-supervised methods, performing binary classification or
localizing tasks. In recent years, there has been significant
progress in image anomaly detection techniques, yet their
application in the field of emergency rescue remains unexplored. In this section, unsupervised image anomaly detection
methods are reviewed and categorized into traditional methods and deep learning-based methods, distinguishing whether
they incorporate DNNs. The overview of the image anomaly
detection methods is shown in Fig. 3.
A. Anomaly Detection Methods Based on Traditional
Approaches
In this section, traditional image anomaly detection methods
are categorized into the following types: statistical modelbased, sparse coding reconstruction-based, decompositionbased, and frequency-domain analysis-based.

5403518

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Anomaly detection methods overview.

1) Statistical Model-Based Methods: Statistical modelbased methods typically utilize statistical models to describe
the distribution of pixels or feature vectors in normal images.
Regions in images that deviate from this distribution are
considered anomalies. These methods typically represent the
normal parts of images using Gaussian distributions in the
spatial or frequency domain, detecting abnormal regions based
on outliers. Representative works include Reed–Xiao (RX)
[65], Gaussian expectation–maximization [66], Markov random field Gaussian model [67], and so on.
The RX algorithm was selected as the representative method
for detailed analyses. The RX algorithm is based on two
hypotheses, H0 and H1 . Assuming that the background and
the anomaly target have the same covariance matrix Cb , if the

target is present, the mean of the background becomes the
feature vector s of the target. H0 represents the absence of a
target, and at this time, the background follows an N (0, Cb )
distribution; H1 represents the presence of a target, and the
background follows an N (s, Cb ) distribution.
For the input image that consists of P spectral bands, the
background containing N pixels can be represented as a P ∗ N
matrix Xb = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x N ], where xi = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x P ]T .
Under the H0 hypothesis, the mean vector µb and covariance
matrix Cb of the background are estimated as follows:
N

1 X
xi ,
µb =
N i=1

Cb =

1
Xb XTb .
N

(12)

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

For each pixel xi with P spectral bands, its RX statistic r is
calculated as follows, which is equivalent to the Mahalanobis
distance [68]:
r = (xi − µb )T C−1
b (xi − µb ).

(13)

Given a threshold λ , if a pixel’s RX statistic r is larger
than the threshold, then the pixel is determined to be an
anomalous one, which conforms more to the H1 hypothesis
(the target is present); otherwise, it is a background pixel under
H0 hypothesis (the target is absent).
2) Sparse Coding Reconstruction-Based Methods: Methods
of this kind typically involve reconstructing images using
sparse coding. In this process, a dictionary is learned to
represent normal images. Subsequently, during the testing
phase, anomaly detection is performed based on aspects
such as reconstruction differences and sparsity. This includes
methods such as principal component analysis (PCA) [69],
independent component analysis (ICA) [70], and alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMMs) [71].
Analyzing with the classical PCA algorithm as a representative, suppose that there are m normal images, and each image
is flattened into a vector x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ]T with n pixels;
then, an m ∗ n matrix X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ] can be conducted.
For the matrix X, the covariance matrix C can be computed first. The eigenvalues λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λn and corresponding
eigenvectors e1 , e2 , . . . , en of C are then computed. The top
k principal eigenvectors are selected with the larger eigenvalues and are rearranged as the projection matrix P =
[e1 , e2 , . . . , ek ], where k is far smaller than n.
In the testing phase, the flattened vector x of test image
can be mapped to a k-dimensional vector y in the principal
component space, which is calculated by y = PT x. Then, the
reconstruction vector x′ is computed as follows:
x′ = Py.

(14)

For each pixel xi of the test image, where i = 1, 2, . . . , n,
the PCA anomaly score can be computed in a typical approach,
namely, weighted summation of all possible k values. Suppose
that there are q possible k values in total, the anomaly score
c is calculated using the following equations:
c=

q
X

|xi − xi′ | · w p

p=1
Pp
j=1 λ j
w p = Pn
j=1 λ j

(15)
(16)

where w p is the weight of the pth possible k values, with p
principal eigenvectors selected.
3) Image Decomposition-Based Methods: Methods based
on image decomposition are mostly designed for the detection
of small anomalous areas on surfaces with periodic textures.
Since anomalous regions typically appear randomly and have
weaker periodicity, this characteristic allows them to be distinguished from backgrounds with strong periodic textures.
Classical methods include hyperspectral image decomposition [72], low-rank decomposition [73], GoDec [74], and
so on.

5403518

DEC represents classical low-rank decomposition methods.
For the input image, low-rank decomposition is employed
to decompose the original test image into a low-rank matrix
representing the background and a sparse matrix representing
the anomalous regions. It is represented as follows:
min ||L||∗ + λ ||S||1 ,
L,S

s.t. F = L + S

(17)

where F represents the original image matrix; L and S
represent the low-rank matrix and sparse matrix, respectively;
|| · ||∗ represents the rank of matrix; || · ||1 represents the L1
norm to approximately describe the sparsity of the matrix; and
λ is the tuning hyperparameter.
4) Frequency-Domain-Based Methods: Frequency-domainbased methods mainly manipulate the spectral information of
an image, attempting to eliminate periodic background textures
to highlight anomalous regions. This method can be categorized into two domains: background spectrum elimination and
phase-only Fourier transform. The former aims to eliminate
periodic background spectral information to highlight anomalous regions, while the latter separates repetitive background
and anomalous regions by extracting only the phase spectrum.
For the former, most existing works [75], [76], [77], [78]
first utilize the Fourier transform to convert the original
image into the frequency domain. After removing the spectral
components corresponding to periodic background textures
in the magnitude spectrum, the inverse Fourier transform is
applied to obtain the spatial information of anomalous regions.
For the phase-only-based methods [79], [80], [81], the
amplitude spectrum is discarded, with only the phase spectrum
being subjected to inverse discrete cosine transform (IDCT),
as shown in (18)–(20)
X = F(I)

(18)

where (18) denotes the discrete cosine transform (DCT) processing, F(∗ ) is the Fourier transform, I refers to the original
image, and X is the image in the frequency domain with r
rows and c columns
X (u, v)
∀u ∈ [0, r ) ∀v ∈ [0, c)
(19)
X ′ (u, v) =
M(u, v)
where (19) represents the extraction of the phase spectrum,
X (u, v) is the value at position (u, v) after the Fourier
transform, M(u, v) represents the amplitude value at that point,
and X ′ (u, v) is the normalized result. This process can remove
the majority of periodic textures from the original image,
highlighting the anomalous regions [82]
X ′)
I′ = F −1 (X

(20)

where (20) is the IDCT process, F −1 (∗ ) represents the inverse
Fourier transform, X ′ is the normalized image in the frequency
domain, and I′ refers to the output image through phase-onlybased methods.
B. Anomaly Detection Methods Based on Deep Learning
Deep learning-based methods do not rely on manually
designed features; instead, they leverage DNNs to automatically learn extracting discriminative features, providing the

5403518

Fig. 4.
Pipeline of RIAD. Initially, the input image is divided into n
patches of equal size. These patches are then subjected to random masking,
a process that is repeated n times to yield n masked images. It is imperative
to ensure that the intersection of masked patches in each image is devoid
of any content. Subsequently, the covered portions of the n masked images
are reconstructed by a U-Net architecture model, and the reconstructed
components are then assembled to obtain a complete reconstructed image.
Finally, following evaluation of the results, an anomaly map is generated.

algorithm with higher generalization capability. The existing
methods can be broadly categorized into four types, namely,
AE-based, knowledge distillation-based, generative adversarial
network (GAN)-based, and memory bank-based approaches.
1) AE-Based Methods: These methods typically utilize the
architecture of AE [83] or variational AE (VAE) [84] to
extract features. For an input image X, the process begins
by obtaining the latent code X′ of X through an encoder.
Subsequently, X′ is decoded by a decoder to produce Y.
Due to the anomaly-free nature of the training process for
the encoder–decoder, it can only learn features from normal
samples and cannot reconstruct anomalous regions. Therefore,
the difference between Y and X can serve as an indicator for detecting anomalies. Representative works include:
UTAD [85], DFR [86], ALT [87], P-Net [88], EdgRec [89],
SMAI [90], FAVAE [90], and RIAD [92].
For detailed analysis, RIAD was selected, as shown in
Fig. 4. The input image is uniformly divided into n patches
of size k ∗ k. n patches are randomly masked out, and this
process is repeated n times to obtain n masked images.
It is ensured that the intersection of masked patches in each
image is empty. During the model processing, the covered
portions of the n masked images are reconstructed, and the
reconstructed components are then assembled to obtain a
complete reconstructed image.
2) Knowledge Distillation-Based Methods: Knowledge distillation aims to transfer the knowledge contained in the
pretrained teacher model to the smaller student model, thereby
achieving model compression [93]. In anomaly detection,
knowledge distillation is applied to constrain the generalization
capability of the encoder–decoder, disrupting the reconstruction of anomalous samples, thereby magnifying the distance
between normal and anomalous samples in evaluation metrics [94], [95], [96], [97].
To replicate the experiments on the MRSI-NERD dataset,
the current state-of-the-art reverse knowledge distillation
method, namely, RD4AD [94], was selected. The process is

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 5. Pipeline of RD4AD. The model itself consists of three components:
a pretrained teacher encoder (T-Encoder), a trainable student decoder (D-Decoder), and a OCBE module. The OCBE module includes multifeature fusion
(MFF) module and the one-class-embedding (OCE) module. Also, the SSIM
loss in the illustration refers to the similarity loss.

illustrated in Fig. 5. For the input image, channel normalization
was first performed and then fed into the model. The model
consists of a fixed, extensively pretrained teacher encoder
(T-Encoder), a trainable student decoder (D-Decoder), and a
one-class bottleneck embedding (OCBE). The input image is
encoded by T-Encoder, undergoes redundancy removal through
the OCBE module, and is then decoded by S-Decoder with the
expectation of restoring the normal image information. The
similarity loss between encoder and decoder is calculated, and
the optimization is performed by backpropagating gradients to
update decoder and OCBE.
3) GAN-Based Methods: The application of GANs in image
generation is widespread. Some efforts have been made to
constrain the generator to learn features only from normal samples, preventing it from generalizing to anomalous
samples. There are various works on GAN-based anomaly
detection [98], [99], [100], and here, omni-frequency channelselection representations (OCR)-GAN was selected as a
representative example [100], as shown in Fig. 6.
For the generator, frequency decoupling is performed to
decompose input images at different frequencies. This step is
achieved through predesigned Gaussian blurring. The decoupled inputs are sequentially fed into generators corresponding
to different frequencies through a channel selection module to
reconstruct the respective images. The final output is obtained
by accumulating these reconstructions.
For the discriminator, it takes the original image X1 and the
reconstructed image X2 as input X1 serves as negative inputs,
representing normal samples, while X2 and the augmented
samples of X1 serve as positive inputs, representing abnormal
samples. During the training phase, only X1 and its augmented
version (referred to as CutPaste [101] and CutOut [102] in
the original text) are used as positive and negative samples,
respectively. This is done to learn the distribution of normal images and train the discriminator. During the testing
phase, the discriminator produces binary classification labels
(normal/abnormal), and the location of anomalies is identified
through the reconstruction error.
4) Memory Bank-Based Methods: To address the issue
where neural networks can reconstruct unseen anomalous
regions, memory bank-based methods store features of nor-

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

Fig. 6. Pipeline of OCR-GAN. OCR-GAN comprises two distinct steps:
frequency decoupling and reconstruction. In the frequency decoupling step,
the input image is decomposed at different frequencies through predesigned
Gaussian blurring. In the reconstruction step, through a Channel Selection
module, the decoupled inputs with different frequencies are then fed sequentially into a corresponding U-Net architecture generator. The generators are
used to reconstruct the respective images and the final output is obtained by
accumulating these reconstructions. In the training phase, the discriminator
processes the original image and its augmented version to learn the distribution
of normal images. In the testing phase, the discriminator produces binary
classification labels (normal/abnormal), and the location of anomalies is
identified through the reconstruction loss.

mal samples as prototypes. During decoding, the decoder
indexes the stored features for reconstruction, thereby limiting
the CNN’s generalization ability to unseen features. These
fields include many classic works, such as PatchCore [103],
SPADE [12], SOMAD [105], GCPF [106], SPD [107],
CFA [108], FAPM [109], and N-pad [110].
Selecting SPADE as a general representative, as shown
in Fig. 7, this method extends the KNN anomaly detection algorithm from image level to pixel level. During the
training phase, a ResNet feature extractor pretrained on the
ImageNet dataset is used to extract features from normal
images, and a feature bank is maintained. During the inference phase, first, image-level KNN matching is performed
to distinguish whether an image is normal or abnormal. For
abnormal images, multiscale image alignment is introduced for
pixel-level anomaly localization. For a normal sample that is
misclassified as abnormal, the pixel-level localization should
output a mask of all zeros.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets: In this article, the dataset was organized
following the format of MVTec, where each learning-based
algorithm was trained on the corresponding target-free sample
scene classification. There are a total of four different scenes
for each modal, each containing 1–3 targets. To validate the
effectiveness of the fusion method, the fused data were synthesized using the fusion algorithm proposed and conducted
the same validation analysis. The results are presented in
Section V-D.
2) Metrics: For the evaluation of fusion, EN, SD, SF,
MI, SCD, and SSIM were chosen as comprehensive metrics.
Suppose that the fused image is F, and the source images are

5403518

Fig. 7. Pipeline of SPADE. In the training stage, SPADE employs a pretrained
ResNet to extract features from normal images. The features are subsequently
stored in a feature bank. During the test stage, a multiscale image alignment
is utilized for anomaly localization. This involves querying the features in
the feature bank to generate an anomaly map. In the illustration, “E” denotes
“extract features” and “Q” signifies “query.”

A and B. Also, for an image I with size M × N , assuming
that there are L gray levels, µ I presents the mean value of the
image.
EN is a metric used to measure the amount of information
in an image. The formula for EN can be presented as follows,
where p(i) represents the probability of a pixel with gray value
i appearing:
EN = −

L
X

p(i) log2 p(i).

(21)

i=1

SD reflects the dispersion degree of pixel gray values in an
image relative to the mean value. The formula for SD can be
expressed as follows:
v
u
M X
N
X
u 1
SD = t
(I(i, j) − µ I )2 .
(22)
M × N i=1 j=1
SF refers to the rate of change of the greyscale of an image.
In general, the greater the SF, the higher the quality of the
fused image.
SF includes two further elements, namely, row frequency
(RF) and column frequency (CF). These are described by (23),
where RF and CF are calculated by (24) and (25), respectively,
p
SF = RF2 + CF2
(23)
v
u
M X
N
X
u 1
RF = t
(I(i, j) − I(i, j − 1))2
(24)
M × N i=1 j=1
v
u
M X
N
X
u 1
t
CF =
(I(i, j) − I(i − 1, j))2 .
(25)
M × N i=1 j=1
MI is used to measure the amount of information transferred
from the source image to the fused image. The higher the MI
of the fused image, the more information is transferred from
the source to the fused.
The total MI can be presented in (26). For the source image
A, the MI between the source A and the fused image F is
described as (27), where h A and h F denote the edge histogram

5403518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

of them and h A,F denotes the joint histogram of the source
and fused images
MI = MI A,F + MI B,F
XX
h A,F (i, j)
.
MI(A, F) =
h A,F (i, j) log2
h A (i)h F ( j)
i
j

(26)
(27)

SCD is a measure of the discrepancy between the fused
image and the source image, which is used to evaluate the
efficacy of the fusion algorithm. It can be observed that an
elevated SCD value indicates a greater degree of information
content present in the source image.
The formula for SCD can be described by (28), as shown at
the bottom of the next page, where D A,F denotes the difference
between the fused image F and the source image A (similarly
for D B,F ). For any two images X and Y, r (X, Y ) is presented
in (29), as shown at the bottom of the next page.
SSIM is employed to quantify the information loss and
distortion during the fusion process. A higher SSIM value indicates a greater structural similarity between the two images,
implying a lower information loss and distortion during fusion.
The total SSIM can be presented in (30), and the SSIM
between two images X and Y is described as (31). σ X presents
the SD of image X (similarly for σ F ), where C1 = (0.01× L)2
and C2 = (0.03 × L)2
SSIM = SSIM A,F + SSIM B,F
(2µ X µ F + C1 )(2σ X F + C1 )
.
SSIM X,F = 2
(µ X + µ2F + C1 )(σ X2 + σ F2 + C2 )

(30)
(31)

For the testing of anomaly detection, the settings of MVTec
AD [111] were followed, adopting three popular metrics to
get a comprehensive performance evaluation of all benchmarks, including traditional and deep learning-based methods,
namely, FPR, TPR, and AUC. Negative denotes the background pixels in the image without target objects.
FPR in anomaly detection measures the proportion of
normal data points that the model incorrectly identifies as
anomalies, representing the rate of false alarms in a model.
It is described in the following equation, where false positive
(FP) is the number of negative cases that are incorrectly
predicted as positive and true negative (TN) is the number
of negative cases that are correctly predicted as negative:
FP
.
(32)
FP + TN
TPR is a crucial metric that measures the proportion of
actual anomalies that the detection algorithm correctly identifies, reflecting the ability of a model to identify the positive
instances accurately.
It is presented in (32), where true positive (TP) is the
number of positive cases that are correctly predicted as positive
and false negative (FN) is the number of positive cases that
are incorrectly predicted as negative
FPR =

TP
.
(33)
TP + FN
AUC provides a comprehensive evaluation of the performance of an anomaly detection method across different
decision thresholds. The receiver operating characteristic
TPR =

(ROC) curve is plotted with TPR on the y-axis and FPR on
the x-axis for various threshold settings. The AUC is the area
under this ROC curve.
3) Tested Approaches: For image fusion, the proposed
method was compared with a wavelet transform and
the state-of-the-art deep learning-based methods, including
U2Fusion [112], SDNet [113], TarDAL [114], and DeFusion [115]. For traditional anomaly detection algorithms, the
following were tested: 1) RXD as a statistical model-based
method; 2) PCA as a sparse coding reconstruction-based
method; 3) DEC as an image decomposition-based method;
and 4) POFT as a frequency-domain-based method. For deep
learning-based anomaly detection algorithms, the following
were tested: 1) RIAD as AE-based methods; 2) RD4AD as
a knowledge distillation-based method; 3) OCR-GAN as a
GAN-based method; and 4) SPADE as a memory bank-based
method. All parameters were carefully tuned to achieve the
best results.
4) Parameter Settings: For the wavelet transform, the
wavelet basis function was the second-order Daubechies
wavelet, with the decomposition level set to 1, where the
fusion strategy was using the average method for low frequency and the maximum method for high frequency. For the
deep learning-based fusion methods, the parameter settings
were adjusted to be consistent with the references. For the
fusion method proposed, the number of epochs for training
was set to 150 with 60 and 90 epochs in the first and second
stages, respectively. The batch size was set to 32. For the
model hyperparameter settings, the number of GRL blocks in
the multimodal feature encoder was 6, with eight attention
heads and 64 channels. The channel of the Lite-transformbased block was also 64 with eight attention heads. The
configuration of the decoder is the same as that of the encoder.
As for loss functions (6), α1–α3 were set to 0.3, 0.3, and 0.4,
respectively. As for loss functions (7), µ was set to 0.5. As for
loss functions in (9), λ1 –λ5 were all set to 0.2. For the anomaly
detection algorithms, the summary of the percentage of larger
eigenvalues is over 99%, the tuning hyperparameter was set
to 1 in DEC, and the hyperparameters in RIAD, RD4AD,
OCR-GAN, and SPADE were consistent with the references.
B. Comparison of the Traditional Methods
As shown in Fig. 8, in the low-light modality, the traditional
methods performed poorly in all four scenarios. The binary
and heat maps of POFT and PCA were complex and lacked
the ability to be recognized. The DEC resulted in almost
blank binary maps, with fewer high values (i.e., hotter regions)
being detected. However, RXD was effective in detecting
anomalies, particularly in STD scenarios, and showed suboptimal performance in other scenes compared to the other
methods.
As shown in Fig. 9, in the infrared modality, the four
methods had a superior performance than the low-light modality in all four scenarios. It is obvious that the person was
easier to recognize in the heat maps of DEC and POFT, but
the binary maps of DEC were still empty. The PCA heat
maps had less noise. In addition, the RXD exhibited superior
performance, especially in the STD, FAN, and OAH scenes,

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

Fig. 8.

5403518

Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection algorithms on the low-light dataset.

with obvious objects detected in both binary and heat maps,
where high anomaly scores (i.e., the hotter regions) were more
concentrated on the person to be rescued.
The results presented in Table I demonstrate that, among all
algorithms, the RXD algorithm achieved the best performance.
PCA and DEC struggled to cope with complex nighttime
rescue anomaly detection, resulting in poorer performance.
This may be PCA’s inability to capture the complex non-linear
relationships and DEC’s difficulties due to its low-rank distribution assumptions. The POFT algorithm performed well in
a few scenarios, as indicated by the AUC metric, where the
frequency domain may contain more information and structure
to detect. However, traditional detection algorithms generally
face challenges of high FPRs, making it difficult for direct
deployment.
C. Comparison of the Deep Learning-Based Methods
As shown in Fig. 8, in the low-light modality, the anomaly
regions detected by the SPADE algorithm were able to encompass the person to be rescued, particularly in the STD, FAN,
and FAH scenes. However, the binary maps of OCR-GAN
were complex, with fewer high values (i.e., hotter regions)

detected on the ground truth. The binary maps of RIAD and
RD4AD did not cover the person, and instead, the heat maps
of RD4AD covered the regions of the anomaly.
As shown in Fig. 9, the deep learning-based methods
achieved better performance in the infrared modality compared
to the traditional algorithms proposed above. Compared to the
low-light modality, RIAD and OCR-GAN detected more edges
of the ground truth in the binary maps. Specifically, SPADE
performed poorly in the OAH scenario, detecting misplaced
regions (i.e., background) in both binary and heat maps.
The results in Table I show that the SPADE algorithm
based on memory banks outperformed others in most of the
recognition tasks, followed by the state-of-the-art knowledge
distillation method RD4AD. On the other hand, methods based
on GAN, such as OCR-GAN, and those using E–D structures,
such as RIAD, showed relatively poorer performance on this
dataset.
D. Performance of Fusion-Based Detections
The fusion results of the low-light and the infrared images
are shown in Table II. The experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method has excellent performance on almost

SCD = r (A, D A,F ) + r (B, D B,F )
PM PN
i=1
j=1 (X(i, j) − µ X )(Y(i, j) − µY )
r (X, Y ) = qP P
PM PN
M
N
2
2
i=1
j=1 (X(i, j) − µ X )
i=1
j=1 (Y(i, j) − µY )

(28)
(29)

5403518

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection algorithms on the infrared dataset.
TABLE I
R ESULTS OF T RADITIONAL M ETHODS AND D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS IN D ETECTION

all metrics, proving that our method is suitable for various
kinds of scenarios. Specifically, the method proposed loses
some MI (e.g., in STD and FAH scenarios) due to independence loss, but it still achieves better results compared to

the baseline. Furthermore, the SD and SSIM of the proposed
fusion method are less effective in the OAH scenario, which
is related to the inherent contrast and environmental gradients
in the OAH images.

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

5403518

TABLE II
R ESULTS OF F USION M ETHODS

TABLE III
R ESULTS OF D ETECTION ON F USED I MAGES

To further evaluate the performance of the fused images,
downstream detection tasks were conducted on the fused
dataset. RXD, which performed best among traditional algorithms, and RD4AD and SPADE, which exhibited excellent
performance among deep learning algorithms, were selected.
The results of the experiment are shown in Fig. 10 and
Table III.
As illustrated in Fig. 10, the heat maps demonstrate that,
in comparison with the single-modality-based, high anomaly
scores (i.e., the hotter regions) are more concentrated on the
person to be rescued, with diminished distribution over the
background. Furthermore, in the binary maps, the anomaly

Fig. 10.
Performances of the traditional and deep learning detection
algorithms on the fused dataset. In comparison with the single modality, high
anomaly scores (i.e., the hotter regions) in the heat maps are more concentrated
on the person to be rescued, with diminished distribution over the background.
Furthermore, in the binary maps, the anomaly regions cover the ground truth
more comprehensively, demonstrating the improvements with fusion.

regions cover the ground truth more comprehensively, demonstrating the improvements with fusion.
As demonstrated in Table III, the RXD and RD4AD algorithms, respectively, exhibit the most optimal performance
under the STD and OAH scenarios on the fused dataset,
whereas SPADE demonstrates superior performance under the
FAN and FAH scenarios.
Boldface and underline show the best and second-best
values, respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method has excellent performance on almost all
metrics, proving that our method is suitable for various kinds
of scenarios.
Boldface and underline show the best and second-best
values, respectively. The SPADE outperforms in FAN and
FAH scenarios, while the RXD and RD4AD algorithms,
respectively, demonstrate superior performance in the FAN and
FAH scenarios.
To facilitate a comparison of the performance of RXD,
RD4AD, and SPADE in different scenarios and multimodal
datasets, a further illustration is provided in Fig. 11. The
quantitative comparison reveals that the detection results of
fusion outperform single modality in almost all scenarios. The
SPADE based on fused images demonstrated improving AUC
scores in all four scenarios, with higher TPR scores in STD,
FAN, and OAH scenarios. Similarly, the RD4AD method,

5403518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 11. Comparison of RXD, RD4AD, and SPADE in different scenes and multimodal datasets. The detection results of fusion have more superior AUC and
TPR performance on almost all scenarios than single modality. The SPADE based on fused images demonstrated superior AUC scores in all four scenarios,
with higher TPR scores in STD, FAN, and OAH scenarios. Similarly, the RD4AD method, based on the fusion, exhibited enhanced AUC and TPR values in
nearly four scenarios (e.g., AUC values in the STD, FAN, and OAH). In the case of the RXD, the AUC of fusion surpassed the single modal in the STD and
OAH scenarios, and TPR scores were superior in the STD and FAH. In addition, the performance of fused images in FPR exceeds that of the single-modal
images only in certain instances (e.g., RXD in STD and OAH scenarios, and RD4AD in STD scenario).

based on the fusion, exhibited enhanced AUC and TPR values
in nearly four scenarios (e.g., AUC values in the STD, FAN,
and OAH). In the case of the RXD, the AUC of fusion
surpassed the single-modal in the STD and OAH scenarios,
and TPR scores were superior in the STD and FAH. However,
the performance of fused images in FPR exceeds that of the
single-modal images only in certain instances (e.g., RXD in
STD and OAH scenarios, and RD4AD in STD scenario),
where the misplaced regions are more localized in Fig. 10.
Addressing this problem requires associating more features
with contextual relationships, which is the limitation of our
fusion approach for anomaly detection tasks in nighttime
rescue missions.
VI. S UMMARY AND D ISCUSSION
In this article, a fair evaluation of mainstream unsupervised
anomaly detection methods in the field of nighttime emergency rescue was conducted, and a fusion algorithm based
on frequency-domain feature decomposition was proposed,
which has been shown to enhance the performance of multiple detectors. To address the issue of insufficient data for

target recognition and detection in nighttime emergency rescue
situations, a well-annotated and augmented dataset (MRSINERD) was proposed. Considering the labor-intensive nature
of constructing task-specific annotated datasets in real-world
scenarios, which may not meet the timely requirements of
emergency rescue, pixel-wise anomaly detection algorithms
were researched. These algorithms treat a small number of
annotated samples as anomaly information and extensively
extract meaningful features from normal images. Thanks
to the powerful feature extraction capabilities of DNNs,
deep learning-based detection methods go beyond traditional
algorithms. However, traditional algorithms based on RX
also demonstrate decent performance in complex detection
tasks. Among the deep learning methods, approaches based
on reconstruction and memory bank have achieved superior performance. To further enhance the performance of
unsupervised anomaly detection, a deep multimodal fusion
algorithm based on frequency-domain feature decomposition
was further proposed. Experimental results demonstrate that
this fusion strategy effectively improves the performance of the
detectors.

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

In addition, due to the complexity of natural backgrounds,
it has been observed that some anomaly detection methods
struggle to meet the precision requirements for nighttime
emergency rescue environments. Therefore, it is hoped that
future research directions can focus on the following aspects.
1) Developing Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Methods:
Anomaly detection methods rely on comprehensive normal
datasets that are thoroughly annotated and representative
of the operational environment. However, collecting such
datasets can be challenging in nighttime emergency rescue
scenarios due to the variability and unpredictability inherent
to these situations. Unsupervised domain adaptation methods can effectively leverage data from both domains to
learn an efficient anomaly detection model for the target
domain [116]. Therefore, more unsupervised domain adaptation methods should be developed to promote the detection
performance.
2) Developing Active Learning-Based Methods: The current process of labeling data is typically time-consuming and,
as a consequence, a hindrance to the adoption of machine
learning methods for the automated anomaly detection [117].
Employing expert feedback, active learning is an effective tool
for building anomaly detection models. The model queries
samples that need to be labeled by experts and then retrains the
model using the samples. This approach can reduce the burden
of acquiring labeled datasets while improving the anomaly
detection performance [118]. Therefore, active learning-based
low-light and infrared remote sensing images anomaly detection methods should be further developed.
3) Constructing Different Operators Based on Low-Light
and Infrared Data: Nighttime operations are typified by lowlight conditions, which can significantly restrict the visibility
and efficacy of conventional imaging systems. While infrared
data offer distinct advantages in low-light settings, it necessitates the utilization of specialized processing techniques.
The characteristics of low-light and infrared data can be
leveraged to construct operators that make full use of prior
knowledge [119]. Thus, how best to construct the different
operators based on low-light and infrared data, preserving
texture details, performance, and operational efficiency, is an
interesting topic.
4) Coupling Physical Mechanisms and Data-Driven Methods in Low-Light and Infrared Multimodal Detection System
for Nighttime Rescue Mission: Due to the inability of capturing physical mechanisms present in the images, data-driven
deep learning algorithms to image data frequently result in
suboptimal performance in complex scenarios [120]. Some
traditional anomaly detection algorithms, designed based on
statistical or physical features of the image, such as RXD,
demonstrate performance on par with some deep learning
algorithms on the fused dataset. This suggests the potential
to enhance the efficacy of low-light and infrared multimodal detection systems by coupling data-driven methods
with physical mechanisms. Consequently, the combination
of deep learning anomaly detection methods with physical
mechanisms in low-light and infrared multimodal data could
be promising for further investigation.

5403518

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Guo, “Understanding global natural disasters and the role of
Earth observation,” Int. J. Digit. Earth, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 221–230,
Sep. 2010.
[2] K. Sha, W. Shi, and O. Watkins, “Using wireless sensor networks for fire rescue applications: Requirements and challenges,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electro/Inf. Technol., May 2006,
pp. 239–244.
[3] J. Bravo-Arrabal, M. Toscano-Moreno, J. J. Fernandez-Lozano,
A. Mandow, J. A. Gomez-Ruiz, and A. García-Cerezo, “The internet
of cooperative agents architecture (X-IoCA) for robots, hybrid sensor
networks, and MEC centers in complex environments: A search and
rescue case study,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 23, p. 7843, Nov. 2021.
[4] T. Oron-Gilad, J. Y. C. Chen, and P. A. Hancock, “Remotely operated
vehicles (ROVs) from the top-down and the bottom-up,” in Human
Factors of Remotely Operated Vehicles. Bingley, U.K.: Emerald Group,
2006, pp. 37–47.
[5] R. Bahmanyar and N. Merkle, “Saving lives from above: Person
detection in disaster response using deep neural networks,” ISPRS Ann.
Photogramm., Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 343–350,
Dec. 2023.
[6] M. Zhao, P. Wang, Q. Zhao, X. Mao, J. Nie, and Y. Huang, “Research
on the route selection of emergency rescue materials based on fairness
and timeliness in the early post earthquake period,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput., Inf. Telecommun. Syst. (CITS), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[7] R. Geraldes et al., “UAV-based situational awareness system using deep
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 122583–122594, 2019.
[8] A. Villringer and B. Chance, “Non-invasive optical spectroscopy and
imaging of human brain function,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 20, no. 10,
pp. 435–442, Oct. 1997.
[9] J. Xing, Research on Detection Probability of Infrared and Low Light
Detection Systems, vol. 2073. New York, NY, USA: AIP Publishing,
2019.
[10] J. Zhao and W. Liu, “A fusion method of infrared and low light level
images based on improved NSCT,” in 9th Symp. Novel Photoelectron.
Detection Technol. Appl., vol. 12617. Bellingham, WA, USA: SPIE,
2023, Art. no. 126171D.
[11] M. Chi, A. Plaza, J. A. Benediktsson, Z. Sun, J. Shen, and Y. Zhu,
“Big data for remote sensing: Challenges and opportunities,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 104, no. 11, pp. 2207–2219, Nov. 2016.
[12] N. Levin et al., “Remote sensing of night lights: A review and an
outlook for the future,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 237, Feb. 2020,
Art. no. 111443.
[13] J. Hai et al., “R2RNet: Low-light image enhancement via real-low
to real-normal network,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent., vol. 90,
Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103712.
[14] Z. Zhu, K. Fujimura, and Q. Ji, “Real-time eye detection and tracking
under various light conditions,” in Proc. Symp. Eye Tracking Res. Appl.,
vol. 2002, pp. 139–144.
[15] A. Jara et al., “Joint de-blurring and nonuniformity correction method
for infrared microscopy imaging,” Infr. Phys. Technol., vol. 90,
pp. 199–206, May 2018.
[16] A. M. Waxman, M. Aguilar, D. A. Fay, D. B. Ireland, and
J. P. Racamato, “Solid-state color night vision: Fusion of low-light
visible and thermal infrared imagery,” Lincoln Lab. J., vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 41–60, 1998.
[17] Y. Liu, L. Dong, and W. Xu, “Infrared and visible image fusion via
salient object extraction and low-light region enhancement,” Infr. Phys.
Technol., vol. 124, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 104223.
[18] K. Amolins, Y. Zhang, and P. Dare, “Wavelet based image fusion
techniques-an introduction, review and comparison,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 249–263, 2007.
[19] X. Zhang and Y. Demiris, “Visible and infrared image fusion using
deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 8,
pp. 10535–10554, Aug. 2023.
[20] H. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Tian, J. Jiang, and J. Ma, “Image fusion
meets deep learning: A survey and perspective,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 76,
pp. 323–336, Dec. 2021.
[21] P. Shamsolmoali et al., “Image synthesis with adversarial networks:
A comprehensive survey and case studies,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 72,
pp. 126–146, Aug. 2021.
[22] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Bu, S. G. Kong, and X. Zhang, “Color-aware fusion
of nighttime infrared and visible images,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 139, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 109521.

5403518

[23] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, Y. Bu, S. G. Kong, and J. C. W. Chan, “Laplacian
pyramid fusion network with hierarchical guidance for infrared and
visible image fusion,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 4630–4644, Sep. 2023.
[24] J. Ma, L. Tang, F. Fan, J. Huang, X. Mei, and Y. Ma, “SwinFusion:
Cross-domain long-range learning for general image fusion via Swin
transformer,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1200–1217,
Jul. 2022.
[25] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
[26] W. Tang, F. He, Y. Liu, Y. Duan, and T. Si, “DATFuse: Infrared
and visible image fusion via dual attention transformer,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 3159–3172, Jul. 2023.
[27] J. Yao, Y. Zhao, S. G. Kong, and X. Zhang, “Navigating uncertainty:
Semantic-powered image enhancement and fusion,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 1164–1168, 2024.
[28] J. Liu et al., “PromptFusion: Harmonized semantic prompt learning for
infrared and visible image fusion,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 502–515, Mar. 2025.
[29] Q. Tang, J. Liang, and F. Zhu, “A comparative review on multi-modal
sensors fusion based on deep learning,” Signal Process., vol. 213,
Dec. 2023, Art. no. 109165.
[30] A. Agarwal et al., “Comparison of the theoretical and statistical effects
of the PCA and CNN image fusion approaches,” in Handbook of
Research on Thrust Technologies’ Effect on Image Processing. Hershey,
PA, USA: IGI Global, 2023, pp. 193–205.
[31] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009.
[32] H. E. Egilmez and A. Ortega, “Spectral anomaly detection using graphbased filtering for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2014, pp. 1085–1089.
[33] L. Bruzzone and S. B. Serpico, “Detection of changes in remotelysensed images by the selective use of multi-spectral information,” Int.
J. Remote Sens., vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 3883–3888, 1997.
[34] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images:
A systematic survey,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 199, pp. 471–478,
Jan. 2022.
[35] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly
detection,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
[36] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images:
A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2109.13157.
[37] U. Pietsch et al., “Efficacy and efficiency of indoor nighttime human
external cargo mission simulation in a high-fidelity training centre,”
Scand. J. Trauma, Resuscitation Emergency Med., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 1–7, Dec. 2020.
[38] A. M. R. Bernal, W. Scheirer, and J. Cleland-Huang, “NOMAD: A
natural, occluded, multi-scale aerial dataset, for emergency response
scenarios,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 8584–8595.
[39] S. Leroux, B. Li, and P. Simoens, “Multi-branch neural networks for
video anomaly detection in adverse lighting and weather conditions,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
pp. 2358–2366.
[40] D. J. A. Brown, H. Brugger, J. Boyd, and P. Paal, “Accidental
hypothermia,” New England J. Med., vol. 367, no. 20, pp. 1930–1938,
2012.
[41] S. Davies and R. M. J. Gray, “What is occlusion?” Brit. Dental J.,
vol. 191, no. 5, pp. 235–245, 2001.
[42] T. Ono, H. Egawa, Y. Ono, and S. Ishikawa, “Detection of fallen
persons and person shadows from drone images,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Artif. Life Robot., vol. 28, 2024, pp. 890–894.
[43] M. Zaabi, N. Smaoui, W. Hariri, and H. Derbel, “Deep and statisticalbased methods for Alzheimer’s disease detection: A survey,” J. Comput.
Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2022.
[44] D. Broyles, C. R. Hayner, and K. Leung, “WiSARD: A labeled
visual and thermal image dataset for wilderness search and rescue,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022,
pp. 9467–9474.
[45] C. Frei et al., “Clinical characteristics and outcomes of witnessed
hypothermic cardiac arrest: A systematic review on rescue collapse,”
Resuscitation, vol. 137, pp. 41–48, Apr. 2019.
[46] K. Wang, L. Yang, and M. Kucharek, “Investigation of the effect
of thermal insulation materials on packaging performance,” Packag.
Technol. Sci., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 227–236, Jun. 2020.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[47] N. Bustos, M. Mashhadi, S. K. Lai-Yuen, S. Sarkar, and
T. K. Das, “A systematic literature review on object detection using near
infrared and thermal images,” Neurocomputing, vol. 560, Dec. 2023,
Art. no. 126804.
[48] E. L. Lloyd, “The cause of death after rescue,” Int. J. Sports Med.,
vol. 13, no. S1, pp. S196–S199, 1992.
[49] L. Jia, Z. Qian, X. Feng, and J. Lijun, “Obstacle detection method
for underwater mine emergency rescue AUV,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf.
Frontiers Sensors Technol. (ICFST), Apr. 2017, pp. 458–461.
[50] S. U. N. Aiping, G. Yangyun, and Z. H. U. Youpan, “Optical system
design of low-light-level and infrared image fusion hand-held viewer,”
Infr. Technol., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 712–717, 2013.
[51] H. Santosa, M. Jiyoun Hong, S.-P. Kim, and K.-S. Hong, “Noise
reduction in functional near-infrared spectroscopy signals by independent component analysis,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 84, no. 7, 2013,
Art. no. 073106.
[52] J. Li, Q. Hu, and M. Ai, “RIFT: Multi-modal image matching based on
radiation-variation insensitive feature transform,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 29, pp. 3296–3310, 2020.
[53] D. A. Kalashnikov, A. V. Paterova, S. P. Kulik, and L. A. Krivitsky,
“Infrared spectroscopy with visible light,” Nature Photon., vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 98–101, 2016.
[54] Y. Li et al., “Efficient and explicit modelling of image hierarchies
for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 18278–18289.
[55] Z. Zhao et al., “CDDFuse: Correlation-driven dual-branch feature
decomposition for multi-modality image fusion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 5906–5916.
[56] Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Lin, Y. Lin, and S. Han, “Lite transformer with
long-short range attention,” 2020, arXiv:2004.11886.
[57] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[58] G. G. Gregoriou, S. J. Gotts, H. Zhou, and R. Desimone, “Highfrequency, long-range coupling between prefrontal and visual cortex
during attention,” Science, vol. 324, no. 5931, pp. 1207–1210, 2009.
[59] J. Behrmann, W. Grathwohl, R. T. Q. Chen, D. Duvenaud, and
J.-H. Jacobsen, “Invertible residual networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2019, pp. 573–582.
[60] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[61] M. Ladegaard, F. H. Jensen, M. de Freitas, V. M. Ferreira da Silva,
and P. T. Madsen, “Amazon river dolphins (Inia geoffrensis) use a
high-frequency short-range biosonar,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 218, no. 19,
pp. 3091–3101, Oct. 2015.
[62] L. Liu, L. Tang, and W. Zheng, “Lossless image steganography based
on invertible neural networks,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 12, p. 1762,
Dec. 2022.
[63] M. Kryszkiewicz, “The cosine similarity in terms of the Euclidean
distance,” in Encyclopedia of Business Analytics and Optimization.
Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2014, pp. 2498–2508.
[64] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler, “Root mean square error (RMSE) or
mean absolute error (MAE)?—Arguments against avoiding RMSE in
the literature,” Geosci. Model Develop., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1247–1250,
2014.
[65] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of
an optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans.
Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770,
Aug. 1990.
[66] T. Veracini, S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “Fully unsupervised
learning of Gaussian mixtures for anomaly detection in hyperspectral
imagery,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Design Appl., Nov. 2009,
pp. 596–601.
[67] H. Zhang, X. Jin, Q. J. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. He, and Y. Yang, “Automatic
visual detection system of railway surface defects with curvature filter
and improved Gaussian mixture model,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 1593–1608, Jul. 2018.
[68] G. J. McLachlan, “Mahalanobis distance,” Resonance, vol. 4, no. 6,
pp. 20–26, 1999.
[69] A. Maćkiewicz and W. Ratajczak, “Principal components analysis
(PCA),” Comput. Geosci., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 303–342, 1993.
[70] A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: Algorithms and applications,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, nos. 4–5, pp. 411–430,
Jun. 2000.

WAN et al.: LOW-LIGHT AND INFRARED MULTIMODAL REMOTE SENSING IN NIGHTTIME RESCUE MISSION

[71] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed
optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method
of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122,
2011, doi: 10.1561/2200000016.
[72] P. Rizk, R. Younes, A. Ilinca, and J. Khoder, “Wind turbine blade
defect detection using hyperspectral imaging,” Remote Sens. Appl., Soc.
Environ., vol. 22, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 100522.
[73] B. Shi, J. Liang, L. Di, C. Chen, and Z. Hou, “Fabric defect detection
via low-rank decomposition with gradient information,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 130423–130437, 2019.
[74] T. Zhou and D. Tao, “GoDec: Randomized low-rank & sparse
matrix decomposition in noisy case,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML) 2011, pp. 1–16.
[75] H. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Qi, and J. Wang, “Research of glass defects
detection based on DFT and optimal threshold method,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Process. (CSIP), Aug. 2012, pp. 1044–1047.
[76] H. Liu, W. Zhou, Q. Kuang, L. Cao, and B. Gao, “Defect detection
of IC wafer based on spectral subtraction,” IEEE Trans. Semicond.
Manuf., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 141–147, Feb. 2010.
[77] D.-M. Tsai and T.-Y. Huang, “Automated surface inspection for statistical textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 307–323, 2003.
[78] D.-M. Tsai and C.-Y. Hsieh, “Automated surface inspection for directional textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–62, 1999.
[79] C. Guo, Q. Ma, and L. Zhang, “Spatio-temporal saliency detection
using phase spectrum of quaternion Fourier transform,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Anchorage, AK, USA, Jun. 2008,
pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2008.4587715.
[80] D. Aiger and H. Talbot, “The phase only transform for unsupervised
surface defect detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 295–302.
[81] D.-M. Tsai and C.-C. Kuo, “Defect detection in inhomogeneously
textured sputtered surfaces using 3D Fourier image reconstruction,”
Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 383–400, Nov. 2007.
[82] X. Bai, Y. Fang, W. Lin, L. Wang, and B.-F. Ju, “Saliency-based defect
detection in industrial images by using phase spectrum,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2135–2145, Nov. 2014.
[83] J. A. Dabin, A. M. Haimovich, J. Mauger, and A. Dong, “Blind
source separation with L1 regularized sparse autoencoder,” in Proc.
29th Wireless Opt. Commun. Conf. (WOCC), May 2020, pp. 1–5.
[84] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 1–18, Dec. 2015.
[85] Y. Liu, C. Zhuang, and F. Lu, “Unsupervised two-stage anomaly
detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.11671.
[86] J. Yang, Y. Shi, and Z. Qi, “DFR: Deep feature reconstruction for
unsupervised anomaly segmentation,” 2020, arXiv:2012.07122.
[87] Y. Yan, D. Wang, G. Zhou, and Q. Chen, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation via multilevel image reconstruction and adaptive attentionlevel transition,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[88] K. Zhou et al., “Encoding structure-texture relation with p-net for
anomaly detection in retinal images,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV), Glasgow, U.K.: Springer, 2020, pp. 360–377.
[89] T. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Du, B. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Reconstruction
from edge image combined with color and gradient difference for
industrial surface anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2210.14485.
[90] Z. Li et al., “Superpixel masking and inpainting for self-supervised
anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2020, pp. 1–12.
[91] D. Dehaene and P. Eline, “Anomaly localization by modeling perceptual features,” 2020, arXiv:2008.05369.
[92] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skoč aj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[93] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[94] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[95] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192.
[96] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and
H. R. Rabiee, “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14902–14912.

5403518

[97] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
[98] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic
context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3110–3118.
[99] J. Song, K. Kong, Y.-I. Park, S.-G. Kim, and S.-J. Kang, “AnoSeg:
Anomaly segmentation network using self-supervised learning,” 2021,
arXiv:2110.03396.
[100] Y. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Zhao, R. Wu, Y. Liu, and S. Pan, “Omnifrequency channel-selection representations for unsupervised anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32, pp. 4327–4340, 2023.
[101] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[102] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
neural networks with cutout,” 2017, arXiv:1708.04552.
[103] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
[104] J. Yoon, K. Sohn, C.-L. Li, S. O. Arik, and T. Pfister, “SPADE: Semisupervised anomaly detection under distribution mismatch,” 2022,
arXiv:2212.00173.
[105] N. Li, K. Jiang, Z. Ma, X. Wei, X. Hong, and Y. Gong, “Anomaly
detection via self-organizing map,” 2021, arXiv:2107.09903.
[106] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Industrial image anomaly
localization based on Gaussian clustering of pretrained feature,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 6182–6192, Jun. 2022.
[107] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022, pp. 392–408.
[108] S. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Song, “CFA: Coupled-hypersphere-based
feature adaptation for target-oriented anomaly localization,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 78446–78454, 2022.
[109] D. Kim, C. Park, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “FAPM: Fast adaptive patch
memory for real-time industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICASSP
- IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023,
pp. 1–5.
[110] J. Jang, E. Hwang, and S.-H. Park, “N-Pad: Neighboring pixel-based
industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 4364–4373.
[111] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
[112] H. Qin et al., “Forward and backward information retention for accurate
binary neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 2250–2259.
[113] H. Zhang and J. Ma, “SDNet: A versatile squeeze-and-decomposition
network for real-time image fusion,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129,
no. 10, pp. 2761–2785, 2021.
[114] J. Liu et al., “Target-aware dual adversarial learning and a multiscenario multi-modality benchmark to fuse infrared and visible for
object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 5792–5801.
[115] P. Liang, J. Jiang, X. Liu, and J. Ma, “Fusion from decomposition:
A self-supervised decomposition approach for image fusion,” in Proc.
ECCV, 2022, pp. 719–735.
[116] Z. Yang, I. Soltani, and E. Darve, “Anomaly detection with domain
adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2023, pp. 2958–2967.
[117] S. Russo, M. Lürig, W. Hao, B. Matthews, and K. Villez, “Active
learning for anomaly detection in environmental data,” Environ. Model.
Softw., vol. 134, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 104869.
[118] M. Kim, J. Kim, J. Yu, and J. K. Choi, “Active anomaly detection based
on deep one-class classification,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 167,
pp. 18–24, Mar. 2023.
[119] W. Ma et al., “Infrared and visible image fusion technology and
application: A review,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 2, p. 599, Jan. 2023.
[120] J. Li, X. Wang, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “One step detection
paradigm for hyperspectral anomaly detection via spectral deviation
relationship learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
2024, Art. no. 5517515.

5403518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Yuting Wan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from the School of Geosciences and InfoPhysics, Central South University, Changsha, China,
in 2017, the Ph.D. degree in photogrammetry and
remote sensing from the State Key Laboratory of
Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and
Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China,
in 2022.
He is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with
Wuhan University. His major research interests
include real-time remote sensing image processing,
evolutionary computation, neural architecture search, and disaster emergency
response.

Haoyu Yao is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree with the Remote Sensing and Information Engineering School, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China.
His major research interests include remote sensing, computer vision, multimodal learning, and
embodied intelligence.

Jiawei Liu is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
His major research interests lie in remote sensing
and artificial intelligence to software engineering.

Chen Sun (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2021 and 2023, respectively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in communication and information system
with the State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing
(LIESMARS).
His research interests include multimodal object
tracking and edge computing.

Ailong Ma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree from China University of Petroleum,
Qingdao, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in
photogrammetry and remote sensing from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2017.
He is currently working as an Associate Professor
at Wuhan University. He has authored or co-authored
more than 30 research articles in Remote Sensing
of Environment, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING, and IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON E VOLUTIONARY C OMPUTATION. His major research
interests include multimodal remote sensing image processing, pattern recognition, and disaster damage assessment.

Yanfei Zhong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in information engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in photogrammetry and remote sensing from
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2002 and 2007,
respectively.
Since 2010, he has been a Full Professor with
the State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing
(LIESMARS), Wuhan University. He organized the
Intelligent Data Extraction, Analysis and Applications of Remote Sensing (RSIDEA) research group.
He has published more than 150 research papers in international journals, such
as Remote Sensing of Environment, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE
S ENSING.
Dr. Zhong is a fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology
(IET). He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE J OURNAL
OF S ELECTED T OPICS IN A PPLIED E ARTH O BSERVATIONS AND R EMOTE
S ENSING and International Journal of Remote Sensing.