IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

5039414

LScAD: A Large–Small Model Collaboration
Framework for Unsupervised Industrial
Anomaly Detection
Shichen Qu , Xian Tao , Senior Member, IEEE, Xinyi Gong , Zhen Qu ,
Mukesh Prasad , Senior Member, IEEE, Fei Shen , Zhengtao Zhang , Member, IEEE,
and Guiguang Ding , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Currently, in the field of anomaly detection, most
existing methods rely on small models that focus on specific
industrial scenarios which exhibit strong task orientation but
lack generalization capabilities. Segment anything model (SAM),
a vision foundation model designed for semantic segmentation
tasks, has demonstrated remarkable performance in the natural scene segmentation. However, SAM lacks domain-specific
knowledge of industrial defects and relies on an interactive
inference framework, which restricts its application in industrial anomaly detection. In this article, we propose a novel
framework: A large–small model collaboration framework for
unsupervised industrial anomaly detection (LScAD), aiming to
use task-oriented small models to guide SAM for precise anomaly
localization. Specifically, the small model generates the initial
guidance information, which serves as the input for a multimodal
prompt module. This module consists of two modalities: image
and text prompt. These prompts are then used to guide SAM for
accurate anomaly segmentation. Moreover, we design a dualbranch adapter to enhance SAM’s domain-specific capability
through a color-domain branch and a frequency-domain branch,
aiming to improve its performance in anomaly detection tasks.
Extensive experiments on the MVTec AD benchmark and other
real-world industrial datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance, with an image-level area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of
99.6%, pixel-level AUROC of 98.4%, and average precision (AP)
Received 20 April 2025; revised 26 June 2025; accepted 29 June 2025.
Date of publication 14 July 2025; date of current version 25 July 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Science and Technology Major
Project of China under Grant 2022ZD0119402; in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62373350 and Grant 62371179;
in part by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association, CAS, under Grant
2023145; in part by Beijing Nova Program under Grant 20240484687; and
in part by Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation, China, under Grant
4252053. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr.
Vincenzo Gallo. (Corresponding authors: Xian Tao; Xinyi Gong.)
Shichen Qu and Zhen Qu are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, and also with the School of
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China.
Xian Tao, Fei Shen, and Zhengtao Zhang are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, also with the
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, China, and also with CASI Vision Technology Company Ltd.,
Luoyang 471000, China (e-mail: taoxian2013@ia.ac.cn).
Xinyi Gong is with the Space Information Research Institute, Hangzhou
Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: gongxinyi@hdu.edu.cn).
Mukesh Prasad is with the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia.
Guiguang Ding is with the School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3588927

of 74.1% on the MVTec AD dataset. Our proposed method can
also effortlessly adapt to multiclass anomaly detection without
any modifications and achieve remarkable performance. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/qsc1103/LScAD
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, large–small model collaboration, segment anything model (SAM), unsupervised learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NDUSTRIAL defect detection based on supervised deep
learning is a critical technology widely used in fields,
such as mechanical manufacturing [1], consumer electronics
[2], and bridge inspection [3]. With the advancement of
computer vision technologies, supervised learning methods
have shown impressive performance in industrial defect detection. However, these approaches heavily rely on large-scale,
pixel-level annotated datasets, which are extremely costly
and time-consuming to obtain in real-world manufacturing
environments [4]. Moreover, the diversity of defects, which
includes variations in shape, scale, and texture, makes it difficult to collect sufficient annotated samples to cover all possible
types of anomalies [5]. These limitations have motivated a shift
to unsupervised paradigms, where models are trained only on
normal samples and are expected to identify deviations during
inference [6].
Currently, most unsupervised anomaly detection methods
rely on specific task-oriented small models, which are typically
lightweight convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with a
limited number of parameters and without pretraining on largescale datasets [5]. Existing small-model-based approaches can
be roughly divided into three categories: feature embeddingbased methods [7], [8], [9], which aim to learn unique
feature embeddings and detect anomalies based on the distance
between learned features and input features in the feature
space; reconstruction-based methods [10], [11], [12], [13],
which rely on reconstruction errors between abnormal and normal regions to detect anomalies; and anomaly synthesis-based
methods [14], [15], [16], [17], which introduce the synthetic
anomaly information to detect anomalies in a self-supervised
paradigm. As shown in Fig. 1(a), current task-specific small
models usually introduce refinement modules represented by
U-Net [14] or simple multilayer perceptrons [15] to further
improve the performance of anomaly localization. However,

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Comparison of different frameworks for anomaly detection. (a)
Specific task-oriented small model. (b) Manual annotation single-promptbased SAM. (c) Automatic multimodal prompt-based SAM with dual-branch
adapter.

due to the limited number of parameters, small models inherently lack the capacity to extract and represent high-level
semantic features of anomalies. This limitation significantly
weakens their ability to distinguish subtle defect patterns
from normal textures, especially when dealing with complex
backgrounds or low-contrast variations. Furthermore, in the
absence of pretraining on large-scale and diverse datasets,
these models fail to acquire generalizable knowledge, which
is essential for adapting to unseen scenarios and variations
in lighting, scale, noise, or structural patterns. As a result,
small models often suffer from poor generalization and limited
robustness, making it difficult to accurately detect and localize
defects in real-world industrial environments [5].
Recently, with the rapid rise of large-scale pretrained
techniques, meta-AI research proposed an interactive vision
foundation model for image segmentation called the segment
anything model (SAM) [18]. It is trained on a billion-scale
segmentation dataset, achieving impressive zero-shot segmentation performance in natural scenes. With a large number
of parameters and a powerful feature extraction backbone, it
possesses strong representational capacity, enabling remarkable performance across various downstream vision tasks
[5]. However, applying SAM to industrial anomaly detection
presents several significant challenges. First, SAM’s mask
prediction is inherently interactive and relies on manually
provided prompts, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), which limits its
applicability in fully automated industrial inspection scenarios
[19]. Second, the data distribution of SAM’s pretraining corpus differs substantially from that of industrial environments,
lacking domain-specific characteristics that are essential for
reliable generalization to anomaly detection tasks in manufacturing [20]. Finally, existing SAM-based anomaly detection
approaches typically utilize SAM either as a standalone segmentation module [21] or as a feature extractor backbone [22],
[23], without fully leveraging its potential for understanding
anomaly semantics. Therefore, directly applying large pretrained models such as SAM to industrial anomaly detection
is not an appropriate choice.

In order to combine the generative capabilities of large
models and the specific task orientation of small models, a
novel large–small model collaboration framework for unsupervised industrial anomaly detection (LScAD) is proposed, as
shown in Fig. 1(c). Specifically, different from previous SAMbased anomaly detection methods, a small model built on a
teacher–student network is designed to address the limitations
of SAM’s interactive working framework. During training,
since only normal samples are provided, a self-supervised
strategy based on synthetic anomaly images is employed to
train the multimodal prompt module. Unlike conventional
single-prompt methods, the proposed multimodal prompt module incorporates both location and semantic prompts, which
effectively leverage the preliminary guidance signals generated
by the small model to enhance the anomaly localization task
[24]. This design thereby effectively guides SAM to perform more refined anomaly segmentation tasks. Furthermore,
existing large models often lack adaptability to industrial
scenarios, to address this issue, our method introduces a dualbranch adapter structure composed of a frequency-domain
adapter and a color-domain adapter. These adapters enrich
the feature representation by capturing high-frequency textures
and color variations, ensuring the large model is well-suited
for industrial applications.
The architecture of our LScAD is feasible because it combines the efficiency of small models with the expressiveness of
large models, while addressing domain gap and representation
limitations through prompt guidance and feature adaptation.
In summary, our contributions are as follows.
1) A novel framework LScAD is proposed to guide the
general segmentation ability of SAM with the taskoriented capability of the small model, establishing a
collaborative working approach for industrial anomaly
detection.
2) Combining the small model with the multimodal prompt
module, we have not only resolved the interactive issue
but also generated an efficient prompt for SAM. Furthermore, a dual-branch adapter is designed to inject
color and frequency-domain knowledge into SAM for
industrial anomaly detection.
3) Extensive experiments are conducted on the MVTec
AD, WFDD, and BTAD datasets under the singleclass/multiclass case which demonstrate that LScAD
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both anomaly
detection and localization. Meanwhile, our method is
successfully applied in a real-world vision system to
detect chip trays.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section reviews related works on industrial anomaly
detection and localization, which can be divided into two
main categories: task-oriented small model-based methods and
SAM-based methods.
A. Task-Oriented Small-Model-Based Methods
1) Feature
Embedding-Based
Methods:
Feature
embedding-based methods typically utilize pretrained

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

networks to extract semantic representations and project
them into a lower dimensional latent space [25], where
anomalies are identified by measuring the deviation of testing
sample embeddings from the distribution of normal training
embeddings. RD4AD [7] proposes the research paradigm of
reverse distillation, which effectively alleviates the limitation
of anomaly representation. PaDim [9] utilizes multivariate
Gaussian distributions to obtain a probabilistic representation
and evaluates anomaly scores via the Mahalanobis distance.
Patchcore [8] uses a maximally representative memory bank
of nominal patch features, which offers promising inference
times and detection accuracy.
2) Reconstruction-Based Methods: The reconstructionbased methods rely on the strong assumption that normal
regions can be reconstructed almost perfectly by the model,
while abnormal regions cannot be reconstructed. DFR [10]
proposes a multiscale regional feature generator and a
lightweight convolutional autoencoder to detect and locate
anomalies via fast feature reconstruction. Some methods set
the condition that the abnormal pixels are not visible to the
autoencoder and reconstruct the missing information through
inpainting. Typically, RIAD [11] and Intra [26] use CNN
and Transformer, respectively, to inpaint images. However, the
generalization ability of the generated model is often underestimated, and the network can not only reconstruct normal
regions but also generalize to abnormal regions, resulting in
inaccurate reconstruction errors.
3) Anomaly Synthesis-Based Methods: The existing
anomaly synthesis methods can be divided into two paradigms:
image-level anomaly synthesis and feature-level anomaly
synthesis. The anomaly synthesis strategy of DRAEM [14]
creates binary masks using Perlin noise and fills them with
various textures from auxiliary datasets. Tao et al. [27]
adopted a random erasure method to generate more realistic
defect images. These image-level synthesized anomalies are
primarily utilized to train models in a self-supervised manner.
In contrast to image-level anomaly synthesis, feature-level
anomaly synthesis is typically conducted in high-dimensional
feature spaces. SimpleNet [15] adds random Gaussian noise
sampled from a normal distribution to each feature channel
of normal samples. DSR [28] generates the anomalies at the
feature level by sampling the learned quantized feature space,
which allows a controlled generation of near-in-distribution
anomalies.
While these methods have achieved promising detection
performance, they are constrained by the ability of small
models, making it difficult to achieve a perfect anomaly
localization effect.
B. Sam-Based Methods
With the rapid rise of large-scale vision foundation models, the universal interactive segmentation model SAM has
achieved remarkable performance in natural scenes. However, the bias in SAM’s training data distribution limits its
effectiveness in downstream tasks. To address the adaptation
challenges of SAM across diverse scenarios, researchers have
focused on efficient fine-tuning techniques, such as LoRA
[29] and Adapter [30]. However, the current existing adapter

5039414

structures all originate from natural language processing tasks
[31], and there is no adapter architecture specifically designed
for the purpose of anomaly detection yet. Some studies have
also conducted preliminary explorations of applying SAM to
anomaly detection tasks. ClipSAM [21] leverages the powerful
general capabilities of CLIP and SAM to perform two-stage
zero-shot anomaly detection. STLM [23] designs a dualstream lightweight model and utilizes SAM for knowledge
guidance. UCAD [22] designs a structure-based contrastive
learning module based on SAM to enhance the performance of
prompt learning and continual anomaly detection. The above
SAM-based methods do not incorporate domain knowledge
of industrial anomalies, resulting in difficulty achieving satisfactory performance under the settings of diverse industrial
anomaly detection scenarios.
III. M ETHOD
A. Overview
The overall pipeline of our method is illustrated in Fig. 2,
which consists of three key components: small model, th
multimodal prompt module, and SAM-based large model with
a dual-branch adapter.
We adopt a single-stage training strategy for our proposed
method, as shown in Fig. 3(a). To further elaborate on the
internal structure and detailed functionality of each component, we refer to Fig. 2. During training, a normal sample
IN is used to train the small model, which is a lightweight
teacher–student reverse knowledge distillation network. Since
only normal samples are available for training, we design
a self-supervised training approach to train the multimodal
prompt module for generating location prompts and semantic
prompt embedding. Specifically, anomaly synthesis strategy
is employed to generate an anomalous image IA and its
corresponding mask MA , so the location prompt is obtained by
points and boxes automatically annotated from the known synthetic mask MA . The semantic prompt embedding is generated
by fusing and aligning the anomalous sample IA and its corresponding text t p through the cross-modal model BEIT3 [32]
and an MLP projection layer. The text serves as a semantic
prior to guide the large model in interpreting the visual content
from a multimodal perspective. This design takes advantage
of the vision-language alignment learned during pretraining.
The location prompt and semantic prompt, derived from both
the mask MA and text t p , are subsequently input into SAM’s
prompt encoder. This encoder serves to guide the SAM-based
large model to achieve better anomaly detection results. In
order to facilitate the migration of data distribution from
natural scenes to industrial scenarios, a dual-branch adapter is
delicately designed and then integrated into the original SAM.
The process of embedding the adapter into SAM is as follows:
the high-frequency components IAh of the anomalous image IA
are first extracted by a Butterworth high-pass filter (BHPF).
Then, IAh is input into the proposed frequency-domain adapter,
where it is transformed into frequency-domain embeddings
and embedded before each Transformer block. Meanwhile,
the color-domain adapter is embedded in the main and residual branches of each Transformer block in the SAM image
encoder.

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed LScAD framework.

Fig. 3. Training and inference strategies. (a) Single-stage training strategy. (b) Inference strategy. (c) Two-stage training strategy.

During inference, the pipeline is shown in Fig. 3(b). The
input image IT is first fed into the small model. The score map
of the multiscale feature between the output of encoder E and
decoder D in the small model is then binarized and used as
the initial guidance information. Based on the initial guidance
information, the automatically annotated points, boxes, and its
corresponding text are subsequently input into the multimodal
prompt module to generate the location prompt and semantic
prompt embedding. Finally, image IT and its high-frequency
component ITh are fed into the image encoder and the frequency
adapter of SAM, respectively. Based on the above two types
of prompts, SAM predicts the corresponding masks Mloc
and Msem for IT . The final anomaly detection result M is
obtained by adding and normalizing Mloc and Msem , as shown
in Fig. 2.

TABLE I
A RCHITECTURE OF THE T EACHER E NCODER

B. Small Model
1) Architecture: To address the limitations of SAM’s interactive segmentation, a small model is proposed, as shown in

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

the green background at the bottom left of Fig. 2. Unlike other
methods that require either complex anomaly synthesis strategies [14] or substantial storage to maintain external memory
banks [8], we design the small model based on the reverse
knowledge distillation paradigm, which has been proven to be
an efficient and effective approach for anomaly detection [7].
The teacher encoder E is employed to extract comprehensive
feature representations of the input image IN , as detailed in
Table I. WideResNet [33] pretrained on ImageNet serves as E
to extract multiscale features fEk , where k represents the output
of the kth block of the teacher encoder. In addition, simple
Gaussian noise  is added to fEk , producing noisy feature
representations f˜Ek to enhance the model’s robustness. Subsequently, both fEk and f˜Ek undergo dimensionality reduction
via a projection layer, and a bottleneck-based feature fusion
module is then employed to align the multiscale features of
the projected fEk . Finally, the fused features fEfuse are fed into
the student decoder D to generate fDk , restoring them to the
same dimension as the features of the teacher encoder. During
training, the student decoder is trained to approximate the
output of the teacher encoder as closely as possible, due to
the representational capabilities between the teacher encoder
and the student decoder, the cosine similarity between fEk and
fDk is used to locate anomalous regions. Therefore, the small
model is utilized to generate the initial guidance information
for the following multimodal prompt module during inference.
2) Loss Function: The loss function of the small model
includes the knowledge distillation loss [7] between fEk and
fDk , as well as the cosine reconstruction loss [34] between f˜Ek
and fEk , which can be formulated as follows:

LKd = 1 −
LRec =

1
K

>

K
X
fEk · fDk

k=1
K
X

fEk

fDk

(1 − cos(Proj( fEk ), Proj( f˜Ek )))

(1a)

(1b)

k=1

Lsmall = LKd + αLRec

(1c)

where α is the hyperparameter that balances the loss weight
in the small model. The optimal value of α is empirically determined to be 0.4 based on the ablation study in
Section IV-E7.
C. Multimodal Prompt Module
As shown in the red background at the bottom right of
Fig. 2, we design a multimodal prompt module that generates
both location and semantic prompts based on the initial guidance from the small model, which are used to guide the large
model to more accurately focus on the critical regions relevant
to the anomaly detection task [35]. In this module, an anomaly
synthesis strategy is adopted to generate pseudo-anomalies,
and the corresponding masks of these pseudo-anomalies are
used as initial guidance information to train the multimodal
prompt module. However, during inference, the initial guidance information is derived from the binarized score map
output by the small model.

5039414

Algorithm 1 Anomaly Synthesis Strategy
Input: Normal image IN ; Anomaly source image A; Perlin
noise generator P; Image size H and W; Noise resolution
r x and ry ; Blending factor γ; Binarization threshold λ.
Output: Synthetic anomaly image IA and corresponding mask
MA
1: M p ← where(P(H,W,r x ,ry )> λ, 1, 0)
2: M f ← Foreground(IN )
3: MA ← M p ∩ M f
4: MA ← 1 − MA
5: IA ← γ(MA A) + (1 − γ)(MA IN ) + MA IN
6: return IA , MA

1) Anomaly Synthesis Strategy: We use the Perlin noise
generator [14] to generate global anomaly masks M p . Specifically, to ensure that the generated anomaly regions are located
within the foreground of interest, a foreground segmentation
binarization method based on the adaptive thresholding is
proposed to obtain the foreground mask M f . In practice,
we apply Otsu or Triangle thresholding on grayscale images
depending on the object subclass, followed by morphological
closing and opening using a 10 × 10 square kernel to refine
the mask [36]. The intersection of M p and M f is the final
anomaly mask MA . The whole process of anomaly synthesis
strategy is shown in Algorithm 1. Following the same settings
as [14], we set r x and ry to 4, the blending factor γ is randomly
sampled from the range [0, 1), and the binarization threshold λ
is fixed to 0.5, resulting in a binary mask where values above
the threshold are assigned 1 to indicate anomaly regions, and
values below are assigned 0 as background.
2) Location Prompt: The location prompt includes the
point and box coordinate information of the anomalous
regions.
During training, the synthetic binary masks are generated,
and ten random points are automatically annotated within the
anomalous regions, with these points distributed at different
locations of the defect. In addition, the smallest external
rectangle that encompasses all disconnected regions is computed and used as the bounding box for the location prompt.
This ensures that the location prompt provides comprehensive
spatial information during the training phase, helping the
model to identify and localize the anomalous regions.
In the inference phase, the score map generated by the
small model is first binarized, converting the image into a
mask-like representation. Then, this binarized mask is again
automatically annotated with ten random points, similar to
the process in the training phase. However, a key difference
in the inference phase is that the smallest external rectangle
of the largest connected region in the binarized mask is used
as the bounding box for the location prompt. This ensures
that the model focuses on the most prominent anomalous
region within the image, thereby improving the accuracy of
the localization process. The precise bounding box definition
helps the model focus on the critical areas of the defect.
3) Semantic Prompt: For the semantic prompt, we first
design a pair of opposing generic texts, “defect/good,” which
correspond to the semantic information of anomalous and

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 4. Generation pipeline of the semantic prompt.
Fig. 6. Dual-branch adapter for SAM. (a) Internal architecture of the
frequency-domain adapter. (b) SAM with color- and frequency-domain adapter
encoder’s Transformer block. (c) Internal architecture of the color-domain
adapter.

Fig. 5. Results of LScAD at different stages. (a) Testing image. (b) Output of
the small model. (c) Location prompt (points and box) and semantic prompt
(text). (d) Output of SAM. (b) and (d) are heatmaps, where red indicates
regions with a higher likelihood of being anomalous, and blue represents
normal regions.

erated by the small model, which serves as the initial guidance
information, (c) the location and semantic prompts annotated
by the multimodal prompt module based on the binarized score
ma, and (d) the final result of anomaly detection.
D. Dual-Branch Adapter for Sam

normal samples, respectively. When the initial guidance information does not contain a defect, the text corresponds to
“good”; otherwise, it corresponds to “defect.” This binary
semantic labeling provides clear targets for subsequent model
training.
To effectively integrate the textual and visual features of
anomaly information, we employ the BEIT3 [32] multimodal
encoder. BEIT3 leverages the powerful ability to jointly embed
image and text, enabling fine-grained alignment in crossmodal learning tasks. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 4, the
input image is first divided into nonoverlapping patches and
projected into a sequence of visual tokens, while the input text
prompt (e.g., “defect” or “good” is tokenized and embedded
into a sequence of textual tokens. These two token sequences
are then concatenated and passed through a shared stack of
multihead self-attention (MHSA) layers to enable cross-modal
feature interaction between the textual and visual modalities.
Subsequently, the visual and textual branches are separately
processed by their respective feed-forward networks (FNNs)
to further refine the representations. The outputs from both
branches are then integrated by a fusion layer, and the resulting
multimodal embedding is fed into a three-layer MLP for
dimensionality adjustment. This projection step ensures compatibility with the input dimension of SAM’s prompt encoder,
enabling the semantic prompt to provide precise and flexible
guidance for the downstream anomaly detection task.
This design not only optimizes the fusion of cross-modal
features but also enhances the model’s sensitivity to semantic
prompts. In this way, the model can dynamically adjust its
discrimination ability for anomalous samples based on the
textual prompt, effectively improving detection performance.
As shown in Fig. 5, the overall process consists of the
following steps: (a) the testing image, (b) the score map gen-

Industrial anomaly detection often involves subtle, finegrained defects and complex textures that differ significantly
from the pretrained data distribution of SAM. This domain
gap limits the model’s ability to effectively perceive and
localize anomalies in real-world industrial settings. Therefore,
we propose a dual-branch adapter to enhance the specialization
of the SAM-based large model, as illustrated in the blue
background at the top right of Fig. 2. The dual-branch adapter
parameters are learnable and embedded into the frozen SAM
model, enabling effective transfer to industrial scenarios while
preserving SAM’s strong general-purpose segmentation capabilities. The adapter consists of two complementary branches:
a color-domain adapter and a frequency-domain adapter.
1) Color-Domain Adapter: As shown in Fig. 6(c), we
design a color-domain adapter with a bottleneck structure.
Specifically, the feature embeddings F spat of IA are first comspat
pressed in dimensionality through downprojection to Fdown ,
then enhanced in representational capacity through a linear
spat
layer to Fdown , and finally up-projected back to the original
spat
dimensionality as Fup , which is then residual-connected with
spat
F spat to obtain Fagg . As shown in Fig. 6(b), the color-domain
adapter is integrated into both the main branch and the residual
branch of each frozen transformer block. The process can be
formalized as follows:

spat
Fdown = Down F spat
(2a)
0
spat
spat 
Fdown = GeLU MLP Fdown
(2b)
 0 
spat
spat
Fup = Up Fdown
(2c)
spat
spat
Fagg
= Fup
+ F spat .

(2d)

2) Frequency-Domain Adapter: As illustrated in Fig. 6(a),
we designed a CNN-based frequency-domain adapter module,

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

which uses convolutional filters of various sizes to capture
complex frequency-domain features at different scales.
As shown in the top-left corner of Fig. 2, the high-frequency
component of the image is extracted through frequencydomain filtering. Given a sample IA , the discrete Fourier
transform (DFT) first converts the image to the frequency
domain F A . Then, BHPF is employed to filter out lowfrequency components, enhancing details and edges in the
image. Finally, the inverse DFT (IDFT) converts the image
back to the spatial domain IAh

F A = F (u, v) =

M−1 X
N−1
X

vy

IA (x, y) e−i2π( M + N )
ux

(3a)

x=0 y=0

1
1 + (D0 /D(u, v))2n
h
F (u, v)A = F (u, v) · HB (u, v)

HBHPF (u, v) =

(3b)
(3c)

IAh = f (x, y)h
M−1 N−1

=

vy
ux
1 XX
F(u, v)hA e j2π( M + N )
MN

(3d)

u=0 v=0

where M and N are the spatial-domain dimensions of the
image. u and v correspond to the coordinates in the frequency
domain. x and y correspond to the coordinates in the spatial
domain.
In order to incorporate high-frequency feature information into the frequency-domain adapter, the high-frequency
grayscale image IAh is first patched and reshaped into a feature
map which is reduced in dimensionality via a 1 × 1 convofreq
freq
lution to obtain Fdown . Subsequently, Fdown undergoes feature
extraction through 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7 convolutional filters,
freq
and the resulting outputs are averaged to produce Favg which
is then combined with F freq through a residual connection
freq
freq
to form Fagg . Finally, Fagg undergoes dimensional upscaling
through a 1 × 1 convolution and a GeLU activation function,
freq
resulting in Fup which is reshaped into a feature embedding.
The frequency-domain adapter is inserted before each frozen
transformer block, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The process can be
formalized as follows:

F freq = Reshape Patch IAh

freq
Fdown = Conv1×1 F freq


X
freq
freq
Favg
= Average
Convi×i Fdown
freq
freq
freq
= Favg
+ Fdown
Fagg
freq
Fup
= GeLU Conv1×1

(4a)
(4b)
(4c)
(4d)

freq
Fagg



(4e)

The frequency-domain adapter operates on a high-frequency
representation of the input image to capture local pattern disruptions. Even slight anomalies, such as microdefects or subtle
texture inconsistencies, can produce localized high-frequency
responses [37]. To capture both coarse and fine-grained defect
patterns, the adapter applies parallel convolutions with multiple kernel sizes. This design enables the model to attend
to both large-scale abnormal regions and subtle local defects,

5039414

thereby enhancing SAM’s ability to perceive anomalies in the
frequency domain.
3) Loss Function: The dual-branch adapter is trained endto-end in a self-supervised manner. The loss function is defined
as follows:
Lsam = LDice (MA , M) + LBCE (MA , M)
(5a)
2MA M
(5b)
LDice (MA , M) = 1 −
MA + M

LBCE (MA , M) = − M log MA + (1 − M) log (1 − MA ) (5c)
where LDice (·) is the Dice loss and LBCE (·) is the binary cross
entropy loss. M is the anomaly mask predicted by SAM which
is obtained by fusing the masks corresponding to the location
Mloc and semantic prompt Msem . MA is the synthetic known
anomaly mask.
E. Optimization of Training Strategy
As shown in Fig. 3, we propose two training optimization
strategies to explore the optimal joint training approach for
different modules.
1) Two-Stage Training Strategy: A two-stage training strategy is proposed to better handle the complexity involved in
training a multimodule system. Although this approach helps
alleviate issues such as loss balancing and gradient synchronization during the joint optimization of different modules, it
adds complexity to the training process.
In the first stage, the small model is trained independently,
focusing on generating accurate and informative prompts without being influenced by the complexity of the large model. In
the second stage, the adapter component of the SAM-based
large model and the multimodal prompt module are jointly
trained. This allows the two modules to effectively collaborate
in generating and refining location and semantic prompts for
anomaly detection.
The loss functions for the two-stage training strategy are
given by (1) and (5), respectively, to achieve phase-specific
optimization.
2) Single-Stage Training Strategy: To simplify the training
process, we introduce a straightforward single-stage training
strategy, where all modules are jointly trained in a unified
training process. This approach simplifies the overall training
workflow since all modules are trained together in the same
pipeline. The main advantage of this method is that it reduces
the complexity of training and allows for a more direct
optimization of the entire model.
In this approach, all components of the model, except
for the pretrained parameters frozen in the SAM-based large
model, are optimized simultaneously. By training all modules
together, the model can learn the interdependencies between
them, leading to a more consistent and integrated system.
This method ensures that the small model, large model, and
multimodal prompt module work collaboratively from the
beginning of the training process.
The loss function for the entire training process is the sum
of the loss functions of the small and large models, which can
be expressed as follows:
Ltotal = Lsmall + βLsam

(6)

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE II
A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF AUROC AT I MAGE L EVEL ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS ARE H IGHLIGHTED IN
B OLD , W HILE THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS ARE U NDERLINED . T HE U NCERTAINTIES ARE Q UANTIFIED AS M EAN S TANDARD D EVIATION

where β is a hyperparameter that balances the loss weight
between the large and small models. The optimal value of β
is empirically determined to be 8 based on the ablation study
in Section IV-E7.

adopted to provide a more accurate evaluation of performance
for anomaly localization tasks.

IV. E XPERIMENTS

In our experiments, the feature extractor for the small model
is WideResNet50. The image encoder of SAM is ViT-B,
with its parameters frozen during training. The multimodal
model employed is BEIT3-B. The optimizer is Adam, with
the learning rate set to 1 × 10−5 . The training is conducted
for 200 epochs with a batch size of 8. Our experiments
are implemented using the PyTorch framework on a single
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. All images are resized to
224 × 224 before being input into the model. The model is
evaluated under the single-stage training strategy.

In this section, the proposed method is extensively experimented on different datasets to evaluate its effectiveness, and
the ablation studies have been experimentally conducted and
discussed.
A. Datasets
In our experiment, we primarily use three public unsupervised anomaly detection datasets.
1) MVTec AD: The MVTec AD [38] dataset includes ten
object categories and five texture categories, with a total of
4096 normal samples and 1258 anomaly samples in the test
set. The anomaly types include scratches, dents, and color
variations. Pixel-level annotations are provided as the ground
truth for evaluation.
2) WFDD: The WFDD [16] dataset contains 4101 images
of woven fabrics, categorized into four different types with
various textures and patterns. The training set consists of 3657
normal samples, whereas the testing set is composed of 203
normal samples and 241 anomaly samples.
3) BTAD: The BTAD [39] dataset includes three object
categories, with a total of 451 normal images and 290 anomalous images. The images have resolutions ranging from 600
to 1600.
B. Evaluation Metrics
Image-level area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC) is used to evaluate anomaly detection performance, while pixel-level AUROC and average precision (AP)
are employed to assess anomaly localization performance.
Notably, due to the significant imbalance between positive
and negative samples, AUROC may not effectively reflect
localization performance [14]. Therefore, pixel-level AP is

C. Implementation Details

D. Experimental Results
1) Experiments on the MVTec AD Dataset Under SingleClass Setting: The proposed method is thoroughly compared
with state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods
in both anomaly detection and localization tasks, as shown in
Tables II and III. The methods included in the comparison
are DSR [28], PatchCore [8], DRAEM [14], RD4AD [7],
SimpleNet [15], MDPS [40], DC-AE [41], AMI-Net [42],
REASON [43], and DualFlow [44]. To ensure fairness, all
results, except those from DC-AE [41], are reproduced using
the official code provided in their respective papers. For DCAE, which does not have the official code, the results are
borrowed directly from this article.
The experimental results indicate that the proposed method
has a significant advantage in both anomaly detection and
localization tasks. Specifically, for anomaly detection, our
method achieves an image-level AUROC of 99.6%, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance. In addition, for anomaly
localization, our method achieves a pixel-level AUROC of
98.4% and a pixel-level AP of 74.1%, surpassing all the
existing state-of-the-art methods. The pixel-level AP is 18.2%
higher than that of SimpleNet, showing the superior localization accuracy of our method, particularly in precisely

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5039414

TABLE III
A NOMALY L OCALIZATION R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF AUROC/AP AT P IXEL -L EVEL ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS ARE H IGHLIGHTED
IN B OLD , W HILE THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS ARE U NDERLINED . T HE U NCERTAINTIES ARE Q UANTIFIED AS M EAN S TANDARD D EVIATION

Fig. 7. Qualitative visualization results for anomaly localization on the MVTec AD dataset.
TABLE IV
A NOMALY D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD DATASET FOR M ULTICLASS S ETTING . T HE B EST R ESULTS ARE H IGHLIGHTED IN
B OLD , W HILE THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULTS ARE U NDERLINED . T HE U NCERTAINTIES ARE Q UANTIFIED AS M EAN S TANDARD D EVIATION

identifying the boundaries of anomalies. This significant
improvement suggests that our method is better at capturing
the finer details of defects in complex images, thereby enhancing the model’s anomaly localization capability.
To visually demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method, Fig. 7 presents the visual anomaly score maps of our
model on the MVTec AD dataset, along with a comparison
to other state-of-the-art methods. These visualizations clearly
show that our method outperforms others in both anomaly
detection and localization, proving its superiority in capturing
fine-grained anomaly details.

2) Experiments on the MVTec AD Dataset Under Multiclass
Setting: Most existing methods are designed for single-class
anomaly detection tasks. However, due to the wide variety of
samples to be tested, training a separate model for each class
leads to considerable increases in training and memory usage.
As a result, multiclass anomaly detection techniques have
gradually become a research focus, aiming to train a unified
model that can efficiently detect anomalies across all classes,
thus reducing the computational and memory overhead.
As shown in Table IV, we compared our proposed LScAD
method with several existing multiclass anomaly detection

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE V
A NOMALY D ETECTION (I MAGE AUROC) AND L OCALIZATION (P IXEL
AUROC/P IXEL AP) R ESULTS ON WFDD AND BTAD DATASETS

Fig. 9. Comparisons of different anomaly detection methods in terms of pixel
AP (y-axis) and latency (x-axis).
TABLE VI
PARAMETER AND I NFERENCE S PEED OF S MALL AND L ARGE M ODELS

TABLE VII
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS ON R EAL -W ORLD DATA

Fig. 8. Qualitative visualization results for anomaly localization on (a) WFDD
and (b) BTAD datasets.

methods, including Padim [9], DRAEM [14], RD4AD [7],
UniAD [45], DeSTSeg [46], Simplenet [15], and DiAD [47].
The experimental results show that LScAD outperforms these
methods, especially in terms of pixel-level AP, demonstrating
the superiority of our approach. It is noteworthy that although
UniAD [45] and DiAD [47] are specifically designed for
multiclass anomaly detection, our method not only achieves
state-of-the-art performance in single-class settings but also
surpasses these specialized algorithms in multiclass settings.
This indicates that our model has strong flexibility, easily
transitioning from single-class to multiclass tasks while maintaining high efficiency across different settings.
3) Experiments on WFDD and BTAD Datasets: Table V
presents the results of anomaly detection and localization for
the proposed method and several state-of-the-art unsupervised
anomaly detection methods on the WFDD and BTAD datasets.
On the BTAD dataset, our method achieves comprehensive
state-of-the-art performance in both detection and localization
metrics, with a 9.1% improvement in pixel-level AP. On the
WFDD dataset, which contains anomalies primarily in the
form of points or lines with small areas, our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both image-level AUROC and
pixel-level AP. The anomalies in the WFDD dataset are
typically subtle and low contrast, making detection and localization particularly challenging. Despite this, our method
performs excellently in capturing these defects, demonstrating
its robustness in handling subtle, low-contrast anomalies.
Fig. 8 presents the visual anomaly score maps of our method
on both WFDD and BTAD datasets, along with a comparison

to other methods. These visualizations highlight our model’s
effective capability to detect and localize anomalies. Intuitively, our method excels in anomaly localization for subtle,
texture-based defects, which are typically difficult for other
models to accurately capture. This success can be attributed
to the collaborative working mode of the small and large
models in LScAD. The small model acts as a lightweight
guidance information generator, while the large model refines
the details and contextual understanding of the anomalies,
thus improving the accuracy of anomaly localization. This
collaborative approach enables the model to focus on both finegrained details and broader patterns, making it highly effective
across a variety of tasks.
4) Execution Time Evaluation: We conducted a real-time
performance evaluation of our LScAD on the MVTec AD
dataset and compared it with other methods. The inference
speed, as presented in Fig. 9, was measured on an NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPU. The experimental results show that our
method achieves a latency of 153 ms while delivering the best
performance in pixel-level metrics. Furthermore, the parameter
size and inference speed of the small and large models in our
method are shown in Table VI. The small model has less than
1/10 the number of parameters of the large model.
5) Applications in Real-World System and Data: Fig.
10(b) presents the visualization results of anomaly detection and localization, which demonstrate that our method
produces accurate and fine-grained segmentation masks for
defect regions. In addition, Table VII shows that our method
achieves superior performance in both image-level AUROC

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5039414

Fig. 12. Noise robustness analysis.
TABLE VIII
I NFLUENCE OF THE T RAINING S TRATEGY

TABLE IX
I NFLUENCE OF THE SAM A DAPTER

Fig. 10. Applications in real-world systems. (a) Real photograph of the vision
hardware system. (b) Qualitative visualization results for anomaly localization
on the real-world chip tray dataset.

Fig. 11. Three real-world industrial datasets. (a) Smartphone back cover glass
dataset. (b) Magnetic Tile. (c) KSDD2.

and pixel-level AP compared to existing approaches. The
improvement in AP reflects more precise localization of subtle
defects, which is particularly important in real-world industrial
scenarios. These results confirm the practical effectiveness and
robustness of our method under actual imaging conditions.
To further validate the robustness and credibility of our
method across diverse and challenging real-world industrial
scenarios, we conducted experiments on three representative
datasets, as illustrated in Fig. 11. (a) a smartphone back cover
glass dataset from the actual production line, and (b) and
(c) two public industrial benchmarks, Magnetic Tile [48] and
KSDD2 [49]. These three datasets exhibit varying lighting
conditions and complex backgrounds, demonstrating that our
method can effectively adapt to different inspection scenarios.
6) Noise Robustness Analysis: To evaluate the robustness
of the proposed method under degraded visual conditions,
we conducted experiments by adding different levels of saltand-pepper noise (5%, 25%, and 50%) to the original input
image. As illustrated in Fig. 12, the localization results remain
relatively accurate when the noise level is low (5%), with
the anomaly region clearly highlighted in the heatmap. When

the noise level increases to 25%, the segmentation quality
begins to degrade, but the model can still approximately
identify the defective region. However, at 50% noise, the
anomaly region becomes nearly indistinguishable even to the
human eye, as shown in the zoomed-in patch. Therefore,
the model fails to respond to the anomaly region, leading
to missed detection. These results suggest that our method
maintains reasonable robustness under moderate noise, but its
performance can be compromised when the defect itself is
obscured. This highlights the necessity of applying denoising or image enhancement preprocessing in extremely noisy
industrial environments.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct extensive ablation experiments
and analysis of the proposed method on the MVTec AD
dataset.
1) Influence of the Training Strategy: We have analyzed the
performance of LScAD under different training strategies with
the corresponding experimental results presented in Table VIII.
The results show that both strategies yield comparable performance in terms of anomaly detection and localization. This
suggests that the proposed framework is not sensitive to the
training pipeline design, demonstrating its flexibility and ease
of deployment. Based on these findings, we adopt the simpler
single-stage strategy to reduce training complexity without
sacrificing performance.
2) Influence of the Sam Adapter: We investigated the
impact of the components of the SAM adapter on the proposed method’s performance using the MVTec AD dataset,

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE X
I NFLUENCE OF P ROMPT F ORMATS

Fig. 13. Visualization results using different forms of prompts. (a) Input
image. (b) Only location prompts. (c) Only semantic prompts. (d) Both
location prompts and semantic prompts. (e) GT.

TABLE XI
I NFLUENCE OF SAM T RAINABLE C OMPONENTS

Fig. 14. Influence of the backbone of the small model.

Fig. 15. Influence of the backbone of the large model.

Fig. 16. Influence of the hyperparameter α.

Fig. 17. Influence of the hyperparameter β.

with detailed results presented in Table IX. The experimental
results show that without the adapter, the model struggles to
generalize to the industrial domain, achieving only 37.8% in
pixel-level AP. The addition of the color-domain adapter leads
to a significant improvement of 32.8%, indicating its effectiveness in capturing global appearance information. Further
introducing the frequency-domain adapter brings an additional
10.9% gain, suggesting its ability to capture fine-grained local
anomalies through multiscale frequency features. When both
adapters are combined, the model achieves a pixel-level AP
of 74.1%, confirming that the dual-branch adapter design
provides complementary benefits and plays a critical role in
enhancing SAM’s adaptation to industrial anomaly detection.

3) Influence of the Prompt Formats: To validate the effectiveness of the multimodal prompt module, we conducted a
series of comparative experiments, with quantitative results
presented in Table X. We also visualized the anomaly
localization outputs using heatmaps under different prompt
configurations, as shown in Fig. 13. The results show that the
inclusion of the multimodal prompt leads to more accurate
and complete localization of anomalies, with significantly
fewer false positives. Furthermore, the consistency between the
quantitative improvements and visual results confirms that the
multimodal prompt module effectively enhances both anomaly
detection and localization accuracy in practical scenarios.
4) Influence of the Sam Trainable Components: We conducted a comparative experiment to explore the effect of
making SAM’s prompt encoder and mask decoder either
trainable or frozen. As shown in Table XI, the experimental
results demonstrate that enabling training for both components significantly improves the model’s performance in
anomaly detection and localization. This improvement suggests that fine-tuning these modules allows the model to
better adapt SAM’s pretrained representations to the specific
characteristics of industrial anomaly data. In particular, the
trainable configuration enhances the model’s ability to align
prompt information with downstream segmentation tasks,
resulting in more accurate and robust localization of anomalies.
5) Influence of the Backbone of Small and Large Models: Fig. 14 displays the qualitative comparisons of different
backbones of the small model. Intuitively, the deeper and
wider WideResNet50 enables the small model to generate
high-quality guidance information, which contribute to more
accurate anomaly detection. Fig. 15 presents a comparison of
our method across different image encoder backbones of SAM.
Notably, our method achieves the best performance with the
lightweight ViT-B backbone. This is attributed to the fact that
smaller backbones are better suited for fine-tuning tasks on
the data-limited datasets.
6) Influence of the Text Prompt Template: As shown in
Table XII, we evaluate the impact of various text prompt
templates on the performance of the proposed LScAD frame-

QU et al.: LARGE–SMALL MODEL COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK FOR UNSUPERVISED INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE XII
I NFLUENCE OF THE T EXT P ROMPT T EMPLATE

5039414

have room for improvement. In the future, we will further
enhance the model’s real-time performance and computational
efficiency through techniques such as model distillation and
pruning.
R EFERENCES
[1]

work. Specifically, we compare concise class-level prompts,
such as “good/defect” with more descriptive formulations
inspired by CLIP-style templates, including “a good/defective
[],” and “a photograph of a good/defect [].” The experimental
results show that concise prompt words generally outperform CLIP-style text prompt templates. Among them, the
prompt “good/defect” achieves the best overall performance,
suggesting that in industrial anomaly detection tasks, minimal
semantic cues are sufficient to effectively guide the multimodal
encoder. Moreover, this design simplifies the prompt construction process and enhances the generalizability of the proposed
method.
7) Influence of the Hyperparameter of Loss Function:
Under the single-stage training strategy, we investigated the
impact of two key hyperparameters, α and β, on the performance of our model. Specifically, α controls the contribution
of the reconstruction loss LRec relative to the knowledge
distillation loss LKd in the small model, while β determines
the weight of the segmentation loss Lsam derived from the
large SAM-based model in the overall objective. We conducted
multiple comparative experiments with different settings of
these hyperparameters, and the results are shown in Figs.
16 and 17. The experimental findings indicate that setting
α = 0.4 and β = 8 yields the best performance across various
anomaly detection and localization metrics, suggesting that
a well-balanced tradeoff between the small- and large-model
objectives is crucial for optimal performance.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose LScAD, a novel framework for
unsupervised industrial anomaly detection that leverages the
collaboration between small and large models. This framework
effectively combines the task-specific orientation of small
models with the generalization capability of large models,
achieving complementary strengths. Specifically, the small
model is utilized to generate the initial guidance information
for the large model, overcoming the limitations of SAM’s
interactive working mode. The multimodal prompt module
supplies SAM with diverse and rich prompt information for
subsequent anomaly segmentation tasks. Moreover, the dualbranch adapter mitigates biases in SAM’s pretrained data
distribution, effectively transferring its segmentation capabilities to industrial anomaly detection scenarios. Extensive
experiments on the MVTec AD dataset and other real-world
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Meanwhile, we also acknowledge the current limitations,
due to the integration of the large model-SAM, the overall parameter count and inference speed of the model still

Y. He, K. Song, Q. Meng, and Y. Yan, “An end-to-end steel surface
defect detection approach via fusing multiple hierarchical features,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1493–1504, Apr. 2020.
[2] J. Mao, G. Xu, L. He, and J. Luo, “Attention-relation network for mobile
phone screen defect classification via a few samples,” Digit. Commun.
Netw., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1113–1120, Aug. 2024.
[3] W. Jiang, M. Liu, Y. Peng, L. Wu, and Y. Wang, “HDCB-Net: A
neural network with the hybrid dilated convolution for pixel-level crack
detection on concrete bridges,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17,
no. 8, pp. 5485–5494, Aug. 2021.
[4] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for
unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[5] Y. Lin et al., “A survey on RGB, 3D, and multimodal approaches for
unsupervised industrial image anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 121,
Sep. 2025, Art. no. 103139.
[6] S. Q. Qu, X. Tao, Z. Qu, X. Gong, Z. Zhang, and M. Prasad, “ALMRR:
Anomaly localization mamba on industrial textured surface with feature
reconstruction and refinement,” in Proc. Chin. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis. (PRCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2024,
pp. 378–391.
[7] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[8] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 14318–14328.
[9] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan.
2021, pp. 475–489.
[10] J. Yang, Y. Shi, and Z. Qi, “DFR: Deep feature reconstruction for
unsupervised anomaly segmentation,” 2020, arXiv:2012.07122.
[11] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[12] X. Tao, C. Adak, P.-J. Chun, S. Yan, and H. Liu, “ViTALnet: Anomaly
on industrial textured surfaces with hybrid transformer,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[13] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with
prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[14] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively
trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Jun. 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[15] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
[16] Q. Chen, H. Luo, C. Lv, and Z. Zhang, “A unified anomaly synthesis
strategy with gradient ascent for industrial anomaly detection and
localization,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, Nov. 2024, pp. 37–54.
[17] Q. Chen et al., “Center-aware residual anomaly synthesis for multiclass industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
2025, doi: 10.1109/TII.2025.3575122. [Online]. Available: https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11040032
[18] A. Kirillov et al., “Segment anything,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[19] L. Zheng, X. Pu, S. Zhang, and F. Xu, “Tuning a SAM-based
model with multicognitive visual adapter to remote sensing instance
segmentation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 18, pp. 2737–2748, 2025.
[20] T. Chen et al., “SAM fails to segment anything?—SAM-adapter: Adapting SAM in underperformed scenes: Camouflage, shadow, medical
image segmentation, and more,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09148.
[21] S. Li, J. Cao, P. Ye, Y. Ding, C. Tu, and T. Chen, “ClipSAM: CLIP
and SAM collaboration for zero-shot anomaly segmentation,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.12665.

5039414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[22] J. Liu et al., “Unsupervised continual anomaly detection with
contrastively-learned prompt,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jan.
2024, pp. 3639–3647.
[23] C. Li, L. Qi, and X. Geng, “A SAM-guided two-stream lightweight
model for anomaly detection,” ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1–23, Feb. 2025.
[24] S. Song, C. Zhang, P. Zhang, P. Li, F. Song, and L. Zhang, “Urban
waterlogging detection: A challenging benchmark and large-small model
co-adapter,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, Oct. 2024, pp. 366–382.
[25] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of
data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
Jul. 2006.
[26] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2022, pp. 394–406.
[27] X. Tao, D. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Lu, and C. Adak, “Unsupervised
anomaly detection for surface defects with dual-siamese network,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7707–7717, Nov. 2022.
[28] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DSR—A dual subspace reprojection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 539–554.
[29] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
2021, arXiv:2106.09685.
[30] J. Wu et al., “Medical SAM adapter: Adapting segment anything model
for medical image segmentation,” 2023, arXiv:2304.12620.
[31] N. Houlsby et al., “Parameter-efficient transfer learning for NLP,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 2790–2799.
[32] W. Wang et al., “Image as a foreign language: BEIT pretraining for
vision and vision-language tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 19175–19186.
[33] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
arXiv:1605.07146.
[34] S. Sheng, J. Jing, Z. Wang, and H. Zhang, “Cosine similarity knowledge
distillation for surface anomaly detection,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14, no. 1,
p. 8150, Apr. 2024.
[35] Y. Zhang et al., “EVF-SAM: Early vision-language fusion for textprompted segment anything model,” 2024, arXiv:2406.20076.
[36] X. Zhang, M. Xu, and X. Zhou, “RealNet: A feature selection network with realistic synthetic anomaly for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 16699–16708.
[37] D.-M. Tsai and C.-Y. Hsieh, “Automated surface inspection for directional textures,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–62, Dec.
1999.
[38] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[39] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti, “VTADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection and
localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE), Jun.
2021, pp. 01–06.
[40] D. Wu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via masked diffusion
posterior sampling,” 2024, arXiv:2404.17900.
[41] R. Zhang, H. Wang, M. Feng, Y. Liu, and G. Yang, “Dual-constraint
autoencoder and adaptive weighted similarity spatial attention for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 7,
pp. 9393–9403, Jul. 2024.
[42] W. Luo, H. Yao, W. Yu, and Z. Li, “AMI-Net: Adaptive mask inpainting
network for industrial anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 22, pp. 1591–1605, 2025.
[43] G. Wang, Y. Zou, S. He, Y. Wang, and R. Dai, “Anomaly detection and
localization via reverse distillation with latent anomaly suppression,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., 2025, doi: 10.1109/
TCSVT.2025.3562258. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/10969994
[44] Y. Zhao, X. Wu, and J. Cheng, “DualFlow: Dual-branch flow for
unsupervised anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–14, 2025.
[45] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[46] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 3914–3923.

[47] H. He et al., “A diffusion-based framework for multi-class anomaly
detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38, no. 8,
pp. 8472–8480.
[48] Y. Huang, C. Qiu, and K. Yuan, “Surface defect saliency of magnetic
tile,” Vis. Comput., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 85–96, Jan. 2020.
[49] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedefect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.

Shichen Qu received the B.Sc. degree from Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian, China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the M.Sc. degree with the
Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing,
China.
His research interests include computer vision and anomaly detection.

Xian Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in control
theory and control engineering from the Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China, in 2016.
He is currently an Associate Professor with IA, CAS. His current research
interests include machine learning and automated surface inspection for
industries.

Xinyi Gong received the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering from the Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Beijing, China, in 2019.
He is currently a Professor with the Space Information Research Institute,
Hangzhou Dianzi University (HDU), Hangzhou, China. His research interests
include computer vision, image processing, pattern recognition, and machine
learning.

Zhen Qu received the B.Sc. degree from Xidian University, Xi’an, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute of
Automation (IA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China.
His research interests include machine learning and visual inspection.

Mukesh Prasad (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.S. degree from the
School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, India, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer
Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2015.
He is currently a Senior Lecturer with the School of Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, who has made substantial contributions to
the fields of machine learning, artificial intelligence, and natural language
processing.

Fei Shen received the B.Sc. degree from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in
2007, the M.Sc. degree from Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China,
in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering from the
Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing,
in 2012.
He is currently a Professor with the Engineering Laboratory for Intelligent
Equipment, CAS. His research interests include visual inspection, robot vision
control, and microassembly.

Zhengtao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in control
science and engineering from the Institute of Automation (IA), Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China, in 2010.
He is currently a Professor with the Engineering Laboratory for Intelligent
Equipment and Technology of Industrial Vision, CAS. His research interests
include visual measurement, microassembly, and automation.

Guiguang Ding (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1999 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His research interests include the areas of multimedia
information retrieval, computer vision, and machine learning.