2764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

LUK: Empowering Log Understanding With Expert
Knowledge From Large Language Models
Lipeng Ma , Weidong Yang , Member, IEEE, Sihang Jiang , Ben Fei , Member, IEEE, Mingjie Zhou ,
Shuhao Li , Mingyu Zhao , Bo Xu , and Yanghua Xiao

Abstract—Logs play a critical role in providing essential
information for system monitoring and troubleshooting. Recently,
with the success of pre-trained language models (PLMs) and
large language models (LLMs) in natural language processing
(NLP), smaller PLMs (such as BERT) and LLMs (like GPT-4)
have become the current mainstream approaches for log analysis.
Despite the remarkable capabilities of LLMs, their higher cost
and inefficient inference present significant challenges in leveraging the full potential of LLMs to analyze logs. In contrast,
smaller PLMs can be fine-tuned for specific tasks even with
limited computational resources, making them more practical.
However, these smaller PLMs face challenges in understanding
logs comprehensively due to their limited expert knowledge.
To address the lack of expert knowledge and enhance log
understanding for smaller PLMs, this paper introduces a novel
and practical knowledge enhancement framework, called LUK,
which acquires expert knowledge from LLMs automatically and
then enhances the smaller PLM for log analysis with the expert
knowledge. LUK can take full advantage of both types of models.
Specifically, we design a multi-expert collaboration framework
based on LLMs with different roles to acquire expert knowledge.
In addition, we propose two novel pre-training tasks to enhance
the log pre-training with expert knowledge. LUK achieves stateof-the-art results on different log analysis tasks, and extensive
experiments demonstrate that expert knowledge from LLMs can
be utilized more effectively to understand logs. Our source code
and detailed experimental data are available at https://github.
com/LeaperOvO/LUK.
Index Terms—Log understanding, large language model, pretrained model, knowledge enhancement.

Received 14 May 2025; revised 21 July 2025; accepted 27 July 2025. Date
of publication 31 July 2025; date of current version 17 October 2025. This
work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai
under Grant 24ZR1405000. Recommended for acceptance by Y. Wang.
(Corresponding authors: Weidong Yang; Bo Xu.)
Lipeng Ma, Weidong Yang, Sihang Jiang, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li,
and Yanghua Xiao are with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: lpma21@m.fudan.edu.cn;
wdyang@fudan.edu.cn; jiangsihang@fudan.edu.cn; mjzhou19@fudan.edu.cn;
shli23@m.fudan.edu.cn; shawyh@fudan.edu.cn).
Ben Fei is with the Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077 (e-mail: benfei@cuhk.edu.hk).
Mingyu Zhao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and
Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072,
China (e-mail: myzhao@nwpu.edu.cn).
Bo Xu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Donghua
University, Shanghai 201620, China (e-mail: xubo@dhu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSE.2025.3594046

I. INTRODUCTION

W

ITH the increasing complexity and scale of IT systems,
the maintenance and operation of large-scale systems
become more challenging. Logs record the valuable runtime
status, they play a crucial role in troubleshooting and enable
engineers to monitor system health effectively. However, the increasing volume of logs has made manual analysis a harder task
[1]. Consequently, numerous automated log analysis methods
utilizing machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) models
have been proposed to automatically analyze logs, encompassing various tasks such as log parsing [2], [3], [4], [5], anomaly
detection [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], root cause analysis
[13], [14], [15], failure prediction [16], [17], [18], etc. In particular, with the recent success of pre-trained language models
(PLMs) in natural language processing (NLP), especially the
advent of large language models (LLMs) represented by ChatGPT and GPT-4 [19], language models (LMs) have garnered
significant attention in log understanding and these LM-based
approaches [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28],
[29], [30] achieve tremendous achievements in automated log
analysis due to their outstanding performance.
As language models increase in scale and gain enhanced
capabilities, two mainstream paradigms have emerged for utilizing LMs in log understanding. The first one is based on
PLMs, which follows the pre-train & fine-tune paradigm, such
as BERT [31], fine-tuning a PLM with task-specific data and
enabling it to specialize in the given task. Considering the need
for fine-tuning with limited computational resources and cost
savings, LMs in this paradigm are typically smaller in size,
such as BERT with 110M parameters. The second one is based
on LLMs with vast scale and complexity1 , which can tackle a
diverse array of tasks with remarkable proficiency. The LLMbased methods follow the In-Context Learning (ICL) paradigm
[32], [33], learning from a few examples in the context without
updating the parameters.
Despite the powerful performance of LLMs, limited accessibility and higher costs present significant challenges in leveraging the full potential of LLMs. These LLMs often come
with substantial usage fees and have restricted access to data
privacy and security. Even if the LLM is deployed locally, it
still may face resource constraints, making LLMs less attainable
1 We use LLM to specifically refer to the large language models over 10B
parameters that utilize the ICL paradigm without fine-tuning the parameters.

0098-5589 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

Fig. 1. Example of prompting ChatGPT to help understand log, which
can provide detailed background information, terminology explanations, and
solutions. Without knowledge, the beginner fails to understand the RSSI value.

for individuals and smaller organizations. In addition, due to
their complex autoregressive architectures and a large number
of parameters, LLM-based methods are computationally inefficient. Considering that modern software systems can produce
several petabytes per day [34], [35], directly employing LLMs
for log analysis is impractical due to the significant overhead
of querying LLMs, such as inference time and network latency
[29], [36]. In contrast, smaller PLMs with smaller parameters,
requiring limited resource costs, are more efficient than LLMs
[37]. Hence, we argue that the smaller PLM is more practical
in extensive log analysis scenarios [23], [24], [25].
However, the smaller PLM encounters a bottleneck in log
understanding due to the inadequacy of expert knowledge. Logs
inherently employ concise and highly specialized terminology,
the smaller PLM struggles to understand valuable information
from logs like experts [22]. This issue can be attributed to
the lack of rich sources for knowledge acquisition. Although
KnowLog proposes to acquire expert knowledge from documentation [22], most logs lack professional documentation
(e.g., almost unable to find relevant documents for logs coming
from Loghub [38]), and the manual construction of knowledge
is costly and inefficient, which significantly hinders the availability of the model.
Fortunately, LLMs with extensive knowledge can understand
logs comprehensively, attributed to training on massive textual
data related to code [39] and logging [40], [41]. For example, as
depicted in Fig. 1, ChatGPT can better assist in understanding
the Mac log. Consequently, LLMs such as GPT-4 compensate
for the lack of knowledge of the smaller PLM, which can
analyze logs more efficiently and professionally.
To more effectively harness the knowledge embedded within
LLMs for log understanding, we argue that expert knowledge
can be elicited from LLMs and subsequently utilized to empower the smaller PLM, making the smaller model understand
logs like experts. However, two main challenges exist in enhancing log understanding with expert knowledge from LLMs.
(1) Effective Knowledge Acquisition: Although LLMs have
shown remarkable capabilities in various tasks, LLMs still have
difficulty in acquiring complete and accurate knowledge due to
hallucination, which may result in not covering all the depth of
knowledge, and there may be misunderstandings when dealing

2765

with domain-specific data [42], [43]. In addition, in the era of
LLMs, knowledge distillation (KD) [44] emerges as a pivotal
methodology for transferring advanced capabilities from LLMs
to smaller models. Compared to obtaining answers directly
from the teacher’s model, distillation towards the reasoning
process has proved to be a more effective method [44], [45].
However, current knowledge distillation methods, such as COTbased KD [46], [47], struggle to acquire expert knowledge,
instead imitating the teacher’s reasoning forms and ignoring the
premise that reasoning requires expert knowledge. These distillation methods, which emphasize the process of reasoning and
outcome, still hardly compensate for the lack of expert knowledge. (2) Knowledge Enhancement: Since logs and expert
knowledge obtained from LLM are heterogeneous data, smaller
models with fewer parameters and limited learning capacity
struggle to capture knowledge [48], [49]. Masked Language
Modeling (MLM) [31] is the widely used pre-training task for
most pre-trained models, where they can only perceive their
own contextual information and cannot incorporate external
knowledge. In addition, KnowLog proposes an abbreviation
prediction task specialized for log understanding. However,
its ability to enhance the knowledge of abbreviations in the
logs is limited. It cannot adaptively perceive other important
information from the knowledge to understand logs, such as the
parameter knowledge of logs.
To overcome the above-mentioned challenges, we propose
a novel knowledge enhancement framework to empower log
understanding on a smaller PLM, called LUK. Rather than
utilizing LLMs to solve specific tasks directly, LUK first acquires expert knowledge from LLMs, then enhances the log pretraining with the corresponding expert knowledge, and finally,
the knowledge-enhanced PLM for logs can be fine-tuned to
solve downstream log analysis tasks efficiently. This framework
can maximize the advantages of both LLM and smaller PLMs.
Specifically, to solve the first issue, we design a multi-expert
collaboration framework to acquire expert knowledge from
LLMs. Motivated by the waterfall model [50] in software engineering, we build a professional team consisting of Director,
Executor, and Evaluator, and define the identity and responsibility of the roles through prompt engineering, enabling LLMs
to think and handle tasks just like role play. Then the team cooperates and interacts to construct expert knowledge. To solve
the second issue, we develop a novel hierarchical knowledgeenhanced pre-training framework that combines two complementary training objectives: 1) the word-level token prediction task, focusing on granular knowledge perception, and 2)
the sentence-level semantic alignment, enhancing contextual
understanding.
To evaluate the effectiveness of LUK, we conduct experiments on the software system and network device logs, including six log analysis downstream tasks. The experiment results
show that LUK can harness knowledge from LLMs more effectively to improve log understanding and achieve state-of-the-art
results on different log analysis tasks. In addition, LUK exhibits
remarkable generalization and robustness in log analysis, with
notable advantages in low-resource scenarios.

2766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

This work is an extension of our conference paper
(KnowLog) published in ICSE 2024 [22]. We make several
new contributions:
1) LLM-Driven Knowledge Acquisition: This work designs
a multi-expert collaboration framework to distill expert
knowledge from LLMs, which compensates for the expensive overhead of LLMs. In addition, this collaboration framework mitigates issues of hallucination and
incomplete knowledge by simulating the roles of Director, Executor, and Evaluator, enabling LLMs to construct
reliable and comprehensive domain-specific knowledge.
Compared to the limited usage scenario of KnowLog,
which relies on documentation created by human experts
to acquire knowledge, this work focuses on more generalized log analysis scenarios where logs are available
without accessible domain knowledge.
2) Hierarchical Knowledge Enhancement: This work proposes a hierarchical knowledge-enhanced pre-training
framework, which incorporates two complementary training objectives: (1) word-level token prediction for granular knowledge perception and (2) sentence-level semantic
alignment for improved contextual understanding. This
dual-objective approach enables smaller PLMs to more
effectively utilize expert knowledge from heterogeneous
data, addressing their inherent limitations. Compared to
KnowLog’s inability to perceive fine-grained knowledge
beyond abbreviation, this work enables a more comprehensive understanding of fine-grained knowledge from
the provided information.
3) Extensive Evaluation: This work achieves state-of-theart results on different log understanding tasks, proving
the effectiveness of acquiring knowledge from LLMs to
enhance log understanding. Moreover, LUK extends its
applicability by focusing on challenging scenarios such as
unstable log data and low-resource settings. Experiments
show that LUK consistently achieves superior performance across these scenarios, demonstrating its robustness and adaptability.
II. RELATED WORK AND MOTIVATION
A. Pre-Trained Language Models for Log Analysis
Pre-training is the key to the success of the PLMs and LLMs,
where a language model is first trained on an extensive corpus
with effective pre-training tasks to capture general knowledge
and then adapted to solve different downstream tasks [51], [52].
The emergence of BERT [31] heralds the success of the pretrain & fine-tune paradigm in natural language. Such language
models improve the model’s ability on a specific task by finetuning using task-specific objective functions after pre-training.
Many studies [53], [54], [55] have demonstrated that pretraining on domain corpus and fine-tuning with supervised data
can improve performance on a specific task, even outperforming
LLMs [56], [57]. In the field of log analysis, many studies,
including pre-training on log corpus [20], [21], [22], [58] and
fine-tuning on log analysis tasks [24], [25] have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the pre-trained model for log analysis.

However, training solely on a general or log corpus struggles
to further improve log understanding due to the lack of expert
knowledge. KnowLog [22] firstly proposes to enhance log understanding by integrating expert knowledge during the pretraining phase. Nevertheless, KnowLog’s usage scenarios are
limited as it heavily relies on documentation created by human
experts to acquire knowledge. In contrast, this work addresses
more generalized log analysis scenarios where logs are available without accompanying domain knowledge. In addition,
these pre-trained models rely on the existing Masked Language
Modeling (MLM) as the pre-training task, where they only
perceive their own contextual information and are unable to integrate external knowledge. Although KnowLog also proposes
the abbreviation prediction task, this method cannot adaptively
perceive other knowledge than the abbreviation. Considering
the abundance of knowledge required for log understanding,
hence, we also investigate making the PLM adaptive in perceiving useful information from the knowledge during pre-training.
B. Large Language Model for Log Analysis
Large language models (LLMs), representing a remarkable
advancement in artificial intelligence, have been trained on
diverse corpora, enabling them to generate human-like text and
provide accurate responses to queries [59]. Notably, the recent
introduction of transformative models like ChatGPT and GPT4, characterized by their enormous scale and alignment with
human feedback, presents a novel opportunity for enhancing
software engineering tasks [23], [60], [61], [62]. LLMs can
learn from the prompt context without training the model, which
is called In-context Learning (ICL) [63]. Furthermore, research
has shown that augmenting the size of LLMs significantly
boosts their capacity for knowledge encoding and reasoning
[48], [64]. Due to the outstanding abilities of LLMs, many recent studies [26], [27], [28], [29], [30] utilize the ICL paradigm
of LLMs for different log analysis tasks without fine-tuning the
model and make tremendous achievements in log analysis tasks.
However, restricted accessibility, higher costs, and computational inefficiency limit the widespread use of LLM in realworld scenarios. For example, the GPT-3 model with 175 billion
parameters requires 326GB of GPU memory to deploy [65].
Given the enormous data volumes produced by modern software systems daily, the overhead of querying LLMs, including
inference time and network latency, renders direct application
of LLMs for log analysis impractical. In contrast, small PLMs
with smaller parameters are more efficient compared to LLMs
[37]. We argue that the smaller PLM can make predictions
better in log analysis tasks given sufficient expert knowledge. In
this paper, we guide LLMs as domain experts with prompts and
explore how to effectively acquire and utilize expert knowledge
from LLMs to empower log understanding.
III. METHOD
A. Overview
Fig. 2 shows the conceptual overview of LUK, which consists
of three phases: knowledge acquisition, knowledge-enhanced

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

Fig. 2.

Conceptual overview of LUK.

pre-training, and fine-tuning with downstream tasks. Specifically, in the first stage, we collect various logs as input, and then
we design a multi-expert collaboration framework based on
LLMs to acquire expert knowledge of logs. In the second stage,
we take the raw logs and the corresponding expert knowledge
as input. To effectively leverage expert knowledge to empower
log understanding on a smaller model, we enhance the log pretraining with knowledge based on BERT-base and propose two
pre-training tasks on the word level and sentence level. Finally,
a specific PLM for logs is obtained, which can be fine-tuned on
downstream tasks to solve log analysis tasks. In the following
sections, we describe the details of LUK.

B. Multi-Expert Collaboration Framework
Hallucination is an inherent flaw of LLMs, which may lead to
incomplete or incorrect generation, ultimately failing to fulfill
the intended requirements. To construct comprehensive and
accurate expert knowledge with LLM, motivated by cognitive
synergy [66] and teamwork theory [67], humans can leverage
the power of collaboration and interaction to solve complex
problems. As shown in Fig. 3, we design a multi-expert collaboration (MEC) framework, where we assign LLMs to different
roles, and these roles collaborate to generate effective expert
knowledge.
1) Role Design: Based on the classical waterfall model [50]
in software engineering, we design a similar waterfall model to
analyze logs consisting of three stages: analysis, execution, and
evaluation. Thus, we build a professional team based on LLMs
and define clear goals for each role, comprising a Director,
Executor, and Evaluator.
It is widely acknowledged that one key capability of LLMs
is to follow input natural language instructions or prompts [68],
[69], hence they can customize the output to the specific needs
of the user. As shown in Fig. 3, the prompt design methodology
involves the pre-definition of role cards to allocate distinct roles
and responsibilities to LLMs. These role cards encompass character identity, task objectives, requirements, and input queries.
Initially, the LLM is assigned a character identity to emulate
a specific expert role. This step enables the model to adjust
its output to match the expertise and responsibilities associated
with the designated role. Subsequently, the task objective will
instruct the LLM to perform the corresponding responsibilities

2767

aligned with the assigned character identity. Moreover, the requirement outlines the anticipated outcome or characteristics
that the generated content must exhibit. These criteria may encompass aspects such as reasoning strategies, informativeness,
or other pertinent factors crucial to the task at hand. Lastly,
the inclusion of an input query or data serves to contextualize
the task for the LLM by presenting specific information or
scenarios that the model should engage with or respond to.
By integrating these components into the prompt design
framework, we can effectively guide the LLM in generating
responses that are tailored to specific roles, tasks, and desired
outcomes. These three different roles are assigned the following
tasks:
• Director. The Director’s primary objective is to establish
a comprehensive high-level framework aimed at providing
a strategic overview to drive the team’s efforts in understanding logs. This role outlines the key points essential for
log understanding, thus ensuring that essential insights are
highlighted and comprehensively addressed.
• Executor. As the central role of this team, the Executor
is tasked with the detailed execution of the log analysis
process. By receiving key points from the Director and
feedback from the Evaluator, the Executor undertakes two
critical responsibilities: content generation and refinement.
Specifically, the Executor first generates detailed content
aligned with the outlined key points. Then the Executor
refines and polishes the content based on feedback, improving the knowledge quality.
• Evaluator. The Evaluator assumes the crucial responsibility of ensuring the quality and adherence of generated content to predefined requirements. We define three
evaluation requirements for the Evaluator to check the
Executor’s generation on three fundamental aspects: completeness, consistency, and conciseness. By evaluating
content against these criteria, the Evaluator validates the
accuracy and completeness of the generated knowledge.
2) Dehallucination With Self-Evaluation: Hallucinations
seriously affect the accuracy and quality of outputs [70], [71].
Given the tendency of LLM-generated content to exhibit deficiencies in comprehensiveness and informativeness, ensuring
the superior quality of generated knowledge poses a significant
challenge. To mitigate the hallucination of LLM and ensure the
quality of expert knowledge, we build the role of an Evaluator
in the MEC framework and define three evaluation aspects
to evaluate the quality of generated knowledge automatically,
which encourages the LLM to actively seek more detailed
suggestions from the self-evaluation before delivering a formal response. However, the MEC framework runs under the
challenging reference-free setting, and the evaluation requirements cannot be directly quantified through metrics, where the
LLM tends to generate ambiguous and inconsistent evaluations
without fine-grained distinguishability, causing unsatisfactory
evaluation performance [72], [73].
To address the evaluation weaknesses of the LLM, we
provide evaluation examples as a reference in the Evaluator prompt. By providing specific examples, the Evaluator
uses them as the basis for evaluation, thus better guiding the

2768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 3. Framework of multi-expert collaboration, which consists of three experts. First, the Director meticulously analyzes the input logs to discern key
points. Subsequently, the Executor utilizes these key points to create detailed content. Finally, the Evaluator evaluates the quality of the generated content. In
cases where the evaluation result is unsatisfactory and improvements are needed, the Evaluator provides feedback to the Executor for refinement.

evaluation of LLMs towards our desired goals. Considering that
the single type of example makes the LLM biased, motivated
by contrastive learning techniques [74], [75], we construct contrastive examples consisting of positive and negative knowledge of the same log to Evaluator as reference examples, where
the positive example showcases the desired knowledge, while
the negative example highlights the unsatisfactory knowledge
that should be avoided. By analyzing both types of examples before generating the evaluation, the Evaluator can reason about
our evaluation requirements and understand how to evaluate
them.
Specifically, we select one log L with high-quality knowledge Kpos as the positive example, which can be manually constructed by experts or generated from the LLM
and manually confirmed. Considering that negative examples
{Kneg }C
c=1 , C = 3 of the log L are unavailable directly, to
construct the negative examples automatically, we prompt the
LLM to modify the positive knowledge, making it unsatisfactory for evaluation. As shown in Fig. 4, we first give the
background in the prompt and then clarify the task of modifying
knowledge for the LLM, where we can specify which evaluation
metrics are not fulfilled. Next, we provide the raw log, the raw
positive knowledge, the key points, and the three evaluation
requirements in the prompt. Finally, we require the LLM to
give the reason for not fulfilling the evaluation requirements
while generating the modified content, which not only improves the reasoning ability of the Evaluator but also provides
guidance for the revision of the content by Executor. In cases
where the LLM-generated negative examples do not capture the

Fig. 4. Prompt template of constructing negative samples, where the underlined portion of the prompt supports user modification based on their own
data and intent.

characteristics we want to avoid, this can be manually checked,
and feedback can be given to the LLM to re-generate negative
samples. To avoid the higher expense of the longer prompt, we
construct one positive knowledge and its corresponding three
negative knowledge as reference examples to be provided to
the Evaluator. The contrastive examples we constructed in our
experiments are shown in Fig. 6.

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

3) Collaboration: After constructing evaluation examples
and assigning roles to LLMs, different roles start working to
collaborate according to the provided requirements. First, the
Director carefully analyzes the input logs to recognize key
points and formulates a plan for comprehending the logs effectively. Subsequently, the Director shares these insights with the
Executor to guide the content generation process. The Executor
utilizes these key points to create detailed content that aligns
with the requirements. Finally, the detailed content produced
by the Executor undergoes evaluation by the Evaluator. If the
content meets the evaluation requirement, it is directly output
as expert knowledge. In cases where the evaluation result is
unsatisfactory and improvements are needed, the Evaluator
provides feedback to the Executor for refinement. To rigorously
ensure the quality of the generated knowledge, this evaluation
and refinement mechanism will be iterative until the content
generated by Executor meets the evaluation requirement or the
maximum number of iterations is reached. We set up 3 iterations
to build expert knowledge in our experiments. The pseudocode
of the multi-expert collaboration framework is outlined in Algorithm 1.
This collaborative framework has two pivotal advantages:
Firstly, leveraging multiple roles’ collective insights and skills
enables a multi-perspective analysis of the input log, thereby
mitigating the one-sidedness and bias inherent in a single
model’s response. Secondly, through the feedback loop mechanism, the framework enables iterative refinement of content.
This iterative process of evaluation, feedback incorporation,
and content enhancement promotes continuous improvement,
thereby ensuring that the acquired expert knowledge is comprehensive and of high quality.
C. Pre-Training With Knowledge Enhancement
The overall pre-training framework is shown in Fig. 5, the
input of the pre-training framework is a batch of pairs consisting
of logs and the corresponding expert knowledge, then these
pairs are fed into two encoders to obtain log representations and
knowledge representations through two encoders respectively,
where two encoders are initialized with the same pre-trained
model. Finally, based on the structural characteristics of the log,
we propose two pre-training tasks at word-level and sentencelevel: (1) token prediction and (2) semantic alignment, to incorporate expert knowledge for improving log understanding.
1) Word-Level Token Prediction: To sufficiently understand
domain terminologies in the logs, we propose a Token Prediction pre-training task (TP). Unlike existing word-level tasks of
traditional PLMs only utilizing local context to predict tokens,
our proposed word-level task requires models to aggregate context and knowledge for predicting tokens, leading to a knowledgeable pre-trained model.
Specifically, given a log l and expert knowledge k generated from the LLM, we get the corresponding input token
sequence ls = {l0 , l1 , ..., ln }, ks = {k0 , k1 , ..., lm } after tokenization. The token prediction task randomly masks a certain
percentage (15% in our experiments) of the log tokens li with
a special [M ASK] token, and then tries to recover them by

2769

Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of multi-expert collaboration.
Require: Input Log log, LLM M, Example Knowledge Kpos
Ensure: Output Expert Knowledge k
# Construct Contrastive Examples
for c = 1 to C do
c
= M(P romptM odif y , Kpos )
Kneg
end for
Kexamples = Kpos ∪ {Kneg }C
c=1
# Initial Roles
DIRECT OR = Init_Role(P romptDirctor , M)
EX ECU T OR = Init_Role(P romptExecutor , M)
P romptEvaluator = P romptEvaluator .join(Kexamples )
EVALU AT OR = Init_Role(P romptEvaluator , M)
# Collaboration
Init: epoch = 0, f eedback = F alse
keypoint = DIRECT OR(log)
content = EX ECU T OR(log, keypoint)
repeat
epoch = epoch + 1
f eedback = EVALU AT OR(log, keypoint, content)
if f eedback == F alse then
content = EX ECU T OR(content, f eedback)
end if
until epoch == Epoch or f eedback == T rue
k = content
return k

perceiving external knowledge. To perceive useful information
from the generated knowledge, we design a knowledge perception module (KPM) based on the cross-attention mechanism, which fuses the heterogeneous representations of log and
knowledge to bridge the knowledge gap. The process of this
module can be described in three steps:
Firstly, log encoder and knowledge encoder encode ls and ks,
respectively, and get the corresponding token representations
l = {l[CLS] , l0 , l1 , ..., ln } and k = {l[CLS] , k0 , k1 , ..., km }.
Secondly, since not all tokens in knowledge contribute
equally to the masked token prediction and to measure the
importance of each token in knowledge for the token semantic,
KPM calculates the semantic similarity between masked token
li and knowledge k, and each token in knowledge is assigned
a weight to represent its importance. Considering that the log
representation and the knowledge representation come from
two different encoders, we introduce the cross-attention mechanism to compute this weight, where queries come from the
masked log token li , keys and values come from the knowledge
representations k:
Q = WQ li , K = WK k, V = WV k,

(1)

where, li from the log encoder and k from the knowledge encoder. Then assign a weight α for each token in the knowledge:



QK T
√
α = sof tmax
(2)
, k = αV,
dk
where WQ , WK , and WV are learnable parameter matrices,
dk is the dimension of representation, α refers to the attention

2770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 5. The overview of LUK pre-training framework. LUK includes a hierarchical knowledge-enhanced framework, including two complementary training
objectives on word level and sentence level. The word-level object is designed from the perspective of domain token understanding, while the sentence-level
objective is designed from overall semantic alignment.



distribution, and k denotes the obtained information from the
knowledge based on the weights.

Thirdly, masked token li and obtained knowledge k are
concatenated inside the dk -dimensional space to constitute a

fused representation [li ; k ], which is used to predict the original token:


yˆi = sof tmax(Wf [li ; k ]),

(3)

1 
f (la , ka )
, (6)
−log
LSA (θ) =
N −1
N a=1
f (la , ka ) + b=1 f (la , kb )
N

where τ is the temperature hyperparameter, which is set to 0.05
empirically in our experiments.
At last, we sum the TP loss and the SA loss, and obtain the
overall training objective:
min LT P (θ) + LSA (θ)
θ

where Wf is the weight parameter. This fused representation
contains the key information for the token understanding, which
is adaptively acquired from knowledge. At last, the TP objective
is to predict the original tokens that are masked out, formulated
as follows:
LT P (θ) = −logp(li |ls\{li }),

(4)

where ls\{li } denotes the log tokens sequence ls with token li
being masked.
2) Sentence-Level Semantic Alignment: Since logs do not
conform to the grammatical structure of human language and
are always concise, it is difficult to sufficiently capture the
semantics of logs. To enrich the semantic context of logs
and improve the robustness of log representations, following KnowLog [22], we construct a Semantic Alignment pretraining task (SA) at the sentence level that aligns the semantic
representations of logs with the expert knowledge with contrastive learning.
Specifically, we first construct positive and negative examples from a batch T = {(l, k)} of input pairs with size N .
(la , k a ) is the a-th pair in the batch. We obtain logs l and
knowledge k from the same input pairs {(la , k b )a=b } as positive
examples and different input pairs {(la , k b )a=b } as negative
examples. Then we use la , ka to indicate the representations
of the log and the knowledge, where the hidden state of the
special symbol [CLS] as the sentence representation. To pull
closer positive samples and push away negative samples, the
training objective of SA is defined as follows:

 

(la ) kb
a
b
f (l , k ) = exp
τ ,
(5)
||la || · ||kb ||

(7)

D. Fine-Tuning With Downstream Tasks
After pre-training, we fine-tune the log encoder on different
downstream tasks. We group all downstream tasks into two
categories based on the input type: log-single tasks and log-pair
tasks. We use the final hidden state of the first token (the [CLS]
token) as the sentence representation. For log-single tasks, we
input the output of the language model lCLS into a multi-layer
perception network function fH and obtain the prediction as
fH (lCLS ). For log-pair tasks, we follow sentence-bert [76] and
use the language model to encode two separate sentences u, v,
then input uCLS , vCLS and element-wise difference |uCLS −
vCLS | into a multi-layer perception network function fH and
obtain the prediction as fH ([uCLS ; vCLS ; |uCLS − vCLS |]).
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Data Preparation
In this paper, we collect logs from software systems and
network devices to construct expert knowledge and the log pretrained model. Specifically, we collect software system logs
from Loghub [38], including operating system logs composed
of Windows and BGL, as well as distributed system logs composed of HDFS and OpenStack. Given that these datasets contain a significant proportion of duplicated logs, we employ
widely used Drain [77] to parse these logs and achieve log
templates. Subsequently, we only sample one instance log as
input that corresponds to each unique template. In addition,
we also collect network device logs from the public documentation of two vendors, Cisco2 and Huawei3 , including three
2 https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/support/all-products.html
3 https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/en/index.html

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

TABLE I
STATISTICS OF THE DATASET USED FOR KNOWLEDGE
GENERATION AND PRE-TRAINING
# of Log Templates

Datasets

Category

Software System

Distributed System
Operating System

2,292
11,947

Network Device

Cisco
Huawei

16,591
12,399

Total

43,229

devices: Switches, Routers, and WLAN. The detailed statistics
are shown in Table I.
B. Parameters Setting
• As for expert knowledge acquisition, we explore different
LLMs for experiments, including two proprietary LLMs:
gpt-3.5-turbo (ChatGPT) and gpt-4o (GPT-4o), and one
open-source model: Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (LLama370B) [78]. To increase the stability of LLM’s output, we
set the temperature of LLMs to 0.
• For contrastive examples provided to the Evaluator, we
show in Fig. 6.
• For pre-training, we use bert-base-uncased with 110M
parameters in our experiments. During pre-training, we set
the batch size as 32, epochs as 40 and the maximum length
of the input text as 512. Moreover, the optimizer we adopt
is Adam with a learning rate of 5e-5, a weight decay of
0.01, learning rate warmup for 2,000 steps and linear decay
of the learning rate after.
• For fine-tuning, we adopt the cross-entropy loss as the loss
function in downstream tasks, and we set epoch to 20 and
10 on log-single and log-pair tasks, respectively.
• We spend 3 hours pre-training the LUK on 2 NVIDIA
A100 GPUs with PyTorch 2.4.0.
C. Downstream Tasks
To explore the performance of LUK on different log analysis domains, we conduct experiments on different downstream
tasks, including software systems and network device logs.
Following prior studies on software system logs [38], [79],
we focus on two widely studied tasks, anomaly detection and
failure identification. These tasks are representative of traditional log analysis challenges and help validate the core effectiveness of our approach. However, recognizing that existing
public datasets for these tasks often exhibit relatively simple
and repetitive anomaly patterns [80], [81], we expand our focus
to include knowledge-intensive log understanding tasks [22].
These tasks emphasize the understanding of log semantics and
require deeper domain knowledge, making them ideal for evaluating the capabilities of knowledge-enhanced models. Following the task construction process on log understanding tasks
[22], we construct four different downstream tasks on network
device logs across three vendors, and these datasets have been
organized and made accessible through our GitHub repository.

2771

The evaluation datasets in our experiments include two types:
datasets included in the pre-training corpus and those not included in the pre-training corpus. For most datasets, we collect
the evaluation datasets from the same source as the pre-training
data. Moreover, apart from logs involved in pre-training, to
verify the generalization capability of LUK, we also collect
logs that are not included in the pre-training for evaluation. In
Tables II and III we provide statistics for different tasks of their
datasets and make all publicly available datasets accessible in
our GitHub repository. Next, we give an introduction to each
task and its evaluation metrics.
1) Downstream Tasks of Software System Logs:
• Anomaly Detection (AD). Anomaly detection is a widely
researched log analysis task to predict whether anomalies
exist within a short period of log messages, where the input
is a log sequence and the output is True or False. Following
Biglog [21], we concatenate each log in the sequence and
then input them to the encoder to obtain the representation
of the sequence.
Dataset and Metric. Following previous anomaly detection studies [12], [82], we collect datasets from Loghub
[38]. Given the substantial size of anomaly detection
datasets, such as Spirit and Thunderbird, which contain
more than 200 million messages, full-scale analysis with
LLMs incurs high overhead. Hence, we take 1,000,000 raw
logs in chronological order with a window size of 20, then
group logs into chronologically ordered datasets (30,000
/ 10,000 / 10,000), preserving the natural characteristics
of log patterns while preventing data leakage. To measure
the effectiveness of different models in anomaly detection,
we report Precision, Recall, and F1 on the True (anomaly)
class as evaluation metrics.
• Failure Identification (FI). Failure identification aims to
further discern the type of failure present in the anomaly
log. Given the log messages, the model is required to
determine what error emerges.
Dataset and Metric. This dataset comes from [18], which
is an OpenStack dataset including 396 failure tests and
16 kinds of API errors, such as “network delete error”,
“openstack network create error”. Usually, engineers are
interested in whether top-K recommended results contain
the correct error, hence, we report the Recall@K rate as
the evaluation metric.
2) Downstream Tasks of Network Device Logs:
• Module Classification (MC). MC is a log-single task
aiming at identifying which module the log originates
from, which input is a log with the masked module name
and the output is the corresponding module name.
Dataset and Metric. We collect the log from Table III
and replace the module name with [MASK] as input, the
module name in the log as ground truth. Obviously, this is
a multi-classification task and the model needs to understand the contextual information of the logs to accurately
identify their source. As an unbalanced multi-class classification task and considering the importance of different
classes, we report Accuracy and Weighted F1 as evaluation
metrics.

2772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 6. The contrastive samples constructed in our experiments, where Example 1 represents the positive example, and the remaining three examples are
negative examples obtained from the modification of GPT-4o. Colour-marked text indicates that the evaluation requirements are unsatisfied.

TABLE II
STATISTICS OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS DATASETS ON SOFTWARE
SYSTEM (TRAINING/VALIDATION/TESTING SIZE)
Tasks

Dataset

Anomaly
Detection

BGL
ThunderBird*
Spirit*

Failure
Identification

Openstack

#Size
600,000 / 200,000 / 200,000
600,000 / 200,000 / 200,000
600,000 / 200,000 / 200,000
236 / 80 / 80

* indicates logs not involved in the pre-training.
TABLE III
STATISTICS OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS DATASETS ON NETWORK DEVICE
(TRAINING/VALIDATION/TESTING SIZE)
Tasks

Switches

Routers

Security*

Module
Classification

Cisco 13,495/4,498/4,498
Huawei 3,439/1,146/1,146
H3C* 1,241/413/413

7,265/2,422/2,421 2,539/846/845
1,336/445/444
-

Fault Phenomenon
Identification

Huawei 362/120/120

-

-

Cisco 49,954/16,651/16,651 26,975/8,992/8,991 1,894/631/631
Log and Description
Huawei 7,702/2,567/2,567
5,977/1,992/1,991 4,485/1,495/1,494
Semantic Matching
H3C* 2,606/868/868
2,837/946/945
2,223/741/740
Log and Possible
Cause Ranking

Huawei 3,851/1,283/1,283

3,097/1,032/1,032 2,361/787/787

* indicates logs not involved in the pre-training.

• Fault Phenomenon Identification (FPI). FPI is also a
log-single task to identify the fault category to which the
log belongs. Different from the previous failure identification task, FPI is a multi-label classification task due to a
log may appear in more than one fault category.

Dataset and Metric. We collect 602 real operational logs
of Huawei switches from enterprise as the dataset, covering 43 failure categories, these logs are annotated by experts.Due to data privacy concerns, this dataset is currently
not publicly available. Unlike the multi-class classification
task, we report Average Accuracy of all samples [83] as
the evaluation metric, where the accuracy for each sample
is the number of correctly predicted labels.
• Log and Description Semantic Matching (LDSM).
LDSM is a log-pair task aimed at determining whether
the semantics of a given log align with the corresponding
natural language description, where the input is a log and
description pair, and the output is True or False.
Dataset and Metric. We collect descriptions of logs from
the documentation, then we build (log, description) pair as
ground truth and randomly select one other description for
each log as a negative sample. This task requires the model
to accurately understand the semantics of the logs and descriptions. As a binary classification task, both positive and
negative cases require attention, we report the Accuracy
and Weighed F1 as evaluation metrics.
• Log and Possible Cause Ranking (LPCR). LPCR is
a log-pair ranking task to find the most probable answer
from a list of possible causes for a given log. Specifically,
the input is a log and an answer candidate set, then the
model needs to find the most probable causes from the
set and rank the candidate set based on the priority as
the output.
Dataset and Metric. We collect logs and the corresponding possible causes from the Huawei public documentation
and build (log, possible cause) pairs as ground truth. Then

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

we randomly select 15 possible causes of other logs the
ground truth as a candidate set. This task necessitates that
the model understands the background information of the
log to accurately identify its potential causes. As a typical ranking task, following [52], we report Precision@K
and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) as evaluation metrics,
where MRR is a statistic measure for evaluating search
algorithms.
D. Baselines
We categorize baselines for log understanding into five
groups according to technology type: classical machine
learning-based methods, traditional deep-learning methods,
pre-trained language models, knowledge distillation methods,
and large language models. In addition, to ensure a fair
comparison, apart from LLMs, we reproduce all baselines
from their repositories, and the parameters of baseline models
are according to their original settings.
1) Classical Machine Learning Methods: K-nearest neighbor (KNN) is one of the most fundamental and simple classification methods [84]. In our implementation, we first store
the token list (split from log messages) and the corresponding
labels of the training log data. For inference, the prediction for a
given log is determined by assigning it the label most frequently
found among the nearest k training samples to the query point.
Specifically, we obtain tokens list of the input log (excluding the
header) by splitting the sequence based on spaces. Any token
containing numeric characters is removed during preprocessing. For the sake of simplicity, following LightAD [81], we
utilize the Jaccard index (also known as the Jaccard similarity
coefficient) to find the nearest neighbors in the training set,
defined as:
|A ∩ B|
,
(8)
Jaccard(A, B) =
|A ∪ B|
where A and B are the token sets of two log sequences. The
coefficient ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 indicates no overlap
between the sets (completely dissimilar) and 1 denotes identical
sets (perfect similarity). And we set the number of neighbors
k to 1 in our experiment. The performance of KNN on the
LPCR task is excluded since KNN cannot be adapted to the
ranking task.
2) Traditional Deep-Learning Methods: Traditional deeplearning methods convert each log message into a vector with
the word embedding model and then input the vector to a deep
neural network (CNN or BiLSTM) to analyze logs. Following
previous works [85], [86], we choose the most widely used
BiLSTM and CNN for log analysis as deep neural network
models.
3) Pre-Trained Language Models: PLM-based log analysis
methods follow the pre-train and fine-tune paradigm, where
one pre-trained model serves as the backbone, and then is finetuned on different specific downstream tasks. We select one
general pre-trained model (BERT [24], [82]) and two specific
pre-trained models for logs (Biglog [21] and KnowLog [22])
as baselines. Biglog excels in capturing essential features due to
its extensive training on the log corpus. In addition, KnowLog

2773

is the state-of-the-art log pre-trained model in log analysis,
not only due to pre-training on log corpus but also enhancing
the pre-training with documentation knowledge. Referring to
KnowLog, we collect the descriptions of logs from the Huawei
and Cisco public documentation as background knowledge to
enhance the log pre-training in the same way. For fairness,
we reproduce Biglog and KnowLog with the same pre-training
setting on our log corpus.
4) Knowledge Distillation Methods: In the era of LLMs,
the prevalent paradigm of data augmentation (DA) is to distill
knowledge from LLMs, where it prompts the LLM to generate
more data tailored to train the student model in a targeted skill or
domain [44], [87]. This reasoning process-oriented distillation
method is more effective compared to obtaining labels directly
from the teacher model [45]. Considering the lack of research
on knowledge distillation in the field of log analysis, we select
Chain-of-Thought (COT)-based knowledge distillation as the
baseline, which has proven to be an effective knowledge distillation method for the reasoning process in the field of NLP
[46], [47].
Specifically, we select T5 [88] (t5-base with 223M parameters) as the student model, and GPT-4o as the teacher
model. Given the specific log analysis task, we provide the
inputs and labels from the training set to the teacher model, then
utilize COT prompting to extract rationales from the teacher
model. Finally, the student model is trained with the inputs and
constructed rationales.
5) Large Language Models: LLM-based log analysis methods follow the in-context learning paradigm, where LLMs make
predictions based on contexts augmented with a few examples
without training. Following previous LLM-based log analysis
works [26], [27], [28], [29], we select top-5 similar examples
from the training set for each input log and use bge-largeen-v1.5 as the embedding model to select examples, due to
its excellent performance among all open-source embedding
models. Considering the recency bias of LLMs [89], we arrange
these examples in ascending order based on the cosine similarity. We select two proprietary LLMs (ChatGPT and GPT-4o)
and one powerful open-source LLM (LLama3-70B [78]) as
baselines. We utilize HTTP requests to invoke the OpenAI APIs
and interact with proprietary LLMs. For open-source LLM,
we deploy Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct in our environments to
analyze logs.
In addition, since COT prompting [64] is verified to improve
the performance of LLMs significantly. To verify the effectiveness of the MEC framework, we acquire knowledge with COT
and then train the model with the same pre-training tasks for
comparison. The specific prompt is: You are an engineer in
the maintenance and operation domain, Please help me understand this log, including parameters, description, possible
causes and resolution procedures. Let’s think step by step.
E. Evaluation
We evaluate LUK by answering the following research questions (RQs):
• RQ1: How effective is LUK compared with the current mainstream methods on downstream tasks?

2774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

TABLE IV
RESULTS ON AD AND FI (SOFTWARE SYSTEM LOGS)
Methods

AD (Precision / Recall / F1)
BGL

FI (Recall@1 / 2 / 3)
OpenStack

KNN

98.37 / 96.80 / 97.58

90.00 / 95.00 / 95.00

CNN
BiLSTM
BERT
Biglog
KnowLog

99.95 / 96.06 / 97.97
99.95 / 97.25 / 98.58
99.70 / 98.48 / 99.09
99.87 / 99.63 / 99.75
99.58 / 98.69 / 99.13

83.75 / 86.25 / 90.00
87.50 / 92.50 / 96.25
87.50 / 92.50 / 98.75
90.00 / 95.00 / 98.75
82.50 / 92.50 / 96.25

T5-KD

99.87 / 99.56 / 99.91

86.25 / 92.50 / 98.75

LLama3-70B
ChatGPT
GPT-4o

46.87 / 95.23 / 71.05
42.73 / 95.23 / 68.98
46.85 / 95. 23 / 70.54

85.00 / 96.25 / 96.25
83.75 / 95.00 / 96.25
87.50 / 96.25 / 96.25

LUK (COT-ChatGPT)
LUK (COT-GPT4o)

99.95 / 99.87 / 99.91
99.67 / 100.0 / 99.83

91.25 / 95.00 / 98.75
91.25 / 95.00 / 98.75

LUK (MEC-LLama3)
LUK (MEC-ChatGPT)
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

99.87 / 100.0 / 99.93
99.95 / 99.91 / 99.93
99.87 / 100.0 / 99.93

92.50 / 95.00 / 98.75
92.50 / 95.00 / 98.75
92.50 / 96.25 / 96.25

In this RQ, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of LUK
in comparison to other state-of-the-art baselines on software
systems and network device logs.
The experiment results are shown in Tables IV and VI. It
is clear that apart from the LLMs-based baselines, LUK outperforms all other baselines. In addition, LUK with smaller
parameters outperforms the LLMs on all tasks except for the
MC and LDSM tasks. In particular, compared to the best results
of baselines on the Failure Identification task of software system
logs, LUK improves on Recall@1 by 2.5%. And on the Module
Classification task of network device logs, LUK’s accuracy
improved by an average of 2.34%. This evidence underscores
the superior performance of LUK in the domain of log analysis. We observe that the KNN algorithm excels specifically
in anomaly detection and failure identification tasks, achieving
results comparable to those of PLMs. However, its performance
diminishes significantly in other knowledge-driven tasks. This
performance can be attributed to the relatively simple anomaly
patterns in public anomaly detection datasets [80], [81], which
often contain limited anomaly patterns and numerous repetitive
logs. The relatively simple anomaly patterns allow lexical pattern matching to suffice for basic detection tasks. Conversely,
tasks that require a deeper understanding of log semantics reveal
KNN’s limitations, as it struggles to understand the information conveyed by log data. This inability to grasp semantic
context restricts KNN’s generalizability, making it less effective in more complex log analysis scenarios. In contrast, LUK
not only excels in public anomaly detection datasets but also
achieves state-of-the-art performance across a wider range of
tasks, highlighting its advanced capabilities not only in pattern
recognition typical of machine learning but also in the semantic
understanding of logs. Further, traditional DL models exhibit
relatively poor performance, primarily attributed to their limited
capacity to capture the semantics of logs. When compared
to BERT and Biglog, it becomes evident that pre-training on
an extensive log corpus enhances the semantic understanding
abilities of PLMs. However, a more in-depth analysis uncovers

a notable challenge: the presence of domain-specific terminologies and the concise nature of logs act as barriers, and the lack
of external knowledge limits these models from making further
breakthroughs.
To verify the effectiveness of the expert knowledge obtained
from the LLM, we compare it with the KnowLog, whose
knowledge is obtained from the documentation. Our experimental findings demonstrate that MEC-based LUK outperforms
KnowLog. More specifically, LUK (MEC-GPT4o) improves
the average Accuracy on the Cisco and Huawei datasets regarding the MC and LDSM tasks by 2.38% and 1.15%, respectively.
It is noteworthy that Huawei’s documentation provides more
detailed log descriptions compared to the relatively concise descriptions found in Cisco’s documentation. This gap highlights
the ability of LLM to generate expert knowledge of equal or better quality than high-quality documentation. Given the scarcity
of documented descriptions for most logs in practice, obtaining expert knowledge through KnowLog becomes impractical.
For instance, the challenge of sourcing relevant documents for
logs from Loghub [38] significantly hinders the effectiveness
of KnowLog. Our approach, operating independently of documentation, consistently yields superior results and reduces the
reliance on human experts for complex knowledge construction,
offering a more feasible and practical alternative to traditional
documentation-based methods.
In comparison to the knowledge distillation-based method
(T5-KD), the COT-based knowledge distillation approach exhibits suboptimal performance in specific log analysis tasks.
This gap can be attributed to the unique nature of log analysis,
which typically necessitates a deep understanding of domainspecific knowledge. The chain-of-thought methodology, with
its sequential reasoning framework, may introduce noise or
overlook critical expert knowledge, leading to diminished performance in tasks where precise understanding is crucial. In
comparison, LUK prioritizes the construction of high-quality
expert knowledge explicitly before fine-tuning it for specific
tasks. By pre-building a solid foundation of domain-specific
knowledge, LUK can better address the complex challenges in
log analysis tasks.
In comparison to LLMs, our results show that apart from
LDSM and LPCR tasks, three LLMs perform worse than the
fine-tuned smaller PLMs. This difference can be attributed to
the existence of a significant domain gap, which hampers the
ability of LLMs to effectively address specialized tasks directly.
Consequently, this limitation restricts their potential to fully exploit the wealth of knowledge they encapsulate. Hence, extracting knowledge from LLMs before reasoning directly bridges
these critical gaps for task-specific analysis. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that GPT4o-based enhancement outperforms
the other two LLMs on most datasets, indicating the potential
of leveraging stronger LLMs to significantly enhance the performance of smaller models in various tasks.
Comparing MEC with COT, MEC emerges as the superior
performer. This superiority can be attributed to the collaborative essence of MEC, where multiple experts collaborate to
improve the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the knowledge
extracted from the LLM, effectively mitigating the problem

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

2775

TABLE V
RESULTS ON MODULE CLASSIFICATION (MC) AND LOG AND DESCRIPTION SEMANTIC MATCHING (LDSM) TASKS. (NETWORK DEVICE LOGS)
LDSM (Accuracy / Weighted F1)

MC (Accuracy / Weighted F1)
Methods

Cisco
Switches

Huawei

Cisco

Routers

Switches

Routers

Switches

Huawei
Routers

Switches

Routers

KNN

42.77 / 42.86

46.75 / 46.41

67.71 / 66.64

62.84 / 60.90

53.00 / 52.65

51.45 / 50.83

50.33 / 49.73

47.56 / 46.88

CNN
BiLSTM
BERT
Biglog
KnowLog

56.89 / 56.85
55.74 / 55.63
62.67 / 61.38
62.69 / 62.76
63.33 / 63.35

57.46 / 54.92
57.17 / 56.76
62.72 / 62.60
63.15 / 61.17
63.65 / 63.12

74.52 / 73.95
76.52 / 75.49
82.37 / 81.20
83.24 / 83.25
84.11 / 83.65

72.78 / 72.23
73.96 / 73.30
81.18 / 79.20
82.36 / 81.19
83.55 / 82.41

84.04 / 84.04
89.45 / 89.44
93.06 / 93.06
93.32 / 93.32
95.05 / 95.05

80.99 / 80.99
85.42 / 85.41
90.01 / 90.00
91.46 / 91.46
92.78 / 92.78

86.05 / 86.05
87.85 / 87.85
93.18 / 93.18
94.19 / 94.19
97.15 / 97.15

82.37 / 82.30
84.43 / 84.40
90.06 / 90.05
93.62 / 93.61
96.43 / 96.43

T5-KD

62.96 / 62.36

63.86 / 61.01

83.60 / 83.23

83.55 / 82.82

95.29 / 95.28

93.20 / 93.20

95.25 / 95.25

93.97 / 93.97

LLama3-70B
ChatGPT
GPT-4o

61.61 / 60.95
57.11 / 54.41
62.12 / 61.62

62.99 / 60.55
57.99 / 54.56
63.86 / 61.01

82.98 / 82.83
79.14 / 77.19
83.25 / 82.80

81.66 / 80.34
78.22 / 75.51
81.30 / 79.87

84.48 / 84.31
82.14 / 81.96
89.04 / 88.99

88.32 / 88.24
84.64 / 84.47
93.12 / 93.11

95.49 / 95.49
85.75 / 85.75
97.23 / 97.23

95.57 / 95.57
90.31 / 90.22
97.79 / 97.79

LUK (COT-ChatGPT)
LUK (COT-GPT4o)

63.49 / 63.72
63.47 / 63.51

64.51 / 63.33
63.61 / 63.02

83.42 / 82.70
83.60 / 83.20

83.19 / 82.34
82.84 / 81.92

94.93 / 94.92
94.92 / 94.91

93.11 / 93.11
93.18 / 93.18

96.33 / 96.33
96.46 / 96.46

95.73 / 95.73
95.93 / 95.93

LUK (MEC-LLama3)
LUK (MEC-ChatGPT)
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

65.67 / 65.27
65.54 / 65.12
66.16 / 66.02

66.67 / 65.12
66.29 / 64.27
67.20 / 65.41

85.25 / 84.95
84.64 / 84.47
85.51 / 85.26

85.21 / 84.01
85.09 / 83.82
85.33 / 84.73

96.45 / 96.45
96.32 / 96.32
96.63 / 96.63

94.13 / 94.13
93.80 / 93.80
94.32 / 94.32

97.66 / 97.66
96.92 / 96.92
97.66 / 97.66

97.39 / 97.39
96.74 / 96.74
97.34 / 97.34

TABLE VI
RESULTS ON LPCR AND FPI (NETWORK DEVICE LOGS). NOTE: THE
RESULTS OF PROPRIETARY LLMS ON THE FPI TASK CANNOT BE
COMPARED DUE TO DATA PRIVACY ISSUES. THE RESULTS OF KNN ON
THE LPCR TASK CANNOT BE COMPARED DUE TO KNN’S INABILITY TO
ADAPT TO RANKING TASKS
LPCR (Precision@1 / 3 / MRR)

FPI (Accuracy)

Huawei
Routers

Huawei
Switches

-

-

76.50

54.30 / 77.26 / 67.99
59.27 / 78.04 / 71.22
76.18 / 91.54 / 84.70
83.33 / 94.02 / 89.38
87.50 / 93.01 / 91.84

53.45 / 75.77 / 67.35
51.45 / 69.56 / 63.76
72.57 / 91.59 / 82.61
82.98 / 95.59 / 89.49
89.68 / 96.59 / 93.99

69.00
74.83
88.75
89.58
94.17

Methods
Switches
KNN
CNN
BiLSTM
BERT
Biglog
KnowLog
T5-KD

86.11 / 93.56 / 91.41

84.48 / 92.59 / 90.33

-

LLama3-70B
ChatGPT
GPT-4o

95.61 / 98.04 / 97.27
90.95 / 95.11 / 93.88
95.65 / 98.29 / 97.27

97.48 / 99.49 / 98.52
97.20 / 98.34 / 98.19
97.39 / 99.09 / 98.47

88.83
-

LUK (COT-ChatGPT)
LUK (COT-GPT4o)

85.18 / 95.03 / 90.55
86.34 / 93.79 / 91.37

84.58 / 95.99 / 90.64
87.88 / 95.19 / 92.75

90.42
92.50

LUK (MEC-LLama3)
LUK (MEC-ChatGPT)
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

90.45 / 95.81 / 94.06
89.37 / 95.19 / 93.43
90.92 / 96.04 / 94.46

90.49 / 96.99 / 94.52
88.48 / 94.69 / 90.33
90.69 / 96.09 / 94.39

95.83
93.33
96.67

of inaccurate and incomplete knowledge due to hallucinations.
Moreover, the MEC framework showcases its effectiveness in
generating comprehensive and accurate insights through the
iterative feedback and refinement mechanism.
In conclusion, the superior performance of LUK in log analysis tasks underscores its effectiveness across various datasets.
By leveraging expert knowledge extracted from LLMs, LUK
demonstrates the advantage of enhancing smaller pre-trained
models with professional insights. This approach not only optimizes the utilization of the rich knowledge within LLMs but
also introduces a new paradigm in the realm of log analysis,
paving the way for more efficient and insightful methodologies.
In addition, LUK’s process of acquiring knowledge is automated and independent of experts, making it more practical.

• RQ2: How effective is LUK in generalization ability?
As the system evolves, many previously unseen logs will be
collected [85], and it is unrealistic to collect all the real-world
logs for pre-training. In this RQ, to verify the generalization
of LUK, we conduct experiments on downstream tasks where
the logs in these datasets do not appear in the pre-training
phase. Specifically, for software logs, we collect ThunderBird
and Spirit from Loghub [38] as the datasets of the Anomaly Detection task. For network device logs, as shown in Table III, we
collect logs from other vendors (H3C) and devices (Security)
as the datasets.
The experimental results are shown in Table VII. It can be
found that LUK still has superior performance on the pretraining unseen logs, especially on the Module Classification
task, where LUK improves 3.38% on average Accuracy compared to T5-KD. These results suggest that the expert knowledge distilled from LLMs plays a key role in empowering
smaller PLMs to develop a deeper understanding of log. This
proficiency ensures that the PLM is trained without the tendency
to overfit, which would prevent fine-tuned models from effectively analyzing unseen logs because they fail to grasp crucial
information essential for accurate log analysis.
In comparison to KnowLog, LUK still has a clear advantage
over KnowLog, which derives knowledge from documentation.
The expert knowledge derived from LLMs offers a deeper level
of comprehension and learning, enabling the PLM to generalize more effectively to new logs. Conversely, KnowLog, constrained by information within documentation, may not provide
profound insights to support robust generalization of the PLM
to unseen logs.
In essence, our findings affirm that LUK excels in its generalization capabilities by analyzing unseen logs. The infusion
of expert knowledge sourced from LLMs equips the smaller
PLM with the ability to leverage crucial insights from expert
knowledge, thereby avoiding overfitting and improving its performance in log analysis tasks. This underscores the pivotal role

2776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

TABLE VII
RESULTS OF GENERALIZATION ABILITY EXPERIMENTS
(SOFTWARE SYSTEM LOGS)

Anomaly Detection (Precision / Recall / F1)
Methods
ThunderBird

Spirit

KNN

99.08 / 99.89 / 98.98

96.86 / 99.55 / 98.18

CNN
BiLSTM
BERT
Biglog
KnowLog

94.36 / 99.97 / 97.09
98.10 / 96.96 / 97.52
98.35 / 97.21 / 97.78
97.04 / 96.33 / 96.68
99.56 / 94.46 / 96.95

97.55 / 97.11 / 97.33
98.78 / 95.61 / 97.17
99.98 / 98.74 / 99.36
99.56 / 99.07 / 99.31
99.38 / 99.20 / 99.29

T5-KD

99.35 / 95.08 / 97.17

98.91 / 99.63 / 99.27

LLama3-70B
ChatGPT
GPT-4o

55.05 / 93.96 / 69.42
48.21 / 93.10 / 63.52
49.89 / 100.0 / 66.57

78.16 / 97.49 / 86.76
79.19 / 98.20 / 87.68
75.44 / 90.32 / 82.21

LUK (COT-ChatGPT)
LUK (COT-GPT4o)

98.55 / 95.06 / 96.77
99.35 / 95.08 / 97.17

99.81 / 98.92 / 99.37
98.92 / 99.81 / 99.37

LUK (MEC-LLama3)
LUK (MEC-ChatGPT)
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

99.78 / 96.72 / 98.23
99.57 / 96.51 / 98.02
99.57 / 96.92 / 98.23

99.09 / 99.81 / 99.45
99.89 / 99.16 / 99.52
99.27 / 99.81 / 99.54

of expert knowledge from LLMs in improving the adaptability
of LUK to navigate the complex log analysis.
• RQ3: How effective is LUK on unstable log data?
Real-world systems logs are unstable, meaning that new but
similar logs often appear, which is caused by the fact that
developers may frequently modify the logging statements in
source code. According to the investigation [90], around 20% 45% of logging statements may change throughout the lifetime.
In this RQ, to evaluate the effectiveness of LUK on unstable
logs, we conduct experiments on two log analysis tasks with
unstable logs. Following previous experimental setups [85],
we conduct experiments on two distinct log analysis tasks,
which are based on the BGL dataset of Anomaly Detection
and Huawei-Switches dataset of Log and Description Semantic
Matching. Both tasks utilize synthetic datasets specifically constructed to simulate the unstable characteristics of real-world
logs. The BGL dataset has a limited number of log templates,
and anomaly detection on this dataset can often achieve strong
performance using simple keyword-based matching techniques
[81]. At the same time, the LDSM task emphasizes a deeper
understanding of log semantics. To more deeply evaluate the
model’s ability to understand the semantics of logs, rather
than relying on specific patterns to analyze logs, we synthesize
datasets for both tasks by introducing controlled noise into the
original logs.
To simulate log instability, we apply two transformation rules
to the original logs while maintaining their semantic integrity.
These transformations are inspired by the common practices
developers follow when updating logging statements, such as
modifying or removing certain words. As shown in Fig. 8, the
first strategy is to remove the stop words, where we randomly
remove from the original log messages; the second strategy is
to replace the synonyms, where we replace certain words in the
original log messages with their synonyms based on WordNet.

Fig. 7.

Results on different synthetic datasets of unstable log.

To ensure the robustness of our evaluation, we inject noise
into the original logs by randomly applying these two strategies at specific proportions. Importantly, these transformations
preserve the semantic meaning of the logs, ensuring that the
anomaly labels or semantic relationships in the datasets remain
unaffected.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7, it can be seen
that LUK performs much better than other baselines. With the
increasing injection ratio of unstable logs, the performance of
all methods has declined in different degrees. However, MECbased LUK declines relatively smoothly and still maintains high
performance even under a high injection ratio. Specifically,
as the injection ratio increased from 20% to 40%, LUK’s F1
and Accuracy decreased by merely 0.54% and 0.78% on the
anomaly detection and LDSM tasks, respectively. It confirms
that LUK is robust enough to the unstable logs. The reason
is that incorporating expert knowledge from LLMs into the
smaller model assists in noise filtering, thereby enhancing the
accuracy of log analysis for the smaller pre-trained model.
Compared with KNN, the results of anomaly detection demonstrate that KNN’s performance degrades significantly as the
noise ratio increases. On the LDSM task, KNN’s accuracy
is consistently below 50%, indicating that KNN’s reliance on
lexical similarity prevents it from effectively understanding log
semantics. KNN’s effectiveness in anomaly detection stems
from the high degree of repetition in the original dataset, where

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

2777

TABLE VIII
RESULTS OF GENERALIZATION ABILITY EXPERIMENTS (NETWORK DEVICE LOGS)
Log and Description Semantic Matching

Module Classifiction
Methods

H3C
Switches

LPCR

Routers

Cisco
Security

Huawei
Security

Switches

H3C
Routers

Security

Huawei
Security

KNN

61.74 / 59.07

64.86 / 62.36

50.55 / 50.19

50.06 / 49.10

61.05 / 60.70

53.75 / 53.64

57.02 / 56.62

-

CNN
BiLSTM
BERT
Biglog
KnowLog

69.49 / 67.55
70.21 / 68.45
81.11 / 79.78
81.59 / 79.53
81.60 / 80.27

70.72 / 69.71
71.40 / 69.93
77.93 / 76.05
79.50 / 77.80
79.50 / 79.22

70.36 / 70.36
74.01 / 74.01
79.08 / 79.08
82.73 / 82.69
84.94 / 84.93

81.73 / 81.73
79.12 / 79.12
89.22 / 89.22
94.19 / 94.19
96.45 / 96.45

83.29 / 83.19
80.88 / 80.83
87.44 / 87.41
89.40 / 89.37
93.78 / 93.78

83.60 / 83.59
83.81 / 83.80
88.25 / 88.25
91.11 / 91.11
91.85 / 91.85

82.30 / 82.30
82.57 / 82.57
85.94 / 85.94
92.02 / 92.02
93.65 / 93.65

56.05 / 79.07 / 69.95
55.65 / 79.21 / 69.80
67.89 / 89.73 / 79.55
75.78 / 92.23 / 84.59
83.94 / 91.71 / 89.77

T5-KD

82.32 / 81.26

80.41 / 80.15

84.63 / 84.63

95.31 / 95.31

92.86 / 92.86

94.50 / 94.49

93.78 / 93.78

84.86 / 91.57 / 90.19

LLama3-70B
ChatGPT
GPT-4o

79.90 / 78.35
77.48 / 73.77
79.90 / 78.35

79.28 / 78.22
76.35 / 74.10
79.95 / 79.20

89.42 / 89.42
85.42 / 85.38
93.43 / 93.42

96.98 / 96.98
90.87 / 90.76
98.49 / 98.49

94.58 / 94.57
91.01 / 90.96
96.43 / 96.43

96.08 / 96.08
91.96 / 91.90
97.56 / 97.56

95.67 / 95.67
93.24 / 93.24
96.49 / 96.49

96.97 / 98.94 / 98.11
94.95 / 97.01 / 96.56
96.44 / 98.28 / 97.76

LUK (COT-ChatGPT)
LUK (COT-GPT4o)

83.05 / 81.52
83.05 / 82.18

80.63 / 79.00
80.41 / 82.29

84.31 / 84.30
84.94 / 84.94

96.33 / 96.33
96.52 / 96.51

93.89 / 93.89
94.70 / 94.70

94.18 / 94.18
94.81 / 94.81

93.91 / 93.91
93.92 / 93.92

82.23 / 94.73 / 88.83
83.81 / 90.78 / 89.48

LUK (MEC-LLama3)
LUK (MEC-ChatGPT)
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

84.50 / 83.33
83.78 / 82.69
85.47 / 84.57

83.33 / 81.71
83.11 / 81.40
84.01 / 82.29

87.64 / 87.63
88.90 / 88.90
89.06 / 89.06

97.39 / 97.39
96.99 / 96.99
97.52 / 97.52

95.97 / 95.97
95.16 / 95.16
96.54 / 96.54

96.61 / 96.61
95.34 / 95.34
96.93 / 96.93

96.22 / 96.21
95.54 / 95.54
96.89 / 96.89

87.50 / 94.07 / 92.34
86.71 / 93.55 / 91.75
87.36 / 94.47 / 92.22

a large portion of logs are identical or nearly identical. In
such cases, KNN can rely on simple character or word matching to identify patterns. However, when noise is introduced,
such as through stopword removal or synonym substitution,
the repetitive patterns are disrupted, and KNN fails to generalize. This highlights KNN’s inability to analyze semantic
relationships, which becomes increasingly important in complex and diverse log data. To further investigate the characteristics of the anomaly detection datasets, we calculate the
Jaccard index between logs in the training and testing sets. As
shown in Fig. 9, the Jaccard index for these public datasets is
concentrated around 1.0, indicating a high degree of overlap
between the training and testing data. This overlap leads to data
leakage, where KNN performs well simply by finding repetitive
patterns in the dataset. However, as noise is injected, the Jaccard index drops to approximately 0.5, reducing the repetition
in the dataset. Correspondingly, KNN’s performance declines
significantly, demonstrating its reliance on repetitive logs. This
phenomenon has also been observed in prior studies, where
Yu et al. [81] reports that more than 50% of the BGL dataset
consists of duplicate logs, with other public datasets such as
Thunderbird and Spirit exhibiting even higher duplication rates,
exceeding 99%. These findings confirm that KNN and similar
classical methods are heavily dependent on the presence of
repetitive patterns. Considering that it is only effective when
anomalies exhibit highly repetitive, template-aligned features,
it lacks robustness and generalization capabilities when applied
to more complex and diverse log data.
Compared with CNN and BiLSTM, traditional methods perform the worst on unstable logs, which suggests that the limited
semantic understanding of traditional methods hinders their
ability to analyze logs more robustly. Compared with BERT and
Biglog, although pre-training on log corpus can further improve
log understanding, models are still limited to understanding
logs with professional knowledge. In contrast, KnowLog’s reliance on knowledge solely extracted from the documentation

Fig. 8.

Examples of synthesized logs.

Fig. 9.

Jaccard index on the anomaly detection datasets.

may lead to limitations in handling the evolving nature of log
data. MEC-based LUK, with its multi-expert collaboration, outperforms KnowLog by providing deeper and adaptable expert
knowledge for robust log analysis tasks. When compared to the
COT-based methods, including T5-KD and COT-based LUK,
MEC-based LUK showcases superior robustness on unstable
logs. The collaborative essence of MEC, by incorporating multiple expert perspectives and iterative feedback loops, ensures
the refinement and validation of expert knowledge for log analysis tasks, enhancing robustness and accuracy.

2778

Fig. 10.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Results on different ratios of the training dataset.

Consequently, we can conclude that LUK showcases remarkable robustness when confronted with unstable logs, demonstrating that leveraging expert knowledge from LLMs equips
smaller PLMs with the necessary insights to understand the
semantics of logs, thereby enhancing their resilience against
noise and instability.
• RQ4: How effective is LUK with limited labeled logs?
In real-world applications, obtaining a substantial amount of
annotated samples is challenging, as noted by prior studies
[12], [23]. This poses a significant barrier to the performance
of automated log analysis models. To evaluate the effectiveness of LUK in low-resource scenarios, where annotations are
scarce, we conduct experiments on Anomaly Detection, Log
and Description Semantic Matching, and Fault Phenomenon
Identification with different ratios of training datasets. Both AD
and LDSM tasks possess a relatively high volume of labeled
data in these evaluation tasks. However, considering the high
cost of acquiring extensive annotations in real-world scenarios,
it is critical to assess their performance under low-resource
scenarios. Additionally, the FPI task is derived from real-world
data, where the availability of labeled samples is inherently
limited. Thus, evaluating FPI in low-resource settings aligns
closely with practical constraints.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 10. Considering
that knowledge distillation based on fewer samples is difficult
to train, we do not compare with T5-KD. We find that with
the reduction of training samples, the performance of various
models exhibits a decline, with BERT and Biglog demonstrating a particularly significant downward trend in the LDSM and
FPI tasks, and KnowLog showing a significant decrease on the
AD task. On the other hand, MEC-based LUK achieves optimal
results by fine-tuning the models with different proportions of
annotated samples. Specifically, on the AD task, compared to
the full data, LUK drops only 1.03% in the F1-value with 1%
of the training data. And on the FPI task, LUK’s Accuracy
drops by only 13.2% with 30% of the training data, while BERT
and Biglog drop by 31.45% and 31.25%, respectively. This
demonstrates that LUK gains expert knowledge from LLM,
which helps to compensate for the shortcomings of the smaller
pre-trained model when less annotated data is available. Models
with restricted knowledge struggle to excel in scenarios with

limited resources, highlighting the significance of leveraging
knowledge to mitigate the need for extensive annotation and
enhance performance in data-scarce environments. KnowLog
primarily relies on knowledge extracted from documentation,
which may be limited in scope and quality, especially in lowresource settings. In contrast, this proves that knowledge acquired by the LLM has a wider scope and can provide a more
comprehensive and diverse range of information, rather than
being limited to some specific documentation. In comparison
to KNN, we observe that the performance of KNN declines
significantly as the proportion of the training dataset decreases.
This decline stems from KNN’s reliance on the number of
reference samples. With fewer labeled logs, KNN struggles to
make accurate predictions, particularly for new or unseen logs.
This highlights a fundamental limitation of KNN: its lack of
understanding of the underlying semantics of logs. By relying
solely on fixed patterns, KNN demonstrates poor generalization
capabilities in low-resource scenarios. Compared with utilizing
COT to acquire knowledge, on the FPI task with 30% of the
training data, the Accuracy of MEC-based LUK is 17.2% higher
than COT. This suggests that the MEC framework is more
effective, which can be inferred that more rational and accurate
knowledge enables the model to gain an advantage in lowresource scenarios.
It is worth noting that the FPI task is a real scenario dataset,
which cannot be analyzed directly with LLMs due to privacy
issues. By using log templates to obtain expert knowledge from
LLMs, a task-specific model is constructed based on LUK,
which proves the effectiveness of LUK and improves the efficiency of task analysis.
In summary, LUK achieves outstanding performance in lowresource scenarios, which stems from its ability to leverage expert knowledge acquired from LLMs, effectively compensating
for smaller PLMs when annotated data availability is limited.
By harnessing this expert knowledge properly, LUK enables the
development of efficient and accurate models even in resourceconstrained environments.
• RQ5: How efficient is LUK in inference compared
with LLMs?
Efficiency is a critical factor in log analysis for practical
applications, given the immense volumes of logs generated in

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

2779

TABLE IX
ABLATION STUDIES FOR LUK, WHERE TP AND SA REPRESENT THE
PRE-TRAINING TASKS TOKEN PREDICTION, AND SEMANTIC ALIGNMENT
FOR LUK, RESPECTIVELY. MLM REPRESENTS THE PRE-TRAINING TASK
MASKED LANGUAGE MODELING OF BERT, AND AP REPRESENTS THE
PRE-TRAINING TASK ABBREVIATION PREDICTION OF KNOWLOG
MC (Accuracy / Weighted-F1)
Methods

Fig. 11.

Time expense of different models during reasoning.

real-world systems [23]. In this RQ, we compare LUK’s deployment and time costs with LLMs in inference. Specifically,
to cover log analysis tasks for different input types, we perform
experiments on Anomaly Detection, Log and Description Semantic Matching, and Log and Possible Cause Ranking three
tasks to calculate the inference time with all testing samples.
For fairness, we deploy LLama3-70B and LUK on the same
hardware setup, consisting of 2 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, with a
batch size of 1 for each model. It’s worth noting that deploying
LUK requires about 2 GB of GPU memory, while deploying
LLama3-70B requires 150 GB of GPU memory. For GPT-4o,
we utilize HTTP requests to invoke the APIs, then calculate the
response time. Additionally, we leverage vLLM4 to accelerate
the inference process on LLama3. For further comparison, we
include a lightweight kNN baseline, which operates on CPUs
without neural network computations by calculating the Jaccard
index between tokenized inputs.
The results are shown in Fig. 11. We notice that LUK is
significantly faster than GPT-4o and LLama3. Specifically, excluding the fine-tuning time, the average inference speed of
LUK is 718x and 868x faster than GPT-4o and LLama3-70B,
respectively. Even considering the fine-tuning time, the average inference speed of LUK is still 9x and 11x faster than
GPT-4o and LLama3-70B. In addition, the average response
time for each input is 4.13 and 4.69 seconds for GPT-4o and
LLama3-70B, respectively, while LUK’s average response time
is 0.0058 seconds. This swift response time positions LUK as
a more practical solution for real-world log analysis scenarios.
This efficiency can be attributed to the fact that LLMs possess
extensive parameter sizes and generate outputs sequentially,
necessitating more computational steps to deliver results. In
contrast, LUK, with its smaller parameter sizes and more professional log analysis capabilities, can swiftly address specific
tasks following knowledge enhancement and fine-tuning.
4 https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm

LDSM (Accuracy / Weighted-F1)

Huawei

Huawei

Switches

Routers

Switches

Routers

BERT
LUK (MEC-GPT4o)

82.37 / 81.20
85.51 / 85.26

81.18 / 79.20
85.33 / 84.73

93.18 / 93.18
97.66 / 97.66

90.06 / 90.05
97.34 / 97.34

 w/o Evaluator
 w/o Evaluation Examples

83.77 / 83.26
84.38 / 84.17

82.30 / 81.08
82.13 / 81.06

96.57 / 96.57
96.64 / 96.64

95.53 / 95.53
95.63 / 95.63

 w/o TP
 w/o SA

83.25 / 82.65
83.77 / 83.19

81.66 / 79.92
84.14 / 82.92

95.95 / 95.95
95.25 / 95.25

95.68 / 95.68
94.68 / 94.68

 only with MLM
 only with AP

83.24 / 83.25
83.60 / 82.89

82.36 / 81.19
82.72 / 81.68

94.19 / 94.19
94.39 / 94.39

93.62 / 93.61
93.97 / 93.97

While KNN demonstrates certain efficiency advantages in
log analysis(e.g., achieving 1.4x faster inference than LUK in
the anomaly detection task), it lacks the robustness and generalizability required for complex and diverse log analysis systems.
Efficiency alone is insufficient for building a comprehensive log
analysis framework. By distilling knowledge from LLMs into
smaller models, LUK strikes a balance between computational
efficiency and semantic understanding, allowing it to harness
the advanced capabilities of LLMs while maintaining practical inference times. In the future, we will further explore enhancements on more lightweight pre-trained models to further
improve the efficiency of LUK.
In conclusion, LLMs demand higher deployment resources
and exhibit slower inference speeds. On the other hand, the
knowledge-enhanced LUK offers rapid responses to inputs with
limited deployment resources, making it a highly recommended
choice for executing specific tasks in real-world scenarios.
This advantage underscores the practicality and efficiency of
LUK in comparison to traditional LLMs, such as GPT-4o and
LLama3-70B.
F. Ablation Studies
To verify the effectiveness of the multi-expert collaboration
framework and knowledge-enhanced pre-training tasks in LUK,
we perform ablation experiments on MC and LDSM, which
are two typical tasks of multi-class classification and semantic matching. The results are shown in Table IX, where we
notice that: Overall, LUK achieves optimal performance with
the complete modules. The absence of any module can lead
to performance degradation, which proves that MEC and pretraining tasks contribute positively.
Further, in our multi-expert collaborative framework, the
Evaluator plays a crucial role in evaluating the content generated by the Executor to ensure the completeness and accuracy
of the output expert knowledge. We remove the Evaluator role
and directly utilize the content generated by the Executor. The
results indicated a performance decrease in the absence of the
Evaluator, emphasizing the pivotal role of feedback from the
Evaluator in producing high-quality knowledge and reducing
errors. In addition, to verify the effectiveness of the contrastive
examples for the Evaluator, we conduct an ablation analysis

2780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 12. Figure (a) shows the proportion of unsatisfactory knowledge in each iteration. Figures (b) and (c) show the results of the refined knowledge based
on the evaluation feedback each time.

by removing the referenced examples for the Evaluator and
requiring evaluations to be conducted in the reference-free setting. The experimental results reveal a substantial decline in the
performance of the LUK when lacking referenced examples,
even surpassing the negative impact observed when the Evaluator role was entirely removed. This outcome suggests that
the lack of referenced examples deprives the evaluation process
of essential guidance and benchmarks, increasing the quality
evaluation challenges faced by the system.
To verify the performance of the iterative evaluation and
refinement mechanism, we first statistics the proportion of unsatisfactory knowledge in each iteration, and then verify the
performance of the refined knowledge based on the evaluation
feedback each time on the MC and LDSM tasks, where we
set up 3 iterations in our experiment. As shown in Fig. 12, we
can find a consistent decline in the proportion of unsatisfactory
knowledge with each successive iteration. Simultaneously, the
performance of the enhanced model exhibits steady improvement, underscoring the positive impact of the iterative evaluation and refinement mechanism within the framework. Notably,
our observations indicate that a significant portion of knowledge
refinement occurs following the initial feedback round, with
subsequent iterations primarily focusing on refining a smaller
fraction of the knowledge. To save costs, we suggest that the
framework can iterate once as a cost-effective strategy, effectively balancing performance gains with resource optimization.
For pre-training tasks, the performance of the model declines
without either token prediction (TP) or semantic alignment
(SA) pre-training task, which suggests that pre-training on logs
with knowledge enhancement helps the model capture knowledge from external information and improves log understanding. Specifically, without the TP task, the model drops more
significantly on the MC task, which implies that understanding
domain tokens can enhance log understanding. And lacking the
SA task, the model drops more remarkably on the LDSM task,
which implies that external knowledge can enrich the contextual
information of logs. To further verify our proposed word-level
Token Prediction (TP) task, we also compare it with other wordlevel pre-training tasks, including BERT’s Masked Language
Modeling (MLM) task and KnowLog’s Abbreviation Prediction (AP) task. The results demonstrate the superior capability
of our token prediction task in integrating expert knowledge

effectively. Unlike MLM and Abbreviation Prediction tasks,
our proposed pre-training task requires models to not only
predict tokens within the log itself but also dynamically capture
contextual insights from domain-specific knowledge with the
knowledge perception module. This distinctive aspect sets our
approach apart, as BERT solely relies on internal information
and cannot leverage external knowledge. Conversely, KnowLog
is limited in its scope, focusing solely on abbreviations and
failing to comprehend other critical log elements such as parameters, conditions, and more, which are essential for a comprehensive understanding of domain-specific terminology.

V. DISCUSSIONS
A. Qualitative Analysis
To show the usefulness of LUK more intuitively, we select
two representative cases for qualitative analysis. Specifically,
we employ a pre-trained model to obtain embedding representations of the input log and natural language (NL) description,
then calculate cosine similarity as the score to demonstrate their
capability of semantic understanding. As shown in Table X,
to provide a challenge in this case, we deliberately select logs
with closer events and then compute their similarity to the
description, which is matched only with one log.
From this case, we notice that, for the matched example,
BERT demonstrates better performance, whereas Biglog’s performance is comparatively weaker when compared to BERT.
This suggests that only pre-training on logs makes it challenging to capture log semantics adequately without external
knowledge, and this may enlarge the semantic differences between logs and natural language. In contrast, LUK achieves the
highest similarity score on the matched example and the lowest
similarity score on the unmatched example, which suggests
that, benefiting from expert knowledge, LUK exhibits superior
proficiency in capturing log semantics for log understanding. It
also verifies the effectiveness of knowledge acquisition from
LLMs. For the unmatched example, both BERT and Biglog
exhibit significantly weaker performance compared to LUK,
which implies that BERT and Biglog have limitations in recognizing log semantics. These results reveal the remarkable
performance of LUK in log understanding.

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

2781

TABLE X
QUALITATIVE EXAMPLES OF LUK AND BASELINES. WE CALCULATE THE COSINE SIMILARITY AS THE SCORE FOR ANALYSIS
Label

Index

Examples

Models Score

1

Log: OPSA/3/OPS_CLI_CLOSE_FAIL: Failed to stop the terminal using the script.
(Script=[script-name], event=[event-name], instance=[instance-id],terminal=[cli-id])
NL Description: There was a failure in stopping the terminal using a specific script.

2

Log: SYSTEM/4/SYS_IMAGE_ERROR: The next startup image package is error. (imageIndex=[imageIndex], BERT 0.723
curImageName=[curImageName], nextImageName=[nextImageName], errReason=[errReason])
Biglog 0.629
NL Description: An error occurred in the next startup image package.
LUK 0.788

1

Log: OPSA/3/OPS_TERMINAL_WRITE_FAIL: Failed to display the string on the
terminal using the script. (Script=xx,event=xx, instance=xx, string=xxx, terminal=xx)
NL Description: There was a failure in stopping the terminal using a specific script.

BERT 0.657
Biglog 0.646
LUK 0.514

2

Log: TRILL/4/TRILL_RECV_ERR_PKT: TRILL-INFO: Drop error packet. (PktType=[PktType],
ProcessId=[ProcessId], ErrReason=[ErrReason], ErrCount=[ErrCount], InterfaceName=[InterfaceName])
NL Description: An error occurred in the next startup image package.

BERT 0.671
Biglog 0.486
LUK 0.077

Match

UnMatch

BERT 0.671
Biglog 0.624
LUK 0.740

B. Cost Analysis
To quantitatively evaluate the cost-effectiveness of leveraging
LLMs for expert knowledge construction, we conduct a detailed
cost analysis using GPT-4o5 to build the multi-expert collaboration framework. The average API cost for constructing expert
knowledge per log entry is $0.07. Considering the high redundancy in log data (typically containing millions of entries), we
recommend applying log parsing techniques to deduplicate logs
by retaining only one instance per unique template. This significantly reduces the cost of domain knowledge construction.
For instance, for a deduplicated dataset containing 10,000 logs,
the total knowledge construction would cost only $700. This
approach demonstrates significant cost advantages compared to
conventional LLM-based log analysis. Analyzing each log entry
directly with ICL-based GPT-4o would cost about $0.02 per
entry, which becomes prohibitively expensive when scaling to
millions of logs.
To explore the trade-off between the scale of expert knowledge and model performance, we conduct experiments using
knowledge sampled from Huawei logs at different proportions.
The enhanced models are evaluated on the MC and LDSM
tasks, where the granularity of the domain knowledge they
need is more representative. As shown in Fig. 13, the performance of the models improves with increased knowledge injection ratio, plateauing beyond a 60% knowledge injection ratio.
This indicates that collecting a sufficient but not exhaustive
amount of domain knowledge is effective for enhancing the
models, thereby further reducing the cost of knowledge construction. These findings demonstrate that LUK effectively balances performance and cost by minimizing the reliance on LLM
APIs and optimizing the scale of domain knowledge used for
pre-training.
C. Case Analysis
1) Evaluation and Refinement Mechanism of the MEC
Framework: To intuitively understand the workflow of the
MEC framework and analyze the impact of the evaluation and
refinement mechanism on knowledge generation, we provide
5 https://openai.com/api/pricing/

Fig. 13.

Performance with different proportions of knowledge injection.

a specific case of expert knowledge construction as shown in
Fig. 14, where this input log from the Huawei device6 .
As can be seen from the case, the Director first analyzes the
input log to give key points, and then the Executor generates
detailed knowledge based on the guidance of these key points.
Following evaluation criteria, the Evaluator evaluates the quality of the generated knowledge and provides feedback to the
Executor for refinement. The evaluation feedback shows that
the content generated by the Executor does not fulfill completeness and consistency. Specifically, the generated knowledge
lacks an introduction to the procedure step, and the explanation of the severity level is not rigorous. In addition, there is
also an uninformative explanation in the generated knowledge,
6 https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/en/doc/EDOC1100332302/
fb54bda3

2782

Fig. 14.

Fig. 15.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

An complete workflow of the MEC framework to construct knowledge.

Distributions of error categories in unsatisfactory knowledge.

which makes it more difficult for the smaller model to understand the expert knowledge. Finally, the Executor refines the
generated knowledge based on the evaluation feedback. From
the regenerated knowledge, we can find that the Executor not
only supplements the clear introduction of the procedure step
but also modifies the explanation of severity level to make it
more reasonable. Overall, the regenerated knowledge is more
comprehensive and rigorous, which is more conducive for the
smaller model to learn expert knowledge.
To more deeply reveal the issues of knowledge generated
by LLMs. We count the distributions of different error categories in unsatisfactory knowledge according to Evaluator’s
results for GPT-4o and LLama3-70B, respectively. As shown
in Fig. 15, it can be found that a significant portion of the inadequacies stems from issues related to completeness. The prevalence of completeness-related errors underscores the challenge
faced by the single LLM in producing comprehensive knowledge autonomously. Moreover, alongside completeness issues,
a smaller yet notable proportion of unsatisfactory knowledge is
attributed to deficiencies in conciseness and consistency. This
finding underscores the significance of collaborative frameworks that integrate diverse roles, each contributing unique
perspectives and expertise to compensate for the capacity deficiencies of the single LLM and improve the completeness and
accuracy of generated knowledge.
2) Comparison of Knowledge From Different Sources: To
further intuitively analyze the quality of the expert knowledge
constructed with the MEC framework, we compare it with the
knowledge collected from documentation and the COT-based

approach. As shown in Fig. 16, we collect a Cisco log7 as the
case and give the corresponding generated knowledge based on
the COT and MEC methods.
As can be seen from these cases, the knowledge provided by
the documentation is too simple, which provides a generic and
limited understanding of the log without delving into specific
details or potential causes. Although COT-based knowledge
offers a more detailed explanation of the log, compared to
MEC-based knowledge, there is still the problem of inadequate
knowledge and lack of insight. In contrast, the knowledge derived from the MEC framework excels in its comprehensive
analysis and insights. By explicitly outlining the specifics of the
log error, including the MTS queue failure and the placeholders
for queue and error message, the MEC-based knowledge provides a deeper understanding of the issue at hand. Furthermore,
it goes beyond mere description to identify potential root causes
such as network connectivity issues. The comparison highlights
the clear advantage of the MEC framework in expert knowledge
generation. Its collaborative nature allows for the integration of
diverse expertise and perspectives, resulting in a more comprehensive analysis of complex logs.
To quantify the differences among the various forms of
knowledge, we employ the evaluation criteria of the MEC
framework to evaluate the knowledge acquired by the documentation and the knowledge constructed based on COT in
the network device logs. The evaluation results are shown in
Fig. 17, revealing a notable contrast in quality between the
different sources of knowledge. It is apparent from the analysis
that a significant proportion of knowledge sourced from documentation falls short of meeting the evaluation requirements.
This deficiency can be attributed to the inherent limitations
of documentation-derived knowledge, which often lacks depth
and detail, offering only the most straightforward description
of the logs. Combined with Fig. 12(a), this suggests that the
knowledge acquired from MEC based on LLMs is comparable
or even better than the documentation. Considering the lack
of documentation support for most logs and the high cost of
7 https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/switches/datacenter/
sw/routing_messages/reference/7k_rout_mess_ref_book/
7k_rout_mess_ref_2mess.html

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

Fig. 16.

2783

Example of knowledge generated by GPT-4o and retrieved from documentation.

Fig. 17. Proportion of unsatisfactory knowledge, where we employ the
evaluation criteria of the MEC framework to evaluate the knowledge.

manually constructing knowledge, this provides a feasible way
to gain a wealth of practical knowledge automatically.
Despite the advantages of the MEC framework in knowledge
generation, domain-specific documentation continues to hold
an indispensable role. LLMs remain struggling with knowledge
gaps, especially when dealing with customized modules and
terminology, leading to misconceptions. In such cases, documentation can bridge these gaps, providing essential context
and expertise to enhance the understanding of LLMs. This relationship allows LLMs to enrich documentation content and, in
turn, enables documentation to improve the professionalism and
accuracy of LLMs. We will optimize the integration of domain
documentation and LLM to further enhance the knowledge
acquisition process in the future.
D. Threats to Validity
1) Construct Validity: Since LLMs are black box models,
LLMs pose a risk of generating output content that may be
unreasonable, potentially impacting the accurate interpretation
of logs. First, to counteract the inherent randomness in the
inference process of LLMs, we set the model temperature to
0. This step ensures that LLMs consistently produce results
for the same inputs, mitigating variability in output. Second,
to mitigate hallucinations of LLMs, we propose a multi-expert
collaboration framework, which can work better with the power
of cooperation and interaction. In particular, we design an Evaluator in this framework, which checks the generated knowledge
by evaluating completeness, consistency, and conciseness. In
addition, to address the issue of ambiguous and inconsistent
evaluations by LLMs under the reference-free setting, we construct contrastive examples consisting of positive and negative
knowledge of the same log. By presenting these contrastive
examples to the Evaluator as reference examples, we steer the

evaluation of LLMs toward our desired objectives. In cases
where issues are identified, the Executor within the framework
revises or refines the generated content based on the feedback
received. This iterative process helps improve the quality and
reliability of the generated knowledge. We also verify the importance of the Evaluator for acquiring high-quality knowledge
in ablation studies.
2) Internal Validity: It is widely agreed that the performance
of DL models is significantly affected by hyperparameters.
Due to the limited computation resources, we do not search
for the optimal hyperparameter settings and instead follow the
empirical settings. We acknowledge that further fine-tuning of
these hyperparameters may yield better results.
3) External Validity: From the perspective of enterprises,
utilizing external LLMs to acquire expert knowledge may cause
leakage of user privacy and internal information in logs. To
alleviate this issue, we suggest that enterprises can utilize log
parsing as a potential approach to mitigate privacy risks while
removing duplicate logs. Log parsing can be used to extract log
templates, which help in removing sensitive information from
logs. By using these sanitized templates, enterprises can safely
leverage proprietary LLMs to acquire expert knowledge without
exposing user privacy or internal information. On the other
hand, LUK is a general framework that can combine any LLMs,
and users can also employ their LLMs to acquire knowledge
to enhance a small model for solving a specific problem. For
example, apart from invoking the proprietary LLMs, we also
verify the effectiveness of LUK by deploying LLama3-70B in
our experiments, which is an open-source LLM.
From the perspective of evaluation, in RQ3, we simulate
log instability by injecting controlled noise into original logs
due to the lack of real-world evolving log datasets. However,
when the noise ratio increases to 40%, especially for short
log messages with fewer tokens, the semantic meaning of the
original logs may be modified, deviating from the ground truth
and potentially impacting evaluation validity. Moreover, our
synthetic approach cannot fully capture the diversity of realworld log changes. In future work, we will collect more realworld logs to explore other possible types of changes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this paper introduces LUK, a novel knowledge enhancement framework to improve log understanding
with expert knowledge from LLMs. Unlike existing LLM-based

2784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

log analysis studies that directly use the in-context learning of
LLMs, LUK first acquires expert knowledge from LLMs, then
enhances the log pre-training with the corresponding expert
knowledge on a smaller pre-trained language model. Finally, the
enhanced smaller pre-trained model for logs can be fine-tuned
to solve downstream log analysis tasks. Compared to existing
models, LUK achieves state-of-the-art performance on different
log analysis tasks, which proves that expert knowledge from
LLMs can be used more effectively to understand logs.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Our source code and detailed experimental data are available
at https://github.com/LeaperOvO/LUK.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The computations in this research were performed using the
CFFF platform of Fudan University. We express our sincere
appreciation to all anonymous reviewers for their constructive
feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud
systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found.s Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1253–1263.
[2] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Softw. Eng. Pract. (ICSE-SEIP),
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 121–130.
[3] H. Dai, H. Li, C.-S. Chen, W. Shang, and T.-H. Chen, “Logram: Efficient
log parsing using n n-gram dictionaries,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.,
vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 879–892, Mar. 2022.
[4] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao,
“Self-supervised log parsing,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery
Databases, Appl. Data Sci. Track, Eur. Conf. (ECML PKDD), Ghent,
Belgium. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2021, pp. 122–138.
[5] Y. Liu et al., “UniParser: A unified log parser for heterogeneous log
data,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1893–1901.
[6] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[7] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 4739–4745.
[8] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified
deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc.
IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng. (ISSRE), Piscataway, NJ, USA:
IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 92–103.
[9] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Selfattentive classification-based anomaly detection in unstructured logs,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE
Press, 2020, pp. 1196–1201.
[10] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly
detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020.
[11] X. Han and S. Yuan, “Unsupervised cross-system log anomaly detection
via domain adaptation,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2021, pp. 3068–3072.
[12] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep
learning: How far are we?” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
pp. 1356–1367.
[13] S. Lu, B. Rao, X. Wei, B. Tak, L. Wang, and L. Wang, “Log-based
abnormal task detection and root cause analysis for Spark,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services (ICWS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press,
2017, pp. 389–396.
[14] L. Wang, N. Zhao, J. Chen, P. Li, W. Zhang, and K. Sui, “Root-cause
metric location for microservice systems via log anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services (ICWS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE
Press, 2020, pp. 142–150.

[15] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
Comput. Surv. (CSUR), vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[16] S. Zhang et al., “PreFix: Switch failure prediction in datacenter networks,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–29,
2018.
[17] J. Gao, H. Wang, and H. Shen, “Task failure prediction in cloud data
centers using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 1411–1422, May/Jun. 2022.
[18] D. Cotroneo, L. De Simone, P. Liguori, R. Natella, and N. Bidokhti,
“How bad can a bug get? An empirical analysis of software failures
in the OpenStack cloud computing platform,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint
Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 200–
211.
[19] J. Achiam et al., “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774.
[20] Y. Zhu et al., “UniLog: Deploy one model and specialize it for all log
analysis tasks,” 2021, arXiv:2112.03159.
[21] S. Tao et al., “Biglog: Unsupervised large-scale pre-training for a unified
log representation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 31st Int. Symp. Qual. Service
(IWQoS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2023, pp. 1–11.
[22] L. Ma et al., “KnowLog: Knowledge enhanced pre-trained language
model for log understanding,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw.
Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[23] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE),
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2023, pp. 2438–2449.
[24] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LAnoBERT: System log anomaly detection
based on BERT masked language model,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 146,
Oct. 2023, Art. no. 110689.
[25] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. Azad, “LogFiT: Log
anomaly detection using fine-tuned language models,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1715–1723, Apr. 2024.
[26] J. Xu, R. Yang, Y. Huo, C. Zhang, and P. He, “DivLog: Log parsing
with prompt enhanced in-context learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th
Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE), Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2024, pp. 983–983.
[27] J. Xu et al., “UniLog: Automatic logging via LLM and in-context
learning,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–
12.
[28] Y. Liu et al., “LogPrompt: Prompt engineering towards zero-shot and
interpretable log analysis,” 2023, arXiv:2308.07610.
[29] Z. Jiang et al., “LLMParser: A LLM-based log parsing framework,”
2023, arXiv:2310.01796.
[30] H. Guo et al., “Lemur: Log parsing with entropy sampling and chainof-thought merging,” 2024, arXiv:2402.18205.
[31] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Human Lang.
Technol. (Volume 1 Long and Short Papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[32] Q. Dong et al., “A survey on in-context learning,” 2022,
arXiv:2301.00234.
[33] Y. Lu, M. Bartolo, A. Moore, S. Riedel, and P. Stenetorp, “Fantastically ordered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot
prompt order sensitivity,” in Proc. 60th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2022, pp. 8086–8098,
[34] X. Wang et al., “Spine: A scalable log parser with feedback guidance,”
in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw.
Eng., 2022, pp. 1198–1208.
[35] X. Li, H. Zhang, V.-H. Le, and P. Chen, “LogShrink: Effective log
compression by leveraging commonality and variability of log data,” in
Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12.
[36] Y. Wang, K. Chen, H. Tan, and K. Guo, “Tabi: An efficient multi-level
inference system for large language models,” in Proc. 18th Eur. Conf.
Comput. Syst., 2023, pp. 233–248.
[37] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “LLMParser:
An exploratory study on using large language models for log parsing,”
in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[38] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection
of system log datasets for ai-driven log analytics,” in Proc. IEEE 34th
Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng. (ISSRE), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press,
2023, pp. 355–366.
[39] Y. Peng, C. Wang, W. Wang, C. Gao, and M. R. Lyu, “Generative type
inference for Python,” in Proc. 38th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw.
Eng. (ASE), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2023, pp. 988–999.

MA et al.: LUK: EMPOWERING LOG UNDERSTANDING WITH EXPERT KNOWLEDGE

[40] A. Mastropaolo, L. Pascarella, and G. Bavota, “Using deep learning to
generate complete log statements,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.,
2022, pp. 2279–2290.
[41] Y. Li et al., “Exploring the effectiveness of LLMs in automated logging
generation: An empirical study,” 2023, arXiv:2307.05950.
[42] N. Mündler, J. He, S. Jenko, and M. Vechev, “Self-contradictory hallucinations of large language models: Evaluation, detection and mitigation,”
2023. arXiv:2305.15852.
[43] P. Manakul, A. Liusie, and M. Gales, “SelfCheckGPT: Zero-resource
black-box hallucination detection for generative large language models,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2023,
pp. 9004–9017.
[44] X. Xu et al., “A survey on knowledge distillation of large language
models,” 2024, arXiv:2402.13116.
[45] X. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Liu, C. Ma, and W. Wang, “Distilling mathematical reasoning capabilities into small language models,” Neural Netw., vol. 179,
Nov. 2024, Art. no. 106594.
[46] C.-Y. Hsieh et al., “Distilling step-by-step! Outperforming larger language models with less training data and smaller model sizes,” in Proc.
Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (ACL), 2023, pp. 8003–8017.
[47] K. Shridhar, A. Stolfo, and M. Sachan, “Distilling reasoning capabilities into smaller language models,” in Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics (ACL), 2023, pp. 7059–7073.
[48] J. Wei et al., “Emergent abilities of large language models,” 2022,
arXiv:2206.07682.
[49] S. Lu, I. Bigoulaeva, R. Sachdeva, H. T. Madabushi, and I. Gurevych,
“Are emergent abilities in large language models just in-context learning?” 2023, arXiv:2309.01809.
[50] K. Petersen, C. Wohlin, and D. Baca, “The waterfall model in largescale development,” in Proc. Product-Focused Softw. Process Improvement, 10th Int. Conf. (PROFES), Oulu, Finland. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, Jun. 15–17, 2009, pp. 386–400.
[51] F. Bai, A. Ritter, and W. Xu, “Pre-train or annotate? Domain adaptation
with a constrained budget,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
Lang. Process., 2021, pp. 5002–5015.
[52] C. Niu, C. Li, V. Ng, J. Ge, L. Huang, and B. Luo, “SPT-code: sequenceto-sequence pre-training for learning source code representations,” in
Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 2006–2018.
[53] Y. Gu et al., “Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural language processing,” ACM Trans. Comput. Healthcare
(HEALTH), vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2021.
[54] I. Beltagy, K. Lo, and A. Cohan, “SciBERT: A pretrained language
model for scientific text,” 2019, arXiv:1903.10676.
[55] S. Gururangan et al., “Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models
to domains and tasks,” in Proc. 58th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2020, pp. 8342–8360.
[56] L. Yang et al., “Supervised knowledge makes large language models
better in-context learners,” 2023, arXiv:2312.15918.
[57] G. Juneja, S. Dutta, S. Chakrabarti, S. Manchanda, and T. Chakraborty,
“Small language models fine-tuned to coordinate larger language models
improve complex reasoning,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
Lang. Process., 2023, pp. 3675–3691.
[58] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via
BERT,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[59] E. Kasneci et al., “Chatgpt for good? On opportunities and challenges
of large language models for education,” Learn. Individual Differences,
vol. 103, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 102274.
[60] J. White et al., “A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering
with ChatGPT,” 2023, arXiv:2302.11382.
[61] S. Feng and C. Chen, “Prompting is all you need: Automated Android
bug replay with large language models,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int.
Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[62] J. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Software
testing with large language models: Survey, landscape, and vision,” IEEE
Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 911–936, Apr. 2024.
[63] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901.
[64] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, vol. 35,
pp. 24824–24837.
[65] E. Frantar, S. Ashkboos, T. Hoefler, and D. Alistarh, “OPTQ: Accurate
quantization for generative pre-trained transformers,” in Proc. 11th Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=tcbBPnfwxS

2785

[66] B. Goertzel, “Cognitive synergy: A universal principle for feasible
general intelligence,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Cogn. Inform.,
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2009, pp. 464–468.
[67] J. R. Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams: Creating the
High-Performance Organization. Harvard Business Review Press, 2015.
[68] J. Zhou et al., “Instruction-following evaluation for large language
models,” 2023, arXiv:2311.07911.
[69] Z. Li, B. Peng, P. He, and X. Yan, “Evaluating the instruction-following
robustness of large language models to prompt injection,” in Proc. Conf.
Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2024, pp. 557–568.
[70] S. Dhuliawala et al., “Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large
language models,” 2023, arXiv:2309.11495.
[71] L. Huang et al., “A survey on hallucination in large language models:
Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 42:1–42:55, 2025, doi:10.1145/3703155.
[72] L. Zheng et al., “Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot
arena,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 46595–
46623.
[73] P. Ke et al., “CritiqueLLM: Towards an informative critique generation
model for evaluation of large language model generation,” in Proc. 62nd
Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
2024, pp. 13034–13054.
[74] X. Gao, Y. Zhang, M. Galley, C. Brockett, and W. B. Dolan, “Dialogue
response ranking training with large-scale human feedback data,” in
Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), 2020,
pp. 386–395.
[75] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[76] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings
using Siamese BERT-networks,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods
Natural Lang. Process. 9th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process.
(EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019, pp. 3982–3992.
[77] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services
(ICWS), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 33–40.
[78] A. Dubey et al., “The Llama 3 herd of models,” 2024, arXiv:2407.21783.
[79] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.
(CSUR), vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[80] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly
detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting
Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1404–1415.
[81] B. Yu et al., “Deep learning or classical machine learning? An empirical
study on log-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int.
Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[82] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log
parsing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng. (ASE),
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 492–504.
[83] M. S. Sorower, “A literature survey on algorithms for multi-label
learning,” Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 25, 2010.
[84] E. Fix and J. L. Hodges, “Discriminatory analysis: Nonparametric
discrimination, consistency properties,” Int. Stat. Rev.,, vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 238–247, 1989.
[85] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817.
[86] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in big data
system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th
Int. Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Int. Conf.
Pervasive Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput.
Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr. (DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2018, pp. 151–158,
[87] R. Taori et al. “Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following Llama model.”
GitHub. [Online]. Available: https://Github.com/Tatsu-Lab/Stanford_
Alpaca
[88] C. Raffel et al., “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–
67, 2020.
[89] Z. Zhao, E. Wallace, S. Feng, D. Klein, and S. Singh, “Calibrate before
use: Improving few-shot performance of language models,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 12697–12706.
[90] S. Kabinna, C.-P. Bezemer, W. Shang, M. D. Syer, and A. E. Hassan,
“Examining the stability of logging statements,” Empirical Softw. Eng.,
vol. 23, pp. 290–333, Feb. 2018.

2786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. 51, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2025

Lipeng Ma received the B.S. degree in information security from Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications (NUPT), Nanjing, China, in
2019. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science with Fudan University. His
research interests include knowledge graph application, large language models, software engineering,
and AIOps.

Shuhao Li received the master’s degree in computer technology from Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, China, in 2023. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include spatio-temporal data
mining, anomaly detection, and large language
models.

Weidong Yang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in software engineering from Xidian University, in 1999. From 1999 to 2001, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the School of Computer
Science, Fudan University. He is a Professor with
the School of Computer Science, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. His research interests include big
data, knowledge engineering, database and data
mining, and software engineering.

Mingyu Zhao received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Fudan University, China, in
2024. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China. His
research interests include data mining and machine
learning.

Sihang Jiang received the B.Sc. degree in information security from Fudan University, in 2017,
and the Ph.D. degree in software engineering from
Fudan University, in 2024. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher with Fudan University. His
research interests include knowledge graph, large
language models, and AIOps.

Bo Xu is an Associate Professor with the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Donghua
University. His research interests include knowledge
graph, large language models, and intelligent operations and maintenance.

Ben Fei (Member, IEEE) received the M.S. degree
from the Department of Materials Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China, in 2021, and the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Computer Science, Fudan
University, in 2024. He is currently a Postdoctoral
with The Chinese University of Hong Kong. His
research interests include generative models, large
language models, 3-D computer vision, and AI for
science. He is an IEEE Young Professional.

Yanghua Xiao received the Ph.D. degree in software theory from Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, in 2009. He is a Professor of computer
science with Fudan University. He is the Director
of Knowledge Works Lab, Fudan University. His
research interests include big data management and
mining, graph database, knowledge graph. He was
a Visiting Professor with the Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College Medicine, and a
Visiting Researcher with Microsoft Research Asia.

Mingjie Zhou is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree with Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. His research interests include AIOps and
knowledge graph. His work has been published in
data mining and software engineering international
conferences.