IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

2533712

MAOTIN: A High-Accuracy and -Efficiency
Network for Overloaded Truck Identification With
GPS Trajectories
Jian Liang , Jiehu Kang , Xuesen Wang , Zongyang Zhao , Chi Zhao , Siyang Zhang , Zefeng Sun ,
Luyuan Feng , and Bin Wu
Abstract—Overloaded truck transportation poses a significant
threat to road safety. However, mainstream methods for overloaded truck identification suffer from low efficiency, limited
monitoring range, and high costs, posing obstacles to curbing
overloaded transportation. To tackle these challenges, this study
proposes a novel approach called a multiaspect overloaded
truck identification network (MAOTIN), which achieves accurate
identification by analyzing truck trajectory data comprehensively.
MAOTIN comprises three efficient and specific modules: an
overloaded feature identification module (OFIM), a trajectory
similarity identification module (TSIM), and a decision fusion
module (DFM). Initially, the trajectory representation method
was designed to transform the multidimensional spatiotemporal
truck trajectory data into images, aggregating overload features
while reducing dimensionality. Subsequently, the OFIM and
TSIM are developed to comprehensively identify overloaded
behavior from typical overloaded features and overloaded trajectories similarity features. Finally, the DFM adaptively and fully
fuses feature images of different properties to obtain the ultimate
identification result. To evaluate the performance of MAOTIN,
this study conducted experiments on the constructed overloaded
truck dataset. The results indicated that the model achieves
an accuracy of 96.4% and 316 FPS, surpassing mainstream
image classification networks. Moreover, MAOTIN performed a
precision of 97.3% on practical application testing and assisted
traffic police in apprehending 7591 overloaded trucks in one
quarter, demonstrating its high practical value. Hence, MAOTIN
enables accurate, rapid, and comprehensive identification of
overloaded trucks and can be effectively applied to the overloaded
identification tasks in urban traffic management.
Index Terms—Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), intelligent system application, overloaded truck identification, trajectory similarity.

Received 7 March 2025; accepted 3 May 2025. Date of publication 23
May 2025; date of current version 12 June 2025. This work was supported
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
52375545 and Grant 62371339 and in part by Tianjin Municipal Transportation Commission Science and Technology Development Plan Project under
Grant 2022-09. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was
Dr. Fernando J Álvarez. (Corresponding author: Jiehu Kang.)
Jian Liang, Jiehu Kang, Zongyang Zhao, Zefeng Sun, Luyuan
Feng, and Bin Wu are with the State Key Laboratory of
Precision
Measurement
Technology
and
Instruments,
Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300072, China (e-mail: liangjian@tju.edu.cn;
zhongdian313@163.com).
Xuesen Wang is with Tianjin Municipal Engineering Design and Research
Institute, Tianjin 300051, China (e-mail: angle new@163.com).
Chi Zhao and Siyang Zhang are with the Key Laboratory of Road and
Traffic Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail:
siyangzhang@tongji.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3573008

I. I NTRODUCTION
OAD transportation is a fundamental driver of economic
and social development. However, the high profitability
of overloaded transport makes it difficult to eliminate the issue
of overloaded truck transportation [1]. Overloaded transport
accelerates the degradation of critical infrastructure such as
highways and bridges, increasing the risk of rollovers and loss
of control, even severe road accidents [2].
Traditionally, overloaded trucks were identified through
manual weighing at checkpoints. However, this method has
proved inefficient and resource-intensive, and it failed to
tackle the issue of trucks deliberately avoiding inspection by
taking alternative routes. Recent studies have explored new
weight-measuring technologies [3], which aim to automate
the inspection process. It includes dynamic and vehiclemounted weighing systems [4], [5]. The dynamic weighing
method improves efficiency but suffers from limited inspection
coverage. Vehicle-mounted sensors provide real-time monitoring [6], [7], but their high cost and complexity limit
their practicality for large-scale deployment. On the other
hand, traffic management systems now collect vast amounts of
trajectory data from truck-mounted GPS devices. Despite its
potential, this data remains underutilized in overloaded truck
identification.
Vehicle trajectory data provides valuable insights into
driving behavior, road conditions, and vehicle performance.
Mining patterns from this data has proved feasible for tasks
such as traffic mode identification [8], [9], [10], state prediction [11], [12], and traffic flow forecasting [13], [14].
However, applying to overloaded truck identification remains
an area with limited exploration. The implicit characteristic
of overload-related behaviors within trajectory data and the
large volumes of data present significant challenges for current
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which struggle to
capture these complex patterns.
To address these challenges, this article proposes a novel
framework for overloaded truck identification based on trajectory analysis. This framework is specifically designed
to capture the unique driving information of overloaded
trucks. Compared with normal trucks, overloaded trucks
exhibit distinct driving patterns to avoid inspection. Moreover,
overloaded truck drivers often choose routes that maximize
efficiency, leading to striking similarities in the trajectories
[15]. Our framework integrates both typically overloaded

R

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

forms comprehensive and rapid analysis of these trajectory
data, generating accurate overload identification results. These
results are subsequently visualized, providing crucial decisionmaking support for traffic police officers. This integrated
approach enables timely detection and enforcement actions
against overload violations.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
In Section II, the article reviews the existing work related
to the traditional overloaded truck identification and pattern
recognition methods based on traffic trajectory data. Next, Section III outlines the methodology of our proposed MAOTIN.
Subsequently, Section IV introduced the dataset construction
and experimental settings, followed by the results analysis of
the model testing experiment and practical application testing.
Finally, the article concludes in Section V.
Fig. 1. Application process of MAOTIN. Initially, the GPS device affixed
to the vehicle acquires real-time trajectory data. Subsequently, this data is
relayed to the traffic management platform for recording and storage. Finally,
MAOTIN identifies the overloaded trucks through the data, processes the
information, and presents the visualization results in the system.

features and trajectory similarity features, resulting in the
development of an accurate, efficient, and highly robust multiaspect overloaded truck identification network (MAOTIN).
It consists of the overloaded feature identification module
(OFIM), a trajectory similarity identification module (TSIM),
and a decision fusion module (DFM). The OFIM captures
typical overloaded features, the TSIM identifies trajectory
similarity features, and the DFM merges the outputs from both
modules to generate the final identification results.
The contributions of this article are as follows.
1) This article proposes a multiaspect overloaded truck
high-precision identification network, a deep learningbased framework that comprehensively learns and
extracts overloaded truck features from trajectories. To
the best of our knowledge, MAOTIN is the first model
to use driving trajectory data for overload identification.
2) This article introduces an innovative truck trajectory
representation method that transforms multidimensional
driving data into a 2-D image. This transformation
enhances overload feature aggregation, simplifying the
training process and improving network efficiency.
3) This article designs two specialized neural network
modules for feature extraction. The OFIM fully extracts
typical overloaded features from multiple spatial scales,
while the TSIM analyzes the trajectory similarity
features between current and historically severely overloaded trajectories. Together, these modules significantly
improve the accuracy and robustness of the overload
identification process.
A notable advantage of our model is its practical applicability. It can be seamlessly integrated into traffic management
platforms to establish an intelligent overload detection system.
Fig. 1 depicts the application process of MAOTIN. The GPS
devices installed on trucks continuously transmit real-time
trajectory data to the data cloud and traffic management
platform database for recording and storage. Our model per-

II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Traditional Methods of Overloaded Truck Identification
The traditional method of identifying overloaded trucks
relies on weighing sensors, which can accurately measure
the weight to determine whether the truck is overloaded.
Currently, most cities still use the manual weighing method,
which requires traffic police to individually inspect trucks at
fixed overload checkpoints (such as highway intersections or
expressway checkpoints). The method suffers from a limited
monitoring range, low detection efficiency, significant consumption of workforce and material resources, and inability
to address the issue of trucks deliberately avoiding inspection
by taking alternative routes.
Some researchers have improved the inefficiency of manual
weighing and designed dynamic weighing devices. These
devices automatically record the weight when trucks pass
through the weighing devices at checkpoints at low speeds.
The cameras capture images of the vehicle, recording details
such as the number of axles, license plate number, and other
essential information, enabling determination of whether the
vehicle is overloaded. Qiao and Zhao [16] designed a dynamic
weighing device for the road surface using the bending plate
sensor with strain gauges. The principle of this method is
straightforward, but its detection accuracy is compromised and
demands a reduced passing speed. To overcome this problem,
Lydon et al. [17] improved the system by adding fiber-optic
sensors, a vision system, and a new shear strain transducer,
enhancing weighing system accuracy but raising device cost.
While the above dynamic weighing method improves detection efficiency and reduces workforce costs, it is limited to
fixed points, resulting in a small. Consequently, it failed to
solve the problem of trucks evading inspection by making
detours.
Some researchers have sought to overcome the limitation of
fixed monitoring points by developing vehicle-mounted load
cells for real-time weight monitoring. Vehicle-mounted sensors
operate on different principles. For example, Gaira et al. [18]
installed laser displacement sensors on trucks to measure
the deformation of the steel plate spring, which is then
used to estimate the truck’s weight. While the approach is
straightforward, it faces challenges in accurately estimating

LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION

weight, as extensive calibration is needed to correlate spring
deformation with weight, and the results are sensitive to
external environmental factors. Similarly, Wang et al. [19] used
onboard sensors to measure road gradient and rear suspension
deformation for weight estimation. Although this method can
be applied to most trucks, it requires precise sensor installation
and is costly. Despite enabling real-time monitoring of truck
overload behavior, vehicle-mounted weighing systems are
expensive and face limitations in terms of truck compatibility.
No universal vehicle-mounted weight monitoring device has
been developed, limiting the scalability of these methods.
B. Pattern Recognition Method Based on Traffic
Spatiotemporal Trajectory Data
Spatiotemporal trajectory data captures a wealth of behavioral features, and deep analysis of this data provides strong
support for decision-making and solving complex tasks. With
advancements in high-precision positioning technologies and
the Internet of Things (IoT), large volumes of valuable traffic
trajectory data have become readily available, enhancing the
accuracy and effectiveness of traffic identification and prediction tasks.
Analyzing and mining the information from trajectory
enables the acquisition of the behavioral characteristics of
the vehicle ontology. This process facilitates trajectory classification, anomaly detection, and prediction. Ma et al. [20]
proposed a multiattribute-based fusion network (MASO-MSF)
and constructed an MASO structure to represent the local
motion state and spatial characteristics of a GPS trajectory
segment at different spatial scales. Additionally, they designed
a multistage fusion model to accurately identify traffic modes,
which fully considers the spatial scale information of the
features. However, the drawback of the model is complexity,
which results in poor performance when processing large
volumes of trajectory data. Yu and Huang [21] proposed
a deep learning framework for driving trajectory anomaly
detection, STDTB-AD. It divides the road network into a
series of spatiotemporal units and uses the motion parameters
of each spatiotemporal unit to represent the driving mode
and characteristics. Then, accordingly, to sense abnormal
driving behavior. Ji et al. [22] introduced a spatiotemporal
self-supervised learning framework for traffic flow prediction,
which enhances the model’s ability to represent spatial and
temporal heterogeneity. This is achieved through adaptive
data augmentation and supported by self-supervised learning
tasks. The above methods accomplish pattern recognition by
designing various network structures to represent trajectory
features. However, it is challenging for these networks to handle overloaded truck identification. Unlike other traffic data,
truck journeys often span long distances, resulting in large
volumes of data that cannot be directly processed as simple
time series. Additionally, the overloaded characteristics are
implicitly involved in the driving data, which cannot be simply
described by the shape of the trajectory. The features behave
differently at different spatial scales, which also complicates
the learning process for conventional CNNs.
Unlike the previous methods, an accurate, efficient, and
highly robust multiaspect overloaded truck high-precision

2533712

identification network is proposed in this article. The trajectory representation method fully considers the truck driving
characteristics and converts the driving trajectory data with
the image. The OFIM and TSIM form two branches of the
network. They identify overload from typical overloaded features and trajectory similarity features, respectively. The OFIM
acquires multiscale and accurate feature maps, and the TSIM
efficiently gets the trajectory similarity feature map. Both of
them are merged in the DFM for the last results. This design
introduces the specific characteristics of overloaded trucks into
the model’s structure, enhancing the accuracy and reliability of the results. In addition, the trajectory representation
method helps MAOTIN apply to massive truck data processing
tasks.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overview of MAOTIN
Fig. 2 shows the overall structure of MAOTIN. The process begins with the trajectory representation method, which
transforms truck driving trajectory data into an image, serving
as the model’s input. Then, the OFIM and TSIM identify
overload behavior from different aspects. The OFIM mines
multiscale typical overloaded features layer by layer. Its unique
Swin feature pyramid (SwinFP) stage and feature selection
layer enable it to capture richer and more comprehensive
feature maps efficiently. Meanwhile, the TSIM analyzes the
similar features of driving routes and historically overloaded
routes. It generates a similarity feature map using a full convolutional Siamese network (FCSN). Following this, the DFM
comprehensively integrates the two feature maps, yielding
accurate overloaded identification results.
B. Trajectory Representation Method
The initial truck driving trajectory data is multidimensional spatiotemporal data (including time, position, velocity,
etc.), presenting challenges due to its large volume, dimensionality, and feature dispersion. For the above problems,
a trajectory representation method is proposed. It can convert complex truck driving trajectories into 2-D trajectory
images.
The trajectory representation method first defines the range
and resolution of the trajectory image, mapping the input
truck trajectory data into the spatial domain. A transformation
model is then established to convert trajectory information into
image pixels, where the number of trajectory points is encoded
as pixel gray. After this, the method reinforces the essential
features in the generated image, and the final truck driving
trajectory image is produced. The overall process is depicted
in Fig. 3.
Fully analyze the truck’s driving characteristics. An excessive number of points in a pixel indicates that the truck is
stationary, with limited observable feature information. Fewer
points, particularly when distinct from surrounding pixels,
suggest dynamic behaviors such as deceleration, turning, lane
changing, or potential overloads, making this feature the most
informative for overload identification. Sparse trajectory points
indicate high-speed travel, with trajectory shapes providing

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Overall structure of MAOTIN. The figure comprises four distinct parts. (a) Tasked with converting trajectory data into trajectory images to serve as the
MAOTIN’s input. The remaining three parts represent the main components of MAOTIN. (b) OFIM and (c) TSIM constitute two branches of the MAOTIN,
each executing overloaded identification from unique aspects. Lastly, (d) DFM extensively integrates the identification outcomes from both branches.

Fig. 3. Truck driving trajectory image generation process. A driving trajectory image is utilized to represent the initial driving trajectory data.

more significant features. The study summarizes this into two
types of pixels: differential pixels, which show significant
differences from neighboring regions and are enhanced to
highlight key features and stay pixels, representing areas
with excessive points that should be suppressed in the image
to prevent the network from overly concentrating on these
regions. Considering these, the method offers special processes
from global and local perspectives.

The first is in the stage of building the transformation model,
converting the trajectory information into
gi, j = log(1 + α ∗ Ni, j )

(1)

g∗i, j = 255 ∗ Norm(gi, j )

(2)

where i and j denote the pixel coordinates, Ni, j is the number of
trajectory points at that pixel, g∗i, j represents the gray value, and
gi, j is the unnormalized value. The hyperparameter α adjusts

LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION

the sensitivity of the gray value to the number of trajectory
points. The model differs from the normal linear transformation [23], [24]. Its unique functional properties reduce
the impact of stay pixels. The special mapping relationship
introduced by the prior information is leveraged to enhance
texture features globally.
The local feature enhancement is involved in the feature
reinforcement stage. The individual pixels are classified into
differential pixels and stay pixels based on their density and
predefined thresholds. The type of each pixel determines
whether it should be enhanced or suppressed. The enhancement and suppression factors are defined as

Een = k · exp τ · (Ni − Nneighbor )
(3)


1
(4)
Ewe = 1 −
1 + exp (λ (Ni − T ))

2533712

Fig. 4. Feature selection mechanism.

where k is a constant factor, γ controls enhancement intensity,
λ governs the width of the transition, and T is the threshold
for identifying stay pixels. These factors are applied to the
respective pixels, resulting in an enhanced trajectory image
that emphasizes the truck’s driving characteristics.
C. Overloaded Feature Identification Module
Typical overloaded features exhibit significant disparities
across various spatial scales within truck trajectory images.
Its complexity also brings obstacles to the learning process of
the conventional CNN. In this regard, this study designed the
OFIM to quickly and thoroughly mine the typical overloaded
features in truck driving trajectory images.
Fig. 2(b) illustrates the architecture of the OFIM. The
input, an overloaded vehicle trajectory image, first undergoes
feature extraction through a stem layer and N consecutive
Swin blocks. This stage generates high-resolution feature
maps. These feature maps are then passed through M-cascaded
SwinFP stages, which progressively expand the receptive field,
enabling the network to capture features at multiple spatial
scales. As a result, the network produces a comprehensive
feature map highlighting the overloaded characteristics across
details of various scales.
It is important to note that vehicle trajectory images differ
from traditional images. The valuable information within these
images occupies a smaller portion of the frame, and background texture information is weak, providing limited utility
for overload identification. Thus, the model incorporates a
feature selection layer in the backbone network to enhance
efficiency and identification performance.
The feature selection layer divides the feature map into
blocks and evaluates the importance of the information in
each block. Based on these evaluations, a mask is generated
and applied to the original feature map, filtering out unimportant features. Considering computational resources, the
model assesses information strength within each block using
variance. This feature selection process reduces redundant
information and improves identification speed. The variance
is calculated as
P
P
2
1 X X (i, j)
σ2c,m,n = 2
Xc,m,n − µc,m,n
(5)
P
i=1 j=1

Fig. 5. Structure of the Swin block.

where m and n represent the block’s position, c is the channel
index, and µ is the mean value of the block. If the variance falls
below a threshold τ, the block is deemed information-weak
and selected for filtering. The corresponding mask positions
are marked accordingly. As shown in Fig. 4, the resulting mask
is applied to the input feature map to generate a filtered feature
map.
The stem layer of the OFIM consists of a basic 3 × 3
convolution module. The core feature extraction unit of the
OFIM is the SwinFP stage, which employs an encoderdecoder structure. The encoder Swin blocks extract multiscale
features, while the decoder transition block synthesizes them
into a single-scale, high-resolution output. High-level (lowresolution) features from earlier stages guide the learning of
low-level features in subsequent stages, improving the model’s
ability to capture both fine-grained and global features.
The structure of the Swin block is shown in Fig. 5. It is
referred to as the Swin Transformer block when designing
[25]. Two skip connections are incorporated to fuse lowlevel and high-level features, enhancing the model’s ability
to capture richer semantic information. The Swin block processes image data via a self-attention mechanism applied
within local windows, progressively capturing local and global
information. Compared to standard convolutional blocks, this
approach significantly enhances the network’s capacity to
handle complex image features.
With the aid of the OFIM, the typical overloaded feature
information of multiple spatial scales is efficiently extracted
from the truck trajectory image. The information is then
represented as a feature map, serving as the primary basis
for high-precision overloaded identification.

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 7. Structure of the DFM.
TABLE I
D ETAIL I NFORMATION OF THE DATABASE

Fig. 6. Detail of the mobile and SE attention modules.

D. Trajectory Similarity Identification Module
The TSIM extracts the trajectory similarity feature maps
between the historically severely overloaded road sections and
the corresponding driving routes in the truck trajectory images.
Based on this consideration, this study designed the TSIM to
extract the similarity information efficiently.
As shown in Fig. 2(c), the extracted routes are paired with
historical routes, forming route pairs. Pairs with low similarity
are initially filtered out, indicating that the truck did not pass
through those areas. The remaining pairs are used to generate
feature maps for similarity calculation. The core of the TSIM
is an FCSN. It consists of two identical branches with the
same network structure and shared weights. These trajectory
pairs are processed through the two branches to extract feature
maps, and a comparator is employed to assess the similarity
between the two feature maps.
For feature extraction, FCSN primarily utilizes the
lightweight mobile modules [26]. Building upon this, the
model incorporates the squeeze-and-excitation (SE) attention modules [27] to capture channel-wise dependencies and
enhance model performance. The details of its design are
shown in Fig. 6. The cosine similarity is designed as the
comparator, providing the similarity information on the feature
maps. Given two input feature maps, F1 and F2 , the output
similarity feature map Fsim is calculated as
Fsimi,j =

F1i, j · F2i, j
F1i, j

F2i, j

.

(6)

In this equation, (i, j) represents the spatial coordinate in Fsim .
The feature map generated by the TSIM and the feature map
generated by the OFIM are then transferred to the DFM for
final overload behavior recognition.
E. Decision Fusion Module
The DFM module is designed to effectively combine feature
maps extracted from the OFIM and TSIM. The structure of
the DFM is shown in Fig. 7. The DFM module consists of two

branches, each processing a different type of feature map to
ensure that the output feature maps have the same dimensions
for concatenation. After fusion, the features are passed through
a simple classifier to produce the final prediction. The module
incorporates both spatial and channel attention mechanisms to
selectively enhance the most relevant features. Additionally,
the DFM module employs depthwise separable convolution in
the classifier, significantly reducing computational complexity
while preserving the model’s representational power.
IV. E XPERIMENT AND T ESTING
To validate the multiaspect overloaded truck high-precision
identification network, a large-scale truck overload dataset, and
an experimental platform were constructed. The experiments
were conducted on the dataset. In addition, actual application
testing was performed to demonstrate the practicability of the
model.
A. Experimental Preparation
1) Dataset Construction: The database utilized in our study
comes from the Tianjin Public Transportation Big Data Platform, China. The data is collected by GPS devices installed
on the trucks, which regularly transmit information to the
platform for storage. The data attributes include license plate
number, driving time, longitude, latitude, and speed. The
detailed information of the database is in Table I. All the
behaviors of trucks in the database have undergone confirmation of their overload status through the manual checkpoint
weighing method. The time range is 24 h before the inspection.
A portion of the original file of truck driving trajectory
data is depicted in the blue section (Fig. 8). Its data was
optimized and preprocessed based on the computing cluster.

LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION

2533712

Fig. 8. Original and optimized data file.

Fig. 9. Transformed truck driving trajectory image.

The yellow portion in Fig. 8 illustrates the optimized data
file. As shown in Fig. 9, the processed data files are converted
into truck trajectory images according to the method proposed
in Section III-B. For ease of differentiation, Fig. 9 displays
the figure after color inversion, where the darker areas in
the figure correspond to higher gray values. The trajectory
of the truck is clearly visible in the trajectory image, with
important trajectory segments enhanced. The pixel position of
the trajectory in the image represents the actual location of
the trucks, with each pixel corresponding to an approximate
spatial range of 200 m. This approach not only preserves
key trajectory information but also allows for dimensionality
reduction of the trajectory data. The images are classified into
overloaded and normal categories. It includes 200000 truck
trajectory images, with a ratio of overloaded trucks to normal
trucks is 1:1. 90% of the images in the dataset form the trainset
for model training, while the rest form the test set to verify
the model’s validity.
It can be concluded from the trajectory data that, compared with normal trucks, overloaded trucks exhibit driving
characteristics such as detours, frequent lane changes, driving
on paths to avoid inspection at overloading control points,
and engaging in illegal transportation. Fig. 10 displays the
abnormal driving trajectory of some overloaded trucks. Fig. 11
visualizes the driving trajectory heatmap of some overloaded
trucks. The horizontal and vertical coordinates represent the

Fig. 10. Abnormal driving trajectory of some overloaded trucks. (a) Making
detours. (b) Changing roads more often and driving on paths.

position of pixel points in the truck driving trajectory image.
The color of each pixel denotes the driving area heat (trajectory
point density) at that location, with the color bar ranging from
dark to light, indicating increasing heat from low to high.
Some high-frequency truck driving routes can be clearly seen
in Fig. 11, which shows that the overloaded trucks prefer
specific routes, leading to high similarity trajectories across
different trucks. Preliminary trajectory data analysis proves
the feasibility of overloaded identification by mining typical
overloaded characteristics and trajectory similarity.
2) Experimental Platform Establishment: All experiments
are conducted in a workstation with an Intel Core i7-11700
CPU @2.50 GHz, 32 GB memory, and two NVIDIA RTX

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE II
PART OF THE I NFORMATION IN THE H ISTORICALLY S EVERELY OVER LOADED DATABASE

Fig. 11. Driving trajectory heatmap of some overloaded trucks.

4090 GPUs. The operating system is Ubuntu 20.04. Deep
learning models are implemented in the Python programming
language.
In addition, a big data computing cluster was built to
preprocess massive truck trajectory data, consisting of three
host computers with AMD Ryzen 9 5950X 16-Core Processor
CPU, 128 GB RAM, and CentOS 7 64-bit system.
3) Historically Severely Overloaded Database Establishment: The work summarized the driving routes of severely
overloaded trucks and combined them with the investigation and enforcement of traffic management departments to
establish a historically severely overloaded truck database.
It contains 5807 severely overloaded trucks (exceeding the
load capacity by more than 100%) and forms 20 severe
cargo loading areas and 71 seriously overloaded road sections.
Part of the information in the historically severely overloaded
database is shown in Table II. The database provides data
support for the TSIM in Section III-D.
B. Model Testing Experiment
1) Model Training Details: The model was trained using
the constructed training set. First, the upper and lower
branches were trained separately. Then, the weights of both
branches were fixed, and the full model was assembled.
Finally, the complete model underwent training. The model is
trained using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer
with an initial learning rate of 0.0001, a momentum of 0.9,
and a weight decay of 0.0004. The learning rate is dynamically
adjusted following a warm-up and exponential decay strategy:
it linearly increases from 1 × 10−5 to 4 × 10−4 over the
first ten epochs, remains constant for the next five epochs,
and subsequently decays exponentially with a factor of 0.8
for the remaining training period. The model is trained for
50 epochs with a batch size of 32. Input images are resized to
500 × 500 pixels. Data preprocessing includes normalization
with a mean of 0.485 and a standard deviation of 0.229.
The loss function is the cross-entropy criterion. The training

Fig. 12. Confusion matrix of test results.

process applied a ninefold cross-validation method. Model
performance is evaluated using an independent validation set,
and the best-performing model is saved based on validation
accuracy.
2) Model Testing Results: The model was tested on the test
set. The results show that the accuracy of MAOTIN is 96.4%,
the recall is 96.6%, and the precision is 95.9%. The confusion
matrix is shown in Fig. 12.
The comparison experiments were conducted with mainstream image classification networks, and the results are
presented in Table III. All compared networks were trained
with the same training dataset as our proposed network,
employing the trajectory image generation method introduced
in Section III-B. This study’s model performance evaluation

LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION

2533712

TABLE IV
A BLATION E XPERIMENT T EST R ESULTS

TABLE V
K EY C OMPONENT C OMPARISON AND A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 13. t-SNE visualization of feature maps.
TABLE III
C OMPARISON E XPERIMENTS R ESULTS

indices are accuracy, FPS, GFLOPs, GMacs, and Parms. The
optimal results are marked in bold red.
In the experiments, MAOTIN achieves the highest accuracy compared to all other mainstream methods. FPS and
FLOP results of MAOTIN show that it can perform identification with high efficiency and accuracy when dealing
with massive truck driving data. The traditional machine
learning method SVM performs the worst in the experiments, demonstrating that it is unsuitable for overloaded
truck identification. Earlier CNN models VGG16, ResNet101, Densenet-121, and Inception-v3 have improved compared
to SVM but are far from the requirements. MAOTIN overmatches these models in identification accuracy, speed, and
computational power consumption. The lightweight networks,
Squeezenet, Shufflenet, Mobilenet, and Ghostnet, have better
identification speed and computational power consumption

performance, but the accuracy is much lower than MAOTIN.
In comparison, the accuracy of MAOTIN increased by
11.9%, 10.5%, 10.8%, and 11.8%, respectively. Compared
with the latest CNNs such as Regnet, Efficientnet, Repvgg,
and Convnext, MAOTIN has a clear advantage in terms
of accuracy and outperforms these models in identification speed and computational power consumption. Compared
to the most advanced Transformer-based models—Swin-T,
FlashInternImage-T, FasterViT, and ViTamin—MAOTIN still
maintains a significant advantage in terms of accuracy. Among
the reference models, FlashInternImage-T achieved the highest
accuracy results. However, MAOTIN exhibits superiority over
FlashInternImage-T, with an accuracy improvement of +6.7%,
an increase in FPS by +35, and a reduction in Parms by −7.88.
The results show that MAOTIN has the highest accuracy
(96.4%) and the fourth fastest speed (316 FPS), which poses an
excellent compromise between identification accuracy, speed,
and computational consumption.
3) Ablation Experiment: To better analyze the effectiveness
of each module in MAOTIN, three diverse models were
designed and tested, and the test data are displayed in Table IV.
The OFOTIN, TSOTIN, and MBOTIN are the models that
replace the corresponding modules of MAOTIN. Compared to
MAOTIN, the identification accuracy of the model OFOTIN
(removal of the TSIM), the model TSOTIN (removal of
the OFIM) decreased by 5.7% and 17.8%, and the model
MBOTIN (replace the DFM with simplest full connected
layer) decreased by 1.3%, respectively. This result indicates
that the upper and lower branches of MAOTIN can mine
overloaded features from different aspects and play a role in
accomplishing the overloaded identification task. In contrast,
the DFM module is used to fuse and classify different feature
maps rather than to extract features. Moreover, the OFIM plays
the leading role, and the TSIM plays the supporting role. There
are severe limitations when relying on the trajectory similarity
(TSIM) independently.
In addition, the tests of the trajectory representation method
and feature selection layer also have been done. The results
are shown in Table V. It shows that the proposed trajectory

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

V. C ONCLUSION

TABLE VI
P RACTICAL A PPLICATION T EST R ESULTS

representation method is more applicable to the identification
task of truck overload, and the accuracy is improved by 4.7%
and 4.1%. After adding the feature selection layer, the model’s
accuracy is enhanced by 1.9%, indicating that it helps the
model efficiently obtain the overload feature information from
the feature map.
4) Feature Visualization Experiment: To evaluate the feature extraction capabilities of our model, we employed
t-SNE [42] to visualize the high-dimensional feature space
extracted by MAOTIN. The features were extracted before
entering the classifier and reduced to two dimensions using
t-SNE. The perplexity was set to 30, the learning rate to 200,
and the number of iterations to 1000.
As displayed in Fig. 13, the resulting visualization shows
a clear separation between classes, with minimal overlap,
indicating that the model has learned highly discriminative
features. The distinct clustering of red and green points further
demonstrates the model’s ability to effectively differentiate
between categories. These results suggest that the network
captures robust feature representations even before the final
classification layer, reinforcing the effectiveness of the learned
feature space for accurate identification.

C. Practical Application Testing
MAOTIN was integrated with the traffic management big
data platform and deployed in traffic enforcement operations
in Jizhou District, Tianjin, China. The model identified the
overloaded trucks in a wide range to complete the initial
screening work and provided precise enforcement areas for
traffic policies to stop overloaded transportation violations
effectively. The results of the actual application testing from
January to March 2024 are shown in Table VI. It is important
to note that our model undergoes daily updates based on
the most recent overloading conditions and data from traffic
management, ensuring its real-time accuracy and reliability.
This quarter, MAOTIN identified 110457 trucks and helped
traffic police apprehend 7591 trucks. The actual identification
precision is 97.3%, proving it can be adequate for overloaded
identification in the real world. Compared with the traditional
manual checkpoint weighing method, MAOTIN identifies 2.7
times the number of trucks. More importantly, it helps the
police catch a large number of overloaded trucks that intentionally avoid inspection. Our method boasts rapid speed, high
accuracy, and extensive coverage. On the other hand, as our
method does not require the installation of additional sensors,
it holds significant application value.

This study introduces MAOTIN, a deep-learning network designed for overloaded identification using trajectory
data. The proposed multiaspect identification framework, customized trajectory representation method, and three efficient
modules significantly ensure the accuracy and efficiency of
MAOTIN. The innovative trajectory representation method
converts driving trajectory data into images, enabling efficient
feature aggregation while preserving critical overload patterns.
The OFIM and TSIM identify overloads from different aspects.
The OFIM leverages a unique SwinFP stage and feature selection layer to extract multiscale, typical overloaded features,
while the TSIM utilizes a fully convolutional Siamese network
to extract trajectory similarity features with the historically
overloaded routes. Finally, the DFM integrates the feature
maps from both the OFIM and TSIM, producing highly accurate overload identification results. Experimental evaluations
on a constructed overloaded truck dataset show that MAOTIN
achieves 96.4% accuracy, surpassing conventional image classification networks. Moreover, real-world deployment testing
demonstrated a precision of 97.3%, illustrating its practical
value for addressing truck overloading issues. Future work will
focus on enhancing the model’s performance by incorporating
additional data sources, such as urban road data, points of
interest (POI) data, and sensor data, to further refine overload
identification. These advancements will enable MAOTIN to
play a critical role in intelligent transportation systems.
R EFERENCES
[1]

F. A. M. Saad, S. Z. Ishak, S. A. H. Sulaiman, and A. Awang, “The
implication of overloaded truck to developing countries—A review,” in
Proc. IEEE 12th Control Syst. Graduate Res. Colloq. (ICSGRC), Aug.
2021, pp. 165–170.
[2] M. A. Recarte, “Mental load and loss of control over speed in real
driving. Towards a theory of attentional speed control,” Transp. Res. F,
Traffic Psychol. Behav., vol. 5, pp. 111–122, Jan. 2002.
[3] X. Deng et al., “A review of 6G autonomous intelligent transportation
systems: Mechanisms, applications and challenges,” J. Syst. Archit.,
vol. 142, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 102929.
[4] S.-Z. Chen, G. Wu, and D.-C. Feng, “Development of a bridge weighin-motion method considering the presence of multiple vehicles,” Eng.
Struct., vol. 191, pp. 724–739, Jul. 2019.
[5] M. Adresi, M. Abedi, W. Dong, and M. Yekrangnia, “A review of different types of weigh-in-motion sensors: State-of-the-art,” Measurement,
vol. 225, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 114042.
[6] J. W. Kim, Y. B. Jho, and Y. W. Jung, “An effectiveness analysis
of commercial vehicle’s loading pattern and prevention of overloading
with on-board truck weight sensors,” J. Korea Inst. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 153–172, Dec. 2018.
[7] S. Stawska, J. Chmielewski, M. Bacharz, K. Bacharz, and A. Nowak,
“Comparative accuracy analysis of truck weight measurement
techniques,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 2, p. 745, Jan. 2021.
[8] G. S. R. Satyanarayana, S. Majhi, and S. K. Das, “A vehicle detection
technique using binary images for heterogeneous and lane-less traffic,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[9] H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Cai, L. Chen, and Y. Li, “V2I-CARLA: A
novel dataset and a method for vehicle reidentification-based V2I
environment,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–9, 2022.
[10] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural
networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023.
[11] T. Tran, D. He, J. Kim, and M. Hickman, “MSGNN: A multi-structured
graph neural network model for real-time incident prediction in large
traffic networks,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 156, Nov. 2023,
Art. no. 104354.

LIANG et al.: MAOTIN: A HIGH-ACCURACY AND -EFFICIENCY NETWORK FOR OVERLOADED TRUCK IDENTIFICATION

[12] X. Chen, H. Zhang, F. Zhao, Y. Cai, H. Wang, and Q. Ye, “Vehicle
trajectory prediction based on intention-aware non-autoregressive transformer with multi-attention learning for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12, 2022.
[13] Z. Cui, R. Ke, Z. Pu, and Y. Wang, “Stacked bidirectional and unidirectional LSTM recurrent neural network for forecasting network-wide
traffic state with missing values,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol.,
vol. 118, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 102674.
[14] S. Feng et al., “A macro–micro spatio-temporal neural network for traffic
prediction,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 156, Sep. 2023, Art.
no. 104331.
[15] S. Li, J. Wang, K. Li, X. Lian, H. Ukawa, and D. Bai, “Modeling and
verification of heavy-duty truck drivers’ car-following characteristics,”
Int. J. Automot. Technol., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 81–87, Feb. 2010.
[16] X.-X. Qiao and Y.-D. Zhao, “Vehicle overload detection system based on
magnetoresistance sensor,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron. Technol. (ICET),
May 2018, pp. 102–105.
[17] M. Lydon, S. E. Taylor, D. Robinson, A. Mufti, and E. J. O. Brien,
“Recent developments in bridge weigh in motion (B-WIM),” J. Civil
Structural Health Monitor., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 69–81, Feb. 2016.
[18] A. Gaira, A. Parveen, D. Dabral, J. Goyal, and M. R. Rani, “Vehicle
overloading: A review,” Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol., vol. 2020,
pp. 2321–9653, May 2020.
[19] B. Wang, H. Wang, L. Wu, L. Cai, D. Pi, and E. Wang, “Truck mass
estimation method based on the on-board sensor,” Proc. Inst. Mech.
Eng., D, J. Automobile Eng., vol. 234, nos. 10–11, pp. 2429–2443, Sep.
2020.
[20] Y. Ma, X. Guan, J. Cao, and H. Wu, “A multi-stage fusion network
for transportation mode identification with varied scale representation
of GPS trajectories,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 150, May
2023, Art. no. 104088.
[21] W. Yu and Q. Huang, “A deep encoder–decoder network for anomaly
detection in driving trajectory behavior under spatio-temporal context,”
Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 115, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103115.
[22] J. Ji et al., “Spatio-temporal self-supervised learning for traffic
flow prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, 2023,
pp. 4356–4364.
[23] R. Zhang, P. Xie, C. Wang, G. Liu, and S. Wan, “Classifying transportation mode and speed from trajectory data via deep multi-scale learning,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 162, Oct. 2019, Art. no. 106861.
[24] Y. Endo, H. Toda, K. Nishida, and J. Ikedo, “Classifying spatial
trajectories using representation learning,” Int. J. Data Sci. Anal., vol. 2,
nos. 3–4, pp. 107–117, Dec. 2016.
[25] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
[26] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
[27] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7132–7141.
[28] B. E. Boser, I. M. Guyon, and V. N. Vapnik, “A training algorithm
for optimal margin classifiers,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Workshop Comput.
Learn. Theory, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1992, pp. 144–152.
[29] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[30] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[31] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[32] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking
the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[33] B. Koonce and B. E. Koonce, Convolutional Neural Networks With Swift
for Tensorflow: Image Recognition and Dataset Categorization. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2021.
[34] K. Han, Y. Wang, Q. Tian, J. Guo, C. Xu, and C. Xu, “Ghostnet: More
features from cheap operations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 1580–1589.
[35] I. Radosavovic, R. P. Kosaraju, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár,
“Designing network design spaces,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 10428–10436.
[36] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
pp. 6105–6114.

2533712

[37] X. Ding, X. Zhang, N. Ma, J. Han, G. Ding, and J. Sun, “RepVGG:
Making VGG-style ConvNets great again,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13733–13742.
[38] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie, “A
ConvNet for the 2020s,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., May 2022, pp. 11976–11986.
[39] Y. Xiong et al., “Efficient deformable ConvNets: Rethinking dynamic
and sparse operator for vision applications,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 5652–5661.
[40] A. Hatamizadeh et al., “FasterViT: Fast vision transformers with hierarchical attention,” 2023, arXiv:2306.06189.
[41] J. Chen, Q. Yu, X. Shen, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen, “ViTamin:
Designing scalable vision models in the vision-language era,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 12954–12966.
[42] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008.
Jian Liang received the B.S. degree from Harbin
Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2021, the
M.S. degree from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,
in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Instrumentation Science and Technology.
His main research interests include deep learning
and 3-D measurement.

Jiehu Kang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
2010, 2013, and 2021, respectively.
He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the
Department of Instrumentation Science and Technology, Tianjin University. His main research interests
include computer vision and vision measurement
technology.

Xuesen Wang received the B.S. and master’s
degrees from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
2010 and 2013, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Engineer with Tianjin Municipal Engineering Design and Research
Institute Company Ltd., Tianjin. His main research
interests include intelligent transportation.

Zongyang Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in mechanical engineering from China University
of Mining and Technology, Beijing, China, in 2020
and 2023, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the Department of Instrumentation
Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China.
His current research interests include computer
vision and 3-D point cloud registration.

Chi Zhao received the bachelor’s degree in transportation from Chang’an University, Xi’an, China,
in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Transportation, Tongji University,
Shanghai, China.
His main research interests include traffic safety
and human factors engineering.

2533712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Siyang Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in
civil engineering from the University of MissouriColumbia, Columbia, MO, USA, in 2020, with a
statistics minor.
She works as an Assistant Professor with the
College of Transportation, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. She has been dedicated to multimodal
transportation simulator development and application, human factors, and road traffic safety.

Luyuan Feng received the B.S. degree in measurement and control technology and instruments
from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2020,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
instrumentation science and technology.
His research interests include point cloud completion and 3-D optical measurement.

Zefeng Sun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
instrumentation science and technology from Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China, in 2018 and 2024, respectively.
He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the
Department of Instrumentation Science and Technology, Tianjin University. His research interests
include deep learning and vision measurement technology.

Bin Wu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 1997 and 2002,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Instrumentation Science and Technology, Tianjin University. His main research interests include
computer vision, object detection, and vision measurement technology.