IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

1475

TCG-IDS: Robust Network Intrusion Detection via

Temporal Contrastive Graph Learning
Cong Wu , Jianfei Sun , Jing Chen , Mamoun Alazab , Senior Member, IEEE,
Yang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yang Xiang , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In the era of zero trust security models and nextgeneration networks (NGN), the primary challenge is that
network nodes may be untrusted, even if they have been verified, necessitating continuous validation and scrutiny. Effective
intrusion detection systems (IDS) are crucial for continuously
monitoring network traffic and identifying potential threats.
However, traditional IDS approaches often struggle to keep pace
with evolving threats, requiring extensive supervised training
on labeled datasets. This limitation leads to high false positive
rates, low detection accuracy, and a failure to provide realtime detection, thereby undermining the security of NGNs. This
paper proposed the first self-supervised learning-based IDS,
designed on temporal contrastive graph neural network (GNN),
namely TCG-IDS. It innovatively integrates three contrastive
learning strategies: temporal contrasting to capture temporal
dependencies, asymmetric contrasting to account for the diverse
interactions within network data, and masked contrasting to
enhance the learning of node representations by masking parts of
the data during training. Performance evaluation was conducted
on two publicly available network traffic datasets, NF-CSECIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-V2. TCG-IDS achieved
a balanced accuracy of 99.48% and 91.48% on two datasets
respectively, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art graph
learning models. In multi-class detection, TCG-IDS attained a
mean false positive rate of 4.15% and 3.34% on the two datasets
respectively. Besides, it exhibits high efficiency with its running
time of 0.37s and 0.51s on the two datasets to predict per batch

of 100 samples. Results highlight the effectiveness and efficiency
of TCG-IDS in accurately detecting various types of network
intrusions. This work significantly advances the field of network
intrusion detection via self-supervised temporal graph learning,
offering a promising solution for future network security systems.
Index Terms—Cyber security, temporal graph neural network,
intrusion detection system, network security.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE advent of zero trust security models and NGNs has
underscored the need for advanced security measures in
modern network environments [1], [2]. Conventional security
architectures, which assume implicitly trusted devices once
authenticated, are increasingly inadequate and pose significant
security risks [1]. IDSs [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] are essential
for identifying and mitigating potential threats by monitoring network traffic for signs of malicious activities [8].
However, traditional IDS approaches, such as signature-based
and anomaly-based detection, often struggle to keep pace
with the evolving threat landscape, resulting in high false
positive rates and limited effectiveness against novel attacks
[9]. This challenge is particularly acute for NGNs, which
demand more advanced security measures. Zero trust security
models, emphasizing continuous, context-aware, and dynamic
authentication, offer a promising solution by requiring ongoing trust evaluation and leveraging AI and deep learning to
enhance intrusion detection and prevention [1]. Addressing
these aspects is crucial for securing NGNs, highlighting the
importance of research on advanced IDS in this field [10].

Received 5 June 2024; revised 7 December 2024 and 6 January 2025;
accepted 10 January 2025. Date of publication 20 January 2025; date
of current version 31 January 2025. This research was supported in part
by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and the Cyber Security
Agency under its National Cybersecurity R&D Programme (NCRP25-P04TAICeN); in part by the DSO National Laboratories under the AI Singapore
Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-GC-2023-008); and in part by the
A. Motivations
National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under the
Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE)
Recently, researchers have explored various learning-based
programme. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and
approaches,
including feature-based, deep learning-based, and
approving it for publication was Dr. Stjepan Picek. (Corresponding author:
GNN-based methods. Feature-based methods rely on extractJianfei Sun.)
Cong Wu and Jing Chen are with the School of Cyber Science
ing representative traffic features and using machine learning
and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail:
classifiers, showing promise in detecting known attacks but
cnacwu@whu.edu.cn; chenjing@whu.edu.cn).
struggling with unseen patterns [11], [12]. Deep learningJianfei Sun is with the School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 (e-mail:
based methods, such as CNNs and RNNs, excel in learning
jfsun@smu.edu.sg).
complex patterns from high-dimensional data but require
Mamoun Alazab is with the College of Engineering, IT, and Enviextensive labeled data for supervised training [13]. GNNronment, Charles Darwin University, Darwin NT 0810, Australia (e-mail:
alazab.m@ieee.org).
based methods, which naturally model the graph structure
Yang Liu is with the College of Computing and Data Sciof network traffic, have emerged as a promising approach,
ence, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail:
with static GNNs like GCNs and GATs learning node repyangliu@ntu.edu.sg).
Yang Xiang is with the Department of Digital Research, Swinresentations from static snapshots [14], [15], [16], [17].
burne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia (e-mail:
However, these fail to capture temporal dynamics. To overyxiang@swin.edu.au).
come this, dynamic GNNs incorporate temporal information,
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3530702
1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

either through discrete-time models learning from sequences
of static snapshots or continuous-time models capturing the
ongoing evolution of node representations [18], [19]. Dynamic
GNNs, while effective at capturing temporal dependencies,
often rely on supervised learning, limiting their adaptability
to evolving threats and novel attacks. This dependence on
extensive labeled data and predefined signatures restricts their
ability to minimize false positives in real-world scenarios.
Despite advancements in machine learning-based IDS, existing approaches face significant challenges [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. Most focus on static
network data, overlooking temporal dynamics and evolutionary patterns critical to understanding network behavior.
Additionally, their reliance on supervised learning limits applicability in real-world scenarios where labeled data is scarce
or expensive. These methods also exhibit low generalizability, often requiring extensive training data to achieve high
detection accuracy. Addressing these limitations necessitates
self-supervised learning models for NGNs, leveraging GNNs
to capture temporal patterns and enhance detection accuracy
in dynamic and evolving network environments.
B. TCG-IDS
To bridge the research gap, TCG-IDS is proposed as the
first self-supervised temporal contrastive GNN-based system
for intrusion detection that leverages temporal dynamics and
spatial dependencies in network traffic data to learn robust representations of network entities and their interactions. These
representations are robust because they effectively capture the
complex, evolving patterns of normal and malicious behaviors in the network, enabling the model to accurately detect
anomalies even in the presence of noisy or incomplete data.
It integrates three key contrastive learning strategies: temporal
contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked contrasting.
Temporal contrasting ensures that the model captures the
temporal evolution of network behavior, while asymmetric contrasting focuses on the relationships between nodes,
enhancing the model’s ability to detect anomalies in node
interactions. Masked contrasting helps the model learn from
incomplete data, improving its robustness and generalization
capabilities. By incorporating these strategies, TCG-IDS can
effectively detect novel attacks with minimal false positives,
even in scenarios with limited labeled data.
C. TCG-IDS ’s Ability for Constructing Zero-Trust Model
Zero trust security models require continuous validation of
all network entities, emphasizing dynamic, real-time monitoring to detect conflicts or malicious activities. TCG-IDS
addresses this by employing self-supervised learning on unlabeled datasets, leveraging temporal and spatial dependencies
through a GNN framework. Its use of temporal, asymmetric, and masked contrasting strategies ensures robust node
behavior representation, enabling comprehensive monitoring
and effective detection of novel attacks with minimal false
positives. This capability strengthens zero trust environments,
offering a scalable and reliable solution for next-generation
network security.

D. Technical Novelty
TCG-IDS addresses key limitations of existing IDS
approaches with three innovative contrastive learning strategies. (i) Temporal contrasting captures the temporal evolution
of network behavior, overcoming the static data analysis issues in traditional IDS. (ii) Asymmetric contrasting
enhances anomaly detection by focusing on node relationships
and predicting neighboring embeddings, effectively identifying subtle malicious interactions. (iii) Masked contrasting
improves robustness and generalization by enabling learning
from incomplete data, tackling the challenge of limited labeled
datasets and noisy inputs. Together, these strategies reduce
false positives and leverage self-supervised learning to ensure
effective detection with minimal labeled data, setting TCG-IDS
apart from previous GNN-based IDS solutions.
The main contributions are summarized as follows:
• TCG-IDS is the first IDS to integrate temporal graph
learning with self-supervised contrastive learning, leveraging temporal dynamics and spatial dependencies to
enhance detection robustness.
• TCG-IDS employs three novel contrastive learning strategies, temporal, asymmetric, and masked contrasting, to
enhance robustness. These enable the model to capture
temporal network dynamics, node relationships, and learn
from incomplete data, ensuring effective detection with
limited labeled data.
• TCG-IDS models traffic as a continuous dynamic graph
with temporal encoding, enabling real-time, fine-grained
detection. This captures evolving network behaviors,
ensuring accurate and timely intrusion detection.
• Comprehensive experiments on TCG-IDS are performed
on two widely-used datasets to evaluate its performance.
Results demonstrate that TCG-IDS significantly outperforms state-of-the-art graph learning models and IDSs,
achieving a balanced accuracy of 99.48% and 91.48%
for binary detection on the two datasets, respectively.

II. OVERVIEW
A. Threat Model
This paper focuses on an enterprise network environment where attackers, either external (e.g., malicious hackers) or internal (e.g., disgruntled employees), attempt to
compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of
network resources. These attackers exploit vulnerabilities in
the network infrastructure, such as misconfigured firewalls,
unpatched systems, or weak authentication mechanisms, to
gain unauthorized access, as illustrated in Figure 1. Once
inside, they may perform malicious activities like scanning
for vulnerable hosts, escalating privileges, exfiltrating sensitive
data, or launching denial-of-service attacks. To counter these
threats, the paper assumes the deployment of a network intrusion detection system (IDS) that monitors network traffic for
signs of malicious activity. IDS, positioned at strategic network
points, utilizes TCG-IDS, a framework that employs temporal
contrastive learning and graph neural networks to learn robust
representations of network entities and interactions over time.
These learned representations are then used by the detector

WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

1477

transferred bytes, packets, duration, and timestamps. Advanced
features, e.g., TCP flags, Type of Service (ToS), Autonomous
System (AS) numbers, and application layer information, are
also included when available. Preprocessing ensures data quality through cleaning, normalization, encoding, and sampling,
addressing incomplete or duplicate records and scaling feature
values. The resulting dataset, with rows representing network
flows and columns as features, is prepared for constructing the
temporal dynamic graphs used by TCG-IDS.
B. Graph Builder

Fig. 1. Threat model.

Fig. 2. Overview of TCG-IDS.

to identify potential intrusions, with the IDS continuously
updated based on feedback from security analysts and evolving
threat intelligence.
B. System Overview
As depicted in Figure 2, TCG-IDS consists of four main
components: data collector, graph builder, temporal contrastive
GNN, and detector. Data collector is responsible for collecting and preprocessing raw network traffic data from various
sources, such as packet captures or flow records, and extracting relevant features for each network entity, such as IP
addresses or port numbers. Graph builder then constructs a
sequence of attributed temporal dynamic graphs from the
preprocessed data, where each graph snapshot represents the
state of the network at a specific time step, with nodes
representing network entities and edges representing their
interactions. Temporal contrastive GNN is the core component of TCG-IDS, which learns robust representations of
the network entities by capturing their spatial and temporal
dependencies using a combination of graph neural networks,
temporal contrastive learning, asymmetric contrastive learning,
and masked contrastive learning. Finally, detector utilizes the
learned representations to identify malicious network behavior, such as malicious activities or intrusions, by employing
supervised detection classifier.
III. D ESIGN OF TCG-IDS
A. Data Collector
TCG-IDS captures and preprocesses network traffic data
from various sources, e.g., routers, switches, and monitoring
tools, to create a structured dataset for intrusion detection.
Using flow records like NetFlow, sFlow, or IPFIX, it extracts
key attributes, including IP addresses, port numbers, protocols,

The framework constructs a sequence of temporal attributed
graphs from the preprocessed network flow data, capturing
both spatial and temporal dependencies to facilitate robust
and discriminative node representations for effective intrusion
detection. The data is divided into T discrete time steps, each
corresponding to a specific time window ∆t, selected based
on the distribution of timestamps and empirical validation to
balance temporal resolution and computational feasibility. At
each time step t, unique IP addresses are identified to form
the node set Vt of the graph snapshot Gt . Each node vti ∈ Vt
represents a device in the network at time t, with relevant
features extracted into a feature vector xit ∈ Rd , where d
denotes the number of node features.
Edges Et between nodes in Vt are identified based on
network flows, with an edge eti j ∈ Et existing if there is at
least one flow between the corresponding IP addresses within
the time window t. Relevant features for each edge eti j are
extracted into a feature vector yti j ∈ Rm , where m is the number
of edge features. Common edge features include total bytes
and packets transferred, duration, average bytes per packet,
average packets per second, ratio of incoming to outgoing
bytes/packets, protocol distribution, and flag distribution. A
graph snapshot Gt = (Vt , Et ) is constructed for each time
step t, associating node features xit and edge features yti j with
their respective nodes and edges. The sequence of T graph
snapshots G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, representing the temporal
evolution of the network traffic, is outputted. Each graph
snapshot Gt is represented as (Vt , Et , Xt , Yt ), where Xt ∈ R|Vt |×d
is the matrix of node features and Yt ∈ R|Et |×m is the matrix
of edge features. This sequence of temporal attributed graphs
is then used for node representation learning and detection,
effectively capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies in
the network data. This sequence of temporal attributed graphs
is then used for node representation learning and detection,
effectively capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies in
the network data.
C. Temporal Contrastive GNN
This module learns robust node representations from
temporal attributed graphs, capturing spatial and temporal
dependencies for effective detection through GNN encoding,
temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked
contrasting.
1) GNN Encoding: The GNN Encoder is responsible for
learning node embeddings for each temporal graph snapshot
Gt . Given the dynamic nature of the network, TCG-IDS

1478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 4. Illustration of asymmetric contrasting.
Fig. 3. Illustration of temporal contrasting.

utilizes a Temporal Graph Network (TGN) encoder [21]
to capture the temporal evolution of node features and
interactions effectively. It combines memory modules and
graph-based operators to process continuous-time dynamic
graphs. For a given graph snapshot Gt = (Vt , Et , Xt ), the
TGN encoder computes the node embeddings hti for each node
vti ∈ Vt as follows:
hti = TGNθ (Gt , Xt )[i] ∈ RD

(1)

where TGNθ is the TGN encoder with learnable parameters
θ, and D is the dimensionality of the node embeddings. The
TGN encoder leverages a combination of memory modules
and graph attention mechanisms to capture both the historical context and the immediate neighborhood information
of each node. The memory of each node is updated upon
every interaction, allowing the TGN encoder to maintain
long-term dependencies and provide up-to-date embeddings
even in the presence of infrequent interactions. This ensures
that the embeddings reflect both the temporal and structural
characteristics of the network.
2) Temporal Contrasting: This step aims to learn temporally consistent node representations by contrasting the
embeddings of a node at different time steps. The goal is to
maximize the similarity between the embeddings of a node
at nearby time steps while minimizing the similarity between
the embeddings of a node at distant time steps. As illustrated
in Figure 3, for each node vi , it samples a positive pair
t t+n
(hti , ht+k
i ) and a negative pair (hi , hi ), where k is a small
time lag and n is a larger time lag, ensuring that the time
steps are within the valid range and the node vi has varied
significantly. The temporal contrastive loss Ltemp is defined
as Eq. 2.
Ltemp =

X T −max(k,n)
X

1
|V| v ∈V
i

max(0, ∆ + sim(hti , ht+n
i )

t=1

− sim(hti , ht+k
i ))

(2)

where ∆ is the margin, sim(·, ·) is a cosine similarity function, and |V| is the total number of nodes across all time
steps.
3) Asymmetric Contrasting: It aims to learn node representations that capture the local neighborhood context and
the asymmetric relationships between nodes. It predicts the
embeddings of neighboring nodes using an asymmetric predictor function. As illustrated in Figure 4, for each node vti at
time step t, it samples a set of neighboring nodes N (vti ) based
on the graph structure. The asymmetric predictor function fφ

Fig. 5. Illustration of masked contrasting.

takes the embedding of the node vti as input and predicts the
embeddings of its neighboring nodes:
ĥtj = fφ (hti ) ∈ RD ,

∀vtj ∈ N (vti )

(3)

The asymmetric contrastive loss Lasym is formulated as:
T

Lasym =

1 XX X
kĥtj − htj k22
|V|
t
t
t

(4)

t=1 vi ∈Vt v j ∈N (vi )

where k · k2 denotes the L2 norm.
4) Masked Contrasting: To learn node representations that
capture multi-facet features of the network traffic, it divides
the node embeddings into multiple factors, masks each factor
separately, and performs contrastive learning on the masked
embeddings. As illustrated in Figure 5, for each node vti at
time step t, it divides its embedding hti into M factors:
hti = [cti1 , cti2 , . . . , ctiM ]
where ctim

(5)

D/M

∈ R
is the m-th factor of the embedding. It
generates M masked embeddings by replacing each factor with
a learnable mask token [MASK], formulated as Eq. 6:
h̃tim = [cti1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctiM ],

m = 1, . . . , M

(6)

For optimizing the model, the masked contrastive loss Lmask
is defined as:
T

Lmask =

M

1 XXX
max(0, ∆ + sim(h̃tim , h̃tjm )
|V|
t
t=1 vi ∈Vt m=1

− sim(h̃tim , hti ))

(7)

where vtj is a randomly sampled node from the same time step
t, and h̃tjm is its corresponding masked embedding.
5) Training Objective: The overall training objective of the
Temporal Contrastive GNN-based Learner is a combination
of the temporal contrastive loss, the asymmetric contrastive
loss, and the masked contrastive loss: L = Ltemp + λ1 Lasym +
λ2 Lmask , where λ1 and λ2 are hyperparameters that balance
the contribution of the different loss terms. The Temporal
Contrastive GNN-based Learner is trained end-to-end using
backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent optimization.
The learned node embeddings hti are then used as input to the
next module for identifying anomalous network behavior. By
incorporating temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting,
and masked contrasting, the Temporal Contrastive GNN-based

WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

Algorithm 1 Training Process of TCG-IDS
1: Input: Sequence of graph snapshots G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, learning rate η, epochs
E

2: Output: Trained model parameters θ
3: for epoch = 1 to E do
4:
Initialize gradient accumulators dθ ← 0
5:
for t = 1 to T do
6:
Extract Gt = (Vt , Et , Xt , Yt )
7:
for each node vti ∈ Vt do
8:
hti ← TGNθ (Gt , Xt )[i]
9:
for each node vi do
10:
for t = 1 to T − max(k, n) do
11:
Sample pairs (hti , ht+k
) and (hti , ht+n
)
i
i
12:
Compute temporal contrastive loss Ltemp
13:
for each node vti ∈ Vt do
14:
for each neighboring node vtj ∈ N (vti ) do
15:
Predict neighbor embeddings ĥtj ← fφ (hti )
16:
Compute asymmetric contrastive loss Lasym
17:
for each node vti ∈ Vt do
18:
for m = 1 to M do
19:
h̃tim ← [cti1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctiM ]
20:
h̃tjm ← [ctj1 , . . . , [MASK], . . . , ctjM ]
21:
Compute masked contrastive loss Lmask
22:
L ← Ltemp + λ1 Lasym + λ2 Lmask
23:
Update parameters θ ← θ − η · ∇θ L

Learner is able to learn node representations that capture the
spatial, temporal, and multi-facet dependencies in the network
traffic data, enabling more effective detection in TCG-IDS.
Algorithm 1 details this training process.
D. Detector
The detection module identifies malicious network behavior
based on the node embeddings {hti } learned from the Temporal
Contrastive GNN-based Learner. Each embedding hti ∈ RD represents node vi at time t. The module outputs a score sti ∈ [0, 1],
where a higher score indicates a higher likelihood of malicious
activity. This study employs a supervised approach using a
LightGBM classifier, which was chosen for its efficiency in
handling large-scale datasets, its ability to model complex,
non-linear relationships in the data, and its faster training
time compared to other gradient boosting methods. While this
framework supports unsupervised methods such as One-Class
SVM and Isolation Forest for scenarios with limited labeled
data, this work emphasizes the supervised setup, with future
directions focusing on semi-supervised methods to effectively
utilize unlabeled data and minimal labeled samples.
IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setting
1) Dataset: This study evaluates TCG-IDS using two
publicly available network traffic datasets: NF-CSE-CICIDS2018-V2 [22] and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 [23]. NF-CSECIC-IDS2018-V2, developed by the Canadian Institute for
Cybersecurity, contains 18,893,623 records collected over
10 days in July 2018, including 10,423,751 attack samples
covering DDoS, DoS, Botnet, Brute Force, Infiltration, and
Web attacks, alongside 8,469,872 normal traffic samples. It
provides rich features, e.g., statistical metrics and connection
details for advanced intrusion detection model evaluation.
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, created by the Australian Centre for
Cyber Security, includes 2,391,775 records collected over two
months in early 2015, with 96,553 attack samples spanning

1479

categories like Exploits, Fuzzers, Reconnaissance, and DoS,
and 2,295,222 normal traffic samples. It offers detailed features
extracted from raw network packets, including payloads and
flow statistics, enabling robust evaluation of intrusion detection
models.
To address the absence of explicit timestamps in
the datasets, we generated timestamps using FLOW
DURATION MILLISECONDS feature. The process began by
assigning the first record a timestamp of 0 milliseconds
as a reference point. Records were then sorted based
on their occurrence in the original data file to maintain
a logical temporal sequence. For each subsequent
record i, the timestamp T i was calculated as the
cumulative sum of the FLOW DURATION MILLISECONDS
values of all preceding records, i.e., T i = T i−1 +
FLOW DURATION MILLISECONDSi−1 , with T 0 = 0.
For
records
with
missing
or
zero
FLOW
DURATION MILLISECONDS values, the same timestamp
as the preceding record was assigned to preserve continuity.
This approach ensures a realistic temporal context, enabling
a chronological train-test split that respects the temporal
dynamics of network traffic.
2) Parameters: The encoder uses a 128-dimensional
embedding, 256-dimensional memory, and two graph attention layers with 8 heads each, employing ReLU and a 0.5
dropout rate. Temporal dynamics are captured through time
embeddings. The projector network comprises two 128-unit
fully connected layers with ReLU and batch normalization.
Temporal contrasting uses a margin (∆) of 1.0 with time lags
k = 5 and n = 10, while asymmetric contrasting involves a
predictor with two 128-unit layers. Masked contrasting divides
node embeddings into four factors, masking one at a time.
The training combines temporal, asymmetric, and masked
contrastive losses (λ1 , λ2 = 0.5) and uses the Adam optimizer
(lr = 0.001, batch size 64) with gradient clipping and early
stopping to ensure effective detection in dynamic networks.
3) Baseline: To benchmark TCG-IDS, we compare it
against state-of-the-art graph-based models, including GraphSAGE [16], GAT [15], and TGN [21], which are widely
used for network intrusion detection and related tasks. These
models were selected for their graph-focused methodologies,
complementing TCG-IDS’s temporal contrastive approach.
GraphSAGE aggregates features from a node’s local neighborhood, GAT employs attention mechanisms to weigh neighbors’
importance, and TGN captures temporal evolution in dynamic
graphs. We utilized the same hyperparameters as TCG-IDS,
tuned through grid search for optimal performance, to ensure
a fair comparison. We focuses on comparing GNN-based
techniques, distinct from non-GNN-based approaches. All
evaluations were conducted on an Intel Xeon Platinum 8336C
CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, with the
running time per batch recorded to assess computational
efficiency for large-scale network data.
The evaluation uses a chronological split, with 70% of
earlier timestamps for training and 30% later for testing,
preserving temporal integrity. Models are trained on graph
snapshots, with metrics including precision, recall, F1-score,
balanced accuracy (BAC), true negative rate (TNR), and true

1480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 6. FPR/FNR under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

Fig. 9. Distribution of prediction score under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.

Fig. 7. FPR/FNR under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.
Fig. 10. Overall performance under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

Fig. 8. Distribution of prediction score under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

positive rate (TPR) for binary detection, and mean false
positive rate (mFPR) for multi-class detection.

Fig. 11. Overall performance under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.

TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 92.70%, recall of 90.09%,

B. Overall Performance
1) Binary Classification: The NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2
dataset was used to evaluate the effectiveness of TCG-IDS
in identifying diverse attack scenarios. This dataset includes
a wide variety of attack types, such as DDoS, DoS, Botnet,
Brute Force, Infiltration, and Web attacks, making it a comprehensive benchmark for intrusion detection systems. As shown
in Figure 10, TCG-IDS achieved outstanding performance on
this dataset, with a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%, F1score of 99.23%, BAC of 99.48%, TNR of 99.75%, and TPR
of 99.21%. These results highlight the system’s capability to
accurately distinguish between normal and malicious traffic,
ensuring high detection rates with minimal false positives.
The high precision and recall values indicate that TCG-IDS
is highly effective in identifying attacks without raising many
false alarms, which is crucial for real-world deployment.
Figure 6 presents FPR and FNR varied with different thresholds under the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset in detail.
The FNR is 0.068% when the FPR is 3%. Figure 8 also
presents the prediction score distribution of TCG-IDS under
the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset in detail.
Similarly, the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, which includes
a mix of normal traffic and various attack types such as
Exploits, Fuzzers, Reconnaissance, DoS, Analysis, Backdoor,
Shellcode, and Worms, was used to further validate the robustness of TCG-IDS. As shown in Figure 11, on this dataset,

F1-score of 91.38%, BAC of 91.48%, TNR of 92.86%, and
TPR of 90.09%. Although the performance is slightly lower
than on the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, these results
still demonstrate robust detection capabilities across different
network environments and attack scenarios. The balanced
accuracy and recall values indicate that the system can effectively identify malicious activities while maintaining a low
false negative rate, ensuring comprehensive network protection. Figure 7 presents FPR and FNR varied with different
thresholds under the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset in detail.
The FNR is 16.71% when the FPR is 3%. Figure 9 also
presents the prediction score distribution of TCG-IDS under
the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset in detail.
2) Multi-Class Classification: In addition to binary classification, the TCG-IDS system’s performance is evaluated
in multi-class detection scenarios using the NF-CSE-CICIDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. The evaluation settings involved training the TCG-IDS system on a subset
of each dataset and testing its performance on the remaining data, ensuring the results reflect the system’s real-world
capability to handle diverse and complex attack scenarios. The
metrics used for this evaluation include a FPR for each class.
For the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, the TCG-IDS
system was evaluated on ten different classes, including
Benign, DDOS attack-HOIC, DoS attacks-Hulk, DDoS
attacks-LOIC-HTTP, Bot, Infiltration, SSH-Bruteforce,

WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

1481

TABLE I
N UMBER OF M ULTI -C LASS S AMPLES AND I TS P ERCENTAGE OF
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2

TABLE II
Fig. 12. Multi-class FPR under NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2.

Fig. 13. Multi-class FPR under NF-UNSW-NB15-v2.

DoS attacks-GoldenEye, FTP-BruteForce, DoS attacksSlowHTTPTest, DoS attacks-Slowloris, Brute Force-Web,
DDOS attack-LOIC-UDP, Brute Force-XSS, and SQL
Injection. The system achieved the following FPR for each
class, as presented in Figure 12. The results highlight
TCG-IDS’s proficiency in correctly identifying various
attack types while maintaining a low FPR. The system
shows particularly low FPRs for critical classes such as
Benign (0.45%), DoS attacks-Slowloris (0.02%), DDOS
attack-LOIC-UDP (0.02%), and SQL Injection (0.49%),
which are crucial for reducing false alarms and ensuring
accurate threat detection. However, higher FPRs for classes
like SSH-Bruteforce (13.37%) and DoS attacks-GoldenEye
(12.29%) indicate potential areas for improvement. These
higher FPRs might be due to the complexity and similarity of
these attacks to normal traffic, requiring more sophisticated
feature extraction or advanced modeling techniques to
enhance detection accuracy.
For the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, TCG-IDS was evaluated on fifteen different classes, including Benign, Exploits,
Fuzzers, Generic, Reconnaissance, DoS, Analysis, Backdoor,
Shellcode, and Worms. The FPR for each class is presented

N UMBER OF M ULTI -C LASS S AMPLES AND I TS P ERCENTAGE OF
NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 DATASET

in Figure 13. The results indicate that TCG-IDS maintains
a low FPR across most classes, with particularly low rates
for critical classes such as Exploits (1.07%), Fuzzers (2.08%),
and Backdoor (0.51%), demonstrating its ability to accurately
classify different types of network attacks. Slightly higher
FPR for classes such as DoS (12.61%) and Reconnaissance
(8.20%) suggests areas for further refinement but still indicates
strong overall performance. These higher FPRs could be due
to the more varied and complex nature of these attacks, which
might require additional feature engineering or model tuning
to improve detection accuracy.
Overall, the multi-class detection results for both datasets
demonstrate that TCG-IDS can effectively distinguish between
various attack types, maintaining low FPRs across different
classes. This capability is essential for providing comprehensive network security, as it allows for the precise identification
and mitigation of specific threats. The system’s ability to
maintain high accuracy and low FPRs across multiple classes
underscores its robustness and effectiveness in real-world network intrusion detection scenarios. These findings suggest that
TCG-IDS is a reliable and effective tool for enhancing network
security through precise and accurate multi-class detection.
C. Ablation Study
To understand the contributions of different components
in TCG-IDS, an ablation study is conducted by systematically removing each component and evaluating the
performance of the modified system. The components evaluated include temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and
masked contrasting. The results of the ablation study on the

1482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2 DATASET

TABLE IV
B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 DATASET

TABLE V

TABLE VI

M ULTI -C LASS C LASSIFICATION M FPR S OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2

M ULTI -C LASS C LASSIFICATION M FPR S OF A BLATION S TUDY U NDER
NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2

NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset are presented in Table III.
Removing temporal contrasting resulted in a significant drop
in performance, with precision, recall, and F1-score decreasing to 88.74%, 85.44%, and 87.06% respectively. Similarly,
excluding asymmetric contrasts led to a reduction in precision,
recall, and F1-score to 90.05%, 87.12%, and 88.56%. When
masked contrasting was removed, the system’s performance
also declined, though it remained relatively high with a precision of 95.28%, recall of 93.45%, and F1-score of 94.35%.
The full TCG-IDS system, which includes all components,
achieved the highest performance with precision, recall, and
F1-score of 99.25%, 99.21%, and 99.23% respectively, indicating the importance of each component in enhancing the
overall effectiveness of the system.
The ablation study results on the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2
dataset, shown in Table IV, exhibit a similar trend. Excluding
temporal contrasting resulted in the precision, recall, and F1score dropping to 82.92%, 80.33%, and 81.60% respectively.
Removing asymmetric contrasts led to performance decreases
with precision, recall, and F1-score at 85.77%, 83.05%, and
84.39%. Without masked contrasting, the system’s precision,
recall, and F1-score were 88.16%, 85.90%, and 87.02%.
The complete TCG-IDS system outperformed these modified
versions, achieving precision, recall, and F1-score of 92.70%,
90.09%, and 91.38%, respectively. These results reinforce
the critical role each component plays in maintaining high
detection performance across different datasets.
For multi-class detection, the mean false positive rates
(mFPRs) for each ablation variant on the NF-CSE-CICIDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets are provided
in Tables V and VI. On the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset,
the mFPR increased significantly when temporal contrasting
was removed (19.29%), followed by asymmetric contrasting
(14.26%), and masked contrasting (8.58%). The complete

C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018V 2 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK

TABLE VII

TCG-IDS system achieved the lowest mFPR (3.34%), underscoring the importance of all components in maintaining a low
rate of false positives across multiple classes. Similarly, on the
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset, removing temporal contrasting
led to the highest mFPR (25.36%), followed by removing
asymmetric contrasting (13.18%), and masked contrasting
(5.49%). The full system maintained a low mFPR (4.15%),
indicating robust performance in detecting various attack
types.

D. Comparing With Baseline Models
To evaluate the effectiveness of TCG-IDS over existing models, a comparison with several baseline models is
performed, including GraphSage, GAT, and TGN, on the
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets.
The comparison focused on binary detection tasks, using
metrics such as precision, recall, F1-score, BAC, TPR, and
TNR. As shown in Table VII, TCG-IDS significantly outperformed the baseline models on the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2
dataset. GraphSage achieved a precision of 72.91%, recall of
68.51%, and F1-score of 70.64%, while GAT improved these
metrics to 79.10%, 74.35%, and 76.65%, respectively. TGN
further enhanced performance with a precision of 84.14%,
recall of 79.97%, and F1-score of 82.01%. However, TCG-IDS
achieved the highest precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,

WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

TABLE VIII
C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2
DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK

1483

TABLE XIII
C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018V 2 IN M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

TABLE IX

TABLE XIV

C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018V 2 IN M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 IN
M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

TABLE X
C OMPARING W ITH BASELINE M ODELS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2 IN
M ULTI -C LASS D ETECTION TASK

TABLE XV
RUNNING T IME (S ECOND ) OF TCG-IDS P ER BATCH

positive rates, outperforming existing methods across diverse
network intrusion scenarios.
TABLE XI
C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018V 2 DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK

TABLE XII
C OMPARING W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS U NDER NF-UNSW-NB15- V 2
DATASET IN B INARY D ETECTION TASK

and F1-score of 99.23%, demonstrating superior detection
capabilities and robustness.
In the binary detection task, TCG-IDS demonstrated superior performance on both the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2,
TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,
and F1-score of 99.23%, significantly outperforming DLGNN,
EgraphSage, and Sarhan et al., as shown in Table XI. Similarly,
on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, TCG-IDS attained a precision of
92.70%, recall of 90.09%, and F1-score of 91.38%, surpassing
these baseline models (Table XII). In the multi-class detection
task, TCG-IDS achieved the lowest mean false positive rates
(mFPRs) of 3.34% on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 (Table XIII)
and 4.15% on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 (Table XIV), compared
to higher mFPRs for DLGNN, EgraphSage, and Sarhan et
al. These results highlight TCG-IDS’s robustness, precision,
and ability to balance high detection accuracy with low false

E. Comparing With Existing Methods
To evaluate the performance of TCG-IDS in comparison
to existing methods, experiments are conducted using the
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets
in both binary and multi-class detection tasks. The existing
methods compared include DLGNN [18], EgraphSage [19],
and Sarhan et al. [7], which are representative of recent
advances in graph-based intrusion detection systems.
In the binary detection task, TCG-IDS demonstrated superior performance on both the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and
NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 datasets. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2,
TCG-IDS achieved a precision of 99.25%, recall of 99.21%,
and F1-score of 99.23%, significantly outperforming DLGNN,
EgraphSage, and Sarhan et al., as shown in Table XI. Similarly,
on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2, TCG-IDS attained a precision of
92.70%, recall of 90.09%, and F1-score of 91.38%, surpassing
these baseline models (Table XII). In the multi-class detection
task, TCG-IDS achieved the lowest mean false positive rates
(mFPRs) of 3.34% on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 (Table XIII)
and 4.15% on NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 (Table XIV), compared
to higher mFPRs for DLGNN, EgraphSage, and Sarhan et
al. These results highlight TCG-IDS’s robustness, precision,
and ability to balance high detection accuracy with low false
positive rates, outperforming existing methods across diverse
network intrusion scenarios.
F. Running Time Evaluation
The running time of TCG-IDS per batch is measured to
assess its computational efficiency. The experiments were
conducted on two publicly available network traffic datasets,
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 and NF-UNSW-NB15-V2. Each
batch consisted of graph snapshots processed by the TCG-IDS

1484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE XVI
T IME C OMPLEXITY OF TCG-IDS

system. Results of the running time evaluation are presented in Table XV. For NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-V2 dataset, it
achieved a running time of 0.3754 seconds per batch. For the
NF-UNSW-NB15-V2 dataset, the running time was slightly
higher, at 0.5112 seconds per batch. These results demonstrate
that it is capable of processing network traffic data efficiently,
making it suitable for real-time intrusion detection scenarios.
G. Time Complexity
The time complexity analysis of TCG-IDS reveals its efficiency in handling dynamic network traffic data. The TGN
Encoder operates with a complexity of O(Nv + Ne ), where
Nv and Ne represent the number of nodes and edges, respectively, ensuring scalability with network size. The temporal
contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked contrasting
components contribute complexities of O(Nv ·T ·D), O(Nv ·d̄·D),
and O(Nv · M · D) respectively, reflecting their operations’
dependence on the number of nodes, temporal steps, and
embedding dimensions. The combined complexity, O(Nv ·(T +
d̄ · D + M · D) + Ne ), highlights the framework’s capacity
to efficiently process large-scale and temporally evolving network data, making it suitable for real-time intrusion detection
applications. This balance between computational efficiency
and robust detection underlines the practical applicability of
TCG-IDS in diverse network environments.
V. D ISCUSSION
While temporal contrasting aims to distinguish embeddings
at nearby and distant time steps, this approach may be less
effective in the presence of periodic patterns. For instance,
network traffic with regular fluctuations, such as nightly or
weekend activities, may share consistent underlying patterns
across timestamps. Accounting for such periodicity could
better preserve meaningful temporal correlations and refine
anomaly detection in dynamic networks. Another limitation
is the lack of comparison with existing non-GNN methods.
While we focused on graph-based approaches due to their
relevance in modeling temporal and spatial dependencies,
exploring non-GNN methods could provide valuable insights
and broaden the scope of evaluation. Future work should incorporate comparisons with more diverse and relevant techniques
to further validate the robustness of TCG-IDS.
The lower performance onNF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset
compared to NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 can be attributed to
several factors. First, the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 dataset includes
a broader range of attack types, such as Exploits, Backdoor, and Worms, which present more complex detection

challenges compared to the more straightforward DoS and
DDoS attacks in NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2. Additionally, NFUNSW-NB15-v2 features packet-level details that increase the
complexity of the detection task, requiring more sophisticated
preprocessing and fine-tuning of the model. Finally, differences
in the distribution of attacks and traffic patterns between
the two datasets influence the model’s ability to generalize
effectively, further contributing to the performance gap.
The relatively high FPRs for classes such as DoS (12.61%)
and Reconnaissance (8.20%) highlight areas for improvement
in the model’s detection capability. While the framework
shows strong overall performance, these high FPRs are significant and will be addressed in future work. Additionally,
although the datasets used in this study are based on older
data, they remain representative of many real-world scenarios,
covering a wide variety of attack types and network traffic
patterns. Nevertheless, as cyber threats continue to evolve, it is
crucial to evaluate our framework on newer datasets that reflect
recent attack techniques and network behaviors to ensure its
continued relevance in modern network security contexts.
We reference several relevant graph-based models; however,
we specifically selected graph-based models for comparison
due to their direct relevance and proven performance in
dynamic graph-based tasks, particularly in network intrusion
detection. GraphSAGE, which aggregates features from a
node’s local neighborhood, and GAT, which uses attention
mechanisms to weigh neighbors’ importance, are both effective
for capturing node relationships in network traffic data. These
models are highly suitable for handling large-scale dynamic
networks and can offer meaningful insights into detection.
Although other models may be applicable, we focused on
these two because of their successful application in temporal
settings and their ability to capture relevant graph structures
and temporal dynamics. In future work, we will extend this
comparison to include additional models that could provide
further insights.
Detecting SSH-brute force and DoS attacks is critical for
strengthening network security, as these attacks are noisy
and distinct from human behavior. However, their detection
can be complicated by factors such as traffic burstiness and
network congestion, which may cause them to resemble
legitimate high-volume events, increasing false positive rates.
Addressing these challenges requires refining feature selection
and optimizing thresholding mechanisms to improve detection
accuracy and reduce false positives in these attack classes.
It is important to note that while the goal of temporal
contrasting is generally to distinguish between embeddings
at nearby and distant time steps, this approach might not
always be appropriate in the presence of periodic patterns.
For example, network traffic at specific times, such as nightly
or weekend traffic, might exhibit regular fluctuations, yet still
share underlying patterns across different timestamps. In such
cases, rather than strictly minimizing the similarity at distant
time steps, it may be more beneficial to account for periodicity
to preserve meaningful temporal correlations, thus refining the
detection of anomalous behaviors in dynamic networks.
The architecture of the proposed framework was determined
through a systematic tuning process, including grid search and

WU et al.: TCG-IDS: ROBUST NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION VIA TEMPORAL CONTRASTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

ablation studies, to optimize hyperparameters and component
selection. This iterative approach ensured that the model configuration effectively balances performance and computational
efficiency, tailored to the characteristics of the datasets used in
the study. Future work could explore automated architecture
search methods to further refine the framework’s design.
VI. R ELATED W ORK
A. Deep Learning-Based IDS
Deep learning techniques, including Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
have significantly improved network IDS performance. CNNs
excel at capturing spatial features in traffic data, while RNNs
like LSTMs and GRUs effectively model temporal dependencies [24], [25]. For instance, Kitsune [26] uses autoencoders
to detect anomalies, and DeepLog [27] leverages LSTMs for
sequence modeling in system logs. However, these methods
struggle to simultaneously capture spatial and temporal dependencies and often require extensive labeled data. To overcome
these challenges, researchers are increasingly turning to graph
neural networks (GNNs) to model interactions and learn rich
representations of network data for intrusion detection.
B. GNNs and GNN-Based IDS
GNNs [28], [29], [30], [31] have gained significant attention
for learning powerful representations of graph-structured data.
They are broadly categorized into spectral-based and spatialbased methods. Spectral methods, like GCNs [17], perform
convolution in the Fourier domain using the graph Laplacian’s
eigendecomposition, but they suffer from high computational
complexity and limited scalability. In contrast, spatial-based
methods, such as GraphSAGE [16] and GATs [15], aggregate
information from neighboring nodes directly on the graph
structure, offering greater efficiency and scalability, making
them suitable for large-scale and dynamic graphs, such as
in network intrusion detection. However, challenges like the
over-smoothing problem [32] and limited expressiveness in
capturing long-range dependencies [33], [34] remain. Recent
innovations like Graph Transformers [35] and Graph Contrastive Learning [36] address these issues, enabling more
sophisticated applications of GNNs in complex tasks, including intrusion detection.
Existing GNN-based IDSs can be grouped into three categories: (1) methods leveraging Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) or Graph Attention Networks (GATs) for static graph
representation, (2) approaches incorporating temporal information through dynamic GCNs or recurrent architectures like
LSTMs, and (3) hybrid techniques combining GNNs with
reinforcement or adversarial learning. GCNs [37] capture
local structural information, while GATs [14] use attention
mechanisms for expressive node embeddings but lack temporal
considerations. To address this, dynamic GCNs [38] and recurrent models [39] integrate spatial and temporal dependencies,
improving detection in evolving networks. Advanced methods
like reinforcement learning [40] for subgraph selection and
adversarial training [41] enhance scalability and robustness,
pushing the boundaries of GNN-based IDSs.

1485

VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper presents TCG-IDS, a self-supervised temporal
GNN-based model for network intrusion detection. It uses
temporal contrasting, asymmetric contrasting, and masked
contrasting to capture temporal dynamics and spatial dependencies in network traffic. By modeling traffic as a dynamic
graph, it enables real-time detection with minimal false positives and improved novel attack identification. Evaluation
on benchmark datasets shows it surpasses existing models,
offering a robust solution for modern network security.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this article are those of the authors and do
not reflect the views of the National Research Foundation
Singapore or the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore.
R EFERENCES
[1] I. A. Ridhawi and M. Aloqaily, “Zero-trust UAV-enabled and DTsupported 6G networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM), Dec. 2023, pp. 6171–6176.
[2] I. Al Ridhawi, S. Otoum, and M. Aloqaily, “Decentralized zero-trust
framework for digital twin-based 6G,” 2023, arXiv:2302.03107.
[3] M. Aloqaily, S. Otoum, I. A. Ridhawi, and Y. Jararweh, “An intrusion
detection system for connected vehicles in smart cities,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
vol. 90, Jul. 2019, Art. no. 101842.
[4] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.
[5] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro,
“TESSERACT: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classification across space and time,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019,
pp. 729–746.
[6] E. M. Rudd, F. N. Ducau, C. Wild, K. Berlin, and R. Harang, “ALOHA:
Auxiliary loss optimization for hypothesis augmentation,” in Proc.
USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2019, pp. 303–320.
[7] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.
[8] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning
for network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 1st Quart., 2023.
[9] J. Vitorino, I. Praça, and E. Maia, “SoK: Realistic adversarial attacks and
defenses for intelligent network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 134, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 103433.
[10] Z. Li, A. L. G. Rios, and L. Trajković, “Machine learning for detecting
anomalies and intrusions in communication networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 2254–2264, Jul. 2021.
[11] S. Muneer, U. Farooq, A. Athar, M. A. Raza, T. M. Ghazal, and S. Sakib,
“A critical review of artificial intelligence based approaches in intrusion
detection: A comprehensive analysis,” J. Eng., vol. 2024, no. 1, Jan.
2024, Art. no. 3909173.
[12] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Fusion of statistical importance for feature
selection in deep neural network-based intrusion detection system,” Inf.
Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 353–363, Feb. 2023.
[13] S. M. Kasongo, “A deep learning technique for intrusion detection
system using a recurrent neural networks based framework,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 199, pp. 113–125, Feb. 2023.
[14] G. Miao, G. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Tong, and B. Lu, “AddAG-AE: Anomaly
detection in dynamic attributed graph based on graph attention network
and LSTM autoencoder,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 13, p. 2763, Jun.
2023.
[15] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2017, pp. 1–12.
[16] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan.
2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[17] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.

1486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[18] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[19] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “EGraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for IoT,” in Proc. NOMS IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Apr.
2022, pp. 1–9.
[20] H. Gharaee and H. Hosseinvand, “A new feature selection IDS based
on genetic algorithm and SVM,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Telecommun.
(IST), Sep. 2016, pp. 139–144.
[21] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and M. Bronstein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs,”
2020, arXiv:2006.10637.
[22] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow
datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection
systems,” in Proc. 10th EAI Int. Conf. Big Data Technol. Appl., 13th
EAI Int. Conf. Wireless Internet (WiCON), Dec. 2020, pp. 117–135.
[23] N. Moustafa, “Designing an online and reliable statistical anomaly
detection framework for dealing with large high-speed network traffic,”
Ph.D. dissertation, School Eng. Inf. Technol., Univ. New South Wales,
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017.
[24] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
[25] J. Kim, J. Kim, H. L. T. Thu, and H. Kim, “Long short term memory
recurrent neural network classifier for intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Platform Technol. Service (PlatCon), Feb. 2016, pp. 1–5.
[26] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[27] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[28] G. Corso, H. Stark, S. Jegelka, T. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Graph
neural networks,” Nature Rev. Methods Primers, vol. 4, pp. 1–13, Mar.
2024.
[29] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM:
Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 540–557.

[30] S. Siby, U. Iqbal, S. Englehardt, Z. Shafiq, and C. Troncoso,
“WebGraph: Capturing advertising and tracking information flows
for robust blocking,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2021,
pp. 2875–2892.
[31] B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Wang, Q. Li, M. Xue, and S. Pan, “Securing graph
neural networks in MLaaS: A comprehensive realization of query-based
integrity verification,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
2024, pp. 2534–2552.
[32] Q. Li, Z. Han, and X.-M. Wu, “Deeper insights into graph convolutional
networks for semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., Jan. 2018, pp. 3538–3545.
[33] Z. Zhang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Deep learning on graphs: A
survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 249–270,
Mar. 2020.
[34] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” 2018, arXiv:1810.00826.
[35] V. P. Dwivedi, C. K. Joshi, A. T. Luu, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and
X. Bresson, “Benchmarking graph neural networks,” J. Mach. Learn.
Res., vol. 24, no. 43, pp. 1–48, 2023.
[36] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., Jan. 2020, pp. 1–12.
[37] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 37, Jun. 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
[38] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35,
May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[39] X. Teng, Y.-R. Lin, and X. Wen, “Anomaly detection in
dynamic networks using multi-view time-series hypersphere
learning,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Nov. 2017,
pp. 827–836.
[40] J. Jiang et al., “Anomaly detection with graph convolutional
networks
for
insider
threat
and
fraud
detection,”
in
Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Nov. 2019,
pp. 109–114.
[41] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Suarez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. BarletRos, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for robust
intrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jun. 2022.