IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

2535014

MGCL: Multiorder Graph Neural Network With
Cross-Learning for Multivariate Time-Series
Anomaly Detection
Zhe Cui , Di Zang , Junqi Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Keshuang Tang

Abstract—Multivariate time-series (MTS) anomaly detection
is critical for industrial systems. However, for inter-variable
dimensional modeling, existing work mainly focuses on low-order
dependencies between variable pairs, overlooking high-order
interactions among multiple variables. Additionally, for temporal
dimension modeling, time series are influenced by various system
factors, posing challenges in simultaneously capturing long-term
and short-term dependencies. To address these challenges, we
propose a multiorder graph neural network with cross-learning
(MGCL). First, we design a multiscale temporal module that
captures long-term seasonal dependencies and short-term trend
dependencies by employing a temporal global attention network
(TGAN) and a gated temporal convolution network (GTCN),
respectively. Second, we construct an adaptive hypergraph generator to explicitly represent the dynamic high-order interactions
among multiple variables. Finally, we develop a multiorder graph
cross-learning module, which integrates a dynamic memory
graph convolution network (DMGCN), a tri-directional diffusion
hypergraph convolution network (3D-HGCN), and a crosslearner to comprehensively capture multiorder inter-variable
dependencies. Extensive experiments on eight real-world datasets
demonstrate that MGCL outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, cross-learning, graph neural
network (GNN), hypergraph, multivariate time series (MTS).

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

ULTIVARIATE time series (MTS) are prevalent in the
Internet of Things (IoT), industry, transportation, and
power grids. Anomaly detection in MTS aims to identify
behaviors that deviate from expected patterns. However, due
to the high complexity and susceptibility of MTS, manual
monitoring is no longer feasible. Therefore, automated MTS
Received 8 January 2025; revised 9 May 2025; accepted 23 May 2025.
Date of publication 9 June 2025; date of current version 18 June 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62476200 and Grant 62472313, in part by
the 2024 Shanghai “Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan” International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Program under Grant
24510714400, and in part by the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal
Education Commission under Grant 202101070007E00098. The Associate
Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Mahnoosh Tajmirriahi. (Corresponding authors: Di Zang; Junqi Zhang.)
Zhe Cui, Di Zang, and Junqi Zhang are with the College of Computer
Science and Technology and the Key Laboratory of Embedded System
and Service Computing, Ministry of Education, Tongji University, Shanghai
200092, China (e-mail: cuizhe117@tongji.edu.cn; zangdi@tongji.edu.cn;
zhangjunqi@tongji.edu.cn).
Keshuang Tang is with the Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering,
Ministry of Education, and the College of Transportation Engineering, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200092, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3577826

anomaly detection has become indispensable for fault diagnosis and emergency response [1], [2].
Early MTS anomaly detection methods primarily rely on
machine learning techniques [3]. However, these approaches
often encounter the “curse of dimensionality” when dealing
with high-dimensional MTS. Specifically, as the dimensionality of time series increases, model performance tends to
degrade. In contrast, deep learning methods have gained significant attention for automatically capturing nonlinear features in
high-dimensional data, including supervised, semi-supervised,
and unsupervised methods. Supervised methods rely on predefined labels and perform well when detecting known anomaly
patterns. However, due to the diversity of anomaly classes,
high-quality labels often require extensive manual annotation.
Furthermore, the extreme imbalance between positive and
negative samples in anomaly data limits the model’s generalization ability. Although semi-supervised methods improve
generalization by learning from limited labeled data, they
still struggle to recognize diverse anomaly patterns due to
the limited label categories. Unsupervised methods bypass
the need for labels, effectively addressing challenges related
to label scarcity and diverse anomaly patterns. Early unsupervised approaches, such as RNNs [4], GRUs [5], and
LSTMs [6], excel at capturing temporal dependencies but
overlook the strong correlations between different time series,
limiting their ability to model inter-variable dependencies.
Subsequently, unsupervised methods based on graph neural
networks (GNNs) [7] and Transformer [8] are introduced into
MTS anomaly detection, demonstrating significant potential in
modeling inter-variable relationships. Nevertheless, they still
face the following limitations.
First, in terms of temporal dimension modeling, time series
often exhibit complex multiscale characteristics. Fig. 1(a)
shows two days of traffic flow data recorded by different
sensors. Specifically, the traffic system displays dissimilar
patterns during peak and off-peak periods (Window 1 and
Window 2). Additionally, peak periods on different days often
exhibit similar patterns (Window 1 and Window 3). This
indicates strong long-term seasonal dependencies inherent in
the time series. Although models like RNNs have advantages
in capturing long-term dependencies, they are often limited by
the size of the time window and typically suffer from gradient
explosion when processing long sequences. Moreover, the time
series also contains more complex short-term patterns. For

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Intricacy of temporal and inter-variable dependencies modeling in a
system. (a) In temporal dimension modeling, similar and dissimilar patterns
represent consistent or divergent data variation trends, respectively. These
patterns across time windows reveal the multiscale temporal characteristics
of traffic flow, encompassing short-term and long-term trends, and reflect
the hierarchical complexity of time series at various temporal granularities.
(b) In inter-variable dimension modeling, similar patterns indicate consistent
trends between sensors or regions composed of multiple sensors, highlighting
strong correlations or synergistic effects. Conversely, dissimilar patterns reflect
local disparities or independent characteristics. Thus, dynamic low-order
interactions between sensors manifest as pairwise dependencies between
topological nodes, whereas dynamic high-order interactions across regions
reveal complex associations among multiple topological nodes.

instance, there are both similar and dissimilar patterns in Window 3, reflecting the complexity and diversity of short-term
trend dependencies. Therefore, to comprehensively understand
the complex characteristics of time series, it is essential to
capture both long-term and short-term dependencies.
Second, in terms of inter-variable dimensional modeling,
the relationships among variables often exhibit dynamics and
multiorder characteristics. Fig. 1(b) illustrates an example of
traffic conditions during peak hours on a workday. During peak
hours, traffic flow usually travels between residential and business areas, with variable relationships evolving continuously
over time. This highlights the dynamic correlations among
variables. However, most existing MTS anomaly detection
methods rely on static graph structures, lacking the ability to
dynamically model inter-variable dependencies. Furthermore,
both low-order and high-order interactions coexist among
variables, reflecting their multiorder characteristics. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(b), low-order interactions may occur
between topological node pairs within a business area, while
high-order interactions arise from regional disparities. Traffic
patterns between business areas often display similarities,
while those between leisure and residential areas may be vastly
dissimilar. These regional disparities underscore the complexity and significance of high-order interactions among multiple
topological nodes. However, existing methods, such as GNNs

and Transformer, primarily model inter-variable dependencies
based on non-Euclidean graph structures, neglecting dynamic
evolution and high-order interactions among variables.
To address the first limitation, we propose a multiscale
temporal module. It utilizes fast Fourier transform (FFT)
to decompose raw time series into seasonal and trend
components. Then, the temporal global attention network
(TGAN) and gated temporal convolution network (GTCN) are
employed to capture long-term seasonal and short-term trend
dependencies, respectively. This enhances the model’s ability
to perceive multiscale temporal features.
To overcome the second limitation, we propose an adaptive
hypergraph generator. It constructs dynamic hypergraphs based
on the spatial-temporal characteristics of input MTS, explicitly
representing complex high-order interactions and their evolution among variables. Furthermore, we design a multiorder
graph cross-learning module, which captures low-order dependencies via the dynamic memory graph convolutional network
(DMGCN) and high-order dependencies via the tri-directional
diffusion hypergraph convolution network (3D-HGCN). Additionally, a cross-learner further facilitates complementary
learning and deep fusion of multiorder dependencies.
In the end, the model proposed for the above limitations is
named multiorder GNN with cross-learning, namely MGCL.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to apply
dynamic multiorder graphs for MTS anomaly detection. The
main contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
1) We propose an MGCL framework for MTS anomaly
detection, which effectively captures multiscale temporal dependencies and models multiorder inter-variable
dependencies.
2) We design a multiscale temporal module that captures
long-term seasonal and short-term trend dependencies, thereby thoroughly perceiving multiscale temporal
dependencies.
3) We construct an adaptive hypergraph generator that
automatically builds hypergraphs based on the spatialtemporal characteristics of MTS, explicitly representing
high-order interactions and their evolution among variables. Meanwhile, we design a multiorder graph crosslearning module aimed at capturing both low-order and
high-order inter-variable dependencies, promoting their
complementary learning and deep fusion.
4) We conduct extensive experiments on eight real-world
datasets. The results demonstrate that MGCL achieves
state-of-the-art performance and validates its effectiveness in anomaly localization and diagnosis.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II summarizes the related work. Section III presents
preliminary. Section IV introduces our method. Section V
shows experiment results. Finally, Section VI concludes this
article.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Traditional Methods for Anomaly Detection
Early anomaly detection studies primarily rely on statistical
theories, such as ARIMA [9] and PCA [10]. These methods

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

2535014

assume that time series follows a linear structure, which prevents them from capturing nonlinear features. Subsequently,
machine learning methods, such as One-Class SVM [11] and
STS-AD [12], improve detection performance by capturing
nonlinear features. However, these methods rely on manually
designed features and suffer significant performance degradation when dealing with high-dimensional data.
Fig. 2. Traditional graph and hypergraph structure.

B. GNNs for Anomaly Detection
Deep unsupervised methods are widely adopted for handling
high-dimensional, hard-to-label anomalous data. RNN-based
approaches [13] excel at capturing temporal dependencies
within individual time series but face gradient explosion
issues with long sequences and cannot model inter-variable
dependencies. Although CNN-based methods [14] can capture
inter-variable dependencies, they assume MTS follow gridlike, Euclidean structures. However, in real-world IoT, power,
and transportation systems, sensor distributions exhibit unique
non-Euclidean structures, motivating the use of GNN [7].
Early GNN methods primarily rely on static graphs to
model inter-variable dependencies. GDN [15] represents intervariable relationships as non-Euclidean graph structures and
detects anomalies based on prediction errors. MSCRED
[16] employs a graph feature matrix to encode intervariable relationships and integrates LSTM to capture temporal
dependencies, detecting anomalies via reconstruction errors.
MTAD-GAT [17] utilizes a graph attention network to jointly
learn temporal and inter-variable dependencies. However,
these methods assume static graph structures, neglecting the
dynamic evolution of variable relationships.
To overcome the limitations of static graphs, recent methods
have explored dynamic graphs. MAGNN [18] proposes a multiscale adaptive GNN that dynamically models inter-variable
dependencies through multiscale temporal decomposition and
adaptive graph learning. However, its multiscale modeling fails
to explicitly distinguish between global and local temporal
dependencies and overlooks the multiorder characteristics of
variables. Additionally, AddGraph [19] combines dynamic
graphs with GRU to capture anomalous patterns. GReLeN
[20] models inter-variable dependencies using dynamic graphs
and a random graph relation learning strategy. MEGA [1]
integrates discrete wavelet transforms with graph autoencoders
(AEs) to enhance anomaly detection. CrossFuN [2] further
improves detection by combining dynamic graphs with timefrequency domain information.
C. Transformer for Anomaly Detection
Benefiting from advancements in self-attention mechanism, Transformer has demonstrated exceptional performance.
TranAD [21] utilizes a self-attention-based sequence encoder
to capture temporal dependencies and infer anomaly patterns.
Anomaly Transformer [22] improves the conventional selfattention mechanism by introducing an anomaly attention
mechanism, achieving effective detection by maximizing the
distinction between normal and abnormal patterns. DTAAD
[23] integrates TCN with Transformer, enabling it to capture
both temporal and inter-variable dependencies. However, in

modeling temporal dependencies, these methods fail to fully
consider the multiscale temporal characteristics. Moreover, in
modeling inter-variable dependencies, they overlook higherorder interactions among multiple variables.
In summary, compared to prior work, our proposed MGCL
offers the following advantages.
1) MGCL employs FFT for multiscale decomposition of
raw time series and constructs TGAN and GTCN to
effectively capture long-term seasonal and short-term
trend dependencies.
2) MGCL adaptively constructs hypergraphs based on
the spatial-temporal characteristics of MTS, explicitly
representing high-order interactions and their dynamic
evolution among variables. This overcomes the limitations of traditional Euclidean graph structures, making
it more suitable for real-world data.
3) MGCL leverages DMGCN and 3D-HGCN to model
low-order and high-order inter-variable dependencies,
respectively, and employs a cross-learner to promote
their complementary learning and deep fusion.
III. P RELIMINARY
A. Definitions
1) Traditional Graph Structure: It is G = (V; E; A). It consists of a node (variable) set V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN } (|V| = N), and
an edge set E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , e M } (|E| = M) that connects paired
nodes. Edges in E represent low-order pairwise relationships
between variables, as shown in Fig. 2. An adjacency matrix
A defines these relationships: when variable vi is correlated
with v j , A(vi , v j ) = 1. Otherwise, A(vi , v j ) = 0. Notably, A
may not always be available in all systems. In such cases, we
adopt an adaptive embedding matrix Z as a substitute.
2) Hypergraph Structure: It is defined as G = (V; E; H),
an extension of a traditional graph. It includes a hyperedge
set E = {e01 , e02 , . . . , e0M } (|E| = M) that connects multiple
nodes, as shown in Fig. 2. Hyperedges represent high-order
inter-variable interactions. An incidence matrix H encodes
the relationships between nodes and hyperedges: if a node
v belongs to a hyperedge e0 , then H(v, e0 ) = 1. Otherwise,
H(v, e0 ) = 0.
B. Problem Formalization
A system is represented as G. MTS is X ∈ RN×T , where
N represents the number of variables and T is the length of
the time series. At time step t, MTS is simplified as Xt . The
objective of anomaly detection is to learn a function S from
historical h time steps of data without requiring known labels,

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Architecture of the proposed MGCL consists of four main modules: a multiscale temporal module, an adaptive hypergraph generator, a multiorder
graph cross-learning module, and a predictor. The multiscale temporal module leverages TGAN and GTCN to capture long-term seasonal and short-term trend
dependencies within the time series. The adaptive hypergraph generator dynamically constructs hypergraphs based on the spatial-temporal characteristics of
input MTS, explicitly representing high-order inter-variable interactions and their dynamic evolution. The multiorder graph cross-learning module integrates
DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner, which captures low-order dependencies in traditional graphs and high-order dependencies in hypergraphs, while
promoting their complementary learning and deep fusion. The predictor refines feature dimensions and produces the final prediction results.

to detect the anomaly state D ∈ {0, 1} (1 represents anomaly)
within a future time window W
S

[X(t−h):t , G] −→ D t:(t+W) .

(1)

IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Framework Overview
The structure of MGCL is shown in Fig. 3. First, the
MTS is processed in parallel by the multiscale temporal module and the adaptive hypergraph generator, which,
respectively, capture multiscale temporal dependencies and
construct dynamic hypergraphs. Second, the multiorder graph
cross-learning module comprehensively models multiorder
inter-variable dependencies. Finally, the predictor refines the
channel dimensions of multiorder dependencies and generates
prediction results. Detailed descriptions of each module are
provided below.
B. Multiscale Temporal Module
In real-world systems, time series exhibit complex characteristics, with both long-term seasonal and short-term trend
dependencies. However, models are often constrained by the
size of a time window. When a window is large, the model
tends to overlook short-term detailed features. Conversely,
when a window is small, the model struggles to capture longterm dependencies and is prone to gradient explosion. To
address these challenges, we propose a multiscale temporal
module, comprising three components.
1) Temporal Scale Decomposition: This process first
applies FFT to convert the original MTS into multiple frequency signals
XFFT = FFT(X)

(2)

f1 , . . . , fk = argTopK(Amp(XFFT ))

(3)

Xmain
FFT = {X FFT [ f1 ], . . . , X FFT [ fk ]}

(4)

where X represents MTS data, XFFT is a frequency domain
signal after FFT processing, Amp(·) denotes an amplitude
function, argTopK(·) selects the top K frequency components
based on their amplitudes, and Xmain
FFT represents a set of
multifrequency signals composed of the top K amplitude
components.
Subsequently, a seasonal time series XSeason , which represents long-term variations in time series, is extracted using
inverse FFT (IFFT) based on Xmain
FFT . Then, a trend time series
XTrend , representing short-term variations in time series, is
obtained through a series reduction process. This process is
expressed as follows:

XSeason = IFFT Xmain
(5)
FFT
XTrend = X − XSeason .

(6)

2) Global Temporal Attention Convolution: Seasonal series
typically exhibit smooth variations, requiring the capture of
dependencies on a global scale. Therefore, we construct the
TGAN

T

exp W Q XSeason,t
W K XSeason,i

ati = P
(7)
T

t
W Q XSeason,t
W K XSeason,m
m=1 exp
HT L = TGAN(XSeason ) =

t
X

ati W V XSeason,i



(8)

i=1

where exp(·) denotes exponential function. W Q , W K , and
W V are trainable parameters. ati represents the correlation
between time step t and time step i. HT indicates long-term
seasonal dependencies captured by GTAN.

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3) Gated Temporal Convolution: Trend series often exhibit
complex local fluctuations. To effectively capture their shortterm trend dependencies, we construct the GTCN
TCN(XTrend ) = Convdil
s (X Trend )

(9)

HTS = GTCN(XTrend ) = Tanh(TCN(XTrend ))
Sigmoid(TCN(XTrend ))

(10)

where Convdil
s (·) represents a temporal convolution operation
with s kernel size and dil dilation rate. Tanh(·) and Sigmoid(·)
are Tanh and Sigmoid activation functions, respectively.
indicates Hadamard product. HTS is short-term trend dependencies captured by GTCN.
Finally, the short-term trend dependencies HTS are combined with the long-term seasonal dependencies HT L to
comprehensively capture multiscale temporal dependencies
HT = HTS + HTL .

(11)

C. Adaptive HyperGraph Generator
In real-world systems, sensors of the same type exhibit
homogeneity, whereas sensors of different types display heterogeneity. While low-order inter-variable interactions are
important, high-order interactions among multiple variables
cannot be overlooked. Although prior studies have utilized
traditional hypergraphs [24] to represent such higher-order
inter-variable interactions, several limitations remain. 1) Traditional hypergraphs are constructed using K-means clustering
to define hyperedges, requiring manual tuning of the K value.
However, real-world systems are diverse, making it challenging to determine an appropriate K value, which may also vary
with system changes. 2) Traditional hypergraph construction
is applied directly to the complete training set, resulting in
a static and unchangeable structure. Thus, it lacks flexibility
and the ability to adjust in real time. To address these issues,
we design an adaptive hypergraph generator. The generator
not only dynamically constructs hypergraphs but also adjusts
their structure in real time, explicitly modeling the impact of
anomalies on a system. For example, it can describe fault
propagation in a power grid or congestion diffusion in a traffic
system.
1) Feature Dimension Expansion: The adaptive hypergraph generator first employs a standard multilayer perceptron
(MLP) to adjust the channels of the original MTS to facilitate
subsequent feature exploration. The process is expressed as
H0 = MLP(X)

(12)

where X represents the original MTS data, and H0 denotes the
hidden features processed by the MLP.
2) Adaptive Graph Convolution: To cluster similar variables into a hyperedge, we construct an adaptive graph
convolutional network (AGCN) to capture inter-variable relationships in H0 . The adaptive adjacency matrix is

Aa = Soft ReLU Z 1 Z T2
(13)
where Z1 and Z2 are adaptive embedding matrices. Soft(·)
and ReLU(·) are Softmax and ReLU functions, respectively.
In real-world systems, inter-variable interactions are often

2535014

directional, such as traffic flows in transportation systems or
communication links in IoT systems. Based on the predefined
adjacency matrix A, we construct a forward propagation
matrix DF and a backward propagation matrix DB
DF = A/rowsum(A),

DB = AT /rowsum(AT ).

(14)

Furthermore, we design the AGCN with a dual-propagation
mechanism, formulated as
H A = AGCN(H0 ) =

K
X

DkF H0 W 1 + DkB H0 W 2



k=0
0

+ Aa H W 3

(15)

where W 1 , W 2 , and W 3 are trainable parameters. k indicates
a diffusion step length. H A is inter-variable relationships
captured by AGCN.
3) Hypergraph Construction: Based on H A , we cluster
highly similar variables into a hyperedge and construct the
hypergraph incidence matrix H to represent high-order intervariable relationships
H = Max(Soft(H A )W 4 )

(16)

where W 4 is a trainable parameter. Max(·) selects the maximum value of each row in the matrix, indicating the variable
with the highest similar score. Based on the incidence matrix
H, we construct the hypergraph G = (V; E; H) to support
the subsequent modeling of high-order inter-variable dependencies.
4) Convergence of Hypergraph: The adaptive hypergraph
generator dynamically constructs a hypergraph G from MTS
data X, explicitly representing high-order interactions and
their dynamic evolution among variables. To address convergence challenges arising from dynamic adjustments, we
ensure stability through mathematical constraints and optimized strategies.
Specifically, a global optimization constraint L, as defined
in (38), is imposed during training. This constraint ensures
convergence toward the global optimum, mitigating random
drift of the hypergraph. Concurrently, the Adam optimizer
updates the model parameters as follows:
P n+1 = P n − µ∇P L

(17)

where P n represents the model parameters at iteration n, µ
is the learning rate, and ∇P L denotes the gradient of the
loss L. Since H is driven by X and the prediction results
depend on H, optimizing L indirectly constrains the hypergraph adjustment process. The Adam optimizer adaptively
adjusts the learning rate by computing the first- and secondorder moment estimates of the gradients, thereby preventing
divergence.
Additionally, to mitigate significant fluctuations of the
hypergraph, we introduce a smoothness regularization term
Lsmooth = η

T
X

2

H(t) − H(t−1) F

(18)

t=2

where η is the regularization coefficient, and |·|F denotes the
Frobenius norm. This smoothness constraint ensures numerical stability by penalizing abrupt changes in the hypergraph

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

between consecutive time steps. Moreover, from a theoretical
perspective, we analyze the convergence of the hypergraph and
use (18) to derive its structural variation bounds
p
H(t) − H(t−1) F ≤ Lsmooth /η(T − 1).
(19)
The bound ensures that the hypergraph’s variation is tightly
constrained by regularization, preventing divergence. In
summary, these mathematical constraints and optimization
strategies promote the stable convergence of the hypergraph
generator during training.
D. Multiorder Graph Cross-Learning Module
To capture multiorder inter-variable dependencies, we
design the multiorder graph cross-learning module comprising
three submodules: DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner.
1) Dynamic Memory Graph Convolution: Although prior
methods using GCNs [25] have proven effective in capturing
inter-variable dependencies, limitations still remain. 1) Intervariable relationships in a graph structure may change over
time. However, traditional graph structures are static, meaning
their adjacency matrix A is time-invariant and cannot represent the dynamic inter-variable associations. 2) Due to the
sparsity of anomalous data, MTS anomaly detection methods
need to learn normal patterns. The periodic characteristics of
historical data are important for learning these patterns. For
instance, traffic flow often exhibits similar patterns on the
same weekdays (days of week), and electricity consumption
often follows similar behavior during the same times of the
day (times of day). However, current methods overlook these
historical periodic patterns. Therefore, we construct a dynamic
adjacency matrix Ad to represent the time-varying relationships among variables. Additionally, to enhance the model’s
memory of periodic patterns, we introduce a historical pattern
bank for each variable and construct a pattern adjacency matrix
A p. They are expressed as

exp HT T (. . . , i) HT (. . . , j)
Ad = P N
(20)

T
i=1 exp HT (. . . , i) HT (. . . , j)

exp HT T (. . . , i) B (. . . , j)
(21)
A p = PN

T
i=1 exp HT (. . . , i) B (. . . , j)
where HT T represents the transpose of the multiscale temporal
features HT . N is the number of variables. B indicates the
pattern bank, which stores historical periodic features (times of
day and days of week) for each variable to assist in modeling
normal patterns.
Furthermore, we fuse the two adjacency matrices to construct DMGCN
Q = FC(Ad k A p )

(22)

H L = DMGCN(Q, HT W 5 )

(23)

where k denotes a feature concatenation operation. FC(·)
represents a fully connected layer. Q is the fused dynamic
memory adjacency matrix. W 5 indicates a trainable weight
matrix. H L represents low-order inter-variable dependencies
captured by DMGCN.

2) Tri-Directional Diffusion Hypergraph Convolution: To
effectively capture high-order dependencies of dynamic hypergraphs, we need to construct a Hypergraph Convolutional
Network (HGCN). Previous HGCNs [26] and their advanced
variants [27] rely solely on variable features, aggregating
variable features into hyperedges and subsequently updating
variable features based on hyperedge features. However, these
methods focus only on local features of hypergraphs while
neglecting their global features. Therefore, we propose the
3D-HGCN, which comprehensively captures high-order intervariable dependencies from both global and local perspectives.
First, through a dimensional transformation layer, variables
and hyperedges in a dynamic hypergraph H are transformed into feature representations to facilitate subsequent
tri-directional feature diffusion
X̃i = W 6 Xi + b1

(24)

Ẽ j = W 7 E j + b2

(25)

where Xi is the time series of variable vi . X̃i represents
the feature representation of variable vi after the dimensional
transformation. Similarly, E j is the embedding of hyperedge
e0j . Ẽ j denotes the feature representation of hyperedge e0j after
the dimensional transformation. W 6 , W 7 , b1 , and b2 are
trainable parameters.
Next, based on the feature representations of variables and
hyperedges, the interaction similarity between variables and
hyperedges is computed using a self-attention mechanism


T
exp X̃i Ẽ j


(26)
ai j = P
T
exp
X̃
Ẽ
i
r
er ∈vi
T

where Ẽ j is the transpose of hyperedge feature representations
Ẽ j . ai j represents the similarity score between node vi and
hyperedge e0j , which can dynamically change over time.
Then, 3D-HGCN performs a tri-directional diffusion process. Specifically, hyperedge features propagate to variables,
variable features propagate to hyperedges, and hyperedge
features aggregate to variables. These processes are expressed
as follows:
P
e j ∈ev ai j Ẽ j
(27)
gi = P
e j ∈ev ai j
P
vi ∈e j ai j X̃ i
oj = P
(28)
v ∈e ai j
P i j
e j ∈ev ai j o j
qi = P
.
(29)
e j ∈ev ai j
Finally, a feature aggregation operation is performed to
obtain high-order representations after tri-directional diffusion
!
N
N
X
X
gi +
qi
(30)
H H = Sigmoid
i=1

i=1

where N indicates the number of variables, and H H represents
high-order inter-variable dependencies captured by 3D-HGCN.

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3) Cross-Learner: Low-order inter-variable dependencies
H L and high-order inter-variable dependencies H H inevitably
have overlapping and complementary features. To eliminate
redundant features and promote complementary advantages,
we design a cross-learner

exp H H T (. . . , i) H L (. . . , j)
ALH = PN
(31)

T
i=1 exp H H (. . . , i) H L (. . . , j)

exp H L T (. . . , i) H H (. . . , j)
AHL = PN
(32)

T
i=1 exp H L (. . . , i) H H (. . . , j)

2535014

where Y t represents a predicted value by MGCL, Ŷ t is a
ground truth, and ψ is a hyperparameter. The segmented
loss function improves the overall performance of anomaly
detection by enhancing MGCL’s sensitivity to anomalies while
maintaining a stable fitting effect during normal periods.
Algorithm 1 Training of MGCL

where ALH and AHL represent the correlation scores between
low→high and high→low dependencies, respectively.
Then, based on the correlation scores, cross-learning is
performed as follows:
H0 L = ω

HL + $

( ALH H H )

(33)

HH=ξ

HH + γ

( AHL H L )

(34)

0

where ω, $, ξ, and γ are trainable parameters. H0 L (H L )
and H0 H (H H ) denote the updated low-order and high-order
dependencies at l (l − 1) layer, respectively.
Finally, H0 L and H0 H are fused to achieve multiorder intervariable dependencies modeling:
H M = H0 L + H0 H .

(35)
G. Anomaly Detection

E. Predictor
The multiorder inter-variable dependencies H M are fed into
the predictor to generate predictions Y, as shown in Fig. 3.
This process is expressed as
Y = MLP(H M )

(36)

where the MLP consists of two fully connected layers and
functions as a non-autoregressive method to generate predictions, effectively avoiding the issue of error accumulation.
F. Loss Function
In MTS anomaly detection, the choice of the loss function
has a significant impact on model performance [28]. To
effectively handle anomaly detection in different time periods,
we propose a segmented loss function that combines mean
absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE).
For time periods with abrupt changes (e.g., sensor anomalies), RMSE is employed to amplify the differences between
predictions and actual values, ensuring MGCL accurately
detects anomalies with large fluctuations. For stable periods
with minor changes under normal conditions, MAE is used
to avoid over-penalizing small errors, thereby maintaining
accuracy during stable periods. The segmented loss function
is formulated as
(ˇ
ˇ
ˇŶ t −Y t ˇ , Y t−Y t−1 < ψ
Yt
(37)
f (Ŷ t , Y t ) =
(Ŷ t −Y t )2 , otherwise
L Ŷ (t+1):(t+T ) , Y (t+1):(t+T ) =


T
X
t=1

f (Ŷ t , Y t )

(38)

The MGCL is trained using the segmented loss function
L to achieve optimal performance, as shown in Algorithm 1.
Additionally, during the threshold selection phase, traditional
MTS anomaly detection methods often adopt the Peak Over
Threshold (POT) [25]. However, POT suffers from several
drawbacks, including strong dependence on data distribution
assumptions, high subjectivity in threshold selection, poor
scalability to high dimensions, and sensitivity to noise. To
address these limitations, we propose a novel dynamic threshold search strategy, as illustrated in Algorithm 2. It enables
more adaptive and robust selection of threshold scores. Finally,
during the detection phase, anomaly states of test samples
are determined based on the dynamically selected thresholds,
achieving more accurate anomaly detection, as demonstrated
in Algorithm 3.
V. E XPERIMENT
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on eight
real-world datasets to answer the six research questions.
1) RQ1: How does MGCL perform compared to baselines
in terms of benchmark MTS anomaly detection?
2) RQ2: How does MGCL perform in traffic anomaly
detection with a larger number of variables?
3) RQ3: How do different components of MGCL influence
its performance?
4) RQ4: How do hyperparameter settings affect MGCL?
5) RQ5: How is the robustness of MGCL?
6) RQ6: How does the running time and complexity efficiency of MGCL compare to the baselines?
7) RQ7: How does MGCL perform in real scenarios?

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Algorithm 2 Threshold Selection for Anomaly Score

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

Among them, PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-ACC8
are traffic accident datasets. They are built using traffic data
recorded by the California Performance Measurement System
(PEMS) [31] in combination with the Countrywide Traffic Accident Datasets (CTADS) [32]. CTADS contains 1.5
million accident reports collected since March 2016, providing detailed information such as accident types, locations,
and durations. PEMS-Rainy [33], derived from our previous
research, includes traffic condition data associated with heavy
rainfall events. The details of all datasets are summarized in
Table I.
B. Experiment Settings and Evaluation Metrics
Algorithm 3 Anomaly Detection of MGCL

The experiments are conducted on a computer equipped
with Python 3.6, PyTorch 1.12, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
4090 GPU, and an i9-12900K CPU. These datasets are preprocessed using Z-score normalization. During the training phase,
an Adam optimizer is utilized, with the initial learning rate,
batch size, and epochs set to 0.001, 64, and 200, respectively.
To prevent model overfitting, an early stopping strategy is
employed. During the testing phase, model performance is
evaluated using Precision (P), Recall (R), F1-score (F1), and
area under the ROC curve (AUC) [23]. Consistent with prior
works, following the point adjustment strategy proposed in
[13], [35], if any point is detected as abnormal within a time
window, the window is marked as abnormal.
C. Baselines

A. Datasets
The experiments involved eight MTS datasets covering a
variety of application scenarios. The Soil Moisture Active
Passive (SMAP) and Mars Science Laboratory Rover (MSL)
datasets [29], published by NASA, provide data on soil
moisture and the Martian environment, respectively. The server
machine dataset (SMD) [13], collected by an internet company,
includes data on server operating states. The MSDS dataset
[30] contains records from distributed systems. However, as
system complexity increases, more systems are required to
record an expanding number of variables.
To meet the requirements of MTS anomaly detection in realworld complex scenarios, we construct four traffic datasets
specifically designed for large-scale MTS anomaly detection.
These datasets include PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, PEMSACC8, and PEMS-Rainy.

We compare MGCL with 20 baselines. On benchmark
datasets, we select classic MTS anomaly detection models.
1) LSTM-NDT [29]: Is one of the earliest models to use
LSTM for MTS anomaly detection.
2) DAGMM [35]: Combines AE and Gaussian mixture
model for anomaly detection.
3) OmniAnomaly [13]: Uses RNN to capture temporal
dependencies and planar normalization flow to model
inter-variable dependencies.
4) MSCRED [16]: Models temporal dependencies from a
multiscale perspective.
5) USAD [36]: Improves anomaly detection performance
using AE with adversarial training.
6) GDN [15]: Is one of the first models to use GNNs,
leveraging attention scores for anomaly detection.
7) TranAD [21]: Builds on a Transformer framework,
proficient in capturing inter-variable dependencies.

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

2535014

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS I NCLUDES SMAP, MSL, SMD, AND MSDS. B OLD : B EST, U NDERLINE : S ECOND B EST

8) CAE-M [37]: Combines LSTM and AE to capture
temporal and inter-variable dependencies, suitable for
complex MTS data.
9) CrossFuN [2]: Considers both time domain and frequency domain information of time series.
10) DTAAD [23]: Based on Transformer framework, integrates Autoregressive (AR) modeling and AE to achieve
strong anomaly detection performance.
11) MTGFlow Cluster [38]: Combines a clustering strategy
with an entity-aware normalizing flow.
On traffic datasets, we select models specifically designed
for traffic tasks.
1) ASTGCN [39]: Utilizes attention mechanisms to capture
spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic states.
2) AGCRN [40]: Combines GCN and GRU to capture
spatial-temporal dependencies.
3) MTGNN [41]: Enhances spatial-temporal dependencies
modeling through Mix-Hop propagation and dilated convolutions.
4) STG-NCDE [42]: Models traffic patterns using neural
controlled differential equations.
5) DDGCRN [43]: Introduces a dynamic graph convolutional recurrent module for effective spatial-temporal
dependencies modeling.
6) MegaCRN [44]: Proposes a meta-graph learner to capture spatial-temporal dependencies.
7) ST-Wave [45]: Leverages a wavelet decomposition to
disentangle and fuse spatial-temporal dependencies.
8) iTransformer [46]: Enhances performance by utilizing
attention mechanisms on inverted time-series dimensions.
9) DeepSTUQ [47]: Considers spatial-temporal uncertainties and effectively captures traffic dependencies.
D. Experimental Comparison and Analysis on Benchmark
MTS Datasets (RQ1)
To verify the general applicability of MGCL in MTS
anomaly detection tasks, we conduct comparative experiments
and analyses on four benchmark datasets, including SMAP,
MSL, SMD, and MSDS, as shown in Table II. Early models,
such as LSTM-NDT and DAGMM, primarily focus on modeling temporal dependencies while neglecting inter-variable
dependencies, resulting in poor performance. AE, as an effective mechanism for capturing inter-variable dependencies, is
widely adopted due to its ability to efficiently encode MTS.
Based on the AE architecture, models like OmniAnomaly,
MSCRED, USAD, and CAE-M successfully capture intervariable dependencies. Leveraging the advantages of GNN in
modeling non-Euclidean structures, GDN and CrossFuN effectively model inter-variable dependencies. Moreover, thanks to
advancements in attention mechanisms, TranAD, DTAAD, and
MTGFlow cluster achieve remarkable detection performance.
Although the above methods achieve notable performance,
they remain inferior to the proposed MGCL. Its advantages
are mainly reflected in two aspects.
1) MGCL incorporates the multiscale temporal module that
comprehensively captures short-term trend dependencies and long-term seasonal dependencies. This design
enables better adaptation to the multilevel characteristics
of time series.
2) MGCL introduces the DMGCN module, integrating a
historical pattern bank and dynamic graphs. It dynamically captures normal inter-variable patterns, thereby
enhancing anomaly detection performance.
However, MGCL shows suboptimal F1 performance on the
MSDS dataset. This may be attributed to the relatively small
number of variables in MSDS, which constrains high-order
inter-variable interactions. Consequently, the effectiveness of
the adaptive hypergraph generator and 3D-HGCN is limited
in such scenarios.
E. Performance Comparison and Analysis on Traffic
Datasets (RQ2)
As system complexity increases, the number of variables
grows correspondingly. To meet the requirements of realworld detection, we conduct experiments on traffic datasets
with a larger number of variables, as shown in Table III.
ASTGCN, based on a spatial-temporal GNN framework and
incorporating an attention mechanism, effectively captures
spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic patterns. AGCRN and
MTGNN focus more on the dynamic characteristics of traffic
patterns, enhancing their ability to model spatial-temporal

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE ON T RAFFIC DATASETS I NCLUDES PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, PEMS-ACC8, AND PEMS-R AINY.
B OLD : B EST, U NDERLINE : S ECOND B EST

dependencies. STG-NCDE introduces differential equations
into deep neural networks, modeling continuous spatialtemporal dependencies. DDGCRN, MegaCRN, and ST-Wave
demonstrate strong performance by incorporating dynamic
graph mechanisms. iTransformer and DeepSTUQ, as the latest
methods, exhibit excellent detection performance.
However, none of them outperforms MGCL. This is
mainly due to: 1) the proposed adaptive hypergraph generator
dynamically constructs hypergraphs, accurately representing
high-order inter-variable interactions and 2) the 3D-HGCN
module effectively extracts hypergraph features, capturing
complex high-order inter-variable dependencies. It is worth
noting that, as shown in Table III, compared with other stateof-the-art baselines, MGCL achieves significant performance
improvements on PEMS-ACC4 (307 variables), PEMS-ACC7
(228 variables), and PEMS-Rainy (308 variables). This can
be attributed to the hypergraph mechanism, which simplifies
graph structures by grouping multiple similar variables into
a hyperedge, thereby capturing complex inter-variable dependencies. However, its improvement on PEMS-ACC8 (170 variables) is relatively limited. The smaller number of variables in
PEMS-ACC8 reduces the effectiveness of hypergraph simplification, constraining MGCL’s performance on PEMS-ACC8.
F. Ablation Study (RQ3)
To evaluate the contribution of key components in MGCL,
we design the following ablation variants.
1) w/o Trend: Removes the trend series.
2) w/o Season: Excludes the seasonal series.
3) w/o Trend-T: Preserves the trend series, replacing GTCN
with a conventional TCN.
4) w/o Season-A: Retains the seasonal series and replaces
TGAN with a conventional attention mechanism.
5) w/o Cross: Substitutes the cross-learner module with a
conventional fusion mechanism.
6) w/o DMGCN: Replaces DMGCN with a standard GCN.
7) w/o 3D-HGCN: Applies a traditional hypergraph generation approach and replaces 3D-HGCN with a standard
hypergraph convolution.
We conduct an ablation study on six datasets, as shown
in Fig. 4. The w/o 3D-HGCN significantly affects the
performance of MGCL. This is attributed to the adaptive

hypergraph generator’s ability to dynamically construct reasonable hypergraphs, while 3D-HGCN excels in modeling
multiorder inter-variable dependencies. The results of w/o
DMGCN highlight the essential role of DMGCN, as it not only
captures normal patterns through the historical pattern bank of
variables but also effectively models low-order inter-variable
dependencies. The performance of w/o Cross indicates that the
absence of the cross-learner module results in insufficient complementary learning and deep fusion between low-order and
high-order dependencies. Furthermore, the w/o Trend-T and
w/o Season-A results underscore the critical roles of GTCN
and TGAN, respectively. Compared to conventional temporal
feature extraction modules, they enhance the modeling of longand short-term dependencies in time series. Additionally, the
results of w/o Trend and w/o Season, respectively, reveal the
importance of capturing both trend and seasonal series, both
of which contribute to model performance enhancement. All
in all, each key component of MGCL plays a positive role,
aligning with the design objectives.

G. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis (RQ4)
To further explore the impact of different hyperparameters
on MGCL, we analyze three key hyperparameters: time window size, threshold search interval [δ, ∂] of anomaly score,
and diffusion steps of AGCN. The results on six datasets are
shown in Fig. 5. Time window size, as a critical parameter,
significantly affects the model’s performance. A large window
size may capture excessive redundant information, increasing
the risk of overfitting. Conversely, an overly small window size
may fail to capture sufficient temporal dependencies, resulting
in the loss of critical information. As observed, when the
window size surpasses a certain threshold, the performance
generally declines.
Threshold search interval [δ, ∂] anomaly score directly
affects anomaly detection performance. A smaller search interval enables fine-grained threshold adjustment but may fail to
encompass a global optimal threshold, preventing the model
from achieving peak performance. Conversely, a larger search
interval broadens the search scope but may introduce excessive
invalid thresholds, increasing computational costs and potentially introducing noise, leading to performance fluctuations.

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

2535014

Fig. 4. Ablation study results on SMAP, MSL, SMD, PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-Rainy datasets.

Fig. 6. Robustness testing results on PEMS-ACC4, PEMS-ACC7, and PEMSACC8 datasets.

Fig. 5. Hyperparameter study results on SMAP, MSL, SMD, PEMS-ACC4,
PEMS-ACC7, and PEMS-Rainy datasets.

Previous studies indicate that increasing the diffusion step
of GCN can expand the spatial perception range of the model,
enhancing its ability to capture inter-variable dependencies.
However, as shown in Fig. 5, performance deteriorates when
the diffusion step exceeds a certain threshold. We attribute
this to the fact that 3D-HGCN already possesses robust
spatial perception capabilities. Excessive diffusion steps may
introduce redundant information and noise, leading to inaccuracies in hypergraph generation and ultimately degrading the
performance.

MegaCRN, and ST-Wave are shown in Fig. 6. As data loss
rates or noise levels increase, MGCL demonstrates superior
robustness with a relatively slower performance degradation
trend compared to these baselines. This robustness stems
from the combined effects of the multiscale temporal module and the multiorder graph cross-learning module. In the
inter-variable dimension, the multiorder graph cross-learning
module effectively captures both low-order and high-order
inter-variable dependencies. Additionally, it facilitates complementary learning between these dependencies, mitigating the
impact of data missing and errors. In the temporal dimension,
the multiscale temporal module captures comprehensive temporal dependencies by modeling trends and seasonal series,
ensuring a more robust representation of temporal patterns.

H. Robustness Testing (RQ5)
In real-world scenarios, sudden events such as traffic
accidents or communication interruptions can cause sensor
failures, leading to data loss or errors. Therefore, we conduct
two robustness tests to facilitate the application of MGCL
in practical scenarios. Specifically, on PEMS-ACC4, PEMSACC7, and PEMS-ACC8 datasets, we randomly erase 5% to
20% of the data to simulate data missing. In addition, we
add 10% to 50% Gaussian noise (mean 10, standard deviation
60) to simulate data errors. Comparison results with AGCRN,

I. Complexity Analysis (RQ6)
Model complexity is a key indicator for evaluating efficiency in practical applications. We perform a comprehensive
complexity analysis on the PEMS-Rainy dataset, as shown
in Fig. 7. AGCRN, a lightweight architecture based on
adaptive graphs and RNN, significantly reduces computational overhead. However, its low F1-score reveals limitations
in detection performance. MegaCRN enhances detection
performance by incorporating a meta-graph learner, while ST-

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 7. Running time and parameter count of models on PEMS-Rainy dataset.
The running time per epoch encompasses training, validation, and testing time,
while the number of parameters reflects the model’s complexity.

Fig. 9. Visualization of the hypergraph during the accident near node No.137.
Nodes in different colors indicate that they belong to different hyperedges.
From the occurrence to the propagation to the dissipation of the accident, the
dynamic changes in hyperedge types and the spatial-temporal evolution of the
circled regions intuitively reveal the propagation and recovery mechanisms of
the traffic network under the impact of the accident. (a) At 14:00. (b) At
14:15. (c) At 14:30. (d) At 14:45. (e) At 15:00. (f) At 15:15.

Fig. 8. Traffic speed variation curve at node No.137 near the accident site
in California on January 10, 2019 shows significant fluctuations during the
accident period (red shaded area).

Wave employs a decoupling fusion framework with graph
wavelet position encoding to model inter-variable dependencies. Although ST-Wave improves detection accuracy, it incurs
higher runtime costs. In contrast, MGCL effectively balances
accuracy and complexity, making it well-suited for real-world
applications.
J. Case Study (RQ7)
1) Visualization of Adaptive Hypergraphs: To evaluate the
effectiveness of the adaptive hypergraph generator, we conduct
experiments on the PEMS-Rainy dataset. Specifically, on January 10, 2019, at 14:15, a level-3 traffic accident occurred in
downtown California, lasting approximately 2 h. We visualize
traffic speed changes at node No.137 near the accident site,
as shown in Fig. 8. This curve reveals a significant impact
of the accident on traffic patterns. Furthermore, we visualize
hypergraphs during the accident period. Fig. 9(a) shows the
hypergraph before the accident. As shown in Fig. 9(b), the
accident triggered notable structural changes, with a newly
formed hyperedge (marked in red) emerging in the affected
downtown area. Fig. 9(c) and (d) shows that as the impact of
the accident spreads, the number of nodes associated with the
red hyperedge grows as congestion propagates. Conversely, as
emergency measures such as traffic control are implemented,
the accident’s impact gradually diminishes. Fig. 9(e) and (f)
demonstrates a reduction in the number of nodes covered by
the red hyperedge. The above results show that compared
with traditional static hypergraphs, the adaptive hypergraph
generator can not only generate dynamic hypergraphs but also
explicitly represent the diffusion and dissipation process of

Fig. 10. Visualization of spatial-temporal anomaly scores during the heavy
rainfall in California on February 14, 2019. Darker colors indicate higher
anomaly scores at the corresponding locations. (a) At 11:00. (b) At 12:30.
(c) At 14:00. (d) At 15:30. (e) At 17:00. (f) At 18:30.

anomalous events, providing valuable insights for resource
allocation and management.
2) Anomaly Localization and Diagnosis: Accurate anomaly
localization and diagnosis are key for MTS anomaly detection,
enabling rapid identification and resolution of anomalies. To
evaluate MGCL’s capability in anomaly localization and diagnosis, we conduct experiments on PEMS-Rainy. Specifically,
on February 14, 2019, a heavy rainfall event occurred in
California. The spatial-temporal anomaly score map of the
affected area, as shown in Fig. 10, reveals distinct patterns
of anomaly distribution. Overall, during the rainfall period,
the intensity and extent of the rainfall typically increase initially and then decrease. Correspondingly, the number of high
anomaly score points follows a similar trend, first increasing
and then diminishing. However, at 17:00, despite a reduction
in rainfall intensity, certain regions still exhibit relatively high
anomaly scores. These areas are primarily concentrated in Silicon Valley, downtown, and key public transportation hubs. We
hypothesize that this phenomenon is related to the evening rush
hour at that time. The rainfall exacerbates traffic congestion
in these already busy regions, significantly increasing traffic

CUI et al.: MGCL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

2535014

techniques to
practicality.

enhance

computational

efficiency

and

R EFERENCES
[1]

Fig. 11. Visualization of predictions and anomaly scores for nodes No.39 and
No.271. (a) Prediction curve for node No.39. (b) Anomaly score curve for
node No.39. (c) Prediction curve for node No.271. (d) Anomaly score curve
for node No.271.

pressure and consequently leading to sustained high anomaly
scores.
Furthermore, we visualize the traffic speed predictions and
anomaly scores for nodes No.39 and No.271. These nodes
exhibit high connectivity within the adjacency matrix, representing critical locations in the road network. Fig. 11(a)
and (c) demonstrates that MGCL accurately predicts normal
traffic patterns while effectively amplifying the differences
between predictions and ground truth during anomalous periods, thereby maximizing anomaly scores. Fig. 11(b) and (d)
presents the time-varying anomaly score curves for nodes
No.39 and No.271, revealing that anomaly scores during
anomalous periods are significantly higher than those in nonanomalous periods. The case study results indicate that MGCL
not only accurately localizes anomalous variables but also
effectively detects anomalous periods.
In summary, experimental results from various aspects show
that MGCL achieves state-of-the-art anomaly detection performance and can be effectively applied to MTS anomaly
detection in the real world.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose an MGCL framework for
MTS anomaly detection. The multiscale temporal module,
built with TGAN and GTCN, effectively captures both
long-term seasonal and short-term trend dependencies in
time series. Additionally, we design an adaptive hypergraph
generator that dynamically constructs hypergraphs to
represent high-order inter-variable interactions. Furthermore,
by integrating DMGCN, 3D-HGCN, and a cross-learner,
MGCL deeply models multiorder inter-variable dependencies.
Experimental results on eight real-world datasets demonstrate
that MGCL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines. Moreover, we validate the robustness of
MGCL under scenarios involving data loss and errors.
Through the visualization of adaptive hypergraphs and
spatial-temporal anomaly score maps, MGCL exhibits
outstanding capabilities in anomaly localization and diagnosis.
However, MGCL demands substantial computational
resources when processing datasets with a large number of
variables. In future work, we aim to explore lightweight

J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[2] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multiview
joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–9, 2023.
[3] C. Li, L. Guo, H. Gao, and Y. Li, “Similarity-measured isolation forest:
Anomaly detection method for machine monitoring data,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[4] M. Canizo, I. Triguero, A. Conde, and E. Onieva, “Multi-head CNNRNN for multi-time series anomaly detection: An industrial case study,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 363, pp. 246–260, Oct. 2019.
[5] A. J. T. Sukanda and D. Adytia, “Wave forecast using bidirectional GRU
and GRU method case study in Pangandaran, Indonesia,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Data Sci. Appl. (ICoDSA), 2022, pp. 278–282.
[6] H. Abbasimehr, M. Shabani, and M. Yousefi, “An optimized model using
LSTM network for demand forecasting,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 143,
May 2020, Art. no. 106435.
[7] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10466–10485,
Dec. 2024.
[8] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, and D. Metzler, “Efficient transformers:
A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 6, p. 109, 2023.
[9] J. Bi, H. Yuan, S. Li, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “ARIMA-based
and multiapplication workload prediction with wavelet decomposition
and Savitzky–Golay filter in clouds,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.,
Syst., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2495–2506, Apr. 2024.
[10] Y. Jin, C. Qiu, L. Sun, X. Peng, and J. Zhou, “Anomaly detection in
time series via robust PCA,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Transp.
Eng. (ICITE), Sep. 2017, pp. 352–355.
[11] C. Huang, G. Min, Y. Wu, Y. Ying, K. Pei, and Z. Xiang, “Time series
anomaly detection for trustworthy services in cloud computing systems,”
IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 60–72, Feb. 2022.
[12] C. Dong, J. Tao, Q. Chao, H. Yu, and C. Liu, “Subsequence time series
clustering-based unsupervised approach for anomaly detection of axial
piston pumps,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
[13] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[14] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 1003–1012.
[15] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[16] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[17] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
2020, pp. 841–850.
[18] L. Chen et al., “Multi-scale adaptive graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
no. 10, pp. 10748–10761, Oct. 2023.
[19] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
[20] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[21] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[22] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. 10th
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–20.
[23] L. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual tcn-attention networks for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.

2535014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[24] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019,
pp. 3558–3565.
[25] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[26] N. Yadati, M. Nimishakavi, P. Yadav, V. Nitin, A. Louis, and P. Talukdar,
“HyperGCN: A new method for training graph convolutional networks
on hypergraphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, Jan.
2019, pp. 1509–1520.
[27] J. Yi and J. Park, “Hypergraph convolutional recurrent neural network,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2020, pp. 3366–3376.
[28] H. Poostchi and M. Piccardi, “BiLSTM-SSVM: Training the BiLSTM
with a structured Hinge loss for named-entity recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 203–212, Feb. 2022.
[29] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[30] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. K. Mandapati, S. Becker, J. Cardoso,
and O. Kao, “Multi-source distributed system data for AI-powered
analytics,” in Proc. 8th IFIP WG 2.14 Eur. Conf. (ESOCC), Crete,
Greece. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 161–176.
[31] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial–temporal synchronous
graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial–temporal
network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34,
2020, pp. 914–921.
[32] S. Moosavi, M. H. Samavatian, S. Parthasarathy, R. Teodorescu, and
R. Ramnath, “Accident risk prediction based on heterogeneous sparse
data: New dataset and insights,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGSPATIAL Int.
Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2019, pp. 33–42.
[33] Z. Cui et al., “Predictive and multigranularity resilience assessment of
urban transportation based on neural controlled differential equation,”
IEEE Trans. Reliab., early access, Dec. 27, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TR.2024.3514712.
[34] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[35] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, Feb. 2018, pp. 1–12.
[36] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[37] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[38] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024.
[39] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention
based spatial–temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow
forecasting,” in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 31st Innov.
Appl. Artif. Intell. Conf., 2019, pp. 922–929.
[40] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, and X. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020,
pp. 17804–17815.
[41] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang,
“Connecting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph
neural networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 753–763.
[42] J. Choi, H. Choi, J. Hwang, and N. Park, “Graph neural controlled
differential equations for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 6367–6374.
[43] W. Weng et al., “A decomposition dynamic graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 142, Oct.
2023, Art. no. 109670.
[44] R. Jiang et al., “Spatio-temporal meta-graph learning for traffic
forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 37, no. 7, 2023,
pp. 8078–8086.
[45] Y. Fang et al., “When spatio-temporal meet wavelets: Disentangled
traffic forecasting via efficient spectral graph attention networks,” in
Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), Apr. 2023, pp. 517–529.
[46] Y. Liu et al., “ITransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
series forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2023, pp. 1–12.

[47] W. Qian, Y. Zhao, D. Zhang, B. Chen, K. Zheng, and X. Zhou,
“Towards a unified understanding of uncertainty quantification in traffic flow forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 5,
pp. 2239–2256, May 2024.

Zhe Cui was born in Shandong, China, in 1998. He
received the B.S. degree from Shandong University
of Science and Technology, Qingdao, China, in
2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
His current research interests include deep learning, intelligent transportation systems, and data
mining.

Di Zang received the Ph.D. degree from Kiel University, Kiel, Germany, in 2007.
She was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA,
in 2008. She is currently an Associate Professor
with Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Her current
research interests include deep learning, intelligent
transportation systems, and data mining.

Junqi Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computing science from Fudan
University, Shanghai, China, in 2007.
He was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with
Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2007. From
2014 to 2015, he was a Visiting Scholar with New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA.
He is currently a Full Professor with Tongji University, Shanghai. He has published more than 20
articles in IEEE T RANSACTIONS and more than 60
papers in conferences. His current research interests include swarm intelligence, swarm robots, multiagent systems, learning
automata, reinforcement learning, and big data.
Dr. Zhang was a recipient of the Outstanding Postdoctoral Award.

Keshuang Tang received the Ph.D. degree in traffic
engineering from Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan,
in 2008.
He has worked as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, and
as a Project Assistant Professor with the University
of Tohoku, Sendai, Japan. He was a Visiting Scholar
with the University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2010. He is currently a Full
Professor with the College of Transportation Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. His
main research interests include driver behavior, signal control, and intelligent
transportation systems.