IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

11447

Mining Multi-Scale Spatial-Frequency Clues for
Unsupervised Intrusion Detection
Chenyang Qiu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Guoshun Nan , Member, IEEE, Caiyi Zhang, Chenrui Liang,
Ruiqi Dai, Hongchen Yang, Shiyuan Liu , Zhili Zhou, Member, IEEE, Changhua Pei,
and Xiaofeng Tao , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Unsupervised network-based intrusion detection
system (UNIDS) identifies suspicious traffic and alerts administrators without using any traffic labels. Existing Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN)-based UNIDS approaches show
great potential with collaboratively utilizing traffic features and
network topologies. However, these methods suffer from an
excessively high false-positive rate (FPR), e.g., 3.27% FPR in
a supervised NIDS approach, while increases dramatically to
19.37% under the unsupervised setting. We reveal that the
high FPR stems from a single-scale spatial-frequency learning
paradigm, which blurs the distinction between benign and
malicious traffic and misleads UNIDS systems. Therefore, we
propose a Multi-scale Spatial-Frequency Intrusion Detection
System (MSF-IDS) to mitigate the high FPR. Specifically, we
propose multi-scale frequency encoders, thereby differentiating
abnormal feature patterns. Then we propose NAPH as a spatial
encoder, mining intrinsic abnormal topology patterns by tracking
tens of thousands of evolving traffic nodes. To the best of
our knowledge, NAPH takes the first step toward differentiable
persistent homology analysis over dynamic network data. We
also develop an executable application for NAPH to provide
easy-access visualization insights. Finally, a self-supervised representation augmentor and an intrusion detector are proposed
to refine and highlight the attack-specific information. Equipped
with MSF-IDS, administrators effectively identify the unknown
attack traffic, freeing security staff from labor-intensive engineering. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
MSF-IDS, including binary classification, multi-classification,
online intrusion detection, and visualized discussions. Our codes,

Received 3 March 2025; revised 28 July 2025 and 29 September 2025;
accepted 30 September 2025. Date of publication 10 October 2025; date
of current version 29 October 2025. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2022YFB2902200 and in part by the General Program of National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471064. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Mika Ylianttila. (Corresponding author: Guoshun Nan.)
Chenyang Qiu, Guoshun Nan, Caiyi Zhang, Chenrui Liang, Ruiqi
Dai, Hongchen Yang, Shiyuan Liu, and Xiaofeng Tao are with the
National Engineering Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China, and also with the Beiyou Shenzhen Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: cyqiu@bupt.edu.cn; nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn;
zcy qyq@bupt.edu.cn; lcr2021211321@bupt.edu.cn; dairuiqi@bupt.edu.cn;
yanghongchen@bupt.edu.cn; liu sy@bupt.edu.cn; taoxf@bupt.edu.cn).
Zhili Zhou is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: zhou zhili@gzhu.edu.cn).
Changhua Pei is with the Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China (e-mail:
changhuapei@gmail.com).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3620090, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3620090

Fig. 1. Illustration of a GCN-based UNIDS. The left is encrypted traffic
data, with only available traffic features and network topology. The former
includes the statistical description of the traffic flow, i.e. source IP, flow
duration, etc. The network topology and features are fed into UNIDS in a
read-only way. Then the UNIDS aggregates the traffic features by topology
in an unsupervised way and alerts the suspected ones to administrator for
further response. More specific threat model of this paper is available in
Appendix P (see supplementary material).

datasets, and an executable application are available at https://
github.com/qcydm/MSF-IDS
Index Terms—Unsupervised intrusion detection, network security, anomaly detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION

N

ETWORK intrusion detection system (NIDS) [1], [2],
[3], [4] forms a security frontline in network systems,
aiming to filter out malicious network attacks in an automatic
way, such as man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM) [5], and
denial of service (DoS) [6]. These attacks can be considered
outliers or anomalies, as they may involve different characteristics in both traffic features and traffic topologies from
the benign ones [7]. However, most of the existing NIDS
methods are built on inherent anomaly patterns, e.g. blacklist
[8], whitelist [9], or known attack labels [10], struggling to
identify new attacks accurately, such as sophisticated phishing
schemes, using deep fake technology to impersonate trusted
sources [11]. With the rapid development of mobile online
business and wireless communications [12], [13], [14], [15],
unknown network attacks show an escalation in both sophistication and frequency. According to Splunk’s “State of World
Security 2023” [16], 65% of respondents indicated that they
have observed an increase in attempts at unknown attacks, a
39% increase over the previous year’s survey. The surge of
unknown attacks in mobile online businesses leaves security
teams exhausted and overextended. This urgently calls for
an intelligent unsupervised network-based intrusion detection

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

11448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. (a)(b)(c)(d) show that the GCN-based UNIDS filters out high-frequency information in spectral view, referred to as single-scale frequency learning,
and leads to high FPR. (e)(f) show that the single-scale topology learning exacerbates FPR in spatial view.

system (UNIDS) capable of identifying unknown and evolving
attacks, especially for the abnormal spatial-frequency patterns.
The existing unsupervised NIDS methods involve three categories: the signature-based ones [17], the anomaly-based ones
[18], [19], and the deep learning-based ones [20], [21]. The
signature-based ones are built on pre-defined anomaly patterns,
i.e. blacklist [22]. The attack traffic can easily escape, once the
pre-defined patterns are not matched. The anomaly-based ones
can automatically mine the attack patterns in a data-driven
way, i.e. clustering methods [23], [24], one-class classifications
[25], [26], etc. Lately, deep learning-based ones are popular
in UNIDS, freeing security staff from labor-intensive handcrafted traffic feature engineering, i.e. self-supervised [27],
[28], [29], [30], reconstruction-based [27], [31], [32], and
graph convolution network-based [33], [34], [35], [36], [37],
[38]. The GCN-based UNIDS utilizes both traffic features and
topology for intrusion detection, as shown in Fig 1, showcasing
great potential in UNIDS tasks.
Although promising, our empirical analyses indicate that
existing GCN-based UNIDS faces a high false positive rate
(FPR) problem As shown in Fig. 2(a), we conduct unsupervised intrusion detection on three representative baselines and
compare the FPR on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset [39]. AGNN
[40], a GCN-based approach, achieves 88.48% F1-score, outperforming the deep-learning baseline SOM-DAGMM [21]
at 78.13%. However, AGNN’s FPR is 21.33%, significantly
higher than the 15.88% of SOM-DAGMM. Furthermore, we
report the FPR of an existing SOTA-supervised intrusion
detection approach 3D-IDS(S) [41], as low as 3.27%. Then
we utilize a cluster model to replace the original classifier for
unsupervised intrusion detection in 3D-IDS, referred to as 3DIDS(U). Under unsupervised settings, the FPR of 3D-IDS(S)
rapidly increases to 19.37%, almost 5 times than 3D-IDS(S).
These results pinpoint the high FPR as the key bottleneck
of GCN-based UNIDS. Boosting GCN-based UNIDS performance by mitigating its FPR rates is feasible and
prospective.
We attribute the high FPR problem to single-scale spatialfrequency learning in GCN-based UNIDS. We present
discussions Q1 and Q2 to understand why this scheme makes

traffic representations indistinguishable and misleads UNIDS.
In short, single-scale spatial-frequency learning focuses only
on a narrow frequency range and filters out high-frequency
attack information, causing traffic representations blur between
benign and malicious traffic, thus leading to a high FPR.
Q1: Single-scale frequency learning. From the spectral
view, GCN-based UNIDS are low-pass filters [18], [42].
They collaboratively capture feature and topology information
by aggregating neighboring traffic features [43]. In this way,
potential attack information will be filtered out, making it
hard for UNIDS to differentiate between benign and attack
traffic, thus causing a high false positive rate. As shown in Fig.
2(b) (c), we depict the frequency distribution of benign and
attack traffic in 100 and 300,000 samples, respectively.1 We
observe that the frequency distributions of attack traffic have
significant ‘right-shift’ phenomena, compared to the benign
traffic. It reveals that high-frequency information commonly
exists in attack traffic, an important evidence for distinction.
Fig. 2(d) further shows that GCN-processed features undergo
a left-shift, compared to the without one. This observation
uncovers that the GCN learning paradigm will filter out and
suppress the high-frequency information in attack traffic.
Q2: Single-scale spatial learning. Moreover, the topology
learning of GCN-based UNIDS exacerbates the suppression of
important high-frequency traffic information. As shown in Fig.
2(e), ‘left-shift’ phenomenons exist in different layers of GCN,
and the shift rates increase as the GCN layer increases. Finally,
we verify our hypothesis quantitatively using three metrics:
entropy, measuring the redundancy or uncertainty, FPR, and
mean squared error, measuring the representation similarity.
As shown in Fig. 2(f), the entropy and FPR increase with the
GCN layer, aligning with the hypothesis on single-scale spatial
learning, while MSE decreases, revealing that traffic representations become increasingly similar and indistinguishable
between attack and benign traffic.
In response to the above discussion, we raise a crucial
question: ‘How can a UNIDS model automatically preserve
1 More frequency distribution analyses are available in the Appendix L (see
supplementary material).

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

11449

TABLE I
T HE C OMPARISONS OF THE R ELATED W ORKS , W HERE X M EANS T HAT H AS THE C APABILITY, AND × M EANS T HAT D OES N OT H AVE THE C APABILITY

multi-scale spatial-frequency traffic information to highlight attacks, thus reducing FPR and boosting performance?’.
Achieving this goal is challenging. First, existing spectral GCNs focus on multi-scale frequency preserving, while
the effective multi-scale topology learning is underexplored
[43], [44], [45], [46]. Second, the persistent homology (PH)
approach [47], [48] showcases great potential in multi-scale
spatial learning in anomaly detection [49], [50], biomedicine
[51], and finance [52], etc. However, PH faces two challenges
when deployed in real-world dynamic intrusion detection:
• Challenge 1. Static data only: PH is specially designed
for static data, e.g., data cloud. Since traffic data evolve
over time, efficiently mining abnormal spatial patterns
from dynamic traffic streams remains challenging.
• Challenge 2. Scalability: PH provides multi-scale spatial
insights through persistent diagrams, but the scalability
of this paradigm is insufficient for large-scale dynamic
traffic data. Bridging the gap between PH and an end-toend UNIDS framework for tens of thousands of evolving
traffic nodes remains challenging.
We propose a novel UNIDS approach MSF-IDS, aiming to
mitigate the high FPR and boost detection performance. It has
three key components, multi-scale spatial-frequency encoders,
a self-supervised representation augmentor, and an unsupervised intrusion detector. In the proposed spatial-frequency
encoders, we present wavelet-based dual graph filters to
efficiently preserve multi-scale frequency information. As
for spatial encoders, we propose a differentiable networkaware persistent homology, i.e., NAPH, to track the abnormal
multi-scale spatial patterns. Specifically, we propose a time
filtration for spatial mining over dynamic networks and address
Challenge 1. Then we propose a novel persistent heatmap
tool for end-to-end intrusion detection, benefiting abnormal
topological mining in tens of thousands involving traffic nodes,
and address Challenge 2. Finally, the augmentor and detector
refine and highlight attack-specific information without using
any prior knowledge. Our specific contributions are as follows:
• We present MSF-IDS, a novel unsupervised intrusion
detection approach to mitigate the false positive rate. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to qualitatively
and quantitatively uncover the underlying reason.

• We propose multi-scale spatial-frequency encoders to differentiate the salient anomaly patterns in traffic topologies
and features, boosting the performances of unsupervised
intrusion detection.
• We firstly propose a novel NAPH module to track multiscale topological information over dynamic networks.
NAPH can be seamlessly incorporated into end-to-end
deep learning approaches. We also developed an easyaccess NAPH app for visualized topological insights.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
MSF-IDS in various benchmarks, including binary classification, multi-classification, online intrusion detection,
visualized discussions, etc.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Unsupervised Network Intrusion Detection
The existing unsupervised network intrusion detection systems (UNIDS) can be classified into three categories: the
signature-based ones [17], the anomaly-based ones [18],
[19], and the deep learning-based ones [20], [21]. In the
deep learning-based ones, the state-of-the-art methods are the
GCN-based ones [33], [34], [35], [37]. Zhang et al. [53]
systematically reviews recent GCN-based intrusion detection
approaches, pointing that ‘reducing the FPR within a secure
range’, which poses practical challenge to existing GCN-based
methods and also aligned with our study motivation. Among
them, GLD-Net [54] augments traffic features with dynamic
DDoS topology graphs, but still relies on vanilla GCN layers
that suffer from over-smoothing. GLAD-PAW [55] leverages
weighted graph attention to capture session-level anomalies,
yet its graph-level pooling strategy aggregates all nodes
uniformly, thereby diluting fine-grained multi-scale patterns.
Most related to our works is EULER [33], an unsupervised
GCNs and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) stacking-based
dynamic intrusion detection technique. The key differences
between our MSF-IDS and EULER lie in the following two
aspects: 1) MSF-IDS preserves multi-scale feature information
to mitigate high FPR, while EULER tends to filter out the
high-frequency anomaly information by using traditional GCN
schemes. 2) MSF-IDS mines the anomaly topology patterns by
tracking multi-scale topology information, while EULER uses
a single-scale spatial learning strategy, making representations
blur and misleading the UNIDS.

11450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

B. Spectral Graph Neural Networks
Frequency-based graph neural networks, or graph filters,
focus on handling the GCNs by graph signal optimization
[56], [57], [58], [59], [60]. The pioneering work is the GCN
[43], a low-pass filter, using a simplified first-order Chebyshev
kernel. The following works focus on different-pass filters via
various optimizations, i.e. low-pass, high-pass, and all-pass.
Additionally, there is a line of works designing graph neural
networks in spectra view, e.g. ESGNN [61], BWGNN [62].
The frequency-based GCNs have shown a broad picture and
potential in graph mining e.g. network intrusion detection.
BWGNN is the most similar work to us. Ours differs from
it in two aspects: 1) We utilize dual graph filters to preserve
the multi-scale traffic frequency information more efficiently,
while BWGNN uses a single graph filter to preserve information; 2) We propose a persistent homology-based approach to
mine traffic networks explicitly, while BWGNN has no other
explicit topology learning design.
C. Persistent Homology and Multi-Scale Topology Mining
Persistent Homology [47], [48], [67], [68] analyzes the
topological structure across different scales. As a Topological
Data Analysis (TDA) approach, PH identifies and tracks the
‘birth-death’ progression [68], such as connected components,
holes, and voids in specific topologies. Specifically, the “birth”
of a homology class is defined as the scale i at which it first
appears, while “death” refers to the smallest subsequent scale
 j where it no longer exists [47]. In this way, dynamic changes
at different scales can be used for downstream tasks, such as
intrusion detection. More background about PH are available
in Appendix J (see supplementary material). Persistent homology has been applied in various fields, including biology [51],
finance [52], and anomaly detection [49], [50]. However, to
the best of our knowledge, the existing PH approaches are
established on static data points or data point clouds [68].
Second, scalability remains an ongoing challenge in this field,
especially when dealing with large-scale dynamic datasets
[65]. To address these two challenges, we propose NAPH, a
differentiable PH approach, achieving end-to-end multi-scale
topological analysis over large-scale dynamic network.
In multi-scale topological information mining, a line of
UNIDS focused on multi-scale topology in traffic [21], [36],
[69], [70], [71], [72]. Most related to our work is DMTR
[36]. The key differences between DMTR and our work are
two-fold: first, DMTR preserves only multi-scale topology
information; second, we propose an augmentor and a intrusion
detector to refine and highlight attack-specific information,
while DMTR directly utilizes topology to identify anomalous
traffic.
Finally, we provide a comparison Table I. Specifically,
compared to the existing methods, the proposed MSF-IDS
achieves multi-scale spatial-frequency information mining and
self-supervised refinement to effectively reduce FPR. Furthermore, the proposed NAPH module can be utilized in dynamic
scenarios in an end-to-end manner. Especially for large-scale
dynamic networks, NAPH tracks the multi-scale topology and
identify anomalies with high scalability. We also developed

TABLE II
ACRONYMS TABLE

a NAPH application to support visualization and easy-access
analysis, which the listed approaches do not equipped.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we define network traffic flow and its
notations, and then provide Definitions 2 to 5. They progressively introduce the theoretical basis of persistent homology
to help readers quickly understand it. They also form the
necessary theoretical foundations of the following proposed
Definitions 6 to 8. Finally, they are used to prove the consistency of our proposed NAPH in Theorem 1. We also list an
acronyms Table II, thus enhancing the readability. The detailed
notations used in the paper are available in Appendix A (see
supplementary material).
Definition 1 (Network Flow): Given a network topology G,
considered as an adjacency matrix, vi , v j ∈ G are device nodes
with IP address. Fi j (t) = (vi , v j , t, ∆t, Fi j ) is defined as a traffic
flow at time t, from the source IP vi to the destination IP v j ,
with duration ∆t and traffic feature Fi j .
The MSF-IDS inputs are network topology G and features
Fi j . The MSF-IDS outputs are traffic flow types, e.g., benign,
attacks. Then we provide the following concepts for our
topological NAPH algorithm.
Definition 2 (Rips Complex): The Vietoris-Rips complex,
referred to as the Rips complex, is constructed from a metric
space (X, d) with a specified distance threshold  > 0:
R (X) = {σ ⊆ X : ∀u, v ∈ σ, d(u, v) ≤ }.

(1)

The Rips complex consists of subsets of points that meet
specific distance criteria, and these subsets are closed under
inclusion. If |σ| = k + 1, the subset σ is called a k-simplex,
e.g., points, edges, triangles and tetrahedrons corresponding to
0-, 1-, 2-, and 3-simplices.
Definition 3 (Filtration): Filtration decomposes a topological space into nested subcomplexes. Given a topological space
X and increasing distance thresholds 0 < 1 < . . . < m , we
construct nested Rips complexes Ri (X) such that:
R0 (X) ⊆ R1 (X) ⊆ . . . ⊆ Rm (X).

(2)

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 3. 0-,1-,2-, and 3-simplex from left to right.

Each Ri (X) builds topology elements of different scales.
However, the above-defined trivial and fundamental topology
complexes are not enough to mine subtle topology anomalies
in traffic data. We introduce the following definitions:
Definition 4 (Homology Group): Given a Rips complex, homology group Hk (Ri (X)) is used to quantify its
k-dimensional high-order topological information, such as
holes or connected components.
The details of Hk (Ri (X)) are available in Appendix B
(see supplementary material). The homology group benefits
us from mining the high-order information, e.g., holes, in a
given topology. In this way, we have established the high-order
topology foundations for the following persistent homology,
benefiting the mining of anomaly topology patterns.
Definition 5 (Persistent homology): Given a series of
homology groups, generated by nested Rips complexes in
Definition 4, persistent homology aims to conduct topological
analysis, after employing natural homomorphisms over these
groups:
Hk (R0 (X)) → Hk (R1 (X)) → · · · → Hk (Rm (X)).

(3)

Through these mappings, persistent homology tracks the
changes of homology groups Hk (R (X)) across different scales
 ∈ {0 , . . . , m }.
More information about PH is available in Appendix J (see
supplementary material), which analyses topological information over a series of homology groups in different scales.
However, the traditional PH is limited by the filtration with
preset  and hard to apply on the real-world evolving network
data, e.g., traffic network.
IV. M ODEL
The proposed MSF-IDS consists of three critical modules,
as shown in Fig. 4. We propose frequency and spatial lenses
that highlight spatial-frequency information across multi-scale
views. Then we propose spatial-frequency encoders by equipping the lenses. Finally, we propose augmentor and a detector
for unsupervised intrusion detection.
A. Multi-Scale Spatial-Frequency Lenses
1) Wavelet Kernels-Based Frequency Lenses: Given raw
traffic features Fi j , frequency lenses serve as a plug-andplay module, preserving multi-scale frequency information.
Mathematically, high-frequency information corresponds to
features with high eigenvalues. From this perspective, a feasible approach is computing the eigenvector of each eigenvalue.
However, this naive method is time-consuming.
To this end, graph filters are used to preserve information
more efficiently. Specifically, we propose the following dual
graph filters, involving two steps:

11451

Fast Daubechies Wavelet Transformation: First, we introduce the following Daubechies wavelet transformation, which
is broadly used as an implementation of fast wavelet transformation, FWT [73]:


Z ∞
t−b
1
x(t)ψ
dt,
(4)
Wψ (a, b) = √
a
a −∞
where a and b are preset scale hyperparameters. In practice,
Eq. 4 is computed using numerical integration techniques, such
as Monte Carlo methods. Then the raw traffic features Fi j can
be transformed as Wψ Fi j .
The advantages of Daubechies wavelet are two-fold:
1) Daubechies wavelet effectively extracts low and high
multi-scale frequency information, the former contains key
information of traffic flow, while the latter has the subtle
information to distinguish the anomaly traffic. 2) Daubechies
wavelet boosts the efficiency of frequency information preserving as a pre-wavelet. it reversibly compresses raw features
with 75% compression efficiency theoretically. In practice, we
can efficiently conduct Daubechies wavelet transformation by
FWT. The specific compression efficiency analysis is available
in Appendix E (see supplementary material). We also verify
the effectiveness of Daubechies wavelet in the Ablation Study
section.
Multi-Scale Beta Wavelet Transformation: Then we use
beta kernel-based wavelets to preserve multi-scale frequency
information in Wψ Fi j . We have discussed why beta wavelets
are capable of preserving multi-scale frequencies, e.g., the
high-frequency attack information in Appendix C (see supplementary material). Specifically, we introduce a probability
density function of Beta distribution β p,q (w):
8
1
<
w p (1 − w)q if w ∈ [0, 1]
(5)
β p,q (w) = B(p + 1, q + 1)
:
0
otherwise,
p! q!
is a constant,
where p, q ∈ R+ , B(p + 1, q + 1) = (p+q+1)!
and w ∈ [0, 1] covers the complete spectral range of traffic
features.
We add a restrictions p, q ∈ N+ to ensure β∗ (p, q) is a
polynomial, which is same as the previous work [62]. Then
the Beta wavelet transform W p,q can be written as:

W p,q =

(L) p (I − L)q
,
B(p + 1, q + 1)

(6)

where L is the Laplacian matrix of traffic features. Let p+q =
C be a constant and Beta wavelet transform W is constructed
by a group of C + 1 Beta wavelets with the same order:

W = W0,C , W1,C−1 , · · · , WC,0 .
(7)
Then the raw traffic feature are transformed into different
frequencies as follows:
F̂i j = W(Wψ Fi j ).

(8)

The frequency lenses effectively preserve the subtle highfrequency information, which is filtered out by traditional
GCN-based schemes. The pseudo-code of multi-scale frequency encoders is available in Appendix F (see supplementary material).

11452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 4. The architecture of the proposed MSF-IDS. MSF consists of three key components. First, the traffic features and traffic network are fed into the
Spatial-Frequency Encoders. The traffic features are handled by the frequency encoder (top) to preserve multi-scale feature information. The traffic network
is fed into the spatial encoder (bottom) to track and mine multi-scale topology information. Then the multi-scale features are refined by the Representation
Augmentor. Finally, we concatenate the refined feature and topology representations and feed them into the Intrusion Detector to identify suspect traffic.

The frequency lenses help UNIDS effectively preserve
subtle high-frequency information, which is filtered out by
traditional GCN-based schemes. The pseudo-code of the
multi-scale frequency encoders is given in Appendix F (see
supplementary material). We verify this benefit empirically in
Discussion RQ1.
2) Persistent Homology-Based Spatial Lenses: In this section, we formally propose spatial encoders NAPH to track
multi-scale topology information in an evolving traffic network. We first propose a specialized filtration as follows:
Definition 6 (Time Filtration): A topological space X is
decomposed into a series of time-based nested Rips complexes, defined as R(t) (X) for time points t0 , t1 , . . . , tm :
R(t0 ) (X) ⊆ R(t1 ) (X) ⊆ · · · ⊆ R(tm ) (X).

(9)

At each time point ti , R(ti ) (X) includes all pairs of points
(xi , x j ) such that d(xi , x j ) ≤ (ti ), where d represents the
distance between points xi and x j . This construction allows
us to observe and analyze the changes in the complexes over
time and varying distance thresholds.
The proposed time filtration enables tracking multi-scale
topology in an evolving time stream using (ti ), rather than
a predefined . Equipped with time filtration, we propose the
following network-aware topology analysis (NATA), enabling
tracking multi-scale topology over dynamic traffic data.
Definition 7 (NATA): Given a node in traffic network
x ∈ G, where each node x ∈ G has a timestamp T (x). The node
x and its connections form a sub-network G(x, t) indexed by
time t. By introducing time filtration, we generate a series of
nested topological complexes {Rt }t∈R , where t0 < t1 < · · · < tm :
Rt0 (G(x, t)) ⊆ Rt1 (G(x, t)) ⊆ · · · ⊆ Rtm (G(x, t)).

(10)

Specifically, Eq. 10 specifies the topological space X in
Eq. 9 to dynamic network topological space G(x, t), i.e.,
dynamic network traffic. Each complex Rti contains rich topological information of evolving traffic flow within a given time
window. Finally, Theorem 1 proves the consistency between
NATA and PH theory, enabling multi-scale topology tracking
over dynamic traffic networks.
Theorem 1 (Equivalence): The constructed nested topological complexes in NATA (Def. 7) are topologically equivalent

to the nested Rips complexes constructed by filtration in
Def. 3.
We rigorously prove the equivalence in Appendix D (see
supplementary material) from the perspective of graph isomorphism. Equipped with Theorem 1, we bridge the gap
between NATA and persistent homology, terming it networkaware persistent homology (NAPH). The input of NAPH is
solely topological information, i.e., network topology. In this
way, NAPH tracks multi-scale topology patterns over evolving
traffic networks, thereby addressing Challenge 1. NAPH
involves three steps and its pseudo-code is given in Appendix
G (see supplementary material).
We provide three steps to incorporate NAPH into a learnable
UNIDS task. NAPH is proposed as an end-to-end topology
learning module, thereby addressing Challenge 2. More
discussions on scalability are available in Appendix R (see
supplementary material).
i) Constructing Nested Traffic Complexes By Time Filtration: For a target traffic node x, we construct its multi-scale
nested complexes Rt (G(x, t) by the proposed time filtration.
Rt (G(x, t) contains topological information over dynamic network data, i.e., constructing the network complexes using
time information t. Note that our NAPH and learnable representations are established on the target traffic node and its
sub-network, ensuring the scalability of NAPH.
ii) Generating Traffic Topological Summaries via NAPH:
Equipped with the equivalence Theorem 1, we employ persistent homology [49] on the traffic nested complexes Rt (G(x, t)
in step 1. PH generates the topological summary of each
nested complex. The topological summary can be considered
as a profile with evolving multi-scale topological information.
Specifically, we generate the barcode bar(x, t) by analyzing
the high-order topological birth-death relationships of traffic
complexes. Then the persistent diagrams PD(x, t) with highly
refined multi-scale topological information can be generated
from barcode bar(x, t).
iii) Generating Distinguishable Persistent Heatmap: By
comparing the differences between diagrams, the persistent
diagram PD(x, t) with dynamic information is distinguishable
for the topology anomalies. However, the diagram PD(x) is
not learnable for end-to-end intrusion detection, which means

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

PD(x, t) is non-scalable. To enhance scalability, we develop a
persistent heatmap tool to bridge the gap between persistent
diagrams and learnable end-to-end intrusion detection. Specifically, we have the following definition:
Definition 8 (Persistent Heatmap): Given dynamic network
data, the persistent heatmap extracts time-aligned statistical
information from the persistence diagram, visualizing the
multi-scale topology information in color intensity.
Heatmap(x) = fH (PD(x, t)),

(11)

where fH is a transformation and the pseudo-code of fH is
available in the Appendix H (see supplementary material). The
persistent heatmap benefits the following spatial encoder to
encode distinguishable topology patterns into learnable representations, achieving visualisable, learnable, and differentiable
for the multi-scale topological information in dynamic network
data.
We also incorporate the above three steps into an executable
application, benefiting user personal topological analysis and
visualization. NAPH can also seamlessly incorporate into your
own end-to-end deep learning model. The details of our
NAPH app are available in Section VI and Appendix X (see
supplementary material).
B. Multi-Scale Spatial-Frequency Encoders
Equipped with multi-scale spatial-frequency lenses, we
formally present spatial-frequency encoders for end-to-end
intrusion detection. First, we propose the following frequency
encoder for raw traffic features Fi j :

1) Generating Dynamic Node Representations: We generate dynamic node representation from evolving traffic edge
representations following [41]. Specifically, as for a multiscale traffic flow Fi j , we generate the representation of the
node i at t time as Fi (t) = Fi (t− ) + mi (t), where Fi (t− ) is the
historical representation of node i with initial value Fi (0) is
0. mi (t) is the memory of node i at t time. Now, we formally
denote F as the updated dynamic node representations, where
Fi ∈ F, i ∈ G. The detailed updating rules are available in
Appendix I (see supplementary material).
2) Augmenting Representations By Dual-View graphs:
Then we generate two graph views G1 and G2 , using the
corruption function [74]. The function randomly removes a
small portion of edges from G and also randomly masks a
fraction of dimensions with zeros in node features Fi . The
augmented representations of each graph view as:
Z = ReLU(ĜReLU(ĜFW (0) )W (1) ),

(12)

Fi j carries the multi-scale frequency information in the raw
feature Fi j . It will be fed into the following representation
augmentor for refinement. Furthermore, we propose the following spatial encoders:
H x = E s (G(x)) = FLAT(Heatmap(x)),

(13)

where G(x) is a sub-network of node x, E s is a spatial encoder.
Specifically, a simple yet effective flatten function FLAT
as E s can be used to transform the two-dimensional image
Heatmap(x) into learnable representation H x ∈ H, x ∈ G.
More details are available in Appendix Q (see supplementary
material).
C. Self-Supervised Representation Augmentor
We propose an augmentor to refine the generated multi-scale
frequency information. The rationale is two-fold: 1) contrastive
rules automatically generate negative samples. We refine the
traffic features far from the negative samples without using
any labels or prior knowledge. 2) The proposed augmentor
simulates real-world noise and disturbances. Through selfsupervised learning, representation refinement and generation
will be more robust and reliable for UNIDS. The Augmentor
involves three steps:

(14)

where ReLU is an activate function, W , W ∈ WR are shared
parameter weights between two graph views, Ĝ is normalized
laplace matrix of G. We simulate disturbance and noise in realworld traffic networks by augmenting feature representations
via corrupted dual-view graphs.
3) Refining Representations By Self-Supervised Learning:
Finally, we refine the node representations F by proposing a
self-supervised loss. The refinement also makes traffic features
more distinguishable, using an agreement constraint between
dual-view graphs. Specifically, we sample the contrastive
samples from augmentations and minimize LR as follows:
11
0
0
X
X
@−S1 + log @
[exp(S2 ) + exp(S3 )]AA ,
min LR =
(0)

WR

Fi j = E f (Fi j ) = CONCAT(W(Wψ Fi j ), Fi j ).

11453

(1)

j∈G−i

i∈G

(15)
sim(z1i ,z1 j )
sim(z1i ,z2 j )
,
S
=
,
z
where S1 = sim(zτ1i ,z2i ) , S2 =
3
1i and
τ
τ
z2i denote embeddings node i on Z1 and Z2 respectively, G−i
is the node set excluding node i, sim(·) is the cosine similarity
between the two embeddings, and τ is a temperature parameter.
The features can be strengthened to counteract the noise by
the refinement, without using any labels or prior knowledge.
D. Unsupervised Intrusion Detector
The refined feature representations Z can be generated from
Eq. 14. We concatenate Z and the topology representations H
as the final representations Z. Then we propose a subspace
clustering scheme to identify the attack or suspicious traffic in
an end-to-end manner. The detector first derives each traffic
node’s similarity matrix Q and then outputs the type of each
traffic flow, e.g., benign, attack.
min kZ − QZk2F + λ1 kQk2F
Q

s.t.

diag(Q) = 0,

(16)

where k · kF is a matrix F-norm. Then we generate the
traffic membership C = Softmax(MLP(Z)) by matching the
similarity matrix Q, minWM L M = kCCT − S k2F . We have the
following intrusion detection loss Lin :
min Lin = LR + L M .

WR ,W M ,C

(17)

Finally, well-trained traffic memberships C can be utilized for
unsupervised intrusion detection.

11454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
C OMPARISONS OF B INARY C LASSIFICATION ON F IVE P UBLIC DATASETS . T HE R ESULTS A RE AVERAGE S CORES OF T HREE -T IME R EPETITIONS

V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets: 2 We performed experiments using 5 extensively utilized datasets that capture significant network traffic
within the Internet of Things (IoT). CIC-ToN-IoT [39] is
derived from the ToN-IoT dataset [75] using the CICFlowMeter tool [76] The dataset includes 5, 351, 760 flows, with
53.00% classified as attack samples and 47.00% as benign
samples. CIC-BoT-IoT [77] is derived from the existing BoTIoT dataset using the CICFlowMeter tool [78]. The dataset
contains 6, 714, 300 traffic flows, with 98.82% classified as
attack samples and 1.18% as benign samples. NF-UQ-NIDS
[79] is a comprehensive dataset that merges multiple smaller
datasets to form a larger, universal NIDS dataset. It includes
11, 994, 893 records, with 76.77% benign flows and 23.23%
attack flows. NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 [80] is NetFlow-based,
originating from the UNSW-NB15 dataset [81]. The dataset
contains 2, 390, 275 traffic flows, with 3.98% identified as
attack samples and 96.02% as benign samples. NF-BoT-IoTv2 [80] is an IoT NetFlow-based dataset that extends the
NF-BoT-IoT dataset [79]. The dataset comprises a total of
37, 763, 497 data flows, of which 99.64% are attack samples
and 0.36% are benign.
2) Configurations: All experiments and performance
reports are conducted on a machine with Intel Xeon Gold
6330@ 2.00GHz, RTX A40 GPU, and A100 GPU, and on
the above 5 datasets with proper data sampling. We set the
frequency scale parameter C in the beta wavelet to 4. In
NAPH, we predefine the hops of neighbor nodes to 2 with
the maximum neighbor node sample number 1024. We use
the Adam optimizer with different learning rates for each
component and weight decay being 1e−5 . We train all the
models within 100 epochs.
3) Baselines: We select 5 GCN based-models as baselines,
including 2 spatial domain GCN models(i.e., EULER [33],
AGNN [40]), 2 spectral GCN model (i.e., ClenshawGCN [64],
APPNP [63]), and 1 graph anomaly-based GNN model(i.e.,
GmapAD [37]). Additionally, we choose 2 anomaly-based
baselines(i.e., AGC [18], DSVD [19]), 2 deep learning-based
baselines(i.e., OmniAnomaly [20], SOM-DAGMM [21]) to
compare with the proposed MSF-IDS.
2 The details of datasets, baselines, and implementations are available in
Appendix M and Appendix W (see supplementary material).

Metrics: We follow the previous work [82] to evaluate all
baselines’ performances by two commonly used metrics in
intrusion detection, F1-score and ROC-AUC score (AUC).
B. Main Results
1) Comparisons of Binary Classification: The proposed
MSF-IDS outperforms 9 advanced baselines on 5 benchmarks
for the binary classification task. Binary classification identifies whether a traffic flow is benign or an attack, which
is conducted on the datasets after proper data sampling. For
each comparison method, we run our experiment 3 times and
report the mean and variance values. The reproducible results
in Table III show that our MSF-IDS consistently performs the
best among 9 baselines over the five benchmarks, showing the
superiority of our method in unsupervised intrusion detection.
Specifically, compared to EULER, the previous state-of-theart GCN-based UNIDS approach, MSF-IDS achieves 5.50%
higher F1-score over the CIC-ToN-IoT dataset. MSF-IDS
also outperforms SOM-DAGMM, the previous state-of-theart deep learning-based method on F1-score by 1.84 points
and on AUC by 26.39 points over the NF-UNSW-NB15-v2
dataset, a challenging benchmark for UNIDS. We attribute
the gains stem from 1) multi-scale spatial-frequency encoders
that differentiate anomaly patterns, 2) augmentor that highlights attack-specific information. To address data imbalance
issues, some strategies have been adopted, e.g., re-weight [83]
and oversampling [84]. We also observed that the AUC in
NF-UQ-NIDS, and F1-score in NF-UNSW-NB15-v2 remain
below the supervised ceiling. We leave further improvement
to future work.
2) Comparisons of Multi-Classification: The proposed
MSF-IDS achieves state-of-the-art performance with lower
FPR among three selective baselines on the multi-classification
task. Multi-classification is a more challenging task to distinguish which type of attacks the suspicious traffic. After
appropriate sampling to mitigate imbalance, we compare
the proposed MSF-IDS with AGNN, APPNP, and AGC,
as they are representative and have been widely used in
previous studies. Fig. 5 shows that the proposed MSF-IDS
consistently achieves the best results among three baselines
on five datasets. Our MSF-IDS also achieves relatively low
FPR values across (a) to (d) four datasets. Specifically,
MSF-IDS yields the highest F1-scores with 18.85% to 88.30%

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

11455

Fig. 5. Comparisons of multi-classification between MSF-IDS and the selective three baselines on five benchmarks.

performance gains over five benchmarks, e.g., outperforms
the previous SOTA approach AGNN on CIC-TON-IoT by
up to 9.03 points. The performances benefit from multi-scale
spatial-frequency designs, thus differentiating anomaly patterns and highlighting attack-specific information. Achieving
state-of-the-art F1-score performances, the proposed MSF-IDS
also exhibits the lowest FPR across three benchmarks, with
reductions ranging from 28.75% to 54.78%. For example,
on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset, MSF-IDS achieves an FPR
8.13 points lower than APPNP, reaching as low as 6.71%.
The empirical studies in multi-classifications also demonstrate the effectiveness of MSF-IDS in mitigating high FPR.
As for the CIC-BoT-IoT dataset, MSF-IDS has a slightly
higher FPR, i.e., only 0.15 points than APPNP. However, the
F1-score performance of the proposed MSF-IDS is significantly higher than APPNP by 368.14%. Finally, in the
NF-BOT-IOT-v2 dataset, the FPR values across various baselines, including the proposed MSF-IDS, remain relatively high,
ranging from 14.62% to 18.49%. This highlights the need for
further reducing in FPR. Even though, the proposed MSFIDS still achieves the highest F1-score among all baselines,
with an improvement of more than 86.87% compared to other
methods.
C. Online Unsupervised Intrusion Detection
We deploy MSF-IDS online for more efficient unsupervised intrusion detection at lower computational time cost.
In practice, new traffic samples emerge with time evolving,
and frequent retraining is time-consuming and impractical.
To this end, a feasible way is to perform incremental online
detection. Specifically, for a well-trained UNIDS, we conduct
incremental detection for a short period, e.g., one day, and for
a long period, e.g., one week, we re-train the UNIDS.
Task setting: We extract 20% traffic in the whole dataset
as real-time traffic for online scenario. Then the other 80%
traffic is used to train a UNIDS. Finally, the extracted 20%
traffic can be detected in an online way.
Baselines and metrics: We select 4 baselines AGC,
SOM-DAGMM, and EULER to evaluate MSF-IDS in online
scenario. We use F1-Score and NMI values for metrics,
following the previous work [33].
As shown in Table IV, the proposed MSF-IDS consistently
achieves the highest F1-score and AUC, and the lowest FPR.
This empirical study demonstrates that our spatial-temporal
encoders are also effective in online settings. Specifically,
our MSF-IDS yields 27.16 and 32.69 points improvements in
F1-score and AUC, respectively, compared to the previous
SOTA GCN-based UNIDS EULER, while MSF-IDS still has
4.60 points lower than EULER in FPR. We also observe that

TABLE IV
C OMPARISONS OF O NLINE I NTRUSION D ETECTION
ON THE CIC-T O N-I OT DATASET

Fig. 6. The practical deployment architecture of the proposed MSF-IDS.

MSF-IDS performs better offline than online. We leave how to
close this gap for future work. Nevertheless, the online UNIDS
can be an optimal choice, a trade-off, between performance
and time cost. We report that 10000 traffic data only requires
10.98s in online detection, while requiring 878.73s in offline
detection, involving an expensive time cost in retraining,
almost 80 time practical cost. More discussions and future
directions are available in Appendix N (see supplementary
material).
D. Model Deployment
Furthermore, we present a deployment architecture to illustrate MSF-IDS’s future applicability, as shown in Fig. 6. We
demonstrate how our model work in real-world traffic streams.
Specifically, we adopt an offline-online deployment strategy.
In a predefined time window such as T 1 T 0 , the online intrusion
detector runs for high-efficiency detection. At the end of the
time window such as T 1 , the offline detector incrementally
retrains and updates the online detector. This strategy effectively balances efficiency and performance without frequent
retraining. The online detector can also be empowered by the
period update. In real-word scenarios, the time window T 1 T 0
can be one day or one week, depending on demands. This
hybrid online-offline approach significantly improves detection
performance and efficiency. Future challenges include continual updates and adaptive update periods for online detection.

11456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V

TABLE VI

C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISONS W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE A RT EULER U NDER D IFFERENT T RAFFIC S CALES

A BLATION S TUDY OF MSF-IDS ON THE CIC-T O N-I OT DATASET W ITH
F1-S CORE (%), AUC (%), AND FPR (%), R ECALL (%)

E. Time Cost Analyses
We provide time cost analyses for MSF-IDS and its critical
modules to showcase practical computational superiority. First,
we compare the time cost of MSF-IDS and EULER under
different traffic scales. As shown in Table V, MSF-IDS is more
efficient than the previous SOTA UNIDS approach EULER
under 10, 000 and 100, 000 traffic detection. One single traffic
detection cost within 0.11ms. Especially for multi-scale
spatial mining, our proposed NAPH framework achieves
10,000 traffic node computation within 1s (0.78s).
Furthermore, we conduct time cost analyses for the critical
modules of the online model. The specific computational cost
of critical modules are divided into two parts:
• Frequency encoder (FE): FE runs 67.48% of the total
time. Fast wavelet transformations (FWT) are proven to
handle large-scale data in industry areas efficiently. Using
multiple FWTs for FEs to parallelly handle traffic data is
feasible and prospective for further acceleration.
• Spatial encoder (NAPH): NAPH runs 7.03% of the total
time, lying in, 1) limited neighbor nodes sampling strategy (in Configuration), supporting parallel computation
of millions of nodes. 2) we use system-inherent operators
to achieve computation, e.g., FLAT operator in heatmap,
reducing additional complexity.
More importantly, both the FE and NAPH are neuralparametric-free and will not involve computational-intensive
backpropagation. We can parallelly detect with a preset batch
size, e.g., 10000, thus accelerating the inference speed.
F. Ablation Study
The critical modules such as spatial-frequency encoders,
self-supervised representation augmentor, effectively contribute to performances and reduce FPR in UNIDS task.
Specifically, we conduct an ablation study on the CIC-ToNIoT dataset with three repetitions to evaluate the effectiveness
of each component. We remove our multi-scale frequency
encoders, the proposed Daubechies wavelet, and multi-scale
spatial encoders, and denote them as “w/o FE”, “w/o DW”,
and “w/o NAPH”, respectively. We use “w/o SS” and “w/o
SC” to refer to the model that removes the self-supervised
representation augmenter and the subspace clustering-based
intrusion detector, respectively.
Table VI reports the comparison results. Specifically,
removing the self-supervised augmentor module leads to the
most significant performance degradation, e.g., a 14.48 point
decrease in F1-score, indicating the necessity for highlighting
attack-specific information with the self-supervised term. Our
multi-scale spatial-frequency encoder, including the proposed

Fig. 7. The spectra distribution between different schemes.

Daubechies wavelet and self-expressive detector are also nontrivial to push the F1-score to 92.22%, with 3.74% - 5.23%
performance gains. More importantly, MSF-IDS achieves the
lowest FPR among different variants. In contrast, without frequency or spatial encoders leads to the highest FPR, verifying
the effectiveness of MSF-IDS in mitigating high FPR.
G. Discussion
RQ1: How do our wavelet-based frequency encoders
help distinguish the anomalous traffic? First, the quantitative
results are available in the ablation study. The F1-score and
the FPR of w/o FE and MSF-IDS significantly demonstrate the
effectiveness of frequency encoders. Furthermore, we conduct
a visualized study to demonstrate whether our frequency
encoders help distinguish the anomaly patterns. Specifically,
we depict the frequency distributions in different schemes,
i.e., the raw features, features handled with GCN, and features handled with our frequency encoders. As shown in
Fig 7, the distribution of frequency encoders has mitigated
the ’left-shift‘ phenomenon, preserving more high-frequency
information, compared to the distribution handled with GCN.
Future directions on spatial-frequency attack and defense are
available in Appendix S (see supplementary material).
RQ2: How does our NAPH highlight the anomalous
traffic topology? To answer this question, we analyze a MITM
case using our NAPH application. We first run NAPH on a
benign topology, top box of Fig. 7, and then on the MITM
attack topology, bottom box of Fig. 8, with a red attack node
UE6. The visualized results of heatmaps are highly distinguishable in (d) and (h). It shows that our spatial encoders
effectively identify the anomaly pattern of MITM, a tough
case when using the existing topology learning approaches
[85], [86]. Most existing approaches are built on the cluster
assumption [87], leading to two topological patterns in (a)
and (b) undistinguishable. To further reveal the underlying
reason, we analyze the barcodes in (b) and (f). The differences

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

11457

Fig. 9. The t-SNE visualizations of representations on the CIC-TON-IoT
dataset without and with the augmentor and detector.

Fig. 8. NAPH analysis for benign and attack traffic topology, respectively.
(a)(e) traffic networks. (b)(f) topological barcodes. (c)(d) persistent diagrams
correspond to barcodes. (d)(h) heatmaps generated via persistent diagrams.

Fig. 10. The sensitivity analysis of hyperparameter Beta.

TABLE VII
C OMPARISONS OF FPR ON F IVE DATASETS

Fig. 11. The sensitivity analysis of hyperparameter drop feature rate.

in barcodes directly determine the distinguishable heatmaps.
First, the barcode of the benign one shows longer persistent
times in high-order structure, the blue color ones, compared
to the anomaly one. It is related to potential stable communication topology pattern construction. These patterns are more
persistent and robust than the patterns in MITM attack. As
shown in Fig. 8(e) the attack node UE6 blocks the normal
communications of other attacked nodes. It is one of the
reasons why MITM cannot establish stable patterns.
RQ3: Can the spatial-frequency encoders reduce the
false positive rate in binary classification? To answer this
question, we conduct FPR comparisons in binary classification
on five datasets, as shown in Table VII. The proposed MSFIDS achieves the lowest FPR among 4 selective baselines,
20.89% -92.64% decreases, compared to previous approaches.
For example, in the CIC-ToN-IoT dataset, our MSF-IDS yields
a 31.36% decrease from deep learning-based SOM-DAGMM.
RQ4: How do the augmentor and detector highlight
attack-specific information? To answer this question, we
visualize the representations with and without the augmentor
and detector on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset via t-SNE technology. As shown in Fig. 9(a), representations without the
augmentor and detector are indistinguishable and are very
close and similar in low-dimension space, i.e., the red round
box. It is an important visualization evidence of why without
augmentor and detector leads to poor performance as shown
in ablation studies. In contrast, the representations are highly

separated and distinguishable when using the augmentor and
detector as shown in Fig. 9(b), i.e., the square box. It significantly verifies the effectiveness of our augmentor and detector
in highlighting attack-specific information. We further discuss
novel attack detection ability of the proposed MSF-IDS in
Appendix T (see supplementary material).
H. Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analyses
We conduct hyperparameter sensitivity analyses on the CICBoT-IoT dataset to demonstrate how the critical hyperparameters affect MSF-IDS. We select two critical hyperparameters,
Beta, which controls the loss intensity and drop feature 2,
which control the feature learning intensity of the representation augmentor. As shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11, the
proposed MSF-IDS stably converged to the best performance
with increasing epoch. Specifically, a larger beta and drop rate
2 perform better, demonstrating the effectiveness of mitigating
FPR and boosting performance. More hyperparameter sensitivity analyses are available in Appendix V (see supplementary
material).
Finally, we depict performance curves on the CIC-ToNIoT dataset with different feature space dimensions, 64, 128,
and 256, respectively. As shown in Fig. 12, all dimensions
settings are stable and converge to the best performance as
FPR decreases. More performance curves on various benchmarks in different dimensions are available in Appendix U

11458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 12. The F1-score and FPR comparisons on the CIC-ToN-IoT dataset
with different feature space dimensions.

As shown in Fig. 13, a data example we provided, NAPH
can automatically extract the network topology information
for multi-scale analyses. After processing the data, as shown
in Fig. 14, NAPH provides distinguishable heatmaps of multiscale topology. The representations can be used to end-to-end
deep learning, e.g., UNIDS task. Specifically, NAPH displays:
input topology, i.e., left side, dynamic topology evolving
and persistent barcode, i.e., center, persistent diagram and
our persistent heatmap, i.e., right side. Finally, the generated
representation is shown at the bottom and can be seamlessly
incorporated into end-to-end deep learning. The future practicability of NAPH in various security tasks are available in
Appendix O (see supplementary material), including IoT security enhancement, Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Protection,
and Zero-Day attack detection, ect.
VII. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 13. The Raw traffic data. NAPH processes them in an end-to-end way.

This paper reveals that the high FPR of GCN-based UNIDS
stems from a single-scale spatial-frequency learning paradigm.
This interesting observation motivates us to propose MSF-IDS,
mitigating high FPR by mining multi-scale spatial-frequency
clues. Specifically, the proposed MSF-IDS employs dual graph
filters as frequency encoders, differentiating high-frequency
abnormal patterns. Then a NAPH module is seamlessly integrated into MSF-IDS to track multi-scale topological patterns
over dynamic networks. The developed NAPH app also benefits the topological analysis and visualizations of network data,
e.g., traffic network. Our MSF-IDS also refines and highlights
attack-specific information through the proposed representation augmentor and intrusion detector. Finally, extensive
experiments including binary, multi-class, online intrusion
detection and discussions demonstrate MSF-IDS’s superiority
over the traditional GCN-based UNIDS, effectively reducing
false positive rates and improving detection performance.
NAPH also sheds light on effective multi-scale topology
mining over dynamic networks, such as financial, social, and
geometric networks. Future work can extend to effective smallsample or few-shot learning in UNIDS.
R EFERENCES
[1]

Fig. 14. A topological case of our NAPH, the visualization can be used
for topological data analysis, e.g., traffic topology, geological analysis, social,
financial network analysis, etc.

(see supplementary material). The empirical results show that
sufficient, diverse datasets and multi-scale spatial-frequency
preservation schemes effectively mitigate overfitting.
VI. NAPH A PPLICATION
To enable visual analysis of multi-scale traffic topology,
especially for readers unfamiliar with PH and provided source
codes, we develop an executable (.exe) NAPH application. It
supports the real-time multi-scale topology computation for
input dynamic traffic data using NAPH algorithm.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

C. Zhang, D. Jia, L. Wang, W. Wang, F. Liu, and A. Yang, “Comparative
research on network intrusion detection methods based on machine
learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102861.
V. Varanasi and S. Razia, “Network intrusion detection using machine
learning, deep learning—A review,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Smart Syst.
Inventive Technol. (ICSSIT), Jan. 2022, pp. 1618–1624.
Z. Ahmad, A. Shahid Khan, C. Wai Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
“Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, p. 4150, Jan. 2021.
H. Asad and I. Gashi, “Dynamical analysis of diversity in rule-based
open source network intrusion detection systems,” Empirical Softw.
Eng., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–30, Jan. 2022.
Z. Cekerevac, Z. Dvorak, L. Prigoda, and P. Cekerevac, “Internet of
Things and the man-in-the-middle attacks–security and economic risks,”
MEST J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 15–25, 2017.
K. M. Prasad, “Dos and DDoS attacks: Defense, detection and traceback
mechanisms—A survey,” Global J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 14,
no. E7, pp. 15–32, 2014.
V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

[8]

Y. Meng and L.-F. Kwok, “Adaptive blacklist-based packet filter with
a statistic-based approach in network intrusion detection,” J. Netw.
Comput. Appl., vol. 39, pp. 83–92, Mar. 2014.
[9] T. S. Hwang, T.-J. Lee, and Y.-J. Lee, “A three-tier IDS via data mining
approach,” in Proc. 3rd Annu. ACM Workshop Mining Netw. Data, Jun.
2007, pp. 1–6.
[10] I. Kotenko et al., “Detection of anomalies and attacks in container
systems: An integrated approach based on black and white lists,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Inf. Technol. Ind., 2022, pp. 107–117.
[11] M. Westerlund, “The emergence of deepfake technology: A review,”
Technol. Innov. Manage. Rev., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 39–52, Jan. 2019.
[12] Y. Rong et al., “Semantic entropy can simultaneously benefit
transmission efficiency and channel security of wireless semantic communications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
pp. 2067–2082, 2025.
[13] C. Qiu et al., “Plugging and breathing on the air: A practical defense
system for deep learning-based wireless semantic communications,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 8683–8699, Sep. 2025.
[14] G. Nan et al., “Physical-layer adversarial robustness for deep learningbased semantic communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41,
no. 8, pp. 2592–2608, Aug. 2023.
[15] X. Cao et al., “Exploring LLM-based multi-agent situation awareness
for zero-trust space-air-ground integrated network,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2230–2247, Jun. 2025.
[16] Splunk Inc.(2023). The State of Security. [Online]. Available: https://
www.splunk.com/
[17] D. Kshirsagar and J. M. Shaikh, “Intrusion detection using rule-based
machine learning algorithms,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Comput., Commun., Control Autom. (ICCUBEA), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[18] X. Zhang, H. Liu, Q. Li, and X.-M. Wu, “Attributed graph clustering
via adaptive graph convolution,” 2019, arXiv:1906.01210.
[19] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[20] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[21] Y. Chen, N. Ashizawa, S. Yean, C. K. Yeo, and N. Yanai, “Selforganizing map assisted deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for
intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw.
Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[22] A. Tariq and R. Mohammed, “Signature-based and supervised learning
to improve data loss protection,” Signature, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 161–166,
2017.
[23] V. Q. Nguyen, T. L. Ngo, L. M. Nguyen, V. H. Nguyen, and N. Shone,
“Deep nested clustering auto-encoder for anomaly-based network intrusion detection,” in Proc. RIVF Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Technol.
(RIVF), Dec. 2023, pp. 289–294.
[24] H. Bahjat, S. N. Mohammed, W. Ahmed, S. Hamad, and S. Mohammed,
“Anomaly based intrusion detection system using hierarchical classification and clustering techniques,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Develop.
eSystems Eng. (DeSE), Dec. 2020, pp. 257–262.
[25] F. V. Massoli, F. Falchi, A. Kantarci, S. Akti, H. K. Ekenel, and
G. Amato, “MOCCA: Multilayer one-class classification for anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2313–2323, Jun. 2022.
[26] P. Arregoces, J. Vergara, S. A. Gutiérrez, and J. F. Botero, “Networkbased intrusion detection: A one-class classification approach,” in Proc.
NOMS-IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[27] W. Wang, S. Jian, Y. Tan, Q. Wu, and C. Huang, “Robust unsupervised network intrusion detection with self-supervised masked context
reconstruction,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103131.
[28] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[29] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning
for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5668–5683, 2024.
[30] Z. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, and D. Li, “Network intrusion detection model
based on improved BYOL self-supervised learning,” Secur. Commun.
Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Oct. 2021.
[31] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” 2022,
arXiv:2201.07284.
[32] W. Xu and Y. Fan, “Intrusion detection systems based on logarithmic
autoencoder and XGBoost,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2022, pp. 1–8,
Apr. 2022.

11459

[33] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “Euler: Detecting network lateral movement
via scalable temporal graph link prediction,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–16.
[34] R. Paudel and H. H. Huang, “Pikachu: Temporal walk based dynamic
graph embedding for network anomaly detection,” in Proc. NOMS
IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–7.
[35] J. Ye et al., “Learning the evolutionary and multi-scale graph structure
for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, pp. 2296–2306.
[36] M. Zhong, M. Lin, and Z. He, “Dynamic multi-scale topological representation for enhancing network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 135, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 103516.
[37] X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Towards graph-level anomaly
detection via deep evolutionary mapping,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 1631–1642.
[38] C. Qiu et al., “Disentangled dynamic intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 1–18, Nov. 2025.
[39] N. Moustafa, “New generations of Internet of Things datasets for
cybersecurity applications based machine learning: TON IoT datasets,”
in Proc. eResearch Australasia Conf., 2019, pp. 21–25.
[40] Z. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Lin, S. Wang, C. Plant, and W. Guo,
“AGNN: Alternating graph-regularized neural networks to alleviate oversmoothing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 13764–13776, Oct. 2024.
[41] C. Qiu et al., “3D-IDS: Doubly disentangled dynamic intrusion
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 1965–1977.
[42] X. Zheng et al., “Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A
survey,” 2022, arXiv:2202.07082.
[43] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[44] T. Altaf, X. Wang, W. Ni, G. Yu, R. P. Liu, and R. Braun, “A new
concatenated multigraph neural network for IoT intrusion detection,”
Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 100818.
[45] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 1–9.
[46] J. Bruna, W. Zaremba, A. Szlam, and Y. LeCun, “Spectral networks and
locally connected networks on graphs,” 2013, arXiv:1312.6203.
[47] H. Edelsbrunner and J. Harer, “Persistent homology—A survey,” Contemp. Math., vol. 453, no. 26, pp. 257–282, 2008.
[48] M. E. Aktas, E. Akbas, and A. E. Fatmaoui, “Persistence homology
of networks: Methods and applications,” Appl. Netw. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 1–28, Dec. 2019.
[49] P. Bruillard, K. Nowak, and E. Purvine, “Anomaly detection using
persistent homology,” in Proc. Cybersecurity Symp. (CYBERSEC), Apr.
2016, pp. 7–12.
[50] Z. Yuan, H. Zhou, T. Chen, and J. Li, “PhoGAD: Graph-based anomaly
behavior detection with persistent homology optimization,” in Proc. 17th
ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Mar. 2024, pp. 920–929.
[51] G.-W. Wei, Persistent Homology Analysis of Biomolecular Data.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2017.
[52] M. S. Ismail, M. S. M. Noorani, M. Ismail, F. A. Razak, and M. A. Alias,
“Early warning signals of financial crises using persistent homology,”
Phys. A, Stat. Mech. Appl., vol. 586, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 126459.
[53] M. Zhong, M. Lin, C. Zhang, and Z. Xu, “A survey on graph neural networks for intrusion detection systems: Methods, trends and challenges,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 141, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103821.
[54] W. Guo, H. Qiu, Z. Liu, J. Zhu, and Q. Wang, “GLD-Net: Deep
learning to detect DDoS attack via topological and traffic feature fusion,”
Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2022, pp. 1–20, Aug. 2022.
[55] Y. Wan, Y. Liu, D. Wang, and Y. Wen, “GLAD-PAW: Graph-based
log anomaly detection by position aware weighted graph attention
network,” in Proc. Pacific–Asia Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2021, pp. 66–77.
[56] Y. Dong, K. Ding, B. Jalaian, S. Ji, and J. Li, “AdaGNN: Graph neural
networks with adaptive frequency response filter,” in Proc. 30th ACM
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 392–401.
[57] E. Isufi, F. Gama, D. I. Shuman, and S. Segarra, “Graph filters for
signal processing and machine learning on graphs,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 72, pp. 4745–4781, 2024.
[58] F. Gama, E. Isufi, G. Leus, and A. Ribeiro, “Graphs, convolutions, and
neural networks: From graph filters to graph neural networks,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 128–138, Nov. 2020.
[59] N. Hoang, T. Maehara, and T. Murata, “Revisiting graph neural networks: Graph filtering perspective,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 8376–8383.

11460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[60] C. Qiu et al., “Refining latent homophilic structures over heterophilic
graphs for robust graph convolution networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 8930–8938.
[61] X. Liu et al., “Elastic graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2021, pp. 6837–6849.
[62] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
pp. 21076–21089.
[63] J. Gasteiger, A. Bojchevski, and S. Günnemann, “Predict then propagate: Graph neural networks meet personalized PageRank,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.05997.
[64] Y. Guo and Z. Wei, “Clenshaw graph neural networks,” in Proc.
29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023,
pp. 614–625.
[65] H. Adams et al., “Persistence images: A stable vector representation of
persistent homology,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1–35,
2015.
[66] Q. Zhao and Y. Wang, “Learning metrics for persistence-based summaries and applications for graph classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 9855–9866.
[67] H. Edelsbrunner and D. Morozov, “Persistent homology: Theory and
practice,” in Proc. Eur. Congr. Math., 2013, pp. 31–50.
[68] N. Otter, M. A. Porter, U. Tillmann, P. Grindrod, and H. A. Harrington,
“A roadmap for the computation of persistent homology,” EPJ Data
Sci., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–38, Dec. 2017.
[69] S. Zhao, Z. Guo, X. Cheng, S. Jiang, W. Zhao, and H. Wang, “Learning
spatial–temporal features of fiber-optical data with multi-scale double
dynamic network for human intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[70] I. O. Lopes et al., “Network intrusion detection based on the temporal
convolutional model,” Comput. Secur., vol. 135, Dec. 2023, Art. no.
103465.
[71] X. Guo and Y. Liu, “Network traffic intrusion detection based on multiscale convolution and enhanced temporal convolution,” in Proc. 36th
Chin. Control Decis. Conf. (CCDC), May 2024, pp. 4844–4848.
[72] X. Lu, X. Zhang, and P. Lio, “GAT-DNS: DNS multivariate time series
prediction model based on graph attention network,” in Companion
Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 127–131.
[73] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier, 1999.
[74] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Lió, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[75] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
security systems at the edge: Network TON IoT datasets,” Sustain.
Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994.
[76] A. H. Lashkari, Y. Zang, G. Owhuo, M. Mamun, and G. Gil. (2017).
Cicflowmeter. Accessed: Aug. 10, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter/blob/master/ReadMe.txt
[77] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “An explainable machine
learning-based network intrusion detection system for enabling generalisability in securing IoT networks,” 2021, arXiv:2104.07183.
[78] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for
network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019.
[79] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “NetFlow
datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection
systems,” in Proc. 10th EAI Int. Conf. Big Data Technol. Appl., 2020,
pp. 117–135.
[80] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.
[81] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[82] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Evaluating standard feature
sets towards increased generalisability and explainability of ML-based
network intrusion detection,” Big Data Res., vol. 30, Nov. 2022, Art.
no. 100359.
[83] S. Khanam, I. Ahmedy, M. Y. I. Idris, and M. H. Jaward, “Towards an
effective intrusion detection model using focal loss variational autoencoder for Internet of Things (IoT),” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 15, p. 5822,
Aug. 2022.
[84] L. Sun, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, C. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “The effective methods
for intrusion detection with limited network attack data: Multi-task
learning and oversampling,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 185384–185398,
2020.

[85] A. Venturi, M. Ferrari, M. Marchetti, and M. Colajanni, “ARGANIDS:
A novel network intrusion detection system based on adversarially
regularized graph autoencoder,” in Proc. 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl.
Comput., Mar. 2023, pp. 1540–1548.
[86] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “EGraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Apr. 2022,
pp. 1–9.
[87] Y. Wang, S. Chen, and Z.-H. Zhou, “New semi-supervised classification
method based on modified cluster assumption,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 689–702, May 2012.

Chenyang Qiu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Sc. degree in science from Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
National Engineering Research Center for Mobile
Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing. He has published
the papers in top-tier journals and conferences,
including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN
A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, KDD, and AAAI. His research interests
include wireless network intrusion detection, semantic communication, graph
neural networks, and AI robustness. He severed as a Program Committee
Member for AAAI-26.

Guoshun Nan (Member, IEEE) is a Full Professor
with the National Engineering Research Center for
Mobile Network Technologies, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
He has published more than 30 papers in top-tier
journals and conferences, including IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE
I NTELLIGENCE, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED
A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS, IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECU RITY , NeurIPS, ICML, CVPR, ICCV, and ACL. He also serve as a reviewer
for these communities. He has broad interests in multimodal learning, large
language models, and 6G network security.

Caiyi Zhang is currently a Senior Student in computer science and technology with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT).
His research interests include graph learning, large language models, and
topological data analysis.

Chenrui Liang is currently pursuing the M.S.
degree in computer science with the School of
Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China. His research
interests include cloud native and AI agent.

QIU et al.: MINING MULTI-SCALE SPATIAL-FREQUENCY CLUES FOR UNSUPERVISED INTRUSION DETECTION

Ruiqi Dai is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
in computer science with the School of Cyberspace
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. Her research interests
include network security, anomaly detection, and
graph-based machine learning.

Hongchen Yang is currently a Senior Student in
computer science and technology with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT).
His research interests include graph learning, large
language models, and topological data analysis.

Shiyuan Liu is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree majoring in computer science and technology with the School of Computer Science, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. Her research interests lie in anomaly
detection, graph-based machine learning, and their
applications in network security and data analysis.

11461

Zhili Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer application from
the School of Information Science and Engineering,
Hunan University, China, in 2010 and 2014, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the School of
Artificial Intelligence, Guangzhou University, China.
He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Windsor, Canada. He has authored or co-authored
more than 150 refereed papers. His current research
interests include multimedia security, artificial intelligence security, and information hiding. He received the ACM SIGWEB
Rising Star Award and the Guangdong Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar. He has been selected as a World’s Top 2% Scientists
by Stanford University and Elsevier from 2020 to 2023. He is serving as an
Associate Editor for Tsinghua Science and Technology, Journal of Real-Time
Image Processing, International Journal on Semantic Web and Information
Systems, CMC–Computers Materials and Continua, and Big Data Mining and
Analytics.

Changhua Pei received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science and technology from Tsinghua
University, in 2012 and 2017, respectively. He is
currently an Associate Researcher with the Computer Network Information Center (CNIC), Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research interests
encompass time-series anomaly detection, AI for IT
operations (AIOps), AI for networking, and networking.

Xiaofeng Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1993,
and the master’s and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engineering from Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China,
in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently a
Professor with the National Engineering Research
Center for Mobile Network Technologies, BUPT. He
has authored or co-authored over 200 articles and
three books in wireless communication areas. He
focuses on B5G/6G research. He is a fellow of the Institution of Engineering
and Technology and the Chair of IEEE ComSoc Beijing Chapter.