IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

13795

MKF-ADS: Multi-Knowledge Fusion Based
Anomaly Detection System in Vehicular
Control Area Networks
Pengzhou Cheng , Shouxuan Liu, Zongru Wu, Lixing Tan , and Gongshen Liu

Abstract—As the standard communication protocol for vehicular networks, the Controller Area Network (CAN) plays a crucial
role in coordinating interactions among Electronic Control Units
(ECUs). However, intruders can launch malicious attacks on the
CAN due to the lack of security mechanisms. Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDSs), as a defense component, are deployed to monitor
the CAN and detect suspicious behavior resulting from an attack.
Existing IDSs have high false alarms in complex attacks due to
limited feature modeling capabilities. In this paper, we propose
a multi-knowledge fusion-based anomaly detection system, called
MKF-ADS. Specifically, the method designs a prediction-based
framework that integrates a spatial-temporal correlation module
with an attention mechanism (STcAM) and a patch-based sparse
transformer (PatchST) module. The fine-pruned STcAM applies
one-dimensional convolution (Conv1D) to extract spatial features
and subsequently employs the Bidirectional Long Short Term
Memory (Bi-LSTM) to capture temporal features, with an attention
mechanism that focuses on important time steps. Meanwhile, the
PatchST captures contextual features from independent univariate
time series. Finally, the proposed model uses STcAM as a student
model to learn intrinsic knowledge and cross-imitate PatchST’s
competencies through knowledge distillation. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that MKF-ADS is lightweight and effectively
performs anomaly prediction and detection across six attack scenarios. Compared to the baseline, the proposed method is more
robust, achieving a high F1-score while maintaining controllable
false alarms.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection system, control area network
(CAN), knowledge distillation, spatial-temporal contextual
features.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONTROL Area Network (CAN) has become the standard communication protocol for vehicular networks, enabling seamless interaction among Electronic Control Units

C

Received 24 September 2024; accepted 20 April 2025. Date of publication 8
May 2025; date of current version 19 September 2025. This work was supported
in part by the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant U21B2020 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62406188. The review of this article was coordinated by
Prof. Abbas Jamalipour. (Corresponding author: Gongshen Liu.)
Pengzhou Cheng, Zongru Wu, and Gongshen Liu are with the Department
of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: pengzhouchengai@gmail.com;
wuzongru@sjtu.edu.cn; lgshen@sjtu.edu.cn).
Shouxuan Liu is with the College of Engineering, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48105 USA (e-mail: maksiml@umich.edu).
Lixing Tan is with the College of Information Engineering, Taizhou University, Taizhou 225300, China (e-mail: tanlixing@nuaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3564575

(ECUs) [1]. The emergence of Intelligent Connected Vehicles
(ICVs) has drawn increased attention to the CAN. To support
interconnectivity, CAN has to open additional interfaces to
enable intelligent services, such as Autonomous Vehicles (AVs),
vehicular network communication, and cloud computing [2],
[3], [4]. However, these intelligent services introduce severe cyberattacks to In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs) [5]. Unfortunately, the
CAN bus was not designed with security mechanisms in mind,
such as authentication and encryption [6]. When communicating
via the bus or through external devices like Bluetooth or hardware ports [7], [8], the bus or ECUs can be hijacked, potentially
leading to severe consequences for drivers and pedestrians [9],
[10], [11]. Thus, securing vehicular networks has become a
critical area of research [12].
Although encryption and authentication are commonly used
to defend against cyberattacks [13], studies have shown that
these methods demand substantial memory and computational
resources [14], [15], [16] and account for backward compatibility [17]. In contrast, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) offer
an efficient mechanism for detecting vehicular cyberattacks and
are categorized into two types, signature-based and anomalybased [18], [19]. Signature-based IDS rely on supervised learning to detect known attacks from predefined databases. However,
this method requires a substantial amount of labeled data, which
is difficult to obtain for real-world CAN attacks. In contrast,
anomaly-based IDSs (ADSs) are better suited to the open and
complex vehicular network environment, as they can detect
unknown malicious activities [20].
Recent research on ADSs has focused on modeling the correlations inherent in normal CAN messages to detect deviations
indicative of malicious activity. For instance, Song et al. [1]
proposed an anomaly detection method that identifies attack
messages by analyzing noisy pseudo-normal data. However,
it requires labeled abnormal datasets during training. In contrast, Talyor et al. [21] and Qin et al. [22] applied long and
short-term memory (LSTM) models to learn the temporal correlations of CAN transition bits to detect deviations between
abnormal and normal messages. However, they model all bits
(typically 64 bits) without considering their actual meaning and
show poor predictive performance. Subsequently, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) and Attention Mechanisms (AM) are
introduced to capture spatial-temporal features [23], [24]. However, they struggle to capture long-term historical dependencies

0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

13796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

in time-series data. Thus, Alkhatib et al. [25] developed the
CAN-BERT model to capture the contextual features of CAN
ID sequences. Similarly, Nam et al. [26] regarded the CAN ID
sequence as a sentence composed of multiple words and applied
the Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) model to learn the
normal pattern of each sequence. However, transformer-based
models are unsuitable for IVNs with limited resources due to
their large number of parameters.
To address the above challenges, we propose a MultiKnowledge Fusion based Anomaly Detection System, called
MKF-ADS. This model is lightweight and follows the multivariate time series prediction paradigm. First, we apply the “READ”
algorithm [27] to extract meaningful signal boundaries and
continuous physical signals from CAN messages. These signals
are then fed into a multi-knowledge feature extract module,
which incorporates spatial-temporal correlations and contextual
information to perform signal prediction. Anomaly detection
is conducted by evaluating the deviation between actual and
predicted signals. To accommodate the resource constraints of
IVNs, the fusion mechanism employs a top-down guidance
and cross-imitation approach based on knowledge distillation.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed model is effective
and robust against six attack scenarios. Compared to the baseline
in this field, our method achieves a competitive F1-score. The
main contributions of this paper are as follows.
1) We propose MKF-ADS, a knowledge fusion-based
anomaly prediction framework. The framework integrates
the STcAM module to model spatial-temporal correlations
and the PatchST module to capture long-term contextual
dependencies.
2) We design a lightweight STcAM module, where the
Conv1D extracts spatial knowledge, BiLSTM captures
temporal knowledge, and the soft attention mechanism focuses on important time steps. Additionally,
PatchST is introduced to separate multivariate time series and capture contextual knowledge across all time
steps.
3) We construct a multi-knowledge fusion framework, with
STcAM as the student model and PatchST as the teacher
model. STcAM not only learns inherent knowledge but
also cross-mimics valuable knowledge from PatchST,
helping to resolve conflicts between different knowledge
sources and enhancing training stability.
4) We evaluate the prediction and detection performance
of MKF-ADS in six intrusion scenarios and verify its
generalization on various CAN IDs, multi-time steps,
and real-world attacks from ROAD tasks. Also, we
assess the model’s feasibility in terms of complexity and overall efficiency when deployed in vehicular
networks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews and discusses the related works. Section III introduces
preparatory knowledge on IVNs, attack models, and design intuition. Section IV describes the MKF-ADS framework. Section V
presents the experimental results and discusses the performance
and efficiency advantages. Finally, Section VI concludes the
work.

II. RELATED WORK
This section provides an in-depth overview of previous
works on vehicular network security, broadly categorized into
authentication-based, cryptography-based, and IDS-based.
A. Security Models for Vehicular Network
Authentication-based and cryptography-based methods have
been extensively studied by several researchers [44]. Dariz
et al. [45] proposed a method that combines encryption and
authentication for vehicular networks, while Farag et al. [46]
used a dynamic symmetric key to encrypt the payload without
modifying the CAN ID. Although these methods offer some
level of security for IVNs, they are prone to response delays
or increased bus loads [47]. Alladi et al. [48] developed a
lightweight authentication and attestation scheme to secure vehicles in transit. Similarly, Cui et al. [49] introduced a lightweight
encryption and authentication scheme for the CAN bus based
on message authentication codes and the Grain stream cipher.
However, these methods are either computationally demanding
or require protocol modification, limiting their ability to provide
reliable and efficient defense.
IDSs have been widely studied in vehicular networks [50].
Early IDSs detect malicious messages using predefined knowledge bases [28], [29], [30], [31], yet they exhibit high false
alarms and fail to detect unknown attacks effectively. Although
statistics-based IDSs are efficient and lightweight, they may
overlook low-volume and aperiodic attacks. Machine learningbased methods have also been extensively researched [32],
[33]. However, these approaches face a bottleneck in detection
performance. With the growing density of vehicular data and
enhanced computing resources, deep learning-based strategies
have emerged. Song et al. [34] proposed a deep CNN-based
method for intrusion detection, eliminating the need for handcrafted feature extraction. Xun et al. [35] and Luo et al. [36]
introduced CNN and LSTM-based models to further improve
feature extraction. Cheng et al. [37] incorporated attention mechanisms to reduce false alarms, while Javed et al. [38] replaced
LSTM with GRU to enhance inference speed. Although these
methods improve detection capabilities, they rely heavily on
large amounts of labeled data for supervised learning, making
them impractical against attack variants.
In contrast, ADSs can detect unknown attacks [12]. Ashraf
et al. [9] utilized an auto-encoder (AE) to reconstruct input
messages using spatial-temporal features. Agrawal et al. [2] proposed a method that reconstructs sequence directly using spatialtemporal features and detects anomalies based on threshold deviations. Jeong et al. [39] introduced an explainable intrusion detection based on a self-supervised AE paradigm. Tariq et al. [40]
proposed CANTransfer, a Convolutional LSTM-based transfer
learning model. Zhang et al. [41] introduced graph CNN-based
ADS to detect falsification attacks. Given that CAN messages
always follow fixed patterns, ADS also adopts a predictionbased paradigm to detect cyberattacks. Taylor et al. [21] and
Qin et al. [22] developed LSTM-based models to predict the next
package, with error measured using the log loss function on the
predicted output. Zhang et al. [42] combined CNN with a Gated

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

13797

TABLE I
COMPARISON THE PROPOSED MKF-ADS TO EXISTING SCHEMES

Recurrent Unit (GRU) to model spatial-temporal features. Building on this, Mansouria et al. [43] introduced Gaussian Naive
Bayes (GNB) to improve detection performance. Sun et al. [24]
incorporated an attention mechanism (AM) to enhance adaptive
learning across time steps. Interestingly, Alkhatib et al. [25] and
Nam et al. [26] suggested applying state-language models like
BERT and GPT to ADS. Although these models incorporate rich
contextual features, they are not suitable for IVNs due to their
resource-intensive demands.
B. Comparation In-Depth for IVN-IDS
Based on modeling strategies and objectives, these works are
categorized into Statistical Learning (SL), Machine Learning
(ML), and Deep Learning (DL). Table I presents the main
characteristics and comparisons between MKF-ADS and existing works. Intuitively, early research based on SL and ML
shares common characteristics, including fixed feature extraction patterns [28], [30], [51] and worrisome performance [32].
In contrast, most studies are DL-based, which pursue different
objectives, such as using supervised learning to identify known
attacks and anomaly-based techniques to classify or predict
unknown attacks. We find that supervised DL is significantly
enhanced by rich feature extraction. For example, CNNs extract
spatial features [34], LSTM captures temporal features [36], and
attention mechanism models valuable features [37]. However,
these models have notable drawbacks, such as higher computation complexity and a limited detection range. In anomaly
classification, reconstruction modeling calculates the deviation
score of normal messages [2], [9], but this technique suffers from
significant data collection delays. Also, the one-class classifier,
a minimal adaption, often sacrifices its ability to detect known
attacks [40], [41].
In contrast, we tend to regard anomaly detection in IVN as a
time-series prediction problem due to its lower collection delay
and ability to resist a wider range of attacks. Traditional LSTMbased methods initially prove these advantages [21], [22]. Later,
valuable feature extraction was recognized as equally important,
but it introduced similar complexity as the previous branch
due to the additional encoding components for spatial-temporal

modeling [24], [42]. From a knowledge modeling perspective,
SL and ML models rely on simple, shallow detection criteria. Existing DL-based studies show that spatial-temporal knowledge is
effective for IDS. Moreover, the contextual knowledge extracted
by transformer-based models has proven to offer comparable,
if not superior, performance to spatial-temporal ones [25], [26].
However, it is impractical in IVNs due to the exponential growth
in computational complexity. Importantly, most research to date
has been primarily confined to simulation testing on workstations [34], [51], with only a few works [7], [30], [37] venturing
into vehicle-level testing or real-time analysis.
Given the complementarity of spatial-temporal and contextual knowledge, the multi-knowledge fused is a practical approach. Therefore, the proposed MKF-ADS introduces a crossknowledge distillation framework, where contextual knowledge
serves as the teacher and spatial-temporal knowledge as the student. This structure allows the model to capture subtle deviations
by enriching knowledge, thereby identifying potential threats.
To ensure real-time detection, we apply fine-pruning when
modeling spatial-temporal knowledge, with reduced complexity
guided by contextual knowledge.
III. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we provide a brief overview of vehicular
communication. Next, we analyze in-vehicle vulnerability and
present various attack scenarios. We then discuss the design
intuition based on observation from the collected CAN logs.
A. Control Area Network Bus
The CAN bus is the de facto communication standard for
vehicular networks, organizing ECUs into distinct domains such
as safety, powertrain, and comfort. Each domain handles specific
tasks, including automatic crash notification, vehicle diagnostics, and infotainment services [52]. These ECUs are interconnected through a central gateway and transmit messages at fixed
intervals on the CAN bus. Fig. 1 illustrates the standard structure
of the CAN data frame. The arbitration mechanism—using
11 bits for CAN 2.0 A and 29 bits for CAN 2.0 B—determines

13798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. The standard structure of CAN frame. signals associated with each
ID are processed using the “READ” method. For instance, we extracted four
effective physical signals on the ‘0x260’ ID, including 1th − 7th , 8th − 15th ,
16th − 23th , and 42th − 47th ..

the priority of message transmission. The control and data fields
represent transmission length and signal values, respectively.
To support intelligent services, additional external interfaces
that communicate via WIFI, Bluetooth, and 5G are opened up,
which increases the potential security risks. This study focuses
on the arbitration and data fields of CAN frames to construct
ADS, as they are frequently targeted in cyberattacks.
B. Attack Model
In this study, we assume the attacker can remotely compromise one or more ECUs through a wireless interface (e.g., a
telemetries port [37]) or physically (e.g., via OBD-II [53]).
Thus, each ECU may serve as an entry point for the attacker
to access the CAN bus and launch various attacks. Drawing
from car-hacking [1], ROAD [17], and the attacks described in
work [23], we construct the following attack scenarios:
r Denial of Service (DoS) Attack: This attack aims to interfere with the intended function of the CAN bus. The
attacker usually sends a flood of higher-priority, redundant
messages to exhaust system resources and paralyze the
functions.
r Fuzzy Attack: This attack injects randomly generated CAN
IDs and data frames into compromised ECUs. The randomly generated CAN IDs range from 0x000 to 0x7ff,
including those originally extracted from the vehicle.
r Suspension Attack: This attack aims to prevent compromised ECUs from transmitting CAN messages.
r Replay Attack: This attack hijacks a valid message at a
specific time and transmits it later. The attacker usually
exploits this to gain illegitimate authority.
r Spoofing Attack: This attack first sniffs valid messages
from a specific ECU and then impersonates the compromised ECU by mimicking its message transmission
frequencies with forged signals.
r Masquerade Attack: This attack is more insidious as the
legitimate messages will be deleted before injecting a
spoofing message [54].
These attack mechanisms align with those described in
work [24], which categorizes them as either message injection
or falsification. First, message injection attacks (e.g., DoS, Suspension, and Replay) are usually related to message frequency
or the statistical sequence of CAN ID, so the proposed IDS
should be sensitive to temporal knowledge. Second, message
falsification attacks (e.g., Fuzzy, Spoof, and Masquerade) are
generally related to message content, so the proposed IDS

Fig. 2. Illustration of the design intuition for knowledge modeling, where
(a) shows the frequency of CAN IDs with an example; (b) depicts the bit flip
rate for each CAN ID; and (c) visualizes valid signals based on CAN sequences.

should effectively analyze spatial knowledge. Moreover, context knowledge, such as semantic features, is more robust and
can enhance knowledge modeling. Thus, MKF-ADS caters to
these requirements, improving the effectiveness and efficiency
of detecting malicious messages.
C. Design Intuition for Knowledge Fusion
Knowledge fusion-based modeling is crucial for improving
ADS performance. Previous studies have highlighted the importance of temporal [21], [22] and spatial features [34], [35], [36]
as well as spatial-temporal features [37], [43]. In addition, contextual knowledge exhibits a positive contribution to ADS [25].
To highlight the contribution of knowledge fused contribution,
we conduct statistical analysis. In Fig. 2(a), CAN sequences
transmit messages according to predefined frequencies (e.g.,
CAN ID=‘260’ has a fixed frequency of 10 ms), which requires
our ADS to capture temporal features over both long-time and
short-distance. Empirically, feature extraction is generally handled by recurrent neural networks (RNNs) due to their temporal
capture capabilities. Besides, Fig. 2(b) shows dramatic bit flip
changes in localized regions. Thus, the proposed ADS should
integrate CNNs to capture significant spatial features across
all extracted signals. Also, transformer-based components are
highly effective at extracting semantic features, making them
one of the most powerful tools for ADS. Fig. 2(b) highlights
the vertical contextual relationships between signals, while the
trends in Fig. 2(c) illustrate horizontal interactions between
valid signals. Although this approach significantly improves
performance, it also introduces higher complexity [25], [26].
To this end, we propose MKF-ADS, which also utilizes a
CNN-LSTM paradigm to model spatial-temporal knowledge.
In contrast, the proposed model’s parameters are significantly
reduced through fine-pruning. Meanwhile, the feature dimensional is reduced by the “READ” algorithm. For example, CAN
ID=‘0x260’ has four valid signals, as shown in Fig. 1. Importantly, we consider semantics as high-level knowledge capable
of enhancing spatial-temporal knowledge through knowledge
distillation. In short, MKF-ADS ensures both the richness of
knowledge and low complexity.

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

Fig. 3.

13799

Overview of the proposed MKF-IDS.

IV. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present MKF-ADS, consisting of
the spatial-temporal knowledge module (STcAM), contextual
knowledge module (PathcST), a multi-knowledge fused module,
and an anomaly detection module, as shown in Fig. 3.
A. Overview
MKF-ADS aims to enhance the overall performance of invehicle ADS in predictive paradigms. The improvements span
the entire pipeline and are described as follows.
r Data preprocessing: The physical payload is analyzed
using bit flip rate and boundary decision algorithms to
extract signals and improve training efficiency.
r STcAM: The preprocessed data are fed into the STcAM
to extract spatial and temporal knowledge, while the soft
attention mechanism highlights significant timestamps.
r PatchST: The module extracts fine-grained contextual
knowledge from independent signals using a patch-based
transformer model.
r Cross Knowledge Distillation: This module allows STcAM
to learn internal knowledge maximally, and continuously
mimic contextual knowledge from PatchST.
r Anomaly Detection: This module uses the deviation between the predicted and actual signals to determine the
optimal threshold for detecting anomalies.
In the online detection phase, the CAN bus is flagged as
compromised if the deviation between predicted and received
values exceeds the threshold.
B. Data Preprocessing
First, we evaluate the proposed model on the car hacking
for intrusion detection dataset,1 provided by the hacking and
countermeasure research lab (HCRL). The dataset was collected
via the OBD-II port of real-world vehicles. It contains crucial
information for CAN messages, including the Timestamp, CAN
ID, DLC, and DATA[0]-DATA[7]. To accommodate DL-based
1 https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/CAN-intrusion-dataset

model input, we apply a prediction-based paradigm for data
preprocessing, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, we split the
payload of CAN messages with the same ID from the raw
dataset. Then, we extract significant physical signals using the
“READ” and boundary split algorithms [27], without relying
on the CAN communication protocol. For instance, the valid
signal for CAN ID=‘260’ is reduced from the original 64 bits
to 41 bits. Following this, we introduce a feature generator
that processes continuous raw CAN messages as multivariate
time series and generates discrete sub-sequences. The feature
generator performs two key functions: i) it uses a sliding window
T (T ∈ N |T > 10) to aggregate recent messages and produce a
two-dimensional (2-D) vector; ii) it translates the 2-D vector into
decimal format. To increase the numerical stability and accelerate model convergence, the min-max normalization function is
used to normalize the dataset features, calculated as follows:
Xnormalized =

X − Xmin
,
Xmax − Xmin

(1)

where X is raw data, Xmin is the minimum value within the
dataset for a specific feature, and Xmax is the maximum value.
After normalization, all features are scaled to similar value
ranges between zero and one. Notably, we only considered
the CAN ID from crucial functional areas, as they have fixed
communication frequency (e.g., 10 ms). Next, we parameterize MKF-ADS as Mθ = Mθ (X, Y, ID), where X(f1,...,M ) =
{X(f1 ), X(f2 ), . . . , X(fM )} ∈ RM ×T donates a training instance. Here, X(fi ) donates the i-th physical signal, which contains the t-th observation as determined by the sliding window.
Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , ys } ∈ RM ×1 is the corresponding label, and
M is a nonlinear mapping function.
To evaluate robustness, we also evaluate MKF-ADS on the
Real ORNL Automotive Dynamometer (ROAD) CAN intrusion
datasets.2 Compared to the HCRL dataset, this dataset offers a
more comprehensive set of attack scenarios, including fuzzing,
spoofing, and masquerade attacks. It is noted that its data preprocessing is performed using a feature generator following the
same criteria.
2 https://0xsam.com/road/

13800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

C. Proposed MKF-ADS
Once the data meets the input requirements of the proposed
model, it is fed into the model to generate prediction signals.
The detailed design of MKF-ADS is as follows:
1) STcAM Module: The module is designed to be lightweight
compared to previous works while maintaining detection performance. Given the multivariate time series for the i-th time
window, we first adopt a one-dimensional CNN layer to extract
spatial knowledge, as calculated below:
sjt = hjt (f ) ∗ xjt (f ) =

N


hji (f − m)xjt (m),

(2)

Fig. 4.

Structure of STcAM component.

Fig. 5.

Structure of PatchST component.

m=0

where sjt represents the t-th spatial feature in the j-th channel
for convolution, hjt (f ) donates the convolution kernel, xjt (f )
refer to the feature map, and f is the kernel size (3 × 1). To
nonlinearize spatial features, the rectified linear unit (ReLU)
function is used to retain positive features and discard negative ones, as calculated by: z(s) = s+ = max(0, s). Next, we
utilize a bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) to capture temporal
knowledge within the window size and reduce timing corruption
from window sliding. The key function of the LSTM in each
direction is to preserve information through the cell state. Thus,
the latent representation h, which captures the spatial-temporal
relationship, is calculated as follows:
ht = ot ∗ σ1 (ct ),

(3)

where ot and ct are the output gate and cell state activation
values, respectively, and σ1 is the Tanh activation function. The
cell state is influenced by the forget gate f, input gate i, and
output gate o on current moment t, calculated as follows:
ft = σ2 (Wf [ht−1 , xt ], bf ),
it = σ2 (Wi [ht−1 , xt ], bi ),
ot = σ2 (Wo [ht−1 , xt ], bo ),

(4)

where W and b are weights and biases learned during model
training, and σ2 is the Sigmoid activation function. Hence,
the cell state ct is generated by retaining information from
the previous moment ct−1 , via the forget gate ft and updating
the current state c̃t , via the input gate it , calculated as follows:
c̃t = σ1 (Wc [ht−1 , xt ], bc ),
ct = (ft ∗ ct−1 ) + (it ∗ c̃t ).

(5)

After obtaining the forward spatial-temporal knowledge
→
−
−
→
(h1 , . . . , ht ) and backward spatial-temporal knowledge
←
−
←
−
(h1 , . . . , ht ), we concatenate them to form the final output:
→ ←
−
−
hi = [ hi ; hi ]. Note that all spatial-temporal components
share parameters. Thereafter, we introduce the soft attention
mechanism to assign adaptive weights to the spatial-temporal
representation, allowing the model to focus on significant time
steps, calculated as follows:
exp(hi )
αi = t−1
,
i=1 exp(hi )

(6)

where αi is the conditional probability distribution, computed
using the softmax function. The attention vector of spatialtemporal knowledge is presented as follows:
h∗ =

t−1


α i hi .

(7)

i=1

To avoid overfitting, the dropout layer is introduced. Finally, the
output vector is fed into a dense layer to predict the future time
step. The STcAM component is shown in Fig. 4.
2) PatchST Module: Transform-based contextual knowledge
is one of the state-of-the-art approaches for anomaly detection in
multivariate time series. Inspired by [55], we introduce PatchST
as a complement to spatial-temporal knowledge, alleviating the
challenges of using complex models in resource-constrained
IVNs [25], [56].
Given a multivariate time series with lookback window T :
(x1 , . . . , xT ), where each xt at time step t is a vector of
dimension M , we extract the context knowledge to predict
future physical signals. PatchST is illustrated in Fig. 5. First, we
split the CAN sequence X ∈ RM ×T into M univariate series
x(i) ∈ R1×T , where each series of length T starts at time index
1 and slides across the window size T . Each univariate series is
independently fed into the transformer backbone according to
the channel-independence setting. The transformer-based model
then generates the prediction ŷ (i) .

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

13801

feed-forward network. Additionally, a residual connection is
applied between the two sub-layers, followed by layer normalization. For the l-th transformer encoder, each multi-head
(i)
(i)
attention function h transforms xd into query matrix Qh =
(i)
(i)
(i)
(xd )T WhQ , key matrix Kh = (xd )T WhK , and value ma(i)
(i)
trix Vh = (xd )T WhV , where WhQ , WhK ∈ RD×dk and WhV ∈
(i)
RD×D . The attention output Oh ∈ RD×N is then calculated as
follows:
 (i) (i)T 
Q h Kh
(i)
(i)
√
(9)
Vh ,
Oi = σ
dk

Algorithm 1: Optimized MKF-ADS Algorithm.

(i)

where σ is the softmax function. Then, all Oh are concatenated
column-wise and projected into the representation space via a
linear layer. The final multi-head attention for the l-th transformer encoder is then calculated as:
(i,l)

XA

= W A [O(i,l)1 , . . . , O(i,l)h , . . . , O(i,l)H ],

(10)

where W A is the attention output weight, and H represents the
total amount of the self-attention module.
Next, a residual connection and layer normalization are applied to each sub-layer of the transformer encoder. The residual
connection enables multi-transformer layers to be stacked without degradation. Besides, layer normalization ensures that the
input to each neuron has a consistent mean and variance, helping
to accelerate the network convergence. The output representations are then calculated as follows:
(i,l)

XN

Patching: Given a univariate time series x(i) , we first divide
(i)
it into patches xp ∈ RP ×N , where P is the patch length, N is
)
the number of patches, N =  (L−P
 + 2, and S is the stride
S
between two consecutive patches. This reduces the number of
input tokens from T to approximately T /S, which decreases the
attention map size quadratically by a factor of S. In other words,
PatchST is sparse, focusing on both local and longer historical
sequences simultaneously, significantly improving forecasting
performance.
Embedding: These patches are projected into the Transformer
latent space of dimension D using a trainable linear projection Wp ∈ RD×P , and a learnable additive position encoding
Wpos ∈ RD×N , calculated as follows:
(i)

et = We x(i)
p + be ,
(i)
pt = Wpos x(i)
p + bpos ,
(i)

(i)

(8)

where et and pt represent the embedding feature and positional embedding, respectively. Thus, the model input could
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
present xd = et + pt , where xd ∈ RD×N is fed into the
Transformer encoder.
Transformer encoder: We use a vanilla Transformer encoder
to extract contextual knowledge, which consists of two sublayers: a multi-head attention mechanism and a position-wise

(i,l)

= L(X (i,l) + XA ) = L(X (i,l) + A(X (i,l) )), (11)

where A(·) represents the output function of the multi-head
attention module, and L(·) donates the layer normalization
function, calculated as follows:
gm
(X (i,l) − μl ) + b),
(12)
σm
where g and b represent the gain and bias parameters, respectively. The mean and variance of the
layer are given
 m-th
N
N
1
1
(i,l)
m
m
by μ = N i=0 X
and σ = N i=0 (X (i,l) − μl )2 ,
respectively.
(i,l)
Although XA captures the contextual relationships of the
messages at each patch, it performs only a matrix multiplication,
i.e. a linear transformation. To satisfy non-linear, a positionwise feed-forward with two liner layers is applied to compute
nonlinear attention features:
L(X (i,l) ) = ReLU (

(i,l)

XF

(i,l)

= Wf2 σ(Wf1 XN1 + bf1 ) + bf2 ,

(13)

where the Wf1 , Wf2 and bf1 , bf2 are the weight and bias of the
module, respectively, σ refers to the ReLU activation func(i,l)
is fed into the second normalization. Immediately, XF
tion layer, resulting in the final contextual features H (i,l) =
(i,l)
(i,l)
(i,l)
{h1 , . . . , hp , . . . , hN } of the l-th encoder. After forwarding through all transformer layers, a flattening layer followed
by a linear head is employed to produce the predicted physical
signal ŷ (i) .
3) Cross Knowledge Distillation: It is impractical to apply
Transformer-based models directly to IVN-ADS. To address

13802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

this challenge, we introduce cross-knowledge distillation [57],
enabling knowledge fusion from PatchST to STcAM, while
avoiding knowledge conflict during training. Given the intermediate output of STcAM, denoted as XA (e.g., the output of
attention mechanism), the cross-head student prediction ŷcross
is generated by a share component of PatchST. The CKD is
formulated as follows:
1  (i)
ŷcross
LCKD = KL(ŷt ||ŷcross ) =
ŷcross log (i) ,
N i=0
ŷt
N

(i)

(14)

where KL(·) represents the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence,
and ŷt represents the prediction of the teacher model. The final
optimization objective for the offline training phase is computed
as follows:
L = αLpred + βLCKD
=α

N
N
(i)
1  (i)
1  (i)
ŷcross
|ys − ŷs(i) | + β
ŷcross log (i) ,
N i=0
N i=0
ŷt

(15)

where Lpred is the Mean Average Error (MAE) function, α and β
represent the weight of the two optimization tasks, respectively.
In the online 
detection phase, we use Root Mean Square
N
1
(i) − ŷ (i) )2 and Mean Absolute
Error (RMSE):
i=1 (y
N
N |y(i) −ŷ(i) |
to evaluate the
Percentage Error (MAPE): N1
i=1
y (i)
prediction performance.
4) Anomaly Detection: In this phase, we establish an
anomaly detection threshold using a confidence interval-based
approach. The threshold is the right-side boundaries of the
K-sigma confidence interval derived from the prediction error
distribution, calculated as follows:
Threshold(τ ) = μnormal_messages + K ∗ σnormal_messages ,

(16)

where μnormal_messages is the mean of the prediction error distribution of the normal messages, and σnormal_messages is the standard
deviation for the same distribution. The value of K and the
threshold are determined by an in-depth analysis in Section V-B.
The proposed model is described in Algorithm 1.
D. Runtime Complexity
In this subsection, we provide a theoretical evaluation of the
temporal and spatial complexity of MKF-ADS.
1) Temporal Complexity: During offline training, the proposed model learns both spatial-temporal knowledge from
STcAM and contextual knowledge from PatchST. The time
complexity of the PatchST Op is calculated as follows:
Op + ∂Op = 2Op = 2O(N · p · e)


Embedding Layer

+ 2O(l · (N 2 · e + N · e2 )) + 2O(e · p · du ),




Transformer Layer

(17)

Dense Layer

where e is the embedding size, p is the patch size, N is the
number of patches, l is the transformer layers, and du is the
dense units. Thus, the temporal complexity of the MKF-ADS
Om is composed of Op in the test phase and the STcAM module

Os , denoted as follows:
Om = Os + ∂Os + Op = 2Os + Op = 2O(c2 · fs · sl )


Conv1D

+ 2O(sl · hs · c) + 2O(sl · 2h2s + sl ) + 2O(du ) +Op ,






BiLSTM

 



Attention Mechanism

(18)

Dense Layer

where sl is the sequence length, fs and c are the filter size and
the number of channels in the Conv1D, respectively, hs is the
hidden size in the LSTM, and du is dense units. Thus, in the
training phase, the total temporal complexity of MKF-ADS is
determined by N , e, c, and hs . In contrast, the online detection
phase is influenced only by c and hs .
2) Spatial Complexity: The model parameters and gradient
information primarily determine space complexity. During offline training, the space complexity of PatchST can be approximated as follows:
Op + ∂Op + Opa = 2Op + Opa = 2O(p · e)
 
Embedding Layer

+ 2O(l · (N · e + 2e2 + 2e)) + 2O(e · du ) + 2O(b) .

 


Transformer Layer

Dense Layer

(19)

Biases

Accordingly, the space complexity of MKF-ADS can be approximated as follows:
Om = Os + ∂Os + Op + = 2Os + Op
= 2O(c2 · fs ) + 2O(sl · 2hs ) + 2O(4h2s + 2hs )


 


Conv1D

BiLSTM

Attention Mechanism

+ 2O(2du ∗ hs ) + 2O(b) +Op .



Dense Layer

(20)

Biases

Similarly, during the training phase, the total space complexity
of MKF-ADS is determined by N , e, c, and hs , while the space
complexity in the online detection phase is influenced by hs
and c. Due to fine pruning, these parameters of MKF-ADS
are constrained to be sufficiently small, thereby exhibiting low
temporal and spatial complexity. In other words, the MKF-IDS
is lightweight and suitable for IVNs.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness
and efficiency of MKF-ADS in preventing malicious attacks on
vehicular networks.
A. Experiment Setup
1) Hardware & Software: To develop the MKF-ADS, we
used PyTorch 1.13 in Python for model training. This training
process was run on a server equipped with an Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-9500 U CPU @ 3.6 GHz with 64 GB of RAM and an RTX
3090 GPU. In the testing phase, the model’s performance and
effectiveness were evaluated on a real vehicle equipped with an
NVIDIA Jetson AGX Xavier (16 GB).
2) Metrics: In the publicly available dataset, we consider
each abnormal sequence as a positive case and each normal
sequence as a negative one. Accordingly, we calculate four

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

13803

statistical metrics: true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false
positive (FP), and false negative (FN). Then, the precision (P),
recall (R), and F1-Score are calculated as follows.
P =

TP
2×P ×R
TP
,R =
,F1 =
, (21)
TP + FP
TP + FN
P +R

where high precision indicates the model’s ability to accurately
identify attacks, and stable recall represents that the model will
not miss negatives. The F1-score represents the balance between
precision and recall. Also, the error rate (ER) and false alarm rate
(FAR), both critical measures of detection system performance,
are reported and calculated as follows:
ER =

FP + FN
FP
, F AR =
TP + TN + FP + FN
FP + TN

Fig. 6. The number of features and feature boundaries for candidate CAN
IDs, where (a) shows feature selection based on the “Read” algorithm, and (b)
displays the results of boundary determination.

(22)

where ER represents the percentage of incorrect classifications
relative to the total sample, and a lower FAR represents highquality service from the IDS without constant false alarms.
3) Implementation Details: We employ grid-search to identify the optimal hyperparameters, including slide window size
T ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64}, filter size f ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64}, hidden units
h ∈ {4, 8, 16, 32}, dropout rate of 0.2, and batch size b ∈
{128, 256, 512, 1024}. For the teacher model (PatchST), all
CAN IDs used a patch length of P = 4, a stride of S = 1,
8-dimensional embedding, and 2 transformer heads. The Adam
optimizer was applied with a learning rate of 1e-2, and training
was conducted for 3000 epochs with early stopping.
4) Baseline Models: To deeply analyze the advantages of
knowledge fusion, we compare MKF-ADS with predictionbased methods. These methods use only partial knowledge of
MKF-ADS and are described as follows:
r LSTM-P: This model uses the LSTM network to extract
temporal knowledge and predict a 64-bit physical value
for the next time step [21].
r LSTM-E: This model improves on LSTM-P through optimization function, and its prediction target is a decimal
physical value [22].
r DeepConvGRU: This model uses a depthwise separable
convolutional layer and two extended RNN layers to extract
spatial-temporal knowledge [42].
r ConvLSTM-GNB: This model integrates spatial-temporal
knowledge with Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB) under a
supervised learning [43]. To ensure fairness, we only use
its prediction module for anomaly detection.
r CLAM: This model leverages spatial-temporal attention
knowledge to identify anomalies [24].
B. Detection Performance
To evaluate the performance of MKF-ADS, we build a multivariate time series for the same CAN ID. As described in
Section IV-B, we first select key features using the “Read”
algorithm. Then, we filter 7 out of 28 CAN IDs for evaluation
based on the criteria that each must have more than 15 features
and a periodicity of approximately 10 ms, as shown in Fig. 6(a).
Fig. 6(b) shows the various signal channels of the selected CAN
IDs, as determined by the boundary determination algorithm.
For offline training, 80% of the dataset is used for training and

Fig. 7. Prediction deviation for different hyperparameters under grid search,
where loss represents MAE.

the remaining 20% for testing. Unless otherwise specified, we
use CAN ID 0x260 for evaluation.
Subsequently, we employ a grid search algorithm to identify
the optimal hyperparameters, as shown in Fig. 7. In this step, we
set the sliding window size of 16, which improves contextual
and spatial-temporal knowledge modeling. In contrast, incorporating longer historical data introduces noise, leading to a
significant decline in accuracy. The filter size and the number
of hidden cells are set to 16 and 8, respectively, which not only
yield the lowest MAE but also substantially reduce the model’s
parameter count. Notably, increasing the number of parameters
only adds to inference complexity without any improvement in
prediction accuracy. Additionally, a batch size of 512 is chosen
to facilitate rapid convergence during the cross-fertilization of
knowledge. After determining the optimal hyperparameters, we
train MKF-ADS until convergence. The prediction results are
shown in Fig. 8, where the predicted values closely align with
the actual values. Compared to the method in [24], our model
improves prediction performance in fine-grained variations of
the CAN sequence. We attribute this improvement to the effective trend learning enabled by the knowledge fusion mechanism
in MKF-ADS.
A well-trained ADS is expected to exhibit minimal prediction deviation under normal messages. Table II presents the
prediction performance in comparison with baseline models.
Evolving from temporal knowledge, spatial-temporal knowledge, and spatial-temporal attention knowledge to the proposed
knowledge fusion framework, our model surpasses baselines.

13804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. The prediction results of the MKF-ADS model. The red line is the
ground truth, and the blue line is the prediction result of the MKF-ADS.

Fig. 9. Visualization of the detection of coarse-grained attacks, where the
attacker injects anomalies that deviate significantly from normal values. The red
line is the ground truth of the CAN sequence on the CAN bus, the blue line is
the predicted value, and the yellow line is the anomaly score.

TABLE II
PREDICTION DEVIATION OF THE MODEL COMPARED WITH BASELINE

Notably, the LSTM-P performs the worst, followed by the
LSTM-E due to the lack of knowledge fusion. The MAE and
RMSE of DeepConvGRU and ConvLSTM-GNB show slight
improvements when spatial features are incorporated. Among
the baselines, CLAM achieves the best performance, with its
attention mechanism enabling the model to focus on critical
time steps, resulting in MAE and RMSE of only 0.0391 and
0.0905. Similarly, the MAPE follows the same trend, decreasing from 0.6939 to 0.2547. In contrast, the proposed STcAM
component further reduces the prediction error while lowering
model complexity, achieving an MAE of 0.0325 and a MAPE of
0.1855. Also, the PatchST model effectively models contextual
knowledge, resulting in the lowest error. Thus, the proposed
MKF-ADS achieves a promising prediction performance, with
only 0.0305 on the MAE.
To verify the performance of MKF-ADS in anomaly detection, we simulate attack sequences in six attack scenarios, as
discussed in Section III-B. These attacks disrupt communication
between ECUs by mimicking their behavior and modifying the
data fields of the CAN frame. Also, we vary the anomalous
in the degrees of deviation from the normal value to analyze
the proposed model capability for anomaly identification under
the terms of coarse and fine-grained. Figs. 9 and 10 present
the anomaly detection performance of the model in the coarsegrained and fine-grained, respectively. MKF-ADS can accurately detect anomalous messages when the attacker attempts a
coarse-grained attack to significantly alter the state of the vehicle
in a short period. In such cases, the CAN bus will receive alerts
and discard abnormal messages. Specifically, Fig. 9(a) presents
the detection results for the DoS attack. Due to the injection
of a large number of malicious messages over a short period,

Fig. 10. Visualization of the detection of fine-grained attacks, where the
attacker injects anomalies that closely resemble normal values. The red line
is the ground truth of the CAN sequence on the CAN bus, the blue line is the
predicted value, and the yellow line is the anomaly score.

MKF-ADS successfully identifies the anomaly as it frequently
exceeds the threshold. In Fuzzy attacks, the attacker misleads
the bus by injecting random signals. However, if the range of
random signals becomes uncontrolled, MKF-ADS detects the
anomaly. In suspension and replay attacks, compliant messages
appear on the CAN bus at incorrect times. The model captures
this timing disruption as anomalous deviations occur between
predicted signals (based on the history window) and attack
messages. In Fig. 9(e), the attacker purposefully modifies signal
values to spoof the bus, for instance, by altering the gear speed.
In contrast, the masquerade attack is more stealthy, removing
normal messages before inserting malicious ones. Nevertheless,
MKF-ADS easily detects such anomalies.
Next, we evaluate the proposed model at a fine-grained level,
in which attacks are generated insidiously. In DoS attacks,
numerous messages are injected within the boundaries of normal
messages. Although fluctuation values drop dramatically, the
pattern of injecting numerous messages still draws the model’s
attention. In Fuzzy attacks, the attacker generates random data
within well-controlled bounds. During suspension attacks, the
attacker deactivates the target ECU, disrupting a stable signal.
Similarly, in a replay attack, the attacker records a segment
of messages resembling normal signals and injects it later.
Even though anomaly scores fluctuate slightly, MKF-ADS still
recognizes anomalous intervals. Moreover, we simulate more
insidious spoofing and masquerade attacks. In Fig. 10(e)–(f), the
elaborately modified signals closely match the normal signals for
several instances. However, the proposed model generates only

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

Fig. 11. Threshold determination for anomaly detection using a confidence
interval-based approach.

TABLE III
COMPARISON WITH BASELINE IN SIX ATTACK SCENARIOS

13805

Fig. 12. Evaluation on all candidate CAN IDs, where (a) represents the test
error, and (b) is the average performance on six attack scenarios.

attention mechanism. In contrast, the proposed model performs
best on DoS attacks, achieving 98.7% precision and 100% recall.
Also, MKF-ADS maintains 96.7% precision and 100% recall on
fuzzy attacks, attributed to the random signals being completely
distinct from the normal ones. In replay and suspension attacks,
the proposed model can identify message injections that are
inconsistent with timestamps but legitimate, achieving precision
and recall of 96.1% vs. 100% and 98.6% vs. 97.2%, respectively.
Significant performance degradation is observed in MKF-ADS
for spoofing detection, as gradual load changes severely confuse
the model, especially in masquerade attacks. Nevertheless, the
proposed model remains highly competitive, with precision and
recall of 100% vs. 100% and 91.6% vs. 87.5%. The model also
achieves F1 scores of 99.3%, 98.3%, 97.3%, 98.5%, 95.6%, and
93.3%, respectively. Correspondingly, the error rate reflects the
overall detection ability of MKF-ADS, only fluctuating between
0% and 1.76%. Moreover, maintaining a low FAR is crucial for
vehicle status, and MKF-ADS reduces it to between 0% and
1.97%.
C. Generalization Performance

one false alarm on the attack interval. Thus, MKF-ADS maintains stable performance, even in fine-grained attack scenarios.
To evaluate the detection performance of MKF-ADS, we find
the optimal threshold for six attack scenarios. In Fig. 11, we
observe that the effect of K on detection performance is critical,
i.e., smaller values of K increase the FAR, while larger values
of K result in missed alarms. Thus, we build different values
of K and thresholds in these attack scenarios. As shown in
Table III, MKF-ADS outperforms baseline models. LSTM-P
and LSTM-E, which rely solely on temporal knowledge, exhibit
the worst performance, with the highest FAR across various
attacks. With the introduction of spatial-temporal knowledge,
the DeepConvGRU and ConvLSTM-GNB can detect more
anomalies, while exhibiting poorer robustness. CLAM demonstrates the most stable performance among the baseline, due to

To evaluate the generalization performance of the proposed
model, we report its prediction and detection abilities across all
candidate CAN IDs. In Fig. 12, we find variations in the MAE
across different CAN IDs, attributed to fluctuation in the data.
For example, the periodic patterns for 0x002 and 0x004 result in
a near-zero model error. The errors of CAN IDs similar to 0x260
maintained around 0.03. In contrast, 0x130 and 0x131 exhibit
the worst prediction performance, with errors only reducing to
around 0.06. Regarding detection performance, the precision,
recall, and F1 scores converge to the blue color for all CAN
IDs, indicating anomaly detection capability. Also, the errors
converge to red, suggesting that the FAR and ER are within a
controllable range.
Given a set of observations X (i) ∈ RM ×T for a CAN ID, we
define the predict targets as ŷ (i) ∈ RM ×L . Fig. 13 shows the
evaluation of L from 1 to 5. First, the prediction error gradually
increases as the number of prediction targets grows. For example, when predicting five-time steps, the MAE reached 0.054.
Based on this observation, we set the corresponding thresholds
for different prediction targets. Similarly, the proposed model
maintains stable detection performance and achieves consistently low FAR and ER.

13806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 13. Evaluation on time steps from 1 to 5, where (a) represents the test
error, and (b) is the average performance on six attack scenarios.

Fig. 15. Vehicle-level setup for model efficiency evaluation. (a) Equipment
components, and (b) Connections between experimental components.
TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATION COST

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF TIME COST ON THE REAL VEHICLE

Fig. 14. Evaluation of MKF-ADS on the ROAD dataset with four spoofing
attacks and four masquerade attacks, where the red line is the true value and the
green line is the prediction of MKF-ADS. The x-axis represents the time steps
and the y-axis represents the signal values.

Moreover, we present the generalization performance on the
ROAD dataset. In this task, numerous attacks target spoofing and
masquerade scenarios, which can seriously impact the physical
state of vehicles. These effects include the accelerator failing,
dashboard lights and headlights turning on, and the seat position
shifting. For example, a spoof on 0x0D0 modifies the third bytes
to ‘0 C’ to change the status of the reverse light from off to on.
Fig. 14 shows the prediction results for spoofing and masquerade
attack scenarios, related to the Engine, Speedometer, and Light.
Based on our observation, the vehicle state remains constant on
the CAN bus for a short time. However, when the attacker injects
messages that alter the vehicles’ behavior (e.g., speed changed
to ‘FF’), MKF-ADS deviates significantly from the anomalous
message during the attack interval due to only having the current
signal. In short, the proposed model can identify attack periods
based on specific thresholds and then alert the bus-layer.
D. Vehicle-Level Model Efficiency Evaluation
In this subsection, we compare and evaluate whether the
model is suitable for IVNs based on the computation cost and
time required for anomaly detection. Specifically, we set up a
vehicle-level evaluation on a real vehicle (SAIC Roewe Marvel
X), as shown in Fig. 15(a). First, we connect the PC to the
vehicle’s OBD-II port via the serial peripheral interface (SPI)
and then record CAN logs using the CAN-Test software. The

software also supports injecting attack messages into the vehicle,
with attack rules consistent with the attack model discussed
in Section III-B. Next, we deploy MKF-ADS on the vehicles’
intelligent controller, powered by an NVIDIA Jetson Xavier
(16 GB). The connections between the experiment equipment
are shown in Fig. 15(b).
We report the computational cost in terms of the number
of parameters, floating-point operations (FLOPs), multiplyaccumulate operations (MACs), and memory usage, using the
thop and torchinfo libraries. Table IV shows a comparison
between the proposed model and existing studies. Clearly, MKFADS achieves knowledge fusion using only 1,952 parameters.
In contrast, the parameter count of the baseline increases significantly depending on the type of incorporated knowledge.
Furthermore, MKF-ADS requires FLOPs and MACs comparable to those of LSTM-based models. Notably, the proposed
method consumes the least memory due to parameter pruning.
Table V shows a time cost analysis comparing the proposed
model with the baseline. In this table, DCT, DT, and TT represent
the Data Collection Time, Detection Time, and Total Time for
each intrusion detection. Based on our observations, the DCT
depends on the observation window size during pre-processing,
while DT is influenced by model complexity. In this case, we find
that all models exhibit similar DCT costs, while the proposed
method only requires 2.28 ms for anomaly detection. As a result,

CHENG et al.: MKF-ADS: MULTI-KNOWLEDGE FUSION BASED ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM IN VEHICULAR CONTROL AREA NETWORKS

the MKF-ADS achieves the lowest TT compared to the baseline,
making it well-suited for IVNs.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we propose MKF-ADS, a multi-knowledge
fusion based anomaly detection model for the vehicular network.
This model integrates a spatial-temporal correlation module with
an attention mechanism (STcAM) and patch-based sparse transformer (PatchST) module. Furthermore, the model introduces
cross-knowledge distillation into STcAM, treating it as a student
model to learn intrinsic knowledge and cross-mimic the capabilities of PatchST. Thus, the model achieves a knowledge-fused
at the feature level and is well-suited for resource-limited IVN
environments. Comparing our method with the baseline in this
field, the prediction error and detection capability are improved
and robust.
However, several issues in ADS still need to be addressed
before achieving practical application in IVNs. First, we will
explore how to mitigate noise effects during knowledge fusion.
A promising direction is to use interpretable analysis for precise
knowledge fusion. Also, we aim to enhance forecasting performance across multiple time steps, enabling early-phase attack
detection. To reduce model complexity, we plan to develop an
integrated ADS for all CAN IDs, facilitating secure interactions
between ECUs.
REFERENCES
[1] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for
in-vehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
[2] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane,
“NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intra-vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22596–22606,
Nov. 2022.
[3] M. Han, P. Cheng, and S. Ma, “PPM-InVIDS: Privacy protection model
for in-vehicle intrusion detection system based complex-valued neural
network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 31, 2021, Art. no. 100374.
[4] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur.
Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[5] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intrusion
detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
[6] K. Pawelec, R. A. Bridges, and F. L. Combs, “Towards a can IDS based on
a neural network data field predictor,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Automot.
Cybersecurity, 2019, pp. 31–34.
[7] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[8] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “A survey on machine learning-based misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond vehicular networks,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1128–1172, Secondquarter
2023.
[9] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A.
Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture
for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021.
[10] L. Wang et al., “Periodic event-triggered fault detection for safe platooning
control of intelligent and connected vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 5064–5077, Apr. 2024.
[11] K. H. Park et al., “Unsupervised malicious domain detection with less
labeling effort,” Comput. Secur., vol. 116, 2022, Art. no. 102662.
[12] J. R. V. Solaas, N. Tuptuk, and E. Mariconti, “Systematic review:
Anomaly detection in connected and autonomous vehicles,” 2024,
arXiv:2405.02731.

13807

[13] H. Luo et al., “ESIA: An efficient and stable identity authentication
for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 4,
pp. 5602–5615, Apr. 2024.
[14] O. Schell and M. Kneib, “Valid: Voltage-based lightweight intrusion
detection for the controller area network,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf.
Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 225–232.
[15] M. Foruhandeh, Y. Man, R. Gerdes, M. Li, and T. Chantem, “Simple:
Single-frame based physical layer identification for intrusion detection and
prevention on in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Comput. Secur.
Appl. Conf., 2019, pp. 229–244.
[16] M. Kneib, O. Schell, and C. Huth, “EASI: Edge-based sender identification
on resource-constrained platforms for automotive networks,” in Proc.
NDSS, 2020, pp. 1–16.
[17] P. Cheng, M. Han, and G. Liu, “DESC-IDS: Towards an efficient realtime automotive intrusion detection system based on deep evolving
stream clustering,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 140, pp. 266–281,
2023.
[18] F. Erlacher and F. Dressler, “On high-speed flow-based intrusion detection using snort-compatible signatures,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 495–506, Jan./Feb. 2022.
[19] Z. Wu, H. Zhang, P. Wang, and Z. Sun, “RTIDS: A robust transformerbased approach for intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 64375–64387, 2022.
[20] C. Liu, T. Nie, Y. Du, J. Cao, D. Wu, and F. Li, “A response-type
road anomaly detection and evaluation method for steady driving of
automated vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 21984–21995, Nov. 2022.
[21] A. Taylor, S. Leblanc, and N. Japkowicz, “Anomaly detection
in automobile control network data with long short-term memory networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Analytics,
2016, pp. 130–139.
[22] H. Qin, M. Yan, and H. Ji, “Application of controller area network (CAN)
bus anomaly detection based on time series prediction,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 27, 2021, Art. no. 100291.
[23] M. Hanselmann, T. Strauss, K. Dormann, and H. Ulmer, “CANet: An
unsupervised intrusion detection system for high dimensional CAN bus
data,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58194–58205, 2020.
[24] H. Sun, M. Chen, J. Weng, Z. Liu, and G. Geng, “Anomaly detection for
in-vehicle network using CNN-LSTM with attention mechanism,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10880–10893, Oct. 2021.
[25] N. Alkhatib, M. Mushtaq, H. Ghauch, and J. -L. Danger, “CAN-BERT
do it? Controller area network intrusion detection system based on BERT
language model,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl.,
2022, pp. 1–8.
[26] M. Nam, S. Park, and D. S. Kim, “Intrusion detection method using bidirectional GPT for in-vehicle controller area networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 124931–124944, 2021.
[27] M. Marchetti and D. Stabili, “Read: Reverse engineering of automotive data frames,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 1083–1097, Apr. 2019.
[28] M. Müter and N. Asaj, “Entropy-based anomaly detection for in-vehicle
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2011, pp. 1110–1115.
[29] H. M. Song, H. R. Kim, and H. K. Kim, “Intrusion detection system based
on the analysis of time intervals of can messages for in-vehicle network,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2016, pp. 63–68.
[30] H. Olufowobi, C. Young, J. Zambreno, and G. Bloom, “SAIDuCANT:
Specification-based automotive intrusion detection using controller area
network (CAN) timing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 2,
pp. 1484–1494, Feb. 2020.
[31] Z. Zhang, Y. Cao, Z. Cui, W. Zhang, and J. Chen, “A many-objective
optimization based intelligent intrusion detection algorithm for enhancing
security of vehicular networks in 6G,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
no. 6, pp. 5234–5243, Jun. 2021.
[32] V. Tanksale, “Intrusion detection for controller area network using support
vector machines,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Mobile Ad Hoc Sensor
Syst. Workshops, 2019, pp. 121–126.
[33] M. R. Dey, M. Patra, and P. Mishra, “Efficient detection and localization
of DoS attacks in heterogeneous vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 5597–5611, May 2023.
[34] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
2020, Art. no. 100198.
[35] Y. Xun, J. Qin, and J. Liu, “Deep learning enhanced driving behavior
evaluation based on vehicle-edge-cloud architecture,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6172–6177, Jun. 2021.

13808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[36] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and G. Kumar,
“A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system using spatialtemporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 35, 2022, Art. no. 100471.
[37] P. Cheng, M. Han, A. Li, and F. Zhang, “STC-IDS: Spatial–temporal correlation feature analyzing based intrusion detection system for intelligent
connected vehicles,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 9532–9561,
2022.
[38] A. R. Javed, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. Reddy,
“CANintelliIDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller
area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[39] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware explainable intrusion detection system for controller area network-based invehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 3230–3246,
Mar. 2024.
[40] S. Tariq, S. Lee, and S. S. Woo, “CANTransfer: Transfer learning based
intrusion detection on a controller area network using convolutional
LSTM network,” in Proc. 35th Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., 2020,
pp. 1048–1055.
[41] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for fast
anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023.
[42] J. Zhang et al., “A deep learning framework for driving behavior identification on in-vehicle CAN-BUS sensor data,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 6, 2019,
Art. no. 1356.
[43] P. Mansourian, N. Zhang, A. Jaekel, and M. Kneppers, “Deep learningbased anomaly detection for connected autonomous vehicles using spatiotemporal information,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 16006–16017, Dec. 2023.
[44] M. A. Shawky, M. Bottarelli, G. Epiphaniou, and P. Karadimas, “An
efficient cross-layer authentication scheme for secure communication in
vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 7,
pp. 8738–8754, Jul. 2023.
[45] L. Dariz, M. Selvatici, M. Ruggeri, G. Costantino, and F. Martinelli,
“Trade-off analysis of safety and security in CAN bus communication,”
in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Models Technol. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2017,
pp. 226–231.
[46] W. A. Farag, “CANTrack: Enhancing automotive CAN bus security using
intuitive encryption algorithms,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Model., Simul.,
Appl. Optim., 2017, pp. 1–5.
[47] G. Bella, P. Biondi, G. Costantino, and I. Matteucci, “TOUCAN: A protocol to secure controller area network,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Automot.
Cybersecurity, 2019, pp. 3–8.
[48] T. Alladi, S. Chakravarty, V. Chamola, and M. Guizani, “A lightweight
authentication and attestation scheme for in-transit vehicles in IoV scenario,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 14188–14197,
Dec. 2020.
[49] J. Cui et al., “Lightweight encryption and authentication for controller
area network of autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72,
no. 11, pp. 14756–14770, Nov. 2023.
[50] Y. Xun, Z. Deng, J. Liu, and Y. Zhao, “Side channel analysis: A novel
intrusion detection system based on vehicle voltage signals,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 7240–7250, Jun. 2023.
[51] I. Studnia, E. Alata, V. Nicomette, M. Kaâniche, and Y. Laarouchi, “A
language-based intrusion detection approach for automotive embedded
networks,” Int. J. Embedded Syst., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[52] A. H. Sodhro, G. H. Sodhro, M. Guizani, S. Pirbhulal, and A. Boukerche,
“AI-enabled reliable channel modeling architecture for fog computing
vehicular networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 14–21,
Apr. 2020.
[53] L. Sun, J. Liang, and G. Muhammad, “Distillate a sparse-meta time
series classifier for open radio access network-based cellular vehicle-toeverything,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9262–9271,
Jul. 2024.
[54] M. E. Verma et al., “Addressing the lack of comparability & testing in
CAN intrusion detection research: A comprehensive guide to CAN IDS
data & introduction of the ROAD dataset,” 2020, arXiv:2012.14600.
[55] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. 11th
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.

[56] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via
BERT,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
[57] J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Li, M. -M. Cheng, and Q. Hou,
“CrossKD: Cross-head knowledge distillation for object detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 16520–
16530.

Pengzhou Cheng received the M.S. degree from
the Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
China, in 2022. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Electronic
Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. He is also
co-supervised by Prof. Fengwei Zhang with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen, China. His research interests include artificial intelligence security, backdoor attacks and defenses, cybersecurity, machine
learning, deep learning, and intrusion detection systems.

Shouxuan Liu is currently working toward the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering and physics with the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. His
research interests include semiconductor devices, machine learning, and large-scale integrated photonics.

Zongru Wu received the B.S degree from the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Hubei, China, in 2022. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include
artificial intelligence security, backdoor attack and
countermeasures, cybersecurity, machine learning,
and deep learning.

Lixing Tan received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China. He is currently a Lecturer with the College of Information Engineering, Taizhou University, Taizhou, China. He has authored or coauthored several papers in internationally
renowned journals, such as Artificial Intelligence and
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning. His
research interests include explainable artificial intelligence, knowledge representation, and reasoning.

Gongshen Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
Department of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. He is currently
a Professor with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. His research interests include natural language processing, machine learning, and artificial
intelligence security.