IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

3500714

Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection Based
on Multiple Spatiotemporal Graph Convolution
Shiming He , Qingqing Guo , Genxin Li , Kun Xie , Member, IEEE,
and Pradip Kumar Sharma , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract— Multivariate time series anomaly detection
(MTSAD) plays a crucial role in the Internet of Things (IoT),
identifying device malfunction or system attacks. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) are widely applied in MTSAD to capture
the spatial features among sensors. However, GNN requires
an explicit graph structure and cannot work when spatial
relationships are lacking or sensor dependencies are unknown.
Hence, graph structure learning (GSL) emerges as a promising
solution, which learns graph structures with the downstream
tasks without requiring spatial relationships. However, a general
cascade effect occurs in the industrial scene. Moreover, an attack
event changes sensor data sequentially instead of simultaneously
due to the multiple serial process that occurs (i.e., delay
correlation). Existing GSL-based anomaly detection methods
fail to tackle delay correlation and focus on low prediction
errors. However, the low prediction error distribution is always
dispersed, making it difficult to differentiate between normal and
abnormal samples based on a threshold. Therefore, we propose
an MTSAD based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution
(MSTGAD). MSTGAD uses dynamic time warping (DTW)
distance as prior knowledge instead of Euclidean, guiding graph
learning to capture delay correlations effectively. MSTGAD
designs an ensemble predictor, which uses two subpredictors
with a shared and learnable graph to ensure high prediction
accuracy while maintaining stable anomaly scores. Furthermore,
we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the MSTGAD
method’s effectiveness. Our method outperforms existing
GSL-based methods in anomaly detection on four publicly
available real-world datasets, demonstrating our proposed
approach’s effectiveness. Compared with the best GSL-based

Received 30 May 2024; revised 20 August 2024; accepted 6 September
2024. Date of publication 22 November 2024; date of current version
26 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272062 and Grant 62025201; in
part by the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province
under Grant 2023RC3139; in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan
Provincial Transportation Department under Grant 202143; in part by the
Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Safety Control of Bridge Engineering,
Ministry of Education, Changsha University of Science and Technology,
under Grant 21KB07; and in part by the Open Research Fund of the Hunan
Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Investigational Technology under Grant
2018WLZC003. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was
Dr. Ke Feng. (Corresponding author: Kun Xie.)
Shiming He, Qingqing Guo, and Genxin Li are with the School of
Computer and Communication Engineering and the Hunan Provincial Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Processing of Big Data on Transportation, Changsha
University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, China (e-mail:
smhe_cs@csust.edu.cn; guoqingqing@stu.csust.edu.cn).
Kun Xie is with the College of Computer Science and Electronics Engineering and the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Fusion Computing
of Supercomputing and Artificial Intelligence, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, China (e-mail: xiekun@hnu.edu.cn).
Pradip Kumar Sharma is with the Department of Computing Science,
University of Aberdeen, AB24 3UE Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail: Pradip.sharma@
abdn.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3493890

method, MSTGAD achieves an additional 0.83% improvement
on average.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, graph neural networks
(GNNs), graph structure learning (GSL), Internet of Things
(IoT), multivariate time series (MTS).

X
xi
xt
Xt
N
M
b
yt
G
A
DTW(x i , x j )
ADTW
ε
g
πi
τ
AFPM
0∗T X
2∗G X
⊙
2l
b
xtSTGCN
H(t)
b
xtDCRNN
b
xt
λ1
λ2
Erri (t)
s(t)

I

N OMENCLATURE
Multivariate time series.
ith indicator values.
Indicator values at timestamp t.
Historical window of length ω at
timestamp t.
Number of indicators.
Number of timestamps.
Label of timestamp t.
Graph.
Adjacency matrix.
DTW distance between indicators i and j.
Adjacency matrix of the DTW
prior graph.
Threshold of the DTW distance in prior
graph.
Samples from the Gumbel distribution.
Probabilities of ith class.
Temperature parameter.
Adjacency matrix of the fully
parameterized graph.
Temporal convolutional network.
Graph convolutional network.
Hadamard product of elements.
Spectral kernel of the GCN.
Prediction from the STGCN subpredictor
at timestamp t.
Hidden features at timestamp t.
Prediction from the DCRNN subpredictor
at timestamp t.
Prediction from the ensemble predictor at
timestamp t.
Prediction weight parameter.
Regularization amplitude parameter of
graph learning.
Prediction error at timestamp t for sensor i.
Anomaly score at timestamp t.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, more critical infrastructures have been
deployed by various Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensors.

1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

These sensors, such as water treatment, lithium-ion batteries
[1], and nanogenerators [2], continue to generate substantial
amounts of time series data that record system statuses. The
data generated by these sensors are known as multivariate time
series (MTS) data. Developing effective anomaly detection
technologies to automate the identification of abnormal system
behavior and promptly trigger alerts is a necessary and urgent
task. This is because abnormal MTS data changes indicate
a system attack or equipment failure. If the anomaly is not
discovered and dealt with immediately, the whole system
may fail, leading to economic losses [3]. Therefore, the MTS
anomaly detection (MTSAD) task plays an important role in
the IoT [4].
In the IoT, sensors interact with and depend on each other.
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) [5] have been
incorporated into MTSAD to capture the relationships between
sensors. GNNs require an explicit graph structure. Therefore,
the existing GNN-based anomaly detection methods use a
fixed graph structure derived from the prior domain expert
knowledge. However, sensor graph structures or dependency
information is expensive and not easily accessible in most realworld scenarios.
Graph structure learning (GSL) [6] is a promising solution
when expert knowledge is lacking, sensor dependencies are
unknown, and access costs are high [7]. It learns the optimal
graph structure of the dependencies among sensors to match
downstream anomaly detection tasks. Graph deviation network
(GDN) [8] first introduced GSL into anomaly detection, resulting in two mainstream GSL methods being used in anomaly
detection currently: node feature-based similarity [8], [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15] and fully parameterized GSL [16],
[17], [18], [19], [20]. The former generates a graph using
the learnable node embedding similarities, while the latter
regards the adjacency matrix’s elements as free and learnable parameters. In addition, fully parameterized GSL offers
more flexibility than the node feature-based similarity method.
Although GSL can learn the relationships among sensors
[15], the existing GSL-based anomaly detection method still
encounters several challenges.
1) The Existing Prior Graph Similarity Methods Cannot Tackle With the Delay Correlation Within Time
Series Data: The existing GSL-based anomaly detection
methods usually use prior graphs [21] to guide GSL.
The prior graph in TS-GAT [11] and GSLAD [20]
is generally generated using sensor data similarities,
and the main similarity methods include the cosine
and Euclidean distance approaches, which only compare
the same timestamp values between sensors. However,
a general cascade effect in the industrial field exists,
mainly due to the presence of certain distances in space
between industrial sensors. Moreover, an attack even
changes sensor data sequentially instead of simultaneously. The cosine or Euclidean distance approaches
ignore the similarities between different timestamp values noise into the prior graph.
2) Existing Anomaly Detection Methods Focus on Low
Prediction Error. However, Models With High Prediction Accuracy Have Large Prediction Error Variances,

Resulting in a Dispersed Distribution. This Makes Distinguishing Between Normal and Abnormal Samples
Based on a Threshold Challenging, Thereby Diminishing Anomaly Detection Performance: Most existing
GSL-based anomaly detection methods focus on the
prediction error generated by GNNs and treat timestamps with a large prediction error as anomalies. They
generally select prediction models with a low prediction
error and high overall accuracy [19], [20]. However, the
prediction and anomaly detection tasks differ. Although
the overall prediction accuracy is high, the anomaly
detection effectiveness may not be satisfactory. In addition, models with high overall prediction accuracy
may exhibit inconsistent prediction errors (i.e., anomaly
scores) with large variances. This means that the prediction error at certain timestamps is low, while being
significantly high at others. Consequently, distinguishing
between normal and abnormal samples based on the
prediction error values becomes challenging, leading to
unsatisfactory anomaly detection performance.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose
MTSAD based on multiple spatiotemporal graph convolution
(MSTGAD). We leverage the dynamic time-warping (DTW)
distance to establish a DTW graph as prior knowledge, guiding
the learning process to capture delay correlations effectively.
In addition, we adopt a fully parameterized approach to
construct the learnable graph, substantially reducing time
overhead. Moreover, we combine the diffusion convolutional
recurrent neural network (DCRNN) and spatiotemporal graph
convolutional network (STGCN) with a shared and learnable
graph for ensemble prediction. This strategy ensures precise
predictions and stabilizes the anomaly scores. This article’s
main contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) To effectively address delay correlation, we generate a
prior graph from raw data using DTW distance instead
of Euclidean to accurately guide GSL.
2) To concentrate and stabilize the anomaly scores necessary for anomaly detection, we integrate multiple
spatiotemporal predictors with a shared and learnable
graph instead of focusing solely on the high overall
prediction accuracy. This strikes a balance between
prediction accuracy and anomaly score stability.
3) We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method’s efficiency and effectiveness. On four
real-world and publicly available datasets, our method
achieves state-of-the-art anomaly detection results. Compared with the best GSL-based method, MSTGAD
achieves an additional 0.83% improvement on average.
This article’s remaining sections are organized as follows.
Section II presents an overview of related works. Section III
provides the preliminary knowledge, problem definition, and
research motivation. Section IV comprehensively explains
our approach, including a general overview and an individual components discussion. In Section V, we analyze the
model’s performance and efficiency. Finally, we conclude
by summarizing our findings and discussing future work in
Section VI.

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

II. R ELATED W ORK
The existing works on MTSAD can be classified into three
categories. The first type usually uses temporal features to
detect anomalies, while the second focuses on MTS spatial
features. The third type detects anomalies with unknown
spatial relationships.
A. Temporal Feature-Based Anomaly Detection
Long short-term memory (LSTM) is widely used in
MTSAD due to its ability to process sequence data. For
example, LSTM-NDT [22] uses LSTM to achieve a high
prediction performance while maintaining the whole system’s
interpretability. It uses a nonparametric, dynamic, and unsupervised threshold method to detect anomalies. In contrast,
MSCRED [23] constructs a multiscale feature matrix and uses
conv-LSTM neural networks to encode the correlation between
sensors and reconstruct multiscale feature matrix. The residual
feature matrix facilitates anomaly detection and diagnosis.
MAD-GAN [24] uses LSTM as the basic model in the generative adversarial network framework, capturing the time series
temporal correlation, extracting potential interactions, and
detecting anomalies using discrimination and reconstruction.
LSTM-DAE [25] uses a model trained on operational cycle
signals to select outlier candidate points in the first stage. Then,
it uses another model trained on sensor signals exploiting temporal continuity to detect abnormal events among the candidate
points in the second stage. In comparison, LSTM-VAE [26]
introduces multimodal observation and time dependence into
the potential space, reconstructs the expected distribution, and
evaluates the anomalies based on the reconstructed anomaly
scores.
Other recurrent neural networks (RNNs) beside LSTM are
also applied in MTSAD. For example, OmniAnomaly [27]
uses a stochastic RNN to capture the robust representations
of normal patterns and reconstruct observations. DAGMM
[28] uses a depth self-coding and Gaussian mixture model
to produce low-dimensional representations and reconstruction
errors to detect anomalies.
Although these temporal feature-based methods achieve
adequate anomaly detection results, they ignore time series
correlations.
B. Spatial Feature-Based Anomaly Detection
Graph attention networks (GATs) extract graph data features
and use them to capture the correlation between indicators and
predict the time-dependent relationships. For example, MTADTF [29] captures the temporal and spatial patterns produced by
multiscale convolution networks and GAT. MTAD-GAT [30]
obtains the correlation between different univariate time series
and the temporal dependence within each time series produced
by GAT. It integrates the prediction and reconstruction tasks
to detect anomalies. In contrast, Arvalus [31] treats system
components as nodes, and their dependencies and positions
as edges, thereby improving the identification and location
of anomalies. MDGAT [32] uses a novel architecture based
on the GAT with multihead dynamic attention to learn the
dependencies between sensors in temporal and spatial spaces.

3500714

Moreover, DVGCRN [33] captures uncertain interrelationships in MTS and detects anomalies based on the
reconstruction results. GReLeN [34] uses VAE and GCN to
learn relationships among MTS for reconstructing graphs and
achieve anomaly detection.
GNNs rely on known graph structures. These methods
assume that the relationships between indicators are known.
However, the relationships between indicators are often
unknown or the cost of obtaining them is high.
C. Unknown Spatial Relationship-Based Anomaly Detection
GSL has been used in the MTSAD field to capture spatial indicator features without graph structure. Two GSL
approaches are typically used for anomaly detection: the node
feature-based similarity and fully parameterized methods.
First, GDN [8] learns the relationship graph between sensors
based on learnable node features and identifies data that
deviate significantly from the expected distribution. Building
on GDN, HGTMAD [9] leverages GCNs and the transformer to extract spatial and temporal features independently.
In contrast, FuSAGNet [10] uses a fused sparse self-encoder
graph to explicitly model the relationships between MTS
data. It predicts and reconstructs future time series to detect
anomalies. TS-GAT [11] uses prior knowledge from raw data
to constrain graph learning. MEGA [12] and DPGLAD [13]
learn a unidirectional graph for anomaly detection. GSC-MAD
[14] uses aggregative graph updating, smooth, and sparse
constraints to learn a stable graph structure. ACGSL [15]
learns a graph for individual subsequences using the difference
constraint between two consecutive subsequences, resulting in
dynamic graphs.
GTA [16] introduces a fully parameterized GSL strategy
and uses a transformer for predictions. It detects and diagnoses anomalies in the time series by evaluating the second
norm of the difference between predicted and actual values.
Subsequently, GLAD [17] combines GAT and a transformer
to extract global and local features for anomaly detection.
MGCLAD [18] uses two directed graphs to simultaneously
learn inter- and intra-signal correlations. MEGLAD [19]
exploits three GSL types to extract multiple correlation views.
Finally, GSLAD [20] uses diffusion graph convolution networks to detect anomalies.
Node feature-based similarity GSL only learns a simple
KNN graph, where the node degree is less than K . In contrast,
fully parameterized GSL is more flexible. However, using
a transformer for temporal prediction in GTA, GLAD, and
MGCLAD increases the model’s time complexity.
III. P ROBLEM D EFINITION AND P RELIMINARIES
This article aims to explore anomaly detection in MTS.
In this section, we elaborate on the basic concepts of anomaly
detection in MTS and introduce our motivation.
A. Multivariate Time Series
MTS data comprises a large number of regularly spaced and
uninterrupted samples, which are characterized by N indicators and M timestamps, denoted by X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , x M )T ∈

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Six-stage SWaT test bed processes are P1–P6. These processes include raw water supply and storage, chemical dosing, UF, dechlorination, RO, and
RO permeate transfer, UF backwash. Each process contains several sensors named according to their function and process. For example, AIT-203 represents
the third analyzer indicator transmitter in the P2 process. The three sensors marked in red (P-203, AIT-202, and AIT-503) are used as examples to explain
delay correlation in Fig. 2.

i
R M×N . The ith indicator is defined as x i = (x1i , x2i , . . . , x M
).
In addition, the tth timestamp contains N indicator values,
which is defined as xt = (xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN )T . The history window on timestamp t with length ω is defined as a subsequence
X t = (xt−ω , xt−ω+1 , . . . , xt−1 )T ∈ R ω×N . When the label y of
timestamp t is 1, an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t.
When the label y of timestamp t is 0, timestamp t is normal.

B. Anomaly Detection in MTS
MTSAD calculates the anomaly score of each timestamp t
according to the historical subsequence X t and records it as
st . If the anomaly score st exceeds a predetermined threshold,
an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t. This process is
defined as follows:
b
xt = f (X t )

st = ϕ(xt , b
xt )
(
1, if st > Thr
b
yt =
0, if st ≤ Thr

(1)
(2)
(3)

where f () is the prediction function, b
xt denotes the predicted
value at timestamp t, xt represents the ground truth, ϕ indicates
the anomaly scores function, and Thr is the threshold.
C. Graph Structure Learning
Given the time series X ∈ R M×N , GSL aims to obtain a
graph G = (V, E) and its topology or adjacency matrix A ∈
R N ×N . In this instance, the graph nodes are the sensors that
produce the indicators, and the edges E are the hidden sensor
relationships. Furthermore, the adjacency matrix A stores
the edge information in the graph, reflecting the underlying
dependencies between indicators.

The adjacency matrix elements consist of 0 and 1. If Ai, j
is 1, an edge appears between nodes i and j. On the contrary,
when Ai, j = 0, no edge occurs between nodes i and j.
D. Motivation
Generally, GSL-based MTSAD methods outperform current
approaches. However, the existing methods encounter the
following challenges.
1) Ignoring Delay Correlation in MTS: Typically, industrial
systems are executed within multiple serial processes. For
example, the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) test bed includes
six processes (P1–P6): raw water supply and storage, chemical
dosing, ultrafiltration (UF), dechlorination, reverse osmosis
(RO), and RO permeate transfer, UF backwash, as shown in
Fig. 1. Each process contains several sensors that are named
according to their functions and processes. For example, AIT203 represents the third analyzer indicator transmitter in the
P2 process. A process attack or fault can trigger a cascade
effect on other processes, causing delays within the time
series. As shown in Fig. 2, AIT-202 experienced an attack
from timestamps 707 to 730, during which the P-203 sensor
responded promptly. However, the AIT-503 sensor only starts
responding at timestamp 760. This is because AIT-202 and
P-203 are deployed during P2, while AIT-503 is deployed at
P5. This is known as delay correlation. The existing prior
graph generation methods generally obtain the time series
similarity based on cosine or Euclidean distance, which calculates the sensor proximity at the same timestamp and ignores
the similarity between different timestamps. This makes delay
correlation challenging to tackle; therefore, these methods are
not suitable for asynchronous time series data, leading to
missing edges in the prior graph.
2) Existing Predictors Cannot Meet the Requirements of
High Prediction Accuracy and Concentrated Anomaly Score

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

Fig. 2. Example of delay correlation in the SWaT dataset. We consider three
sensors marked in red in Fig. 1: P-203 and AIT-202 in the P2 process, and
AIT-503 at P5. During the timestamps marked in pink, the sensor AIT-202
experienced an attack, while the sensor P-203 responded during the same
timestamps, marked in blue. On the other hand, the sensor AIT-503 responded
during the subsequent timestamps marked in gray.

Distributions Simultaneously: DCRNN and STGCN are excellent spatiotemporal predictors.
DCRNN combines MTS with diffusion processes to capture
spatial dependencies. Furthermore, it uses gated recurrent units
to capture time dependencies. It also excels in prediction tasks
by effectively capturing temporal and spatial dependencies,
making it an ideal choice for achieving high accuracy and
minimizing overall errors. Anomaly detection tasks aim to
minimize prediction errors at normal timestamps and maximize those at abnormal timestamps. In addition, we expect the
overall prediction error variance at normal timestamps to be
small, and we strive for minimal anomaly score fluctuations.
However, DCRNN exhibits wide anomaly score variances,
ranging from 1 to 11, as shown in Fig. 3. According to
the figure, the anomaly score exhibits a sudden increase
around timestamp 8000. This can be attributed to the indicator
(2B_AIT_002_PV) sharply rising from 0.05 to 267 during
that timestamp. This variance significantly affects the anomaly
detection task performance. The detailed sensor values in
the Water Distribution (WADI) dataset can be found in
Appendix.
In comparison, STGCN combines graph and causal convolution to extract temporal and spatial features. This network
comprises convolutional structures that can be computed in
parallel, resulting in faster speed. Therefore, STGCN is also an
excellent spatiotemporal predictor. During the prediction task,
STGCN has a low prediction accuracy. However, during the
anomaly detection task, it exhibits relatively stable anomaly
scores with low variance, ranging from 11 to 16, as shown
in Fig. 4. The anomaly scores remain stable even around
timestamp 8000.
DCRNN and STGCN have several advantages and disadvantages during prediction and anomaly detection tasks.
Therefore, we combine DCRNN and STGCN to detect anomalies.

3500714

Fig. 3.
DCRNN predictor’s anomaly score distribution. The DCRNN
method’s anomaly scores range from 1 to 11 and exhibits a large span,
indicating that the scores are widely spread and not concentrated.

Fig. 4. STGCN predictors’ anomaly score distribution. The STGCN anomaly
scores range from 11 to 16. While the distribution is concentrated, the STGCN
scores are significantly higher than those of DCRNN.

IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
This section introduces the proposed method, elaborating
on each module.
A. Overview
To obtain stable anomaly scores, we propose the MSTGAD
method. MSTGAD uses the DTW distance to measure the
node similarities and generate the prior graph. It uses the fully
parameterized graph structure learner to generate a learnable
graph and combines DCRNN and STGCN for ensemble
prediction to achieve more accurate predictions and stable
anomaly detection. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the MSTGAD
framework comprises four key modules.
1) DTW Prior Graph Learner: To capture the delay correlation in time series data, we use DTW distance to
measure time series similarities and obtain a similarity
adjacency matrix. The DTW distance is invariant to time
shifts compared with the regular Euclidean and cosine
distances. Therefore, it can capture the delay correlations
between the indicators.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 5. MSTGAD framework. MSTGAD comprises four modules: the DTW prior graph learner, fully parameterized graph structure learner, STGCN and
DRCNN-based ensemble predictor, and the anomaly score and threshold selection.

2) Fully Parameterized Graph Structure Learner: The
graph structure learner exploits the full graph parameterization method to learn the relationships between
indicators. In the full graph parameterization method,
each element of the adjacency matrix A is directly
modeled by a learnable and independent parameter,
which is updated through backpropagation. This method
generates a customized and optimal graph for the downstream task.
3) STGCN- and DRCNN-Based Ensemble Predictor: To
avoid a single predictor pursuing high overall accuracy at the expense of discriminating anomaly scores,
we adopt a combined approach that uses multiple spatiotemporal predictors. We divide the MTS into multiple
subsequences using a sliding window. According to
the learned adjacency matrix in the graph structure
learner, the combined STGCN and DCRNN predictor
uses the subsequence as the input for predicting the next
timestamp’s value.
4) Anomaly Score and Threshold Selection: The anomaly
scores are derived from the prediction error between the
prediction and the ground truth. A high anomaly score
indicates that the subsequence may not follow normal
patterns, increasing its likelihood of being an anomaly.
When the anomaly score exceeds the selected threshold,

we treat it as an anomaly. When the score is below the
threshold, we treat it as normal.
The symbols used in this section are displayed in Nomenclature.
B. DTW Prior Graph Learner
Due to delay correlation in time series, the Euclidean
distance may introduce noise to the prior graph [35]. Thus,
the DTW distance [36] is more robust. Compared with the
Euclidean and cosine distances, DTW is invariant to time
shifts and can consider the time drift between two sequences.
It also searches for the optimal alignment match using dynamic
programming techniques.
Given two time series Y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) and Z =
(z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z m ), the sequence distance matrix is D ∈ R n×m ,
where Di, j = |yi − z j |. Thus, the cost matrix Dc is defined as
follows:
Dc (i, j) = Di, j + min(Dc (i − 1, j), Dc (i, j − 1),
Dc (i − 1, j − 1)).

(4)

Therefore, the final DTW distance is determined as follows:
DTW(Y, Z ) = Dc (n, m).

(5)

The optimal alignment match is the minimum function traversing path of Dc (n, m). In this instance, the DTW distance

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

represents the best alignment gap between Y and Z , indicating
the similarity between the time series.
Thus, we can obtain a similarity matrix S DTW ∈ R N ×N of
all the indicators using the DTW distance
Si,DTW
= DTW(x i , x j )
j

(6)

where the values of the ith row and jth column in the similarity matrix is the DTW distance between the ith indicator
j
j
j
i
x i (x1i , x2i , . . . , x M
) and the jth indicator x j (x1 , x2 , . . . , x M ).
Then, we construct the adjacency matrix ADTW of the prior
graph using the DTW distance as follows:
(
1, Si,DTW
<ε
j
Ai,DTW
=
(7)
j
0, otherwise
where ε is the DTW distance threshold that determines the
sparsity of the adjacency matrix ADTW .
C. Fully Parameterized Graph Structure Learner
The learnable graph structure’s adjacency matrix consists
of 0 and 1, which is nondifferentiable. As a result, the
backpropagation algorithm struggles to efficiently compute the
parameter gradient, thereby failing to jointly optimize the adjacency matrix and downstream task parameters. To address this
issue, we use a reparameterization technique (i.e., GumbelSoftmax), which represents a continuous distribution that can
approximate samples from the class distribution. It enables
the expression of discrete parameters using the continuous
ones, simplifying the parameter gradient calculation. The
Gumbel-Softmax process is defined as follows:
g = − log(− log(u)), u ∽ Uniform(0, 1)

 
i, j
exp log π1 + g i, j /τ
i, j

 
z1 = P
i, j
i, j /τ
exp
log
π
+
g
v
v∈{0,1}

(8)
(9)

where u represents the sample extracted from a Uniform(0, 1)
i, j
distribution, g i, j follows a Gumbel distribution, and π1
denotes the values of the ith row and jth column of probability
matrix π1 ∈ R K ×K , indicating that the probability that node i
is connected to j in the graph. In this instance, τ serves as a
i, j
temperature parameter. As τ approaches 0, z 1 tends toward
0 or 1, and the Gumbel-Softmax distribution converges to the
class distribution. Ultimately, the ith row and jth column in
i, j
the adjacency matrix Ai,FPM
j are assigned the value z 1 , causing
i,
j
Ai,FPM
j to be set to 1 with the probability of π1 .
In graph structure learners, we initialize the probability
matrix π1 randomly. Then, the adjacency matrix is derived
from the probability matrix using Gumbel-Softmax sampling.
Typically, the ensemble predictor uses the adjacency matrix
for the prediction task. Thus, the probability matrix is updated
using backpropagation to accomplish GSL.
D. Ensemble Predictor Based on STGCN and DCRNN
We design an ensemble predictor combining DCRNN and
STGCN to overcome the issue that predictors cannot achieve
high accuracy and a concentrated anomaly score distribution.

3500714

1) STGCN Subpredictor: STGCN [37] adopts a full convolution network, resolving the inherent issues of recursive
networks such as RNN that require iterative training and
accumulate errors during each step.
STGCN comprises several spatiotemporal convolution
blocks (STBlock). These blocks comprise two temporal convolution networks (TCNs) and one GCN layer, forming a
sandwich-like structure. The input X l of the lth STBlock
obtains output X l+1 , where X 1 is X t . Therefore, the STBlock
is defined as follows:

Y l+1 = 01l ∗T ReLU 2l ∗G 00l ∗T Y l
(10)
0∗T Y = P ⊙ σ (Q)

(11)

2∗G Y = 2(L)Y = 2(U 3U )Y = U 2(3)U Y

(12)

− 12

(13)

T

L = In − D

− 21

AD

= U 3U

T

T

where 0∗T X is TCN and 2∗G X is GCN. 00l and 01l are
the left and right temporal TCN kernels in the lth block.
In addition, 2l denotes the spectral GCN kernel, and ReLU(·)
is the activation function.
In (11), P and Q represent the output elements after
the convolutional kernel, with ⊙ representing the Hadamard
product of elements. Furthermore, the sigmoid gate σ (Q)
controls which inputs P of the current state are related.
In (12), graph Fourier basis U denotes the eigenvector
matrix of the normalized graph Laplacian L, and D is the
degree matrix. In addition, 3 and 2(3) are the diagonal
matrix of the eigenvalues of L.
After stacking two STBlocks, we append a fully connected
layer at the end as the output to map the last STBlock output
to a predicted value b
xtSTGCN .
2) DCRNN Subpredictor: DCRNN [38] can capture temporal and spatial features. It uses diffusion convolution to
capture spatial dependence and the encoder–decoder architecture to obtain temporal dependence. Therefore, we use
DCRNN instead of GCN. Thus, DCRNN is defined as follows:



Rt = sigmoid W R ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + b R
(14)



Ct = tanh WC ◦ xt ||(Rt ⊙ H(t−1) ) + bC
(15)



Ut = sigmoid WU ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + bU
(16)
H(t) = Ut ⊙ H(t−1) + (1 − Ut ) ⊙ Ct
L2 
X
l

Q
Q
−1 T l
WQ ◦ Y =
wl,1
D −1
A
+
w
D
A
Y
O
I
l,2

(17)
(18)

l=0

where D O and D I are the out- and in-degree matrices, ∥
Q
Q
is the concatenation operation, wl,1
, wl,2
, and b Q are model
parameters, and the diffusion degree L 2 is a hyperparameter.
During each step, xt ′ and node feature H(t ′ −1) enter the
diffusion convolution layer to obtain the node feature H(t ′ )
at the next timestamp t ′ .
Then, the encoder updates the node feature H(·) from the
timestamp t − ω to t − 1 and obtains the total node feature
H(t−1) of the subsequence. In the decoder, the total node
feature H(t−1) is used as the input. Subsequently, the predicted
value b
xtDCRNN at the timestamp t is obtained, as shown in
Fig. 5.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE I
DATASET D ESCRIPTION

3) Ensemble Predictor: After obtaining the two predictions
using the STGCN and DCRNN predictors, the results are combined. To balance the prediction result accuracy and anomaly
score stability, we adjust their weights to enhance anomaly
detection performance. The combined prediction result is
defined as follows:
b
xt = λ1b
xtSTGCN + (1 − λ1 )b
xtDCRNN

(19)

where λ1 adjusts the two prediction results’ weights.
Then, the anomaly score at timestamp t is determined using
the highest value among all the sensors

E. Loss Function
Generally, the average absolute error is used as the loss
function loss p for the prediction task and can be defined as

s(t) = max si (t).

K

Grid search technology is pivotal for determining the optimal threshold. During grid search, the upper and lower bounds
of the threshold are defined as the maximum and minimum
values of s(t), respectively. All possible thresholds are exhaustively searched with a step size of 0.01, and the threshold with
the highest F1 score is selected as the best one. In addition,
we use the point adjustment strategy to obtain the anomaly
scores.

loss p =

1 X i
b
x − xti
K i=1 t

(20)

where b
xti and xti represent the prediction and ground truth of
the ith indicator at the timestamp t, respectively.
Furthermore, to improve the learned graph’s quality and
guarantee its robustness and generalization ability, we use the
DTW prior graph as prior knowledge. Then, we introduce
graph learning loss during model training to impose constraints
on graph learning. Therefore, the graph learning loss function
lossg is expressed as the cross-entropy between prior knowledge ADTW and the learned graph structure AFPM
X


DTW
lossg =
−Ai,DTW
log Ai,FPM
log 1 − Ai,FPM
.
j
j − 1− Ai, j
j
ij

(21)
Thus, the total loss function is defined as follows:
loss = loss p + λ2 lossg

(22)

where λ2 is the regularization amplitude graph learning parameter.
F. Anomaly Scores and Threshold Selection
The purpose of anomaly detection is to identify abnormal
situations that deviate from the norm according to the ground
truth and prediction values. First, we calculate individual
anomaly scores for each sensor. Then, these scores are combined to obtain the anomaly scores for each timestamp. Once
the anomaly score at timestamp t exceeds the predetermined
threshold, an anomaly has occurred at timestamp t.
The comparison between the ground truth and prediction
values is conducted to obtain the prediction error Erri (t) of
the sensor i at timestamp t
Erri (t) = xti − b
xti .

(23)

To ensure metric scale consistency among sensors with
varying value ranges, a standard normalization process is
conducted on the prediction error as follows:
si (t) =

Erri (t) − µi
σi

(24)

where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of Erri (t),
respectively.

i

(25)

V. E XPERIMENT AND P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
A. Datasets
We use four public real-world datasets; their statistics are
displayed in Table I.
First, the SWaT dataset is derived from the water treatment
test bench supervised by the Singapore Public Utilities Bureau.
The data collection process lasted for 11 days and ran continuously 24 h a day, during which network traffic and values
from all 51 sensors and actuators were recorded.
Second, the WADI dataset is obtained from a comprehensive WADI system composed of numerous pipelines.
As an extension of the SWaT test platform, WADI shows
the water treatment, storage, and distribution network more
comprehensively and realistically. The dataset is collected over
16 consecutive days, with 14 dedicated to routine operations
and the remaining two simulating attack scenarios. The whole
test bed is equipped with 127 sensors and actuators.
Third, the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover is a dataset
comprising sensors and actuators from the NASA Mars rover.
This dataset contains 55 indicators from 27 unique entities.
Finally, the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite
dataset comprises soil samples and telemetry data collected by
NASA using the Mars probe. This dataset contains 25 indicators from 55 entities.
To handle substantial raw data, the SWaT and WADI
datasets undergo a downsampling process every 10 s, capturing
the median value. During this period, an anomaly is tagged
once it occurs.

B. Experimental Setup
1) Metrics: We use precision (Prec), recall (Rec), and F1
score (F1) to evaluate the performance of our method and the

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

baselines
TP
(26)
Prec =
TP + FP
TP
(27)
Rec =
TP + FN
Prec ∗ Rec
F1 = 2 ∗
(28)
Prec + Rec
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the number of true positives,
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively.
2) Baselines: We compare our method with 12 machine and
deep learning methods, including AE, IF, DAGMM, LSTMNDT, LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, OmniAnomaly, USAD,
MTAD-GAT, GDN, FuSAGNet, GTA, MEGLAD, MGCLAD,
and GSLAD.
1) AE: In this method, the input data are reconstructed by
an autoencoder, and the resulting reconstruction error is
used as the anomaly score.
2) IF: Isolation forest is a tree-based anomaly detection
algorithm that effectively identifies anomalies or outliers
in datasets that differ significantly from the majority.
3) DAGMM [28]: This method combines deep autoencoders with Gaussian mixture models to capture the
underlying distribution of normal data and identify
anomalies based on reconstruction errors.
4) LSTM-NDT [22]: This method uses LSTM to capture
contextual information and dependencies in sequential
data for anomaly detection.
5) LSTM-VAE [26]: This method projects multimodal
observations and time dependencies into a latent space
and reconstructs the expected distribution using an
LSTM-based VAE.
6) MAD-GAN [24]: This method uses LSTM as the underlying model in a GAN framework to capture the time
series data temporal correlation.
7) OmniAnomaly [27]: This method is a priori-driven
stochastic model used to detect timestamp anomalies,
directly returning the reconstruction probability.
8) USAD: This method trains an encoder–decoder framework in an adversarial manner to achieve fast and
efficient training.
9) MTAD-GAT [30]: This method regards the relationships
between indicators as a complete graph and uses a GAT
to detect anomalies.
10) GDN [8]: This method constructs a graph structure
using pairwise cosine similarities between nodes and
uses attention GNNs to learn dependencies between time
series and execute prediction.
11) FuSAGNet [10]: This method learns the graph structure
using the pairwise cosine similarity between recursive
sensor embeddings. It obtains the input data’s sparse
representation using a sparse autoencoder and inserts it
into a GAT to execute sensor behavior prediction.
12) GTA [16]: This method automatically learns the graph
structure using a direct method and uses graph convolution and a transformer-based architecture to capture
temporal dependencies.
13) MEGLAD [19]: This method uses three different GSL
methods to learn the relationships between indicators

3500714

from various perspectives. Then, it conducts time series
prediction and anomaly detection based on the predicted
values.
14) MGCLAD [18]: This method achieves anomaly detection by concurrently learning intra- and intersignal graph
structures, capturing temporal context and dependencies
between signals. It performs anomaly detection by comparing inputs and reconstructing outputs.
15) GSLAD [20]: This method uses a fully parameterized
GSL method and uses diffusion graph convolution networks to detect anomalies.
3) Experimental Setting: Our main experimental parameter settings are shown in Table II. The DTW distance
threshold ε is set to 0.5 for the SWaT dataset and 0.6 for
the remaining three datasets according to STGODE [39].
In addition, the Gumbel-Softmax function is implemented
by torch.nn.functional, where the temperature parameter τ is
initialized to 1 and progressively approaches 0 during training.
All the experiments were carried out in Python 3.8, PyTorch
1.10, and CUDA version 11.3 on a server equipped with an
Intel1 Xeon1 Platinum 8255c CPU, NVIDIA RTX 3090 24-GB
GPU, 90-GB memory, and 80 GB of hard disk space.
4) Baseline Method Parameter Settings: For the baseline
methods, we set the sliding window size ω in GDN and
FuSAGNet to 5, and GTA to 60.
C. Detection Performance
As shown in Table III, our method outperforms the
baseline approaches significantly. Compared with the traditional CNN and LSTM anomaly detection methods (i.e.,
IF, DAGMM, LSTM-NDT, LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, OmniAnomaly, USAD), our method uses spatial and temporal
GNNs to effectively extract the relationship between indicators. Compared with the latest GSL-based anomaly detection
methods (such as GDN, FuSAGNet, GTA, MEGLAD,
MGCLAD, and DPGLAD), our method achieves the highest
average F1 score. This is because our method attains a better
balance between prediction accuracy and anomaly scores,
while enhancing the learned graph’s quality using the DTW
prior graph.
All the methods achieved low performances on the WADI
dataset, because it has a longer length, more indicators, and
lower anomaly rate than other datasets, as shown in Table II.
While MGCLAD demonstrates a superior performance in
WADI, its reliance on GNN as an encoder for learning
latent representations restricts the model’s representational and
generalization capacities. In contrast, our approach outperforms MGCLAD across the SWaT, SMAP, and MSL datasets,
underscoring its broader applicability.
Moreover, to underscore our method’s robustness, we perform multiple experiments and present a box plot, illustrating
the F1 scores on all four datasets. The experimental results
are depicted in Fig. 6. Notably, the F1 scores generated by
our method consistently demonstrate a high level of coherence
across all four datasets, underscoring its impressive stability.
1 Registered Trademark.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE II
E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETER S ETTING

TABLE III
P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE ON THE F OUR DATASETS

TABLE IV
P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

similar sensors to construct the prior graph

cos x i , x j =

xi • x j
xi • x j


i
j
Ai,COS
.
j = 1, j ∈ topk cos x , x

Fig. 6.

F1 score distributions on the four datasets.

D. Ablation Experiments
To validate the DTW prior graph and ensemble predictor’s
efficacy, we conduct a series of ablation experiments.
1) Prior Graph Ablation Experiment: The DTW prior
graph is replaced by a COS one, which compares sensor
similarity using cosine distance. Then, we select the top-k most

(29)
(30)

The predictor is same as ensemble predictor (i.e., the COS +
Ensemble function).
The experimental results are shown in Table IV. When the
DTW prior graph is replaced by the COS one, performance
decreases across all the datasets. This decrease in performance
is because the DTW prior graph captures delay correlation,
thereby avoiding the noise that may be present in the prior
graph generated by the cosine distance. Therefore, our proposed anomaly detection method outperforms the COS prior
graph. This further demonstrates our proposed DTW prior
graph’s effectiveness.
2) Predictor Ablation Experiment: To demonstrate the
ensemble predictor’s effectiveness, we conduct experiments
using a single DCRNN or STGCN predictor with the DTW
prior graph. As shown in Table IV, the single predictor’s
anomaly detection performance is lower than that of the
ensemble predictor. This is because a single predictor cannot
meet the requirements for high accuracy and stable anomaly
scores during anomaly detection tasks simultaneously.

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

Fig. 7.
Ensemble predictor anomaly score distribution. The ensemble
predictor’s anomaly scores range from 1 to 6. In comparison to the single
DCRNN predictor, this predictor demonstrates more concentrated anomaly
scores. Furthermore, it exhibits lower anomaly scores when compared with
the single STGCN predictor.

Moreover, we highlight the overall anomaly score distribution
of the ensemble predictor in the WADI dataset, as shown
in Fig. 7. When comparing Figs. 7 and 3, the ensemble
predictor concentrates the anomaly scores ranging from 1 to 6,
whereas the single DCRNN one has anomaly scores ranging from 1 to 11. Similarly, in the comparison between
Figs. 7 and 4, the ensemble predictor achieves lower prediction
errors than the single STGCN one, which ranges from 11 to 16.
The ensemble predictor can effectively balance the requirements of high prediction accuracy and stable anomaly scores,
leading to improved overall performance.
3) Graph Learning Loss Function Ablation Experiment:
To verify the graph learning loss function’s effectiveness,
we perform an ablation experiment where we exclude it from
the total loss calculation, referred to as “w/o GSL loss.”
The experimental results are shown in Table IV. Relying
solely on prediction loss backpropagation to update the graph
structure, without the support of prior graphs, results in a
notable decrease in performance. This underscores the critical
importance of incorporating graph learning loss into the overall
function.
E. Parameter Influence
To assess our method’s stability across various parameters,
the impact of hyperparameters on model performance is analyzed.
1) Window Size: In this experiment, we set the window
lengths w to 10, 12, 15, 30, and 60. The MSTGAD performance with different window sizes is displayed in Fig. 8.
The experimental results demonstrate that the window size
influences the anomaly detection performance. For the SMAP
and MSL datasets, the window size slightly impacts anomaly
detection, resulting in a relatively stable F1 score. However,
for the SWaT and WADI datasets, increasing the window
size initially boosts the F1 score before declining. With a
window size of 10, the historical information is insufficient to
effectively support anomaly detection. Conversely, a window

3500714

Fig. 8.

Impact of window size.

Fig. 9.

Impact of prediction weight parameter.

size of 60 can obscure anomalies within a large dataset,
making anomaly detection more challenging.
2) Prediction Weight Parameter: We introduce prediction
weight parameter on the four datasets. During this experiment,
we adjust λ1 from 0.2 to 0.8. The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 9.
For the SWaT, SMAP, and MSL datasets, the prediction
weight parameter λ1 slightly impacts the performance. For
the WADI dataset, MSTGAD with λ1 = 0.5 exhibits the
most effective performance. A value of λ1 = 0.5 indicates
that both the subpredictors contribute equally to the final
prediction result. Moreover, the DCRNN subpredictor controls
the overall prediction accuracy, while the STGCN one ensures
the stability of the overall prediction results. Optimal anomaly
detection performance is typically attained when these two
aspects are in equilibrium.
3) DTW Distance Threshold in the Prior Graph: To assess
the influence of the DTW distance’s threshold on performance,
we conduct an experiment to identify the optimal parameter.
The DTW distance’s threshold ranges from 0.2 to 1.0. A low
threshold signifies a denser prior graph structure, whereas a
high value indicates a sparse prior graph structure. We compare the impact of various threshold values by training the
model on the four datasets and evaluating their performance.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE V
P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F 1 S CORE FOR D IFFERENT DTW D ISTANCE T HRESHOLDS

Fig. 10.

Partial graph structure learned using the SWaT dataset (left). The ground truth and prediction values of the related sensors (right).

The experimental results are shown in Table V. When the
DTW distance exceeds 1 or falls below 0.2, a notable deterioration in the model’s performance occurs. This is primarily due
to the fact that overly sparse or dense prior graphs do not effectively facilitate GSL. An excessively sparse prior adjacency
matrix decreases the essential information required for guiding
the graph structure learner to understand the relationships
between the indicators. Conversely, an overly dense adjacency
matrix contains redundant information, making it challenging
for the graph structure learner to differentiate crucial edges or
relationships among indicators. Therefore, the DTW distance
threshold is set to 0.5 for the SWaT dataset and 0.6 for the
remaining three datasets.
F. Case Study
We conduct a case study to evaluate the learned graph,
as shown in Fig. 10. Fig. 10 (Left) is a partial graph structure
learned using our method, and Fig. 10 (Right) is the ground
truth and prediction of related sensors obtained with our
method. Specifically, the sensor AIT-202 was attacked from
the timestamp 43 734 to 43 771, which are marked in pink. Due
to the interactions between sensors during the water treatment
process, AIT-202 was attacked, leading to the shutdown of
P-203 in the dosing pump. Due to several water treatment
steps, AIT-501, an osmotic conductivity analyzer, was finally
affected at timestamp 43 850, as shown in Fig. 10 (Right).
Our model accurately predicts the changes in AIT-501,
thereby demonstrating our model’s effectiveness. Moreover,
Fig. 10 (Left) accurately shows the relationship between the
three sensors in the learned graph.

Fig. 11.

Indicator values of the WADI dataset.

VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this article, we propose the MSTGAD method. We incorporate the DTW distance metric to measure the similarity
between time series pairs, effectively capturing the delay
correlations in MTS and obtaining a more accurate prior graph.
Simultaneously, using an ensemble predictor with multiple
graph convolutions, we effectively predict sensor behavior
and significantly improve anomaly score stability. Compared
with the baselines on the four public datasets, our proposed
method achieves the best performance. In future work, we can
consider more efficient GSL strategies to further enhance
model performance.

HE et al.: MTSAD BASED ON MULTIPLE SPATIOTEMPORAL GRAPH CONVOLUTION

A PPENDIX
The WADI dataset includes 127 indicators. Fig. 11 illustrates the sensor values in the WADI dataset. The indicator
(2B_AIT_002_PV) exhibits a sharp increase from 0.05 to
267 at timestamp 8000.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Liu, Q. Li, and K. Wang, “Revealing the degradation patterns
of lithium-ion batteries from impedance spectroscopy using variational auto-encoders,” Energy Storage Mater., vol. 69, May 2024,
Art. no. 103394.
[2] X. Yu, T. Ai, and K. Wang, “Application of nanogenerators in acoustics
based on artificial intelligence and machine learning,” APL Mater.,
vol. 12, no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 020602.
[3] S. He, Z. Li, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Intelligent detection for
key performance indicators in industrial-based cyber-physical systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5799–5809, Aug. 2021.
[4] S. He et al., “Fine-grained multivariate time series anomaly detection in
IoT,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 5027–5047, 2023.
[5] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and
applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, Jun. 2020.
[6] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and
opportunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036.
[7] D. Chai, L. Wang, and Q. Yang, “Bike flow prediction with
multi-graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2018, pp. 397–400, doi:
10.1145/3274895.3274896.
[8] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[9] R. Gao, W. He, L. Yan, D. Liu, Y. Yu, and Z. Ye, “Hybrid graph
transformer networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection,”
J. Supercomput., vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 642–669, Jan. 2024.
[10] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022,
pp. 2977–2986.
[11] W. Zhang, P. He, C. Qin, F. Yang, and Y. Liu, “A graph attention
network-based model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,”
J. Supercomput., vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 8529–8549, Apr. 2024.
[12] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[13] S. He, G. Li, J. Wang, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Uni-directional
graph structure learning-based multivariate time series anomaly detection with dynamic prior knowledge,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 2,
pp. 1–17, May 2024.
[14] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
[15] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[16] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2021.
[17] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global–local association
discrepancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, May 2024.
[18] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive
learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Apr. 2023.
[19] S. He, G. Li, Q. Guo, and K. Xie, “Multi-graph structure learningbased multivariate time series anomaly detection with extended prior
knowledge,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat. Work
Design (CSCWD), May 2024, pp. 109–114.
[20] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series
anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric consumer
applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–15,
May 2024.

3500714

[21] H. Yu et al., “Regularized graph structure learning with semantic
knowledge for multi-variates time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2362–2368.
[22] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[23] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[24] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
2019, pp. 703–716.
[25] K.-J. Jeong, J.-D. Park, K. Hwang, S.-L. Kim, and W.-Y. Shin, “Twostage deep anomaly detection with heterogeneous time series data,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 13704–13714, 2022.
[26] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[27] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[28] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–10.
[29] Q. He, Y. J. Zheng, C. L. Zhang, and H. Y. Wang, “MTAD-TF:
Multivariate time series anomaly detection using the combination of
temporal pattern and feature pattern,” Complexity, vol. 2020, pp. 1–9,
Oct. 2020.
[30] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[31] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao,
“Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and
localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell.,
May 2021, pp. 7–12.
[32] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead
dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40967–40978, 2022.
[33] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 162,
2022, pp. 3621–3633.
[34] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[35] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[36] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
for spoken word recognition,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal
Process., vol. ASSP-26, no. 1, pp. 43–49, Feb. 1978.
[37] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc.
27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
[38] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–24.
[39] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE
networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2021, pp. 364–373.

Shiming He received the B.S. degree in information
security and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and technology from Hunan University, Changsha,
China, in 2006 and 2013, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha. Her research interests include
machine learning, data analysis, and anomaly detection.

3500714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Qingqing Guo received the B.S. degree from Hunan
Agricultural University, Changsha, China, in 2022.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer
technology with Changsha University of Science and
Technology, Changsha.
His research interests include deep learning, data
analysis, and anomaly detection.

Genxin Li received the B.S. degree from Jiangxi
Science and Technology Normal University, Nanchang, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
M.S. degree in computer science and technology
with Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha, China.
His research interests include deep learning, data
analysis, and anomaly detection.

Kun Xie (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in computer application from Hunan University,
Changsha, China, in 2007.
She has published more than 100 articles in major
journals and conference proceedings, including journals such as IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE
C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTERS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND
D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS , and IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON S ERVICES C OMPUTING, and conferences, including
SIGMOD, INFOCOM, ICDCS, SECON, DSN, and IWQoS. Her research
interests include cover network measurement, network security, big data,
and AI.
Pradip Kumar Sharma (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the bachelor’s degree in information technology in 2009, the Master of Technology degree in
computer science in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in
secure computing in 2019.
He is a highly Esteemed Academician and
Researcher known for his expertise in Cybersecurity
and Artificial Intelligence. He is currently serving
as an Associate Professor of Cybersecurity & AI at
the Department of Computing Science, University
of Aberdeen, U.K. His academic journey is characterised by a steadfast pursuit of excellence. His professional background
encompasses roles such as Research Fellow and Software Engineer, reflecting
a blend of academic and industry experience. Throughout his career, he has
shown a strong interest in advancing research in areas such as privacy-aware
AI, blockchain, edge computing, the IoT security, and critical infrastructure
security, earning recognition through various research projects and grants.
Dr. Sharma received the awards from EPSRC and Innovate U.K.