IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

2544912

Perceiver IO Model for Efficient Vibration Signal
Compression and Anomaly Detection
Guillaume Lebonvallet , Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja , Faicel Hnaien , Hichem Snoussi , and Brice Nélain

Abstract—This research presents a deep learning model for
vibration signal compression and anomaly detection, using Perceiver IO—an attention-based architecture—within a railway
industry case study. The model is lightweight and optimized for
deployment on energy- and memory-constrained sensors, making
it ideal for embedded applications. Unlike traditional methods, it
performs signal compression and anomaly detection simultaneously, offering an efficient and unified solution applicable across
industries. To avoid the need for separate classification models
or heavy architectures, contrastive learning is used to improve
feature extraction. This allows the learned representations to be
easily separable via a simple linear function, enabling effective
anomaly detection while preserving signal reconstruction quality.
The model is trained on a large vibration signal dataset using
a weighted loss function combining mean squared error (mse),
cosine similarity, and contrastive loss. Contrastive learning plays
a key role in clustering normal and abnormal signals, achieving
near-perfect classification accuracy. Compression performance is
evaluated with metrics such as peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR),
cosine similarity, and compression ratio. The model achieves a
PSNR of 21.87 while maintaining a much smaller architecture.
The approach shows strong potential for real-time industrial
deployment, ensuring high accuracy and efficiency in resourceconstrained environments.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attention mechanisms,
contrastive learning, embedded computing, neural network compression, signal processing.

I. I NTRODUCTION

V

IBRATION analysis is a critical field in engineering,
widely used to monitor the health of mechanical systems
and detect anomalies that could indicate potential failures.
By identifying early signs of defects, predictive maintenance
strategies can be implemented to enhance reliability, minimize
downtime, and prevent costly repairs. The effectiveness of
monitoring vibration patterns for predictive maintenance has
been well-documented [1]. The nonintrusive nature of vibration analysis makes it an attractive solution across various
Received 29 April 2025; revised 29 July 2025; accepted 5 August 2025.
Date of publication 1 September 2025; date of current version 8 September 2025. This work was supported by French Government through the
Future Investment Program (Programme d’investissement d’avenir). The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Juan Xu. (Guillaume
Lebonvallet and Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja contributed equally to this work.)
(Corresponding author: Guillaume Lebonvallet.)
Guillaume Lebonvallet, Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja, Faicel Hnaien, and
Hichem Snoussi are with the LIST3N (Computer Science and Digital
Society), Université de Technologie de Troyes, Troyes 10004, France, and
also with EUt+ Data Science Institute, European Union, Troyes 10004,
France (e-mail: guillaume.lebonvallet@utt.fr; luis.salazar zendeja@utt.fr;
faicel.hnaien@utt.fr; hichem.snoussi@utt.fr).
Brice Nélain is with the Innovation Team, VOSSLOH, 69100 Villeurbanne,
France (e-mail: brice.nelain@vossloh.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3604141

industries, including marine engineering [2], petroleum [3],
railways [4], and aerospace [5].
With the increasing complexity of machinery and the surge
in sensor-generated data, efficient processing and representation of vibrational signals have become key challenges.
Traditional vibration analysis methods struggle with noisy
high-dimensional data, requiring models that can effectively
capture essential features while reducing redundancy [6].
Compression techniques not only mitigate storage and transmission constraints, but also enhance downstream tasks,
such as fault classification and anomaly detection [7]. These
advances are particularly valuable for real-time industrial
applications, where data efficiency is crucial.
To address these challenges, advanced machine learning
techniques have become powerful tools for vibration analysis,
extracting meaningful patterns from large sensor data for
efficient compression and fault detection. Compact yet informative signal representation reduces data bottlenecks while
preserving diagnostic information. In addition, adaptive learning helps distinguish normal variations from true anomalies,
enhancing fault detection in complex industrial settings.
Machine learning and deep learning techniques provide
several advantages in vibration analysis: the ability to process
large volumes of data efficiently, identify complex patterns,
and adapt to evolving conditions [8], [9]. Over the years,
numerous models have been proposed for fault detection and
diagnosis [10], [11]. Approaches such as K-means clustering
[12], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13], and long
short-term memory networks [14] have demonstrated high
accuracy in detecting faults. More recently, deep autoencoders
combined with ensemble learning [15] have shown robustness
under noisy conditions.
Vibration signal compression plays a vital role in condition monitoring; however, it presents significant challenges
due to the requirement to efficiently store and transmit data
while preserving critical diagnostic information. Key challenges include balancing compression efficiency with signal
integrity and managing computational complexity in real-time
applications. Addressing these challenges, various advanced
methods have been proposed. For instance, Oltean et al. [16]
explored tailored compression techniques suited for aircraft
engine monitoring, ensuring high fidelity in signal reconstruction. Meanwhile, Guo and Tse [17] introduced an approach
leveraging optimal ensemble empirical mode decomposition
to enhance compression performance while preserving key
signal characteristics. Furthermore, Yin et al. [18] integrated

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

encryption into the compression process, providing a dual
advantage of data security and lightweight storage, which
is critical for remote monitoring systems. Collectively, these
studies highlight the ongoing advancements in vibration signal compression, addressing challenges related to efficiency,
accuracy, and security in industrial applications.
Many real-world applications require these models to be
embedded on sensors, which impose strict memory and energy
constraints. Traditional deep learning models can be computationally expensive, making them impractical for edge-based
condition monitoring. To ensure feasible deployment in industrial settings, lightweight models that balance accuracy with
efficiency are essential. Embedded fault detection systems,
such as those presented in [19], demonstrate the effectiveness
of compact machine learning architectures tailored for edge
devices. In addition, compressive sensing techniques designed
for wireless sensor networks [20] offer promising solutions for
reducing data transmission overhead while maintaining signal
integrity. A broader overview of AI models in the Industrial
IoT applications [21] further emphasizes the necessity of
optimized algorithms that can operate within the constraints
of embedded environments.
To the best of our knowledge, existing literature addresses
compression and anomaly detection as distinct tasks, which
can result in redundant computations and increased resource
consumption, particularly problematic in real-time industrial
applications. Moreover, the constraints of embedded environments, including limited memory and power availability,
make it challenging to deploy separate models efficiently. To
address these challenges, we propose a unified Perceiver IObased architecture that integrates vibration signal compression
and anomaly detection within a single framework. Our key
contributions are threefold.
1) We develop a latent space embedding that extracts compact yet informative representations of vibration data,
achieving high compression efficiency without compromising critical diagnostic features.
2) We design an adaptive anomaly detection mechanism
that selectively focuses on relevant patterns, filtering
out noise and enhancing fault diagnosis reliability in
industrial environments.
3) We propose a unified, lightweight framework that efficiently combines compression and anomaly detection,
making it ideal for resource-constrained embedded
systems. This integration ensures our approach is
well-suited for large-scale industrial applications where
real-time processing and accuracy are paramount.
This article is organized as follows. Section II reviews
related work on vibration analysis, fault detection, and signal compression; Section III presents the architecture of
the Perceiver IO model, the data preprocessing steps, the
attention mechanisms for compression and anomaly detection,
and the implementation of contrastive learning to improve
feature separability; Section IV describes the research context, the dataset, and the specific training of our model; the
results are discussed in Section V; and the article concludes
with Section VI, which covers the conclusions and future
prospects.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Deep learning techniques have demonstrated considerable
promise in vibration signal analysis, particularly for fault
detection in mechanical systems. In recent years, several
studies have explored the use of deep learning models to
predict system health from vibration signals. For example, Lin
et al. [22] evaluated various deep learning neural networks for
surface roughness prediction, using vibration signal analysis.
Their findings showed that deep learning models, particularly
CNNs, can successfully extract features from vibration signals
and provide accurate predictions. Similarly, Chen and Lee
[23] investigated how CNNs can enhance vibration signal
analysis for applications like fault diagnosis and surface
roughness estimation. They utilize both 1-D and 2-D CNN
models to process raw vibration data and time–frequency
representations, improving predictive accuracy. Their approach
integrates optimization techniques to refine CNN performance,
demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting faults and assessing machining conditions.
For bearing fault diagnosis, Wang et al. [24] fused vibroacoustic data with a 1-D CNN network, showing significant
improvements in diagnostic accuracy compared to traditional
methods. Another study [25] proposed a distributed approach
for bearing fault diagnosis based on vibration signals. This
method leveraged multiple sensors to collect vibration data,
improving the fault diagnosis process by reducing the impact
of sensor placement and environmental noise.
More recently, the use of explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) has gained traction in vibration signal analysis for
fault diagnosis. Chen and Lee [26] explored the use of XAI
for bearing fault diagnosis, where they employed machine
learning models with interpretability features. This approach
allows for a deeper understanding of the decision-making
process, which is particularly beneficial in critical applications,
like industrial maintenance.
Signal compression has been a significant focus in vibration
analysis, as it helps reduce storage and transmission requirements while preserving diagnostic information. Biagetti et al.
[27] analyzed lossless compression algorithms for wireless
sensor networks, such as EMG sensors, highlighting tradeoffs between compression ratio and signal fidelity—crucial for
real-time vibration monitoring. Xin and Fan [28] introduced
a lossless method for medical image compression using big
data mining to achieve high efficiency while preserving data
integrity. Though focused on medical data, their approach is
also applicable to vibration signals due to similar requirements
for data preservation.
The review of existing methods demonstrates that, while
significant advancements have been made in vibration signal
compression and fault diagnosis, many challenges remain. Traditional approaches often address compression and anomaly
detection separately, leading to inefficiencies and increased
computational demands, particularly in real-time industrial
applications. Furthermore, many existing techniques struggle
to balance compression efficiency with the preservation of
critical fault detection features, especially when dealing with
noisy or high-dimensional data. These challenges are further
exacerbated in embedded environments, where strict memory

LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION

Fig. 1. (a) Time domain signal. (b) STFT representation.

and energy constraints limit the feasibility of complex models.
To address these limitations, this work proposes a unified
Perceiver IO-based model that integrates both efficient compression and anomaly detection while remaining lightweight
and computationally efficient for resource-constrained edge
devices.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
Monitoring vibration signals is essential for identifying
faults in mechanical systems, yet the high dimensionality and
inherent noise in raw data often present significant challenges.
Traditional models frequently struggle to process such signals
efficiently without compromising critical fault-related information. To address these limitations, we introduce a model
based on Perceiver IO [29], known for its capability to manage
diverse, high-dimensional data with remarkable efficiency.
Building on the strengths of Perceiver IO, our proposed
model leverages a latent-space representation to significantly
reduce computational requirements and memory footprint,
while preserving essential signal structures. The domainagnostic attention mechanism enables flexible handling of
arbitrary input and output formats, ensuring adaptability to
various vibration-based fault detection scenarios. This design
is particularly effective in isolating meaningful features from
noise, enhancing the clarity and reliability of fault detection.
A key enhancement of this model is its ability to seamlessly integrate compression and anomaly detection using
a single unified framework. By employing attention-driven
mechanisms, the model dynamically identifies fault-indicative
patterns and suppresses background interference. Moreover,
we incorporate contrastive learning to refine the anomaly
detection process, eliminating the need for an additional
decision-making model. These innovations streamline the
architecture, improving both efficiency and sensitivity to faults.
Sections III-A–III-D detail the application of this enhanced
model to vibration signal compression and contrastive
learning-driven anomaly detection, following initial preprocessing of time-domain signals. This unified approach achieves
acceptable performance in terms of both computational efficiency and fault detection accuracy, positioning it as an
advanced solution for industrial condition monitoring.
A. Preprocessing: Short-Time Fourier Transform
In this study, we apply the short-time Fourier transform
(STFT) to our vibration signal analysis. STFT is advantageous for examining nonstationary signals, as it provides a

2544912

time–frequency representation that captures transient events
and frequency variations, which are crucial for accurate fault
detection in machinery. This method enhances the detection
of localized anomalies in vibration data, thereby improving
diagnostic precision [30].
The STFT process involves segmenting the vibration signal
into overlapping windows and performing a Fourier Transform
on each segment. This approach maintains both time and
frequency information, allowing a detailed analysis of how
signal components evolve over time. By selecting appropriate
window sizes, a balance between time and frequency resolution can be achieved, making STFT a versatile tool for
analyzing complex vibrational signals in various engineering
applications. Fig. 1(a) shows an example of a time-domain
signal and Fig. 1(b) shows a time–frequency signal.
B. Architecture of the Proposed Perceiver IO
The overall framework, as shown in Fig. 2, consists of three
main components: vibration signal compression, attentiondriven anomaly detection, and vibration signal reconstruction.
Initially, the input vibration signals undergo preprocessing
using STFT, as described in Section III-A. The STFT representations are initially transformed into a latent space through
two fundamental steps: 1) a cross-attention block that interacts
between the input signals and the latent space, and 2) a
series of self-attention processes within the latent space itself.
This interaction not only captures the complex relationships
within the data but also significantly reduces dimensionality
while preserving the essential features needed for accurate
representation. This module functions as the encoder in the
Perceiver IO model.
Once the compressed representation is obtained, it is
directed toward two distinct modules for further processing.
The first module is dedicated to anomaly detection, employing
a straightforward linear function based on principal component
analysis (PCA). This approach assists in identifying deviations
from normal operational patterns by analyzing the principal
components of the latent representation. The reconstruction
module (decoder) takes center stage, leveraging a positional
encoding mechanism to reconstruct the STFT representation
of the signal from the compressed representation with a crossattention block.
For each attention module, there is a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) and normalization layers. The MLP consists of two
fully connected layers with a GELU activation in between,
expanding the output to a higher dimension H and then
returning it back to its original shape. The normalization
layers center and reduce the data with a learned mean and
standard deviation for each input value. The MLP introduces
nonlinearity and enhances the expressiveness of the model,
whereas the normalization layers stabilize and accelerate the
training process.
The final output includes both the reconstructed signal and
an anomaly score, enabling real-time fault detection. This
architecture ensures an optimal balance between efficient data
compression and accurate fault identification.
The modular design (encoder, decoder, and anomaly detector) is particularly well-suited for embedded environments. In

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Perceiver IO architecture for compression and anomaly detection.

practice, only the encoder and anomaly detector are deployed
on the edge device, allowing for efficient, on-device processing
with minimal computational overhead. The decoder, which is
more resource-intensive, is applied downstream after transmission of the compressed representation, enabling optional
signal reconstruction for verification, analysis, or archival purposes. This separation of responsibilities ensures low-latency
anomaly detection while maintaining the ability to reconstruct
signals when needed.
C. Attention Internal: Variable-Sized Inputs
The attention module in Perceiver IO operates in a series of
steps, with a design that ensures the length of the key-value
input does not affect the fixed size of the output.
The attention mechanism of the encoder begins by projecting the latent representation and the signal data into
three matrices: queries (Q), keys (K), and values (V). These
projections are linear transformations to a common feature
dimension F using learned weight matrices
Z ∈ R M×C , X ∈ RN×D
Q = ZWQ , WQ ∈ R

C×F

K = XWK , WK ∈ R
V = XWV , WV ∈ R

D×F

D×F

(1)
and Q ∈ R

M×F

(2)

N×F

(3)

.

(4)

and K ∈ R
and V ∈ R

N×F

Z is the latent representation and X is the input STFT of
arbitrary length N. Notice that the learned weight matrices
(WQ , WK , and WV ) do not depend on N, the length of the
input (and neither M, the length of the latent representation).
This ensures the mechanism is agnostic to the input size.
The attention scores are calculated as the dot product
between the query (Q, projection of the latent) and the
transposed key (K > , projection of the input STFT), scaled by
(F)1/2 to stabilize gradients. Mathematically
QK >
A = √ , A ∈ R M×N .
(5)
F
The resulting attention score matrix A has a shape of (M, N),
indicating that each of the M latent queries attends to all

N input STFT time elements. Since A depends on M (size
of the latent representation) and N (input length), it adapts
dynamically to variable-sized inputs.
The attention scores are normalized using the Softmax
function along the input length dimension (N). This step
ensures that the attention weights across all N input elements
for each query sum to 1, regardless of the input size. The
normalized attention weights are used to compute a weighted
sum of the value matrix (V, other projection of the input STFT)
and linearly projected on the latent space. This step produces
the output of the attention module
O = Softmax(A)VWO , O ∈ R M×C and WO ∈ RF×C .

(6)

The key insight is that the shape of O is the same as the
given latent representation. The length L of the input affects
the intermediate attention computation but does not propagate
to the output. This ensures that the final output size remains
consistent, irrespective of the input length.
At no point in this pipeline do the learned weight matrices
(WQ , WK , WV , and WO ) depend on the input length N (and
the latent representation length M). This independence allows
the Perceiver IO model to handle inputs of arbitrary size while
maintaining a consistent, scalable output. This design is ideal
for tasks involving variable-length data, such as the case study
presented in Section IV.
In the decoder section of the model, the roles of the inputs
are reversed: the latent representations are used as the key
and value, whereas the variable-sized output encoding serves
as the query. Since the attention mechanism in the decoder
mirrors that of the encoder, the resulting output is a matrix of
variable length, aligning with the dimensions of the original
input STFT.
D. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a machine learning technique that
emphasizes learning representations by comparing data samples to differentiate between similar and dissimilar pairs. The
core principle involves pulling together the representations of
similar or related data points, known as positive pairs, while

LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION

pushing apart the representations of dissimilar or unrelated
data points, referred to as negative pairs. Triplet loss, also
known as large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) [31], is a
crucial loss function in this context. It aims to organize data
points within an embedding space by ensuring that similar data
points are closer together and dissimilar ones are farther apart,
maintaining a specified margin between different classes or
clusters. This method normally operates on triplets of samples:
an anchor, a positive example from the same class as the
anchor, and a negative example from a different class. The loss
function encourages the model to learn embeddings where the
distance between the anchor and positive is minimized, and
the distance between the anchor and negative is maximized
beyond a certain margin. This margin ensures a meaningful
separation between clusters.
In our approach, the contrastive loss assesses the similarity
between the two latent matrices, utilizing only a selected
portion (i.e., a specified number of columns) of each matrix for
the computation. This approach is based on the understanding
that the characteristics crucial for anomaly detection are often
distinct from those essential for reconstructing the STFT. By
segregating these characteristics, the model minimizes the
adverse impact of the contrastive loss on the reconstruction
process. This ensures that the vital features for reconstruction remain unaffected by the contrastive component, thereby
enhancing the overall performance and accuracy of the model.
When pairs of vectors originate from the same cluster, the
contrastive loss aims to minimize the distance between them,
promoting similarity within clusters. Conversely, for pairs
from different clusters, the contrastive loss enforces a margin
constraint, ensuring these vectors remain sufficiently separated
in the latent space. This separation is vital to ensure accurate
anomaly detection without the dedicated classifier. Our implementation introduces a notable modification to the traditional
LMNN or triplet loss framework [31]. Unlike the original
formulation, where the margin is dynamically calculated, we
fix the margin to a constant value. This adjustment prevents
excessive influence on the reconstruction process, maintaining
a balance that allows the model to learn meaningful cluster
distinctions without compromising its ability to accurately
reconstruct the input data. The implementation of contrastive
learning within this framework is detailed in Section IV-C.
This tailored approach enhances the robustness and overall
effectiveness of the model in anomaly detection tasks.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
A. Case Study on Railway Monitoring
This research was developed within the context of railway
infrastructure monitoring, specifically addressing the challenges of switch and crossing system surveillance [32], [33].
In our industrial context, the railway monitoring system
implements a hierarchical data flow architecture designed to
optimize railway infrastructure monitoring while addressing
the constraints of remote deployment and real-time decisionmaking. Vibration signals are first captured by autonomous
IoT sensors (located at switch and crossing systems) equipped
with energy harvesting capabilities and embedded processing

2544912

algorithms. Rather than transmitting raw data, these sensors perform local processing to extract metadata and detect
anomalies at the source. This strategy significantly reduces
bandwidth usage and enables immediate responses to potential
issues.
The processed information is then transmitted to modular
Virtual Observation Gateway units, which act as data concentrators. These units aggregate input from multiple sensors
and conduct intermediate analysis before forwarding critical
insights to centralized servers. At the highest level of the
architecture, advanced AI algorithms perform global analysis
across the network to predict maintenance needs and coordinate proactive interventions.
This distributed processing approach is essential, as it
reduces communication overhead in remote railway environments, supports real-time local decision-making for
safety-critical events, minimizes data storage requirements,
and enhances system resilience by distributing intelligence
throughout the network.
While the broader railway monitoring system incorporates
a full hierarchical data flow, our work specifically focuses on
the development of lightweight AI models for signal compression and anomaly detection capable of operating directly on
embedded sensor nodes.
B. Dataset Description
To develop and validate the model, a dataset of vibration
signals was collected under various operating conditions in
the railway network. Due to data protection policies, some
details of the data collection process are omitted. The signals
were acquired using accelerometers mounted on multiple
railway switches and crossing systems. The dataset consists of
13 907 time-series recordings, with sampling frequencies ranging from 3100 to 3350 Hz. Of these, 5000 are anomalous, and
each recording lasts between 3 and 26 s.
The signals were recorded under different conditions,
including variations in train types, number of wagons, speeds,
and ambient temperature. To preprocess the data, we applied
a simple trimming procedure to remove noise from the beginning and end of each signal. Furthermore, STFT, as detailed
in Section III-A, was used for further feature extraction.
C. Training of the Model
To ensure the separability of the anomalies over the normal
data, a supervised contrastive learning is introduced along the
reconstruction training. The goal of the contrastive part is to
expand the margin between the two clusters to allow a quick
discrimination of samples without needing a full decision
model. Algorithm 1 shows the training loop within each epoch.
Each training sample is associated with another sample to form
pairs for the contrastive loss calculus. Our implementation uses
a list of shuffled indices to ensure random and diverse pairings.
The signal pairs remain fixed during the whole training process. The code iterates over these shuffled indices, selecting the
original sample and its paired counterpart from the dataset. For
every pair of inputs (x1 , x2 ), the encoder f maps these inputs
into their latent representations z1 and z2 (L2-3). The decoder

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Algorithm 1 Training Epoch
1: for each (x1 , x2 ) do
2:
z1 ← f (x1 )
3:
z2 ← f (x2 )
4:
xˆ1 ← f −1 (z1 )
1 x1 xˆ1 >
1 X
(x1 − xˆ1 )2
5:
LR ← 1 −
+
||.||
x
ˆ
||
ND
1
1
( N ||x
P
1
(z¯1 − z¯2 )2 if same cluster
ND

P
6:
LC ←
1
min MARGIN − ND
(z¯1 − z¯2 )2 , 0 else
7:
if batch is finished or no remaining data then
8:
LG ← λ1 LR + λ2 LC
9:
Backpropagate LG and update model weights
10:
end if
11: end for
f −1 then reconstructs x1 as xˆ1 (L4). The reconstruction loss
LR measures the quality of the reconstruction by combining a
cosine similarity term and a mean squared error (mse) term
(L5). The cosine similarity assesses the alignment in the feature space, whereas the mse ensures the pixel-wise accuracy.
As we want to maximize the cosine similarity between the
original signal and the reconstruction, the cosine similarity
term is defined as one minus the actual cosine similarity value,
allowing us to minimize the reconstruction loss toward zero.
In parallel, the contrastive loss assesses the similarity
between selected parts of the two latent matrices. These
submatrices, called z¯1 and z¯2 , are compared based on their
clustering (L6). For pairs from the same cluster, LC minimizes
the distance between the latent vectors. For pairs from different clusters, it enforces the given fixed margin to maintain
separation in the latent space.
At the end of each batch, or when no data remains, the
global loss LG —a linear combination of LR and LC (L8)—is
backpropagated to update the weights of the model (L9). The
coefficients λ in this combination control the relative influence
of each loss term, allowing for fine-tuning of their impact on
training.
After completing the training loop for an epoch, the model
is evaluated on the validation data to compute the validation
losses. The validation data is processed similar to the training
data, but without updating the model parameters. The validation losses are averaged and used to compute the overall
validation loss.
V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Our final goal is to achieve the implementation of the
model into an embedded target with constrained computation
capabilities and memory capacity. Therefore, we have reduced
the architecture to accommodate our use case without losing
too much performance on the metrics. The latent matrix has
a shape of eight rows (M) and 32 columns (C). The crossattention module of the encoder has a feature dimension (F)
of 128 channels, and its MLP has a hidden layer (H) of 256
neurons. We choose to include one process block with a feature
size of 64 channels and a hidden size of 64 neurons. The
decoder has a feature dimension of 128 channels and a hidden
layer of 512 neurons. All attention modules are single-headed

to reduce the memory footprint of the model. In the following
experiments, models were trained using the Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 0.001 over 50 epochs and a batch size
of 256 signals. The fixed margin used inside the contrastive
loss is set to 1. To ensure robust evaluation, we employed a
threefold cross-validation strategy for training all models. In
each fold, 9271 signals were used for training and 4636 for
testing. Both training and testing sets were balanced to contain
an equal number of normal and anomalous signals.
A. Performance of CS and Deep Learning Models
Compressed sensing (CS) is a signal acquisition paradigm
that allows the reconstruction of sparse or compressible signals
from significantly fewer measurements than required by the
Nyquist theorem [34]. In vibration signal processing, CS has
been used to reduce data transmission and storage demands in
wireless sensor networks by leveraging the inherent sparsity
of mechanical vibration signals in suitable transform domains
[18], [20].
To establish a baseline for comparison with our proposed
Perceiver IO model, we implemented the CS method by
[20], which combines an improved K-SVD dictionary learning
algorithm with sparse adaptive matching pursuit (SAMP)
for automatic sparsity estimation. We selected this method
because it is specifically designed for signal compression in
wireless sensor networks, which closely aligns with our use
case. Our implementation used 128 dictionary atoms, trained
over 50 iterations. SAMP was configured to run for 800
reconstruction iterations with a tolerance of 1e−4 .
We selected 727 signals from our dataset corresponding to
a single train type operating at a fixed speed, in order to
simulate an almost homogeneous dataset where the signals
are highly similar to one another. Each signal was trimmed to
contain exactly 8000 samples. The method was evaluated at
a compression ratio of 0.5, meaning that 4000 measurements
were acquired from 8000-sample signals. This setup allowed
us to compare its performance against our proposed deep
learning-based compression approach.
To ensure both methods operated at the same compression
ratio, we increased the latent space dimension of the Perceiver
IO model from eight rows and 32 columns to 32 rows and 125
columns.
This comparison focuses on signal compression. In the
case of the Perceiver IO, Algorithm 1 computes only the
reconstruction loss LR (and λ1 = 1), whereas the contrastive
loss LC , which is part of the full training objective, is omitted
in this context.
In the case of the K-SVD algorithm, the output is a
reconstructed signal in the time domain. In contrast, our model
produces the STFT representation of the signal. To enable
a comparison between the two approaches, we applied the
real-time phase gradient heap integration (RTPGHI) phase
reconstruction algorithm [35] and a classic inverse STFT
algorithm to convert the output of our model back into the
time domain. Table I reports the mse and cosine similarity
between the original and reconstructed signals in both the
time domain and the time–frequency domain for the K-SVD
algorithm and our proposed approach. Fig. 3 shows examples

LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF T RAINING M ETRICS

2544912

at a given time, thus relating to the amplitude of the temporal
signal and the fidelity of the spectral content. Conversely, the
cosine similarity evaluates the preservation of the overall shape
of the temporal signal. Both metrics indicate better performance for our model, which aligns with the visual comparison
of the reconstruction samples shown in Fig. 3. K-SVD can
reconstruct with a good level of fidelity [see Fig. 3(a)], but it
notably struggles to reconstruct signals involving time shifts
[see Fig. 3(c) and (e)]. This limitation is common among
CS algorithms, which typically rely on fixed dictionaries
and assume sparsity in a certain basis. Such assumptions
make it difficult for these methods to handle heterogeneous
datasets with diverse signal variations, including temporal
shifts. Furthermore, as signal length increases, the complexity
of accurate reconstruction grows, often leading to degraded
performance. Due to these challenges, we restricted our dataset
to a pseudohomogeneous set of signals to ensure fair and
meaningful comparisons between models. For the following
trainings, we use the full dataset available, which includes
signals from seven different train types traveling at speeds
between 90 and 110 km/h. We observed that while the method
performs well, handling a significantly greater diversity of
signal patterns may require increasing the size of the latent
space and, correspondingly, the overall model. This limitation
reflects a common trade-off in AI models between complexity
and generalization.
In both models, the peaks corresponding to axle crossings are not well reconstructed. However, our model exhibits
artifacts induced by the phase reconstruction algorithm [see
Fig. 3(b), (d), and (f)]. These artifacts could potentially be
mitigated by fine-tuning the parameters of the STFT, notably
reducing the step length. This can lead to improved reconstruction fidelity and reduced phase-related distortions, but will
raise the memory footprint.

Fig. 3. (a), (c), and (e) Signal reconstructions using the K-SVD algorithm.
(b), (d), and (f) Signal reconstructions using the Perceiver IO algorithm.

B. Results on Contrastive Learning
of the reconstructed time-domain signals. The plots on the
left correspond to the K-SVD reconstructions, while those
on the right show the outputs from the Perceiver IO model.
For each example, the original and reconstructed signals are
plotted together to visually assess reconstruction quality.
The time-domain metrics presented in Table I suggest that
the K-SVD reconstructions are significantly better than those
produced by our model. Notably, the cosine similarity is shown
to be near zero. However, the issue lies in the fact that these
metrics do not accurately represent the similarity between the
reconstruction and the original signal. The use of the RTPGHI
algorithm for temporal reconstruction introduces phase shifts
that degrade both metrics. For example, a 90◦ phase shift
reduces cosine similarity to zero, while a 180◦ phase shift
maximizes mse. These distortions undermine the validity of
time-domain comparisons.
To provide a more accurate assessment of the reconstruction quality of both models, time–frequency metrics are also
calculated. In this context, the mse represents the accurate
reconstruction of the intensity of each frequency component

The global loss function, which is a linear combination
of normalized metrics, was used to control the influence of
each metric during backpropagation. The values of λ1 and λ2
are initially chosen arbitrarily. These hyperparameters control
the trade-off between optimizing two competing objectives:
signal reconstruction and contrastive learning. Increasing one
relative to the other prioritizes the corresponding objective
during training. In our experiments, we fix λ1 = 1, that is, a
100% influence on both the mse and cosine similarity losses,
and vary λ2 to identify a value that effectively separates the
classes (normal versus anomaly) while preserving the quality
of the STFT reconstruction. For simplicity, we refer to λ2 as
the contrastive weight.
Table II presents a summary of evaluation metrics computed
for a series of our proposed models trained with varying
contrastive weights. Each row corresponds to a distinct model
configuration, where the contrastive weight is incremented
from 0.00 to 0.45. The columns report the mean and standard deviation of the performance metrics across the folds,
including the mse loss, cosine similarity loss, and contrastive
loss. In addition, classification performance is represented by

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF L OSSES AND F1 S CORES ACROSS C ONTRASTIVE W EIGHTS

TABLE III
C LASSIFICATION R EPORT AND T RAINING M ETRICS

the accuracy and the F1-score for the normal and anomaly
classes.
Metrics presented in this table indicate that all configurations, excluding the first two and the last one, are similar in
results. The first configuration with no contrastive learning
gives us the baseline reconstruction metrics (0.0178 for mse
and 81.40% of cosine similarity). The classification accuracy and F1-scores for both normal and anomaly detection
improve significantly with the contrastive weight, reaching
near-perfect values around weights of 0.20 and above. Notably,
at a weight of 0.20, the model achieves an accuracy of
99.99%, with F1-scores exceeding 0.999 for both classes,
while the reconstruction metrics (mse and cosine similarity)
stabilize to approximately 0.04 for mse and 61% for cosine
similarity, indicating minimal compromise in reconstruction
quality. Beyond the 0.20 weight, while some configurations
like 0.30 and 0.35 also show excellent performance, they
do not surpass the 0.20 configuration in terms of overall
balance and consistency across all metrics. Therefore, the
0.20 contrastive weight is chosen for its optimal balance
between reconstruction quality and classification accuracy,
demonstrating the most robust and reliable performance.
To ensure a lightweight and efficient overall model, we
avoid incorporating additional complex models for anomaly
detection and instead utilize a simple linear classifier. Each
signal is classified based on the first PCA component derived
from the latent space as shown in Fig. 2. This component
is compared against a decision threshold to determine the
classification. This threshold is computed by first calculating the mean of the first PCA component for the normal

signals and the mean of the first PCA component for the
anomalous signals, and then taking the average of these
two means. Compared to heavier classifiers, such as support
vector machines (SVMs) and random forests, this approach
offers significant computational advantages. SVMs often need
complex kernel functions and can become resource-intensive
with high-dimensional latent spaces. Random forests, while
powerful, involve multiple decision trees, which increase both
memory usage and inference time. In contrast, our method
reduces overhead by focusing on a single linear decision
boundary, making it highly efficient for our real-time and
resource-constrained use case.
To isolate the contributions of contrastive learning and the
dual-module architecture from other architectural variations,
we compare our proposed method against a basic Perceiver
IO model that shares the same underlying structure. Table III
presents classification and reconstruction metrics for the same
model trained with three different loss functions. The first loss
does not incorporate contrastive learning (λ2 = 0). The second
and third models include contrastive learning with λ2 = 0.2,
but differ in the input used to compute the contrastive loss LC .
The second applies contrastive learning across the entire latent
matrix; that is, the contrastive loss LC is computed using all
8 × 32 values of the latent matrix. The third, referred to as
partial contrastive learning, applies contrastive learning only
on the first eight columns of the latent matrix—specifically, a
submatrix of size 8 × 8 from the full 8 × 32 latent matrix is
used to compute LC .
The model without contrastive loss demonstrates poor
classification performance. The mean precision, recall, and

LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION

2544912

Fig. 4. Projection of the first two PCA components (a) without contrastive learning, (b) with contrastive learning, and (c) with partial contrastive learning.
Histogram of the first PCA component (d) without contrastive learning, (e) with contrastive learning, and (f) with partial contrastive learning.

F1-score for the anomalous class are particularly low (0.24,
0.38, and 0.30), indicating that many anomalies are misclassified. These results suggest that the extracted features from the
first PCA component are not well-separated, making anomaly
detection difficult for the simple detection function. This lack
of separation is clearly seen in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of samples in our dataset
projected onto the first two principal components (top row),
alongside histograms of the projections onto the first principal
component (bottom row). Each visualization corresponds to
the model obtained from the average fold of the respective
configuration.
As shown in Fig. 4(a), the PCA scatter plot reveals no
distinct clustering between normal and anomalous signals.
Consistently, the histogram in Fig. 4(d) demonstrates that
the threshold (green line) does not effectively separate these
two classes when using it as a linear anomaly detection
function.
In contrast, the application of contrastive learning markedly
enhances classification performance, achieving near-perfect
precision and recall values of 0.999 for anomalous signals.
This improvement is corroborated visually in Fig. 4(b) and (e),
where normal and anomalous signals are clearly segregated
along the principal component axis.
Partial contrastive learning, depicted in Fig. 4(c) and (f),
yields slightly lower classification metrics compared to full
contrastive learning. Nevertheless, it delivers notable improvements in reconstruction quality, with an increase from 62.1%
to 64.7% in cosine similarity, as we can see in Table III. Fig. 5
illustrates that reconstructions produced by the partial contrastive learning model (bottom row) exhibit superior fidelity
compared to those generated by the full contrastive learning
model (third row). Moreover, introducing contrastive learning
adversely affects reconstruction quality when compared to
models trained without it (second row). Given that the classification performance remains largely comparable between the
models, with both contrastive learning models misclassifying
an average of 50 samples, this trade-off is deemed beneficial
for the intended application.
Compression performance was evaluated using key metrics,
including the compression ratio, which reflects the size of
the compressed data relative to the original. In addition, we
considered the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), an important
metric in image, audio, and video compression. Our model
achieved a PSNR of 20.46 with a compression ratio of 88.
In comparison, the model built in [29], with 20 million
parameters, achieved a PSNR of 26.97. Despite our model
not achieving the same quality of reconstruction, it is 80
times smaller, demonstrating the efficiency of the Perceiver IO
architecture even with smaller models and flexible, nonfixedsize signals.
The use of contrastive learning proves crucial in enhancing
the feature separability, which enables the model to cluster
the signals effectively, facilitating a simple yet highly accurate
anomaly detection process even in the presence of imbalanced classes with a controlled reduction of the compression
quality. The strong generalization capabilities of the model
demonstrate its effectiveness not only in the railway industry case study but also for potential applications in other
domains.

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE IV
M ODEL S IZE W ITH R ESPECT TO I TS PARAMETERS

can strategically balance computation and size between the
encoder and decoder to minimize the embedded component.
Model G demonstrates our choice of single-headed attention,
which significantly reduces the model size. Since we prioritize
a compact encoder over the decoder, using only one attention
head leads to a smaller model, as the MLPs in the encoder
are smaller than those in the decoder.
To showcase the embedding capabilities of our model, we
have trained a streamlined variant that incorporates parameters
from models A, C, E, and H. The new model has a compact
architecture, with the encoder measuring 106.01 kB and the
decoder at 307.63 kB, resulting in a total model size of
413.64 kB. This model achieved an mse of 0.026 and a
cosine similarity of 72.7%. In addition, it produced a PSNR
of 21.87. For reference, although not previously reported, the
larger model without contrastive learning achieved a higher
PSNR of 23.72, indicating improved reconstruction quality
due to a larger model capacity. This optimized model is
designed to fit within an embedded target while maintaining
performance levels that are comparable to larger, less compact
alternatives. By demonstrating these capabilities, we affirm
the model’s potential for deployment in resource-constrained
environments without sacrificing too much accuracy or
efficacy.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Fig. 5. STFT reconstructions from different models for two sample signals.

C. Embedded Environments
Table IV presents several variants of the model with different configurations compared to the baseline. Although some
models (A, C, E, H, and J) reduce the model size and others
expand it, finding a balance between these extremes is crucial
for embedded environments. In models A and B, the latent
matrix size determines the compression ratio, with smaller
shapes yielding higher ratios. Models C, D, and H–K adjust
the encoder size, whereas E and F modify the decoder. In
our use case, only part of the model runs on an embedded
target. Given Perceiver IO’s asymmetrical architecture, we

Our Perceiver IO-based model excels in vibration analysis
and fault detection through the attention mechanism, which
isolates critical features and filters out noise. The querybased output mechanism enhances precision in identifying
anomalies, such as wear or misalignment, in extensive and
noisy datasets. The scalability of the model and its contrastive
capabilities improve fault detection accuracy and adaptability
across various industrial domains. In addition, integrating
compression and anomaly detection into a unified framework reduces data dimensionality, accelerates computations,
and lowers memory requirements, making it ideal for realtime monitoring and predictive maintenance applications. This
combination of features establishes our model as a robust
and efficient tool for real-world vibration analysis and fault
diagnosis.

LEBONVALLET et al.: PERCEIVER IO MODEL FOR EFFICIENT VIBRATION SIGNAL COMPRESSION

In the future, we plan to test our model on an embedded
target, specifically utilizing the Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense
Rev2, paired with an ADXL355 3-D axis accelerometer. This
development board features 1 MB of flash memory and 256 kB
of RAM, which is ample for storing the model weights as
well as the code required for signal acquisition, inference, and
wireless transmission. We estimate that the model’s inference
requires approximately 2 million floating-point operations for
an input of size (100, 129), corresponding to a temporal
signal of roughly 12 000 samples. This suggests that most
microcontrollers equipped with a floating-point unit (FPU),
such as the nRF52840 integrated within the proposed hardware
platform (operating at 64 MHz), could perform inference in
under 1 s. This estimation is based on the number of all
mathematical operations needed by the different layers of our
model. However, the actual computational load may be higher
depending on the hardware target and the implementation of
the necessary mathematical functions, particularly the exponential and hyperbolic tangent functions. For the same input
size, the inference memory footprint, which is the sum of
the sizes of all intermediate matrices, is less than 16 kB.
We are actively working on further reducing the model’s size
and computational cost by optimizing its weights. By merging
some of the matrices, it is possible to decrease the model’s size
without affecting its output. These optimizations are inspired
by the multihead latent (MLA) attention layer [36]. We will
also work on the effect of quantization on the performance of
the model, both for the model weights and the STFT intensity
values. Reducing the quantification of the STFT amplitudes
reduces the size of the input data, which is important in our use
case, but may also strongly affect the quality of the temporal
reconstructions. In addition, our method may be unsuitable for
use cases involving very short signals or requiring extremely
fast inference.
Our goal is to expand the applicability of our model by
incorporating additional use cases, such as degradation estimation. To achieve this, we aim to further reduce the model’s size
by more accurately balancing reconstruction and contrastive
loss through the implementation of adaptive weights. This
optimization will allow us to ensure that the model is compact
enough to be fully embedded within the target hardware.
Furthermore, the capability for online training or cooperative learning will enable us to adapt the model dynamically
based on incoming data, thereby enhancing its performance
and relevance in real-time applications. By refining our
approach, we hope to leverage the embedded system’s capabilities fully while delivering a robust and versatile solution.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

A. Brandt, Noise and Vibration Analysis: Signal Analysis and Experimental Procedures. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2023.
X. Li et al., “Vibration analysis of the propulsion shaft system considering dynamic misalignment in the outer ring,” J. Sound Vibrat., vol. 589,
Oct. 2024, Art. no. 118612.
T. Chu, T. Nguyen, H. Yoo, and J. Wang, “A review of vibration
analysis and its applications,” Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 5, Mar. 2024, Art.
no. e26282.
Z. Wang, Y. Cheng, G. Mei, W. Zhang, G. Huang, and Z. Yin, “Torsional
vibration analysis of the gear transmission system of high-speed trains
with wheel defects,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Engineers, Part F, J. Rail Rapid
Transit, vol. 234, no. 2, pp. 123–133, Feb. 2020.

[5]

2544912

G. Peixin, Y. Tao, Y. Zhang, W. Jiao, and Z. Jingyu, “Vibration analysis
and control technologies of hydraulic pipeline system in aircraft: A
review,” Chin. J. Aeronaut., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 83–114, Apr. 2021.
[6] J.-G. Jang, C.-M. Noh, S.-S. Kim, S.-C. Shin, S.-S. Lee, and J.-C. Lee,
“Vibration data feature extraction and deep learning-based preprocessing
method for highly accurate motor fault diagnosis,” J. Comput. Design
Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 204–220, Jan. 2023.
[7] J. H. Choi, S. K. Jang, W. H. Cho, S. Moon, and H. Kim, “Motor PHM
on edge computing with anomaly detection and fault severity estimation
through compressed data using PCA and autoencoder,” Mach. Learn.
Knowl. Extraction, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1466–1483, Jun. 2024.
[8] O. AlShorman et al., “A review of artificial intelligence methods for
condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of rolling element bearings for
induction motor,” Shock Vibrat., vol. 2020, pp. 1–20, Nov. 2020.
[9] R. Liu, B. Yang, E. Zio, and X. Chen, “Artificial intelligence for fault
diagnosis of rotating machinery: A review,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process.,
vol. 108, pp. 33–47, Aug. 2018.
[10] Z. Zhu et al., “A review of the application of deep learning in intelligent
fault diagnosis of rotating machinery,” Measurement, vol. 206, Jan.
2023, Art. no. 112346.
[11] C. Wang, Y. Sun, and X. Wang, “Image deep learning in fault
diagnosis of mechanical equipment,” J. Intell. Manuf., vol. 35, no. 6,
pp. 2475–2515, Aug. 2024.
[12] C. T. Yiakopoulos, K. C. Gryllias, and I. A. Antoniadis, “Rolling element
bearing fault detection in industrial environments based on a K-means
clustering approach,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 2888–2911,
Mar. 2011.
[13] W. Zhang, G. Peng, C. Li, Y. Chen, and Z. Zhang, “A new deep learning
model for fault diagnosis with good anti-noise and domain adaptation
ability on raw vibration signals,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 425, Feb.
2017.
[14] B. Zhang, S. Zhang, and W. Li, “Bearing performance degradation
assessment using long short-term memory recurrent network,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 106, pp. 14–29, Apr. 2019.
[15] Y. Zhang, X. Li, L. Gao, W. Chen, and P. Li, “Ensemble deep contractive
auto-encoders for intelligent fault diagnosis of machines under noisy
environment,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 196, May 2020, Art. no.
105764.
[16] M. Oltean, J. Picheral, E. Lahalle, H. Hamdan, and J. Griffaton,
“Compression methods for mechanical vibration signals: Application
to the plane engines,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 41, nos. 1–2,
pp. 313–327, Dec. 2013.
[17] W. Guo and P. W. Tse, “A novel signal compression method based on
optimal ensemble empirical mode decomposition for bearing vibration
signals,” J. Sound Vibrat., vol. 332, no. 2, pp. 423–441, Jan. 2013.
[18] Y. Yin, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Qin, and M. Zuo, “A data compression
method with an encryption feature for safe and lightweight vibration condition monitoring,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19,
pp. 30524–30535, Oct. 2024.
[19] K. H. H. Aung, C. L. Kok, Y. Y. Koh, and T. H. Teo, “An embedded
machine learning fault detection system for electric fan drive,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 493, Jan. 2024.
[20] Q. Huang et al., “Compressed sensing based on an improved KSVD for vibration signal compression reconstruction in wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[21] P. Dini, L. Diana, A. Elhanashi, and S. Saponara, “Overview of AImodels and tools in embedded IIoT applications,” Electronics, vol. 13,
no. 12, p. 2322, Jun. 2024.
[22] W.-J. Lin, S.-H. Lo, H.-T. Young, and C.-L. Hung, “Evaluation of deep
learning neural networks for surface roughness prediction using vibration
signal analysis,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 7, p. 1462, Apr. 2019.
[23] H.-Y. Chen and C.-H. Lee, “Deep learning approach for vibration signals
applications,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 11, p. 3929, Jun. 2021.
[24] X. Wang, D. Mao, and X. Li, “Bearing fault diagnosis based on vibroacoustic data fusion and 1D-CNN network,” Measurement, vol. 173,
Sep. 2020, Art. no. 108518.
[25] B. Dolenc, P. Boškoski, and D. Juričić, “Distributed bearing fault
diagnosis based on vibration analysis,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process.,
vols. 66–67, pp. 521–532, Jan. 2016.
[26] H.-Y. Chen and C.-H. Lee, “Vibration signals analysis by explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) approach: Application on bearing faults
diagnosis,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 134246–134256, 2020.
[27] G. Biagetti, P. Crippa, L. Falaschetti, A. Mansour, and C. Turchetti,
“Energy and performance analysis of lossless compression algorithms
for wireless EMG sensors,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 15, p. 5160, Jul. 2021.

2544912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[28] G. Xin and P. Fan, “A lossless compression method for multi-component
medical images based on big data mining,” Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 1,
p. 12372, Jun. 2021.
[29] A. Jaegle et al., “Perceiver IO: A general architecture for structured
inputs & outputs,” 2021, arXiv:2107.14795.
[30] D. Griffin and J. Lim, “Signal estimation from modified short-time
Fourier transform,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
vol. ASSP-32, no. 2, pp. 236–243, Apr. 1984.
[31] K. Q. Weinberger and L. K. Saul, “Distance metric learning for large
margin nearest neighbor classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 10,
no. 9, pp. 207–244, Dec. 2009.
[32] E. Kassa, J. Saramota, and A. Skavhaug, “Monitoring of switches and
crossings/tracks using smart sensors,” in Intelligent Quality Assessment
of Railway Switches and Crossings. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021,
pp. 149–166.
[33] M. Hamadache, S. Dutta, O. Olaby, R. Ambur, E. Stewart, and R. Dixon,
“On the fault detection and diagnosis of railway switch and crossing
systems: An overview,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 23, p. 5129, Nov. 2019.
[34] E. J. Candès and M. B. Wakin, “An introduction to compressive
sampling,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 21–30, Mar.
2008.
[35] Z. Pruša and P. L. Søndergaard, “Real-time spectrogram inversion using
phase gradient heap integration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digital Audio Effects
(DAFx), 2016, pp. 17–21.
[36] F. Meng, P. Tang, X. Tang, Z. Yao, X. Sun, and M. Zhang, “TransMLA:
Multi-head latent attention is all you need,” 2025, arXiv:2502.07864.

Guillaume Lebonvallet received the master’s
degree in optimization and systems safety and the
engineering degree in networks and telecommunications, with a specialization in mobile technologies
and connected objects from the University of Technology of Troyes (UTT), Troyes, France, in 2022,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.

Luis A. Salazar-Zendeja received the B.S. degree
in mathematics from the Autonomous University of
Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza, Mexico,
in 2015, the M.S. degree in manufacturing systems from the Tecnológico of Monterrey, Monterrey,
Mexico, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from Centrale Lille, Lille, France, in 2022.
He currently holds a post-doctoral position at the
University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, France.
His research interests include scheduling and deep
learning.

Faicel Hnaien received the engineering degree in
industrial engineering from the National Engineering School of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, in 2004, the
master’s degree in industrial engineering from the
Polytechnic Institute of Grenoble, Grenoble, France,
in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in industrial engineering from the École des Mines de Saint-Étienne,
Saint-Étienne, France, in 2008.
From 2008 to 2009, he held a temporary teaching and research position at French Institute of
Advanced Mechanics, Aubière, France. Since 2009,
he has been an Associate Professor at the University of Technology of Troyes
(UTT), Troyes, France, and he was promoted to a Full Professor in 2024. His
academic work has focused on developing optimization methods in industrial
engineering.

Hichem Snoussi received the Diploma degree
in electrical engineering from École supérieure
d’électricité, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, in 2000, the
DEA and Ph.D. degrees in signal processing from
the University of Paris Sud, Orsay, France, in
2000 and 2003, respectively, and the HDR degree
from the University of Technology of Compiégne,
Compiégne, France, in 2009.
From 2003 to 2004, he was a Post-Doctoral
Researcher with the Institut de Recherche en Communications et Cybernétique de Nantes (IRCCyN),
Nantes, France. He has spent short periods as a Visiting Scientist with the
Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Wako, Japan, and Olin Neuropsychiatry
Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT, USA. From 2005 to 2009,
he was an Associate Professor with the University of Technology of Troyes,
Troyes, France. Since 2010, he has been a Full Professor with the University
of Technology of Troyes. Since 2010, he has been the in charge of CapSec
Plateform (Sensors for Security). From 2016 to 2020, he has been the Manager
of the LM2S Laboratory, Charles Delaunay Institute, Troyes. Since 2021,
he has been the Deputy Director of the LIST3N Laboratory, and the Team
Leader of the M2S Group. He is the principal investigator of many research
projects and industrial partnerships. His research interests include Bayesian
techniques for source separation, information geometry, differential geometry,
and machine learning.

Brice Nélain received the M.Sc. degree in advanced
materials from Cranfield University, Wharley End,
U.K., and the Engineering degree from the Ecole
Centrale de Paris, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, in 2007.
From 2008 to 2023, he took over the positions
of computation engineer, and an Expert Engineer at VIBRATEC, Écully, France, specialized in
vibration and acoustics. In 2023, he joined the
Innovation Team, VOSSLOH, Villeurbanne, France,
as the Project Leader. His research was focused
on ground-borne noise and vibration, mechanical
fatigue design, and gearbox noises.