Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

PEZD: A practical and eﬀective zero-delay defense against website
ﬁngerprinting
Hengheng Xiong

, Dapeng Man

∗, Huanran Wang

, Jingwen Tan

, Jiguang Lv, Wu Yang

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, Heilongjiang, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Keywords:
Privacy
Traﬃc analysis
Anonymity system
Website ﬁngerprinting defense

a b s t r a c t
Website Fingerprinting (WF) enables an attacker to infer which website a user is visiting by analyzing the sidechannel information of network traﬃc, posing a serious threat to anonymous systems such as Tor. To mitigate this
issue, numerous defenses have been proposed to resist WF attacks. However, many defenses incur high overhead,
impeding their deployment. Moreover, some defenses rely on the impractical assumption that the defender knows
prior knowledge of which website the user visits. In this paper, we propose a practical and eﬀective lightweight
WF defense, named PEZD. It hinders attackers from recognizing a website’s unique patterns by adding dummy
packets with diverse distributions into traﬃc traces. In particular, PEZD is a website-agnostic defense that does
not require knowledge of the website users are visiting and incurs only moderate overhead to eﬀectively prevent
attacks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PEZD reduces the accuracy of state-of-the-art attacks from 97 %
to 19 %–38 % while introducing zero latency overhead and only 48 % bandwidth overhead. Moreover, we show
that PEZD remains eﬀective for injecting dummy packets only on the client-side, simplifying the implementation
of the defense.

1. Introduction
An increasing number of people are using privacy-enhancing tools
such as Tor [1] to access the Internet, aiming to seek protection against
the potential risks associated with network surveillance. Tor is the most
famous anonymous networking service, with two million people using it
every day [2,3]. It relays user traﬃc through multiple volunteer nodes,
such that attackers cannot capture both their identity and online activity
simultaneously. Nevertheless, many studies have shown that the privacy
of Tor has been undermined by Website Fingerprinting (WF) attacks
[4–13]. In particular, WF attacks are traﬃc analysis attacks that allow
an attacker to identify which websites a user visits by analyzing the sidechannel information of network traﬃc, i.e., directions, sizes, and timing
of packets. Such information can be utilized to build unique patterns for
a target website. The attacker identiﬁes which websites a user visits by
recognizing unique patterns in network traﬃc.
To mitigate WF attacks, numerous defenses have been proposed
[4,6,14–28]. Speciﬁcally, WF defenses reshape network traﬃc by injecting dummy network packets and/or delaying network packets. Among
them, BuFLO [19], Tamaraw [20], and CS-BuFLO [21] mimic a constant
transmission rate, but they incur bandwidth and latency overheads several times higher than the original traﬃc, severely hindering their deployment. To mitigate the high overhead, researchers have proposed a

variety of lightweight (moderate overhead) defenses. However, many
defenses [22–24,28,29] rely on the impractical assumption that the defender knows prior knowledge of which website the user visits, so that
they can collect traﬃc traces from these websites to generate adversarial perturbations. The disadvantage of this type of defense is that it only
protects speciﬁc websites and lacks defense generality. Some websiteagnostic lightweight defenses have been proposed [17,27,30–32], but
several of these defenses [30,31] require to delay packet, resulting in potential out-of-memory errors on Tor’s relays. Moreover, some defenses
have been undermined by state-of-the-art WF attacks [9,10], such as
WTF-PAD [17] and FRONT [27]. In particular, FRONT injects dummy
packets according to a Rayleigh distribution to obfuscate the front of
network traﬃc since WF attacks rely on feature-rich trace fronts. We
show that attackers can still identify the defended traﬃc traces by exploiting the features present in the latter part of the traces, with the
Var-CNN attack [10] achieving an accuracy of 80%. Furthermore, even
when TBP [32] employs multiple ﬁxed distributions for dummy packet
injection, Var-CNN can still achieve 70% accuracy against it. These results demonstrate the fundamental vulnerability of defenses using deterministic distributions.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose PEZD, a practical and eﬀective lightweight WF defense. The basic idea is to hinder
an attacker from discovering patterns common to intra-website traﬃc

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: xionghengheng@hrbeu.edu.cn (H. Xiong), mandapeng@hrbeu.edu.cn (D. Man), huanran.wang@hrbeu.edu.cn (H. Wang), ttt19@hrbeu.edu.cn
(J. Tan), lvjiguang@hrbeu.edu.cn (J. Lv), yangwu@hrbeu.edu.cn (W. Yang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111716
Received 23 May 2024; Received in revised form 21 April 2025; Accepted 11 September 2025
Available online 14 September 2025
1389-1286/© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

DNN with automatically extracted features: Deep neural networks have been widely applied to WF attacks. The DNN-based attacks
can automatically learn features from raw traﬃc traces.
AWF [11]: Rimmer et al. evaluated the performance of Stacked Denoising Auto Encoder (SDAE), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models. The CNN among models performed best, with an accuracy of over 96 % in the closed-world
setting.
DF [9]: Sirinam et al. designed a better attack model. They achieved
98.3 % accuracy in the closed-world setting and also achieved 0.95 TPR
and 0.007 FPR in the open-world setting. In addition, they also evaluated the eﬀectiveness of the attack against WF defenses, signiﬁcantly undermining WTF-PAD, achieving over 90 % accuracy in the closed-world
setting.
Var-CNN [10]: Var-CNN used ResNet, the state-of-the-art CNN architecture in computer vision proposed by He et al. [37], achieving 98.8 %
accuracy in the closed-world setting. In the open-world setting, Var-CNN
has a 0.98 Multi-TPR and a 0.003 FPR.

traces by injecting dummy packets with diverse distributions for each
load. To the best of our knowledge, this paper shows for the ﬁrst time
that WF attacks can be undermined by injecting dummy packets with
diverse distributions. Speciﬁcally, PEZD utilizes the unique nature of the
distribution of outgoing packets from diﬀerent websites to construct the
distribution of dummy packets so that the distribution of dummy packets sent by the same website varies for each load. The diversity in the
distribution of dummy packets diversiﬁes the traﬃc traces of users on
each visit, resulting in the existence of fewer common traﬃc patterns on
the same websites, which severely interferes with the learning process of
the attack model. The distribution of dummy packets can be generated
from the traﬃc trace of any website and therefore can be pre-generated
and applied to real-time traﬃc without prior knowledge of the website
the user is visiting. Furthermore, our defense is a lightweight solution
that introduces only a moderate bandwidth overhead without incurring
latency overhead. The practical, eﬀective, and lightweight nature of our
defense allows it to be adopted by anonymous systems such as Tor.
We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
•

2.2. WF defenses

We propose PEZD, a practical and eﬀective lightweight defense. It
breaks distinctive traﬃc patterns of the website by injecting diﬀerent
distributions of dummy packets for each load. PEZD is a websiteagnostic defense that does not require prior knowledge of the website
the user is visiting, making the defense more practical. Furthermore,
PEZD is a lightweight defense that incurs only moderate bandwidth
overhead and does not need to delay packets.
• We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate PEZD, and the results show that it outperforms the previous WF defense, WTF-PAD
[17], FRONT [27], and Surakav [30]. In the closed-world setting, it
reduces the accuracy of the state-of-the-art attack, Var-CNN, from
97.56 % to 19.39 %, while FRONT only reduces it to 82.92 %, WTFPAD to 93.93 %, and Surakav to 69.93 %. In the open-world setting,
PEZD provides high protection performance that reduces the recall
to 0.26 and the precision to 0.54.
• We show that PEZD still provides high defense performance even if
dummy packets are injected only on the client-side. In addition, we
also show that PEZD does not require signiﬁcant eﬀort to maintain
during deployment.

WF defenses inject dummy packets and/or delay the original packets according to diﬀerent strategies to prevent attackers from identifying
the target website, which introduces bandwidth and latency overheads.
Existing WF defenses can be broadly divided into two classes: websitespeciﬁc defenses and website-agnostic defenses. We summarize the representative defenses in Table 1 in terms of bandwidth overhead, defense
assumptions, and defense performance.
Website-speciﬁc defenses: These defenses require knowledge of the
traﬃc patterns of a speciﬁc website to generate defense information,
and accordingly, they assume that the defender has prior knowledge of
which websites the user visits to collect traﬃc patterns for those websites.
In early WF defenses, some regularization-based defenses were proposed that aim to ﬁt traces into pre-deﬁned patterns. Glove [14] and
Supersequence [6] cluster the websites by their features and compute a
uniform sending pattern for each group. When the websites that users
visit are in a group, it will load the uniform pattern of the group so
that the websites in the group generate a similar traﬃc trace. W-T [28]
confuses the classiﬁer by making the traﬃc trace appear like another
website’s traﬃc trace through burst molding. To easily moldable burst
sequences, they modify the browser to half-duplex mode.
Many WF defenses utilizing adversarial perturbations have been proposed against WF attacks [18,22–25,29]. This type of defense exploits
the weaknesses of DNN models that can cause the misclassiﬁcation of
classiﬁers even using small perturbations. Mockingbird [18] and WFGAN [25] generate adversarial perturbations requiring the entire traﬃc
trace, which is unrealistic under the real scenario. Whereas the network
is in real-time, when the entire traﬃc sequence is captured, then the user
session has concluded. Nasr et al. [29]. proposed Blind that uses GAN to
address the limitation of protecting user traﬃc in real-time. Shan et al.
[23] proposed Dolos, which leverages adversarial patches to resist WF
attacks. Dolos can inject adversarial patches anywhere in the real traﬃc
since the adversarial patches have the location-agnostic property. Qiao
et al. proposed Acup3 [34], a novel approach that employs a many-toone website imitation strategy to increase the similarity of traﬃc patterns across diﬀerent websites. Moreover, Gu et al. [38] employed the
Grad-CAM algorithm to identify key segments for classiﬁcation and optimized adversarial patch generation through segmentation and restriction values. Although these defenses have low bandwidth overhead and
high protection performance, some limitations hinder their implementation:

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a
review of related work, then Section 3 outlines the threat model. Our
proposed defense, PEZD, is presented in Section 4, and its evaluation is
in Section 5. We discuss related issues of PEZD in Section 6 and summarize the paper in Section 7.

2. Related work
2.1. WF attacks
The WF attack is a classiﬁcation problem in which an attacker collects traﬃc traces from targeted websites as instances to train a classiﬁer for identifying unknown traces. Existing WF attacks are broadly
divided into traditional machine learning with hand-crafted features
and deep neural networks (DNNs) with automatically extracted features.
Traditional machine learning with hand-crafted features: WF attacks based on traditional machine learning needs hand-crafted features,
using Naïve-Bayes [12], random decision forests [7], k-Nearest Neighbour [6], and Support Vector Machines (SVM) [4,5,8] as classiﬁers. We
introduce a well-known defense of this type.
CUMUL [8]: Panchenko et al. proposed a novel feature representation method, using the accumulated sum of packet sizes as an abstract representation, and sampling the accumulated sum of packet sizes
by piecewise linear interpolation to obtain additional features. They
achieved over 91 % accuracy in the closed-world setting using the SVM
classiﬁer.

•

2

These defenses ignore the fact that Tor provides defenses for all websites, and users can access any website using Tor. These defenses can
only protect a few websites and lack defense generality.

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Table 1
Comparison of representative WF defenses in terms of overhead, protection performance, and defense assumptions. Overhead deﬁnition: None is no overhead, Low is less than 30 % overhead, Medium is about 30–70 %, High is about 70–100 %,
and Very High is more than 100 %. We deﬁne a defense to be defeated is that an attack achieved with over 80 % accuracy
in the closed-world setting.
Category

Defense

Bandwidth
overhead

Lantency
overhead

Defense assumptions

Defeated by an attack

Website-speciﬁc

Glove [14]
Supersequence [6]
W-T [28]
Mockingbird [18]
WF-GAN [25]
Blind [29]
Dolos [23]
Acup3 [34]

High
Very High
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Low

None
High
Medium
None
None
None
None
None

Prior knowledge of websites
Prior knowledge of websites
Prior knowledge of websites
Prior knowledge of traﬃc traces
Prior knowledge of traﬃc traces
Prior knowledge of websites
Prior knowledge of websites
Prior knowledge of websites

No
No
No
No
No
Yes [33]
No
No

Website-agnostic

BuFLO [19]
Tamaraw [20]
Cs-BuFLO [21]
Decoy [26]
WTF-PAD [17]
FRONT [27]
FRONT-U [35]
Surakav [30]
AAP [36]
TBP [32]
PEZD (our work)

Very High
High
Very High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium

Very High
Very High
Very High
None
None
None
None
Low
Low
Low
None

None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None

No
No
No
No
Yes [9]
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No

•

Even if only a few censored websites are protected, the websites may
vary across countries and regions, which makes these defenses hard
to implement.
• Due to frequent website content updates or Tor Browser Bundle
(TBB) changes, the website patterns may change. As a result, these
website-speciﬁc defenses may need to periodically update the defense information to ensure their eﬀectiveness, which consumes massive computing resources.
• In addition, some of these defenses [24,29] lack the capability to
withstand non-DNN WF attacks that use statistical features such as
packet counts and connection duration.

al. [35] ﬁnd that CNNs focus more on the transitions between uploads
and downloads. Consequently, they proposed an extension of FRONT,
called FRONT-U, which performs padding only on the client side to reduce overhead. In addition, Surakav [30] uses Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) to generate diverse reference traces. The sending patterns of real packets follow these traces, ensuring diﬀerent traﬃc traces
for each user visit. A signiﬁcant drawback of employing GAN to generate
reference traces is the substantial computational overhead. This significant computational burden may impede the practical deployment of
this approach, especially in resource-constrained devices, such as when
users use access Tor via mobile devices.1 Moreover, Surakav requires
to delay packets, which engenders potential memory shortage problems
for Tor’s relays [40]. Wang et al. [32] proposed a novel tree structure to
describe the website browsing process. Based on this, they introduced a
Tree structure Burst-sequence Padding (TBP), which determines dummy
burst sequences through multiple random distributions. However, multiple determined distributions did not eﬀectively disrupt WF attacks, as
Var-CNN can achieve 80 % accuracy.
Other defenses: Recently, some WF defenses based on traﬃc splitting have been proposed [41–43], where they split traﬃc over several
sub-circuits in a random manner, which is slightly diﬀerent from our
threat model. Therefore, we do not discuss these methods in this paper.
Overall, website-speciﬁc defenses have impractical assumptions that
hinder implementation, while website-agnostic defenses either incur
high overhead, cannot provide high protection performance, or introduce latency overhead.

Website-agnostic defenses: Website-agnostic defenses do not rely
on speciﬁc traﬃc trace patterns of the website, and so these defenses do
not require prior knowledge of websites users visit.
BuFLO [21], Tamaraw [22], and Cs-BuFLO [23] transmit at a constant rate to mask traﬃc features, which incur bandwidth and latency
overhead several times. Panchenko et al. [26] proposed Decoy, which
randomly loads a decoy website whenever a user visits a website to
obfuscate the classiﬁer, which requires about 100 % of the bandwidth
overhead.
To mitigate the high overhead, researchers have proposed manifold lightweight defenses that aim to strike a balance between defense
performance and overhead, such as FRONT [27], WTF-PAD [17], and
Surakav [30]. WTF-PAD is a kind of Adaptive Padding (AP) [39] algorithm. WTF-PAD obtains a time 𝑡 by sampling the time of the loaded
website. When the countdown of 𝑡 ends, a dummy network packet is
sent. WTF-PAD aims to hide the excessive time interval between network packets in the traﬃc. Moreover, Yang et al. [36] ﬁnd that rapidly
consecutive requests and responses within a short time interval have
a signiﬁcant impact on traﬃc patterns. In response, they proposed an
advanced adaptive padding (AAP) aimed at modifying the burst nature
of website traﬃc. However, WTF-PAD and AAP have been undermined
by the state-of-the-art DF attack, achieving up to 80 % accuracy in the
closed-world setting. Gong and Wang [27] ﬁnd that WF attacks depend
on feature-rich trace fronts. Therefore, they proposed FRONT, which
injects dummy packets according to Rayleigh distribution to obfuscate
the features of traﬃc trace fronts. However, FRONT provides insuﬃcient protection for the latter part of traﬃc traces. We ﬁnd that attackers can still identify the defended traﬃc traces by exploiting the
features present in the latter part of the traces. Moreover, Attarian et

3. Threat model
3.1. Attack model
We consider the same threat model as existing WF attacks [4,6–11,
17,18,23,27]:
•

WF attacks assume an attacker, located between the user and the
Tor entry node, sniﬀs users’ traﬃc, and the attack model is shown in
Fig. 1. The attacker is passive, meaning they cannot drop, delay, or
modify network packets.

1 Tor Browser for Android has surpassed 10 million downloads on the Google
Play Store.

3

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

4.1. Motivation and intuition
We believe that defense meets deployability and should provide high
protection performance and defense generality while imposing only
moderate bandwidth overhead and no latency overhead. High protection performance means that the defense can resist state-of-the-art WF
attacks, and defense generality means that the defense can protect all
websites. A moderate bandwidth overhead indicates that a moderate
number of dummy packets are injected into the traﬃc. No latency overhead means that real packets are sent without delay.
FRONT provides low protection against state-of-the-art WF attacks,
despite its defense generality, moderate bandwidth overhead, and zerodelay. To have a deep understanding of the reasons why FRONT provides low protection performance, we introduce an explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) framework to analyze it. An XAI framework is a
tool that generates reports on the model’s operation and makes an attempt to explain how it operates [46]. The XAI framework we use here is
Locally Interpretable Model Agnostic Interpretation (LIME) [47]. LIME
operates by generating perturbed samples around a target example and
ﬁtting these samples with an interpretable linear model. This technique
enables us to identify the key features driving the model’s predictions,
eﬀectively making any classiﬁer’s decision-making process locally interpretable, regardless of its underlying complexity. The interpretation
process is shown in Eq. (1),
( )
(
)
𝜉 𝑥𝑖 = arg min𝐿 𝑓 , 𝑔, 𝜋𝑥 + Ω(𝑔)
(1)

Fig. 1. The WF attack model.

•

We consider the attacker has full knowledge of the defense method
implemented by Tor [6–11,17,18,23,27], which means the attacker
can collect the defended traﬃc to train a classiﬁer. We assume that
the attacker’s classiﬁer is trained using already defended traﬃc.
Given that Tor is an open-source project, it is reasonable to assume
that potential attackers would have access to the defended traﬃc
traces and could use them to train more robust attack models.
• We consider WF in closed-world and open-world settings [8–11,17,
27]. In the closed-world setting, users visit only a subset of websites
trained by attackers, called monitored websites. However, this setting was criticized by Juarez et al. [44] as unrealistic since users can
visit any website. The open-world setting is more realistic, and users
can visit unmonitored websites. It is a binary classiﬁcation setting.
The attacker uses the trained classiﬁer to distinguish whether the
website the user visits is monitored or unmonitored.
• We consider the attacker to use only packet direction sequences
as input to the model. This assumption is the same as many previous attacks [9–11] and defenses [18,22–24,28,44,45]. Tor transmits data in ﬁxed-size (512-byte) packets called cells. A sequence
of packets collected throughout the website load process constitutes a traﬃc trace. For example, the traﬃc trace of a website containing only packet directions can be denoted as 𝑇𝑝 =
[ 𝑝 𝑝 𝑝 𝑝 𝑝 𝑝 𝑝
]
𝑂1 , 𝑂2 , 𝐼3 , 𝐼4 , 𝐼5 , 𝐼6 , 𝑂7 … 𝐼𝑛𝑝 , where 𝑂𝑖𝑝 is the 𝑖-th packet in the trafﬁc trace, 𝑖 is the location of the packet, 𝑛 represents the number of
packets, 𝑂 represents the packet is an outgoing packet, 𝐼 means the
packet is an incoming packet, and 𝑝 indicates classes of the website.
In a traﬃc trace, outgoing packets are represented as 1, and incoming packets are represented as −1. Therefore, the input used by the
attacker is 𝑇𝑝 = [1, 1, −1, −1, −1, −1, 1, … , 1].

𝑔∈𝐺

( )
(
)
where 𝜉 𝑥𝑖 is the interpretable feature explained by LIME, 𝐿 𝑓 , 𝑔, 𝜋𝑥 is
loss function, 𝑓 is the black-box model, 𝑔 is the explainer, 𝜋𝑥 is the similarity measure between data points 𝑥, and Ω(𝑔) is the penalty for the
complexity model 𝑔. LIME generates a list of explanations, with each
explanation indicating the role of each feature in the forecast of a particular data sample [47].
We use LIME to analyze which packets in undefended traﬃc and
FRONT play a more important role in WF attack models. We train the
DF attack model on the DS-19 dataset (See Section 5 for more detail).
Typically, for WF attacks based on deep learning models, each packet
(denoted as 1 or -1) in a traﬃc trace serves as a feature. We randomly
pick four classes (indexing 8, 21, 86, and 94 in the DS-19 dataset) with
100 % attack accuracy to analyze their features since we want to analyze why FRONT fails. Note that due to the model’s ﬁxed input, traﬃc
with less than 10,000 packets is padded with zeros. However, LIME also
generates an importance score. For intuition, we only show the importance level of the real packets. Speciﬁcally, we conducted a statistical
analysis of the locations of the 1000 most important packets across 10
traﬃc traces per class, for both the FRONT and undefended datasets.
The traﬃc trace is segmented into a series of intervals, with each interval having a ﬁxed length of 500 packets. We illustrate the number of
signiﬁcant packets within each interval, as shown in Fig. 2.
For undefended traﬃc, we observe that the most important packets
are mostly distributed within the ﬁrst interval of 500, suggesting that
the WF attack heavily relies on packets in the initial portion of traﬃc
traces. In contrast, for FRONT, we ﬁnd that the model relies more on the
features towards the rear of the traﬃc. In other words, the model can
learn distinctive patterns in the latter part of the traﬃc. This is due to
the fact that FRONT adds more dummy packets to the front of the traﬃc
and fewer packets are added to the back, resulting in an incapability to
robustly interfere with the back patterns of the traﬃc traces. In light
of the powerful learning capabilities of deep learning models, even if
there are intra-website traces with a small number of shared patterns,
they can still be learned. The analysis of the reasons for FRONT’s failure also sheds new light on the design of eﬀective defenses, where the
distribution of dummy packets should be diﬀerent for each traﬃc trace.
More speciﬁcally, to avoid the common patterns in intra-website traﬃc
traces, the distribution of dummy packets for each traﬃc trace should
be distinct.

3.2. Defense model
We assume that the defender has the following capabilities:
•

The defender can inject dummy network packets in real traﬃc but
not discard, modify, or encrypt users’ network packets [4,6,14–28].
Defenders can inject bidirectional dummy packets (outgoing and incoming) with the cooperation of both the Tor client and a node in
the Tor circuit. We consider the node in the Tor circuit to be the Tor
bridge.2
• The defender has no prior knowledge of the website the user is visiting [17,19–21,26,27], which means that the defender cannot collect
traﬃc traces of the websites the user will visit in advance.
4. PEZD
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the idea behind the PEZD in Section 4.1. In Section 4.2, we describe PEZD in detail.

2
Tor bridges are commonly used to evade censorship, and they are often used
by WF defenses to generate dummy incoming packets to reshape traﬃc [17,18,
23,27]

4

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. 2. Visualization of the number of important features within intervals. The number of feature importance indicates how many signiﬁcant features fall within an
interval, with each interval having a length of 500.

tance, and ℎ is a smoothing bandwidth, which controls how smooth the
estimated density curve is.
Fig. 3 shows a visualization of the distribution of outgoing packets
of websites (website indexing 32, 39, 50, 55, 78, and 92 in the dataset),
the dataset provided by Gong and Wang [27]. We observe signiﬁcant
variations in the distribution of outgoing packets across various websites. Therefore, We can exploit the distribution of outgoing packets
from diﬀerent websites to randomize the distribution of dummy packets. A greater divergence in the distribution of outgoing packets leads
to greater variations in the distribution of dummy packets across diﬀerent traﬃc traces of the same website. This makes it diﬃcult for intrawebsite traﬃc traces to have common patterns that can be learned by
an attacker.

Next, we describe how to construct a distribution of dummy packets. Intuitively, a probabilistic approach seems feasible. However, previous research has shown that constructing eﬀective probability distributions for this purpose faces signiﬁcant challenges. For instance,
previous defense methods, such as FRONT, attempted to increase diversity by employing various probabilistic parameters in the generation
of dummy packets. Nevertheless, Var-CNN demonstrated superior performance, achieving an accuracy of over 80 %. Even sophisticated techniques like TBP, which combined multiple probability distributions to
generate burst distributions, still remained fragile against attacks. VarCNN, for example, achieved an accuracy of over 70 % against TBP. A
critical reason for this vulnerability is the use of deterministic distributions to generate dummy packets. In these approaches, the distribution
of dummy packets for each traﬃc trace is derived from one or a few
ﬁxed distributions. This increases the similarity of dummy packet distributions across diﬀerent traﬃc traces. An ideal scenario would involve
generating dummy packet distributions from diﬀerent distributions for
each traﬃc trace, thereby signiﬁcantly enhancing the diversity between
traﬃc traces. In addition, Surakav uses a GAN to generate diverse reference traces. However, using a GAN signiﬁcantly increases computational overhead. This motivates us to seek a computationally eﬃcient
way to generate diverse distributions of dummy packets for each traﬃc
trace.
We observe that traﬃc inherently contains diverse distributions,
which inspired us to leverage these natural patterns directly. Each website has unique patterns, including unique packet ordering, packet directions, and packet timing, which makes the traﬃc traces of diﬀerent
websites signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, which is also why the WF attacks are
successful. We observe signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the distribution and
number of outgoing packets in traﬃc traces of diﬀerent websites. We
use Kernel Density Estimation (KDE), a nonparametric model used for
estimating probability distributions, to estimate such a distribution from
a website. The KDE is shown in Eq. (2),
𝑛
𝑛
(𝑥 − 𝑥 )
)
1∑ (
1 ∑
𝑖
𝑓̂ℎ (𝑥) =
𝐾ℎ 𝑥 − 𝑥𝑖 =
𝐾
𝑛 𝑖=1
𝑛ℎ 𝑖=1
ℎ

4.2. Defense design
In this section, we describe in detail how to exploit diﬀerences in the
location of outgoing packets from diﬀerent websites to obfuscate traﬃc
traces.
We add dummy packets according to the outgoing packet location
information extracted from traﬃc traces, and a visual representation of
location information is shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, we are required to
collect a traﬃc trace pool including many traﬃc traces. Note that the
traﬃc traces in the traﬃc trace pool can be any website. The diﬀerence
in websites we utilize does not care which website it is. Therefore, PEZD
does not require any prior information for the websites users visit. We
describe the setting of the traﬃc trace pool in detail in Section 5.3.
Next, we describe adding dummy packets according to the extracted
location information. For simplicity, we do not distinguish the adding
dummy packets’ direction (outgoing and incoming). Suppose we need
to protect a website 𝑤. We randomly select a traﬃc trace from the trafﬁc trace pool, which is called the non-source traﬃc trace. The location information of all outgoing packets in the non-source traﬃc trace
is counted. Afterward, we add dummy packets in real traﬃc at the
same location as the outgoing packets of the non-source traﬃc trace.
The same location means that the outgoing packet is at the 𝑘-th in
the non-source traﬃc trace, and the inject dummy packet is also at
the 𝑘-th in the real traﬃc. Note that we ignore the location of the
ﬁrst packet from the non-source traﬃc trace since the client needs to

(2)

where 𝑥𝑖 is identically distributed samples, and 𝐾(⋅) is a kernel function,
which speciﬁes how to compute the probability density given the dis5

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. 3. Probability density function of outgoing packets from diﬀerent websites.

packet, and 𝑢 is the total number of dummy packets added. Fig. 5 shows
a padding process.
Since the number of outgoing packets accounts for a small proportion (about 10 %) of a traﬃc trace, adding such a number of dummy
packets does not signiﬁcantly impact real traﬃc patterns. Therefore, we
select multiple non-source traﬃc traces from the traﬃc trace pool to
extract the location information of outgoing packets. Speciﬁcally, We
set a number 𝐾 to determine the number of non-source traﬃc traces. A
larger 𝐾 means more non-source traﬃc traces are selected to extract the
location information of outgoing packets, which means more bandwidth
overhead.
In addition, we randomly oﬀset the extracted location information
to avoid the concentration of dummy packets in the front. Suppose we
select non-source traﬃc traces with fewer packets, which means smaller
location information for outgoing packets. The majority of the dummy
packets will be focused in front of real traﬃc, and none will be sent to
the back, as shown in Fig. 6. Therefore, we oﬀset a random value for
each location information extracted from the traﬃc traces to address
the possible imbalance in the distribution of dummy packet locations,
as shown in Fig. 7.
In the above description, we do not distinguish the direction of the
added dummy packets. In real networks, dummy packets can be injected
bidirectionally. We set the parameters 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 to determine the number of non-source websites selected by the Tor client and Tor bridge,
respectively. The bandwidth overhead is determined by 𝐾𝑐 + 𝐾𝑠 , as detailed in Section 5.3. The location information extracted from 𝐾𝑐 nonsource traﬃc traces is placed in the client-side location information set
𝐿𝑐 , and the location information extracted from 𝐾𝑠 non-source traﬃc
traces is placed in the Tor bridge-side location information set 𝐿𝑠 .
Note that PEZD does not need to know the entire traﬃc trace. The
Tor client or bridge only requires to know the location information of
dummy packets to be sent. PEZD is very easy to implement and implements the state machine shown in Fig. 8. For simplicity, we only

Fig. 4. A visual representation of location of packets. The number indicates the
location of the packet.

Fig. 5. Padding process of dummy packets.

send the ﬁrst packet to establish a connection with the server, and the
ﬁrst packet cannot be a dummy packet. For example, we randomly se[
]
lect a non-source traﬃc trace 𝑇ℎ = 𝑂1ℎ , 𝑂2ℎ , 𝐼3ℎ , 𝐼4ℎ , 𝐼5ℎ , 𝐼6ℎ , 𝑂7ℎ , 𝐼8ℎ … 𝐼𝑏ℎ ,
where ℎ can be any website. We extract the location information
of outgoing packets of 𝑇ℎ denoted as 𝐿ℎ = {2, 7 …}. We assume a
[
]
traﬃc trace of the website 𝑤 is 𝑇𝑤 = 𝑂1𝑤 , 𝐼2𝑤 , 𝐼3𝑤 , 𝑂4𝑤 , 𝐼5𝑤 , 𝐼6𝑤 , … 𝐼𝑚𝑤 .
′
We
inject dummy packets to 𝑇𝑤 according to 𝐿ℎ to get
[
] 𝑇𝑤 =

𝑤 , 𝐼 𝑤 , 𝐼 𝑤 , 𝐼 𝑤 , 𝐷 , 𝑂𝑤 , 𝐼 𝑤 , 𝐼 𝑤
𝑤
𝑂1𝑤 , 𝐷2 , 𝐼2→3
, … 𝐼𝑚→𝑚+𝑢
, where
7
3→4 4→5 5→6
6→8 7→9 8→10

𝑖 → 𝑗 means that a packet was 𝑖-th in the traﬃc trace, and after adding
dummy packets is the 𝑗-th, and 𝐷 represents the packet is a dummy

Fig. 6. The result of padding according to location information of multiple traces. 𝐿 is the set of dummy packet location information.
6

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. 7. Location information oﬀset and padding process.

represented as a tuple 𝑓𝑘 = ⟨𝑡𝑘 , 𝑑𝑘 ⟩, with 𝑡𝑘 being the packet timestamp
and 𝑑𝑘 indicating the packet direction.
DS-14 [6]: This dataset was collected by Wang in 2014 on Tor
Browser 3.5.1. It contains 100 websites as monitored websites with 90
traﬃc traces each, these websites were selected from sites blocked in
China, the UK, and Saudi Arabia. It also collected 9,000 websites as unmonitored websites with one traﬃc trace each. The traﬃc traces in this
dataset follow the same feature representation as DS-19.
We use the DS-19 and DS-14 datasets because they provide timestamps and directions of packets that can be used to simulate FRONT
and WTF-PAD defense. We follow Gong and Wang’s settings [27] to set
the length of the traﬃc trace length to 10,000 less than 10,000 ﬁlled
with 0.
5.2. Evaluation metrics
In the closed-world setting, we use accuracy as the evaluation metric.
In the open-world setting, we use true positive rate (TPR), false positive
rate (FPR), precision, and recall as evaluation metrics. In particular, we
consider if it is classiﬁed as monitored with a probability above the
pre-deﬁned threshold, otherwise, a false negative (FN). A false positive
(FP) is an unmonitored traﬃc trace incorrectly classiﬁed as monitored
with a probability above the threshold, otherwise, a true negative (TN).
The bandwidth overhead is deﬁned as the ratio of the total number of
padded dummy packets to the number of real packets in the original
traﬃc sequence. Latency overhead is deﬁned as the ratio of the delay
time incurred by real packets to their original transmission time. For
statistical soundness, we conduct the experiment 10 times and computed
the mean value as the ﬁnal result.

Fig. 8. The ﬁnite state machine of PEZD implementation on client-side.

describe the client-side state machine, and the Tor bridge operations
are symmetric.
Start Mode. Starting in Start Mode, the client has obtained the location information set 𝐿𝑐 and sets counter 𝐶 to 1. The defense waits for
the client to send an outgoing packet to establish a connection with the
server. When the client sends a real packet, switch to Count Mode.
Count Mode. In Count Mode, when the client receives or sends a
packet, counter 𝐶 adds 1. The defense relies on counter 𝐶 to decide
when to send a dummy packet. When set 𝐿𝑐 contains counter 𝐶, switch
to Padding Mode.
Padding Mode. In Padding Mode, the client injects a dummy packet
into the traﬃc sequence. After padding, the defense returns to Count
Mode to continue counting the number of packets. When the connection
ends, switch to Start Mode, and the defense ends.

5.3. Parameters setting
The size of the traﬃc traces pool: PEZD requires selecting nonsource websites from the traﬃc trace pool to extract location information. In our experiments, we set the websites in the traﬃc trace pool
not to overlap with the defended websites, which is a more realistic scenario since PEZD does not have prior knowledge of the websites visited
by users. In the closed-world setting, we use 10,000 unmonitored websites as the traﬃc trace pool. In the open-world setting, we select 2000
unmonitored websites as the traﬃc trace pool. We evaluate the impact
of the size of the traﬃc trace pool on the WF attack performance in
Section 5.4.
The range of random oﬀset values: PEZD needs random oﬀsetting
of dummy packet locations to address the concentration of dummy packets in the front. To set the appropriate random oﬀset range, we counted
the number of packets in traﬃc traces. More than 90 % of traﬃc traces
have fewer than 10,000 packets, and more than 70 % of traﬃc traces
have fewer than 6000 packets. Therefore, we set the oﬀset value in the
range [-10000,10000]. Note that this is the randomly selected oﬀset
values range, not the range of dummy packets added to the traﬃc trace.
The setting of 𝐾: In the PEZD design, the parameter 𝐾 represents the
total number of non-source traﬃc traces selected from the traﬃc trace

5. Evaluation
5.1. Dataset
DS-19 [27]: This dataset was collected by Gong and Wang to evaluate FRONT and was collected between February to April 2019, utilizing
Tor Browser 8.5a7 running on Tor 0.4.0.1-alpha. Data collection was automated through command-line interactions with the Tor Browser. They
collected Alexa [48] top 100 websites as monitored websites with 100
traﬃc traces each, which means there are 100 classes (each website
represents a class) with 100 samples per class. Additionally, they collected 10,000 other websites from Alexa as unmonitored websites with
one traﬃc trace each. These unmonitored websites were used to evaluate the performance in an open-world scenario. Each traﬃc trace in the
dataset consists of a sequence of packet features, where each packet is
7

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Table 2
The defense parameters in DS-19 and DS-14 datasets.
Defense

Parameters

WTF-PAD

𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙_𝑟𝑐𝑣
𝑁𝑐 = 𝑁𝑠 = 2500, 𝑊min = 1s, 𝑊max = 14s
𝑁𝑐 = 𝑁𝑠 =1700, 𝑊min = 1s, 𝑊max = 14s

FRONT
Tamaraw

𝐿 = 100, 𝜌𝑜𝑢𝑡 = 0.04, 𝜌min = 0.012

Surakav

𝛿 = 0.2, 𝜌 = 40ms
𝑁𝑐 = 5000, 𝑁𝑠 = 0, 𝑊min = 1s, 𝑊max = 14s
𝑁𝑐 = 2500, 𝑁𝑠 = 0, 𝑊min = 1s, 𝑊max = 14s
𝑁 = 4000, 𝑄 = 0.4
𝑁 = 2000, 𝑄 = 0.4
𝑃 =5000, 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥 =20, 𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛 =2
𝑃 =2000, 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥 =20, 𝐿𝑚𝑖𝑛 =2
𝐾𝑐 = 9, 𝐾𝑠 = 2
𝐾𝑐 = 12, 𝐾𝑠 = 3

FRONT-U
AAP
TBP
PEZD

Table 3
Accuracy and overhead of WF defense against attack in the closed-world scenario.

Dataset
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14
DS-19
DS-14

Dataset

Defenses

Overhead

Var-CNN

DF

CUMUL

0
29.97 %
44.01 %
71.05 %
47.3 %
44.61 %
43.72 %
50.94 %
45.39 %
43.39 %

97.56 %
93.93 %
82.92 %
16.14 %
94.53 %
69.93 %
91.55 %
80.26 %
70.7 %
19.39 %

96.36 %
93.07 %
68.0 %
10.22 %
94.99 %
70.0 %
79.82 %
86.78 %
65.34 %
37.88 %

95.96 %
70.86 %
30.73 %
16.54 %
93.38 %
48.77 %
62.88 %
53.82 %
35.75 %
21.45 %

0
47.69 %
69.20 %
92.13 %
47.32 %
76.96 %
52.26 %
45.52 %
44.74 %
48.73 %

81.53 %
69.76 %
61.26 %
12.55 %
83.75 %
42.98 %
84.46 %
61.37 %
56.07 %
21.51 %

92.18 %
79.20 %
60.48 %
16.46 %
86.81 %
54.28 %
76.46 %
65.68 %
56.94 %
33.20 %

91.17 %
58.03 %
25.12 %
13.81 %
83.65 %
37.18 %
61.77 %
38.91 %
39.68 %
29.70 %

Latency

Bandwidth

DS-19

No defense
WTF-PAD
FRONT
Tamaraw
Random
Surakav
FRONT-U
AAP
TBP
PEZD

0
0
0
171.15 %
0
12.1 %
0
0
0
0

DS-14

No defense
WTF-PAD
FRONT
Tamaraw
Random
Surakav
FRONT-U
AAP
TBP
PEZD

0
0
0
78.31 %
0
5.1 %
0
0
0
0

injecting dummy packets only on the client-side or server-side. Next, we
evaluate the impact of the size of the traﬃc trace pool on the protection
performance of PEZD. Finally, We evaluate the eﬀect of the parameters
𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 .
5.4.1. Evaluation against WF attacks
We evaluate the protection performance of defenses on the DS19 and DS-14 datasets. We compare with eight representative WF defenses: WTF-PAD, FRONT, Tamaraw, Surakav, and Random. WTF-PAD,
FRONT, FRONT-U, AAP, and TBP are zero-delay lightweight defenses.
Surakav is a lightweight defense that incurs low latency overhead.
Tamaraw is a heavyweight defense. Random is a more common randomization method that randomly adds dummy packets to traﬃc traces
according to the uniform distribution. We consider three state-of-theart attacks, Var-CNN, DF, and CUMUL, to evaluate these defenses. VarCNN and DF are DNN attacks, and CUMUL is a non-DNN attack. Note
that we compute the overhead for monitored websites and unmonitored
websites separately for all defenses since only monitored websites are
included in the closed-world setting.
Table 3 lists experiment results, showing that PEZD oﬀers higher protection than WTF-PAD, Random, FRONT, Surakav, FRONT-U, TBP, and
AAP. Speciﬁcally, Var-CNN achieves over 80 % accuracy for WTF-PAD,
FRONT, FRONT-U, AAP, and Random. TBP performed slightly better,
but Var-CNN still attained an accuracy of over 70 %. In contrast, the
accuracy of PEZD was only 19.39 %. Moreover, compared to Surakav,
PEZD shows 40 % lower attack accuracy against Var-CNN. We observe
that FRONT, Surakav, AAP, and TBP only have a favorable performance
for resisting the non-DNN attack. For instance, for FRONT, CUMUL only
achieves 30.73 % accuracy. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that Random does not
provide eﬀective defense for either DNN attacks or non-DNN attacks,
and WF attacks achieve over 80 % accuracy. A key factor is that adding
dummy packets with the same distribution to traﬃc from the same website does not introduce signiﬁcant distinctions between them. From a
distributional perspective, we posit that traﬃc from the same website
follows a speciﬁc distribution. Since we generate dummy packets from
the same distribution, the distribution of the dummy packets in diﬀerent
traﬃc is also similar, which allows the ﬁnal protected traﬃc from the
same website to still maintain a substantially similar distribution.
Tamaraw is eﬀective against WF attacks, and it reduces Var-CNN accuracy to 16.14 %. However, it incurs over 171 % latency overhead and
71 % bandwidth overhead, while PEZD requires only 43 % of bandwidth

Fig. 9. The bandwidth overhead of DS-19 and DS-14 datasets for the selected
numbers of non-source traﬃc trace 𝐾.

pool, which determines the bandwidth overhead of PEZD. A larger 𝐾
indicates a larger number of selected non-source traces. Since dummy
packets are injected based on the location of the outgoing packets in the
non-source traﬃc traces, this incurs higher bandwidth overhead. Fig. 9
shows the bandwidth overhead corresponding to the number of 𝐾 for
DS-19 and DS-14 datasets. We observe that the bandwidth overhead
gradually increases as 𝐾 increases. The bandwidth overhead is less than
30 % when 𝐾 is less than 7 and greater than 70 % when 𝐾 is greater
than 17. In general, PEZD has a moderate bandwidth overhead when
𝐾 is in the interval [7, 17]. We try to compare the performance of various defenses for the same bandwidth overhead (WTF-PAD and FRONT
claim a bandwidth overhead of about 40 % ), and we thus set 𝐾 = 11 in
the DS-19 dataset (43 % bandwidth overhead) and 𝐾 = 15 in the DS-14
dataset (48 % bandwidth overhead). In addition, We deﬁne 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠
to represent the number of traﬃc traces selected from the traﬃc trace
pool by the client and the server, respectively. We discuss the eﬀect of
the 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 parameters on performance in Section 5.4.
Defense parameters setting: For the parameter setting of WTFPAD, FRONT, and Tamaraw, we follow the default experimental parameters in their papers. To ensure a fair comparison, we tuned the defense
parameters for Surakav, FRONT-U, AAP, and TBP on the experiment
dataset to achieve a low latency overhead while maintaining a comparable bandwidth overhead to our defense. We summarize the defense
parameters in Table 2.
5.4. Closed-world evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the eﬀectiveness of PEZD in the closedworld setting. First, we make a comprehensive comparison of PEZD with
state-of-the-art defenses. Then, we evaluate the performance of PEZD in
8

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Table 4
Defense performance of PEZD for client-side, Tor bridge-side, and bidirectional injection of dummy packets.
Dataset

DS-19

DS-14

Packet direction

Bandwidth overhead

Var-CNN

DF

CUMUL

Client-side
Tor bridge-side
Two-way
Client-side
Tor bridge-side
Two-way

43.43 %
41.31 %
43.39 %
48.88 %
48.50 %
48.72 %

23.16 %
92.19 %
19.39 %
20.26 %
84.11 %
21.51 %

46.71 %
91.42 %
37.87 %
38.81 %
81.25 %
33.20 %

28.63 %
82.09 %
21.45 %
36.64 %
73.20 %
29.70 %

overhead to reduce Var-CNN attack accuracy to 19.39 %. In addition,
we ﬁnd that DF is more robust to PEZD than Var-CNN and CUMUL,
achieving 37.88 % accuracy. Surprisingly, Var-CNN is more fragile than
CUMUL for PEZD, despite its more complex structure and higher classiﬁcation accuracy for other lightweight defenses.
5.4.2. Impact of dummy packet directions
The aforementioned experiments consider the injection of bidirectional dummy packets to reshape the traﬃc, which requires cooperation between the client and the Tor bridge. This approach inherently increases the complexity of deployment. In contrast, implementing PEZD
solely on either the client-side or server-side oﬀers easier deployment
and many potential advantages. For instance, implementation only on
the server-side would minimize modiﬁcations required on the clientside, and vice versa. Moreover, Client-side deployment signiﬁcantly reduces the computational and bandwidth requirements for Tor bridges,
particularly beneﬁcial for overload nodes. Furthermore, the Tor bridge
and client cooperation may pose privacy issues, as some users may
not wish the Tor bridge to access their browsing history directly [24].
In addition, the deployment of other privacy-enhancing technologies,
such as virtual private networks (VPNs), is impeded by the imperative
that clients and remote endpoints cooperate to reshape traﬃc [49]. For
client-side defense, we set the defense parameters for the DS-19 and DS14 datasets as 𝐾𝑐 = 11 and 15, respectively, with 𝐾𝑠 set to zero for both
datasets. Conversely, for server-side defense, we set the parameters as
𝐾𝑠 = 11 and 15 for these two datasets, while maintaining 𝐾𝑐 at zero.
We compare the defense performance of injecting dummy packets
only on the client-side or Tor bridge-side and injecting dummy packets
in both directions, and the results are shown in Table 4. PEZD defense
performance does not signiﬁcantly reduce for dummy packets injected
only on the client-side. For instance, the accuracy of the Var-CNN attack increased by less than 4 %, and the accuracy of the CUMUL attack
increased by about 8 % in the DS-19 dataset. The highest attack accuracy for the three attacks is 46.71 % for the client-side, indicating that
the client-side deployment of PEZD eﬀectively resists WF attacks. Surprisingly, adding only incoming packets is extremely fragile and VarCNN achieves over 90 % accuracy. One possible explanation is that the
model assigns lower weights to incoming packet features while still effectively identifying websites by unperturbed outgoing packet features
with higher weights, consistent with ﬁndings from previous research
[24]. This comparison provides strong evidence that adding dummy outgoing packets yields more eﬀective protection.

Fig. 10. Impact of the traﬃc trace pool size for the performance of PEZD. Three
state-of-the-art attacks, DF, Var-CNN, and CUMUL, are chosen to evaluate the
performance of PEZD under diﬀerent sizes of the traﬃc trace pool.

stable even when traﬃc traces are reduced. Even with only 1,000 traﬃc
traces in the traﬃc trace pool, the protection performance of PEZD does
not degrade signiﬁcantly. In more detail, the accuracy of the Var-CNN
attack is 18.69 % with 1000 traﬃc traces and 19.39 % with 10,000 trafﬁc traces. The slight change in accuracy is potentially due to the higher
bandwidth overhead at 1000 traﬃc traces than at 10,000 traﬃc traces.
An essential factor in the ability of our defenses to withstand the impact
of reduced traﬃc traces is that we apply a random oﬀset to the extracted
location information. Even if diﬀerent traﬃc traces of a website select
the same non-source traﬃc trace, a random oﬀset value will make the
location of the dummy packets diﬀerent.
5.4.4. Impact of 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 on accuracy
The parameters 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 represent the number of traﬃc traces
selected from the traﬃc trace pool by the client and the server, respectively. To investigate the impact of diﬀerent values of 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 on the
defense performance, we adjust the quantities of 𝐾𝑐 and 𝐾𝑠 for a given
setting of 𝐾 = 11.
Fig. 11 shows the eﬀect of diﬀerent numbers of 𝐾𝑐 on the defense
performance for given 𝐾 = 11 in the DS-19 dataset. CUMUL, Var-CNN,
and DF have the lowest attack accuracy for 𝐾𝑐 values of 6, 8, and 9,
respectively, resulting in accuracies of 18.61 %, 19.05 %, and 37.88 %.
The percentage of dummy outgoing packet overhead to total dummy
packets bandwidth overhead is 61.5 %, 77.8 %, and 85.6 % for 𝐾𝑐 values
(
)
of 6, 8, and 9, respectively. We deﬁne 𝛼 = 𝐾𝑐 ∕ 𝐾𝑐 + 𝐾𝑠 , which is the
proportion of non-source traces selected by the client-side. PEZD has
an acceptable defense performance for the three attacks when 𝐾𝑐 is set
to 9. The optimum 𝛼 value is around 0.8. Therefore, we recommend
maintaining this value of 𝛼 in the defense for optimal performance.
5.5. Open-world evaluation

5.4.3. Impact of traﬃc trace pool size on accuracy
Next, we evaluate the impact of the traﬃc trace pool size on the
protection performance of PEZD. In the above experiment, our traﬃc
trace pool contains 10,000 traﬃc traces. The fewer traﬃc traces in the
traﬃc pool will have a higher chance of selecting the same non-source
traﬃc traces, which may make the distribution of dummy packets less
diverse and pose lower protection performance. To investigate the eﬀect
of this factor, we vary the number of traﬃc traces in the traﬃc trace
pool from 1,000 to 10,000. The experiment is conducted on the DS-19
dataset.
The results are shown in Fig. 10. PEZD can withstand reduced traﬃc
traces in the traﬃc trace pool. The defense performance of PEZD remains

We compare the performance of defenses in the more realistic openworld setting. We use the DF attack to evaluate defenses in the DS-19
dataset since DF has better performance for defenses. As we have shown
the eﬀectiveness and high overhead of Tamaraw in the closed-world setting, we exclude it here and focus comparisons on lightweight defenses.
We follow the previous hypothesis to include unmonitored websites in
the training dataset, known as the standard model [6–9]. Following
the DF attack, we use prediction probabilities to distinguish between
monitored and unmonitored websites. A traﬃc trace is considered a
true positive if it is classiﬁed as a monitored website and its maximum
prediction probability exceeds the threshold. Otherwise, it is classiﬁed
as an unmonitored website. To ensure comprehensive evaluation, we
9

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. 11. The eﬀect of diﬀerent numbers of 𝐾𝑐 on the defense performance for
given 𝐾 = 11. The overhead ratio is the ratio of dummy outgoing packages to
total bandwidth overhead. The optimal number of 𝐾𝑐 is indicated by a larger
symbol in each subplot.
Fig. 13. Open-world scenario: ROC curve.

both precision and recall for the undefended traﬃc, while PEZD provides high protection performance that reduces the recall to 0.26 and
the precision to 0.54. Surakav, FRONT-U, and FRONT provide weaker
protection compared to PEZD, with Surakav reducing the recall to 0.51
and the precision to 0.73, FRONT reducing the recall to 0.64 and the
precision to 0.68, and FRONT-U reducing the recall to 0.67 and the
precision to 0.81. In contrast, TBP oﬀers slightly improved defense performance, with DF achieving a recall of 0.43 and a precision of 0.71.
WTF-PAD and AAP provide lower protection performance, and DF can
achieve the precision and the recall up to 0.8.
Fig. 13 shows the ROC curves for the PEZD, FRONT, WTF-PAD,
Surakav, FRONT-U, AAP, TBP, and undefended traﬃc. PEZD provides a
more robust protection performance than FRONT, Surakav, WTF-PAD,
FRONT-U, AAP, and TBP, achieving lower TPR and higher FPR. At the
same FPR, the TPR of PEZD is always smaller than FRONT, WTF-PAD,
Surakav, FRONT-U, AAP, and TBP. For instance, at an FPR of approximately 0.07, the TPR of PEZD is 0.26, 0.23, 0.6, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.2 lower
compared to FRONT, Surakav, WTF-PAD, FRONT-U, AAP, and TBP, respectively. The results show that WTF-PAD provides poor protection
performance, and the DF attack achieves a TPR of 0.98 and an FPR of
0.06.

Fig. 12. Open-world scenario: Precision-Recall curve.

implement multiple threshold values in line with the DF attack. In our
open-world evaluation, the training set contains 13,000 traﬃc traces
(9000 from monitored websites and 4000 from unmonitored websites),
and the testing set includes 5000 traﬃc traces (1000 from monitored
websites and 4000 from unmonitored websites). The test set contains
more unmonitored websites because the size of the set of unmonitored
websites is usually larger than the set of monitored websites, which is
more in line with the real situation [9,17]. For PEZD, the traﬃc trace
pool contains only the remaining 2000 traﬃc traces from unmonitored
websites. For unmonitored websites in the open-world setting, PEZD,
FRONT, WTF-PAD, Surakav, FRONT-U, TBP, and AAP incur bandwidth
overheads of 41 %, 47 %, 30 %, 49 %, 56 %, 59 %, and 53 %, respectively. Moreover, Surakav incurs 12.33 % latency overhead.
As mentioned in Section 3, in the open-world setting, the attacker
distinguishes whether the website the user visits is monitored or unmonitored. If the traﬃc trace is identiﬁed as a monitored website, the
attacker can use the multi-class classiﬁer trained in the closed-world
to predict the class of the traﬃc trace. We assess each defense’s performance in the open-world setting by examining its TPR and FPR. Furthermore, we also use precision and recall as evaluation metrics following
the recommendations of WF studies [8,9,17]. In our evaluation, we plot
precision-recall curves and ROC curves.
Fig. 12 shows precision-recall curves for PEZD, FRONT, FRONT-U,
WTF-PAD, Surakav, AAP, TBP, and undefended traﬃc. PEZD outperforms other defenses at any threshold. We observe that the recall of
PEZD is smaller than FRONT, FRONT-U, AAP, TBP, and WTF-PAD for
the same precision, which means that PEZD makes the attacker miss
more monitored websites. Speciﬁcally, DF achieves more than 0.9 for

6. Discussion
6.1. Analysis
PEZD has signiﬁcant advantages over the lightweight defenses WTFPAD, FRONT, FRONT-U, AAP, TBP, and Surakav, especially for DNN
attacks DF and Var-CNN. In the closed-world setting, PEZD is at least
20 % less accurate than FRONT, WTF-PAD, FRONT-U, AAP, TBP, and
Surakav for the DF attack, and for the Var-CNN attack, this advantage is more signiﬁcant. In the open-world setting, PEZD achieves
lower precision and recall at any threshold than FRONT, WTF-PAD, and
Surakav.
One of the questions our study raises is why PEZD performs so well.
First, PEZD signiﬁcantly increases the diﬀerence among intra-website
traﬃc traces by adding dummy packets with distinct distributions into
each trace. This renders attackers facing challenges in learning common
patterns within the website. Furthermore, PEZD introduces signiﬁcant
confusion between diﬀerent website categories, posing substantial challenges to website recognition.
We apply Cosine similarity to analyze intra-similarity, where the Cosine distance is calculated for diﬀerent traﬃc traces at the same website.
10

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Table 5
Impact of historical datasets as the traﬃc trace pool on the accuracy
of WF attacks.
Bandwidth

Var-CNN

DF

CUMUL

DS-19 dataset
DS-14 dataset

43.39 %
44.54 %

19.39 %
24.86 %

37.88 %
46.83 %

21.45 %
25.69 %

dated regularly to ensure the eﬀectiveness of the defense during deployment. Intuitively, PEZD leverages the diﬀerences between diﬀerent
websites, and these diﬀerences do not change after they are collected.
Therefore, it still provides good protection performance over time. To
validate our idea, we use the DS-14 dataset as the traﬃc trace pool and
the DS-19 dataset as user traﬃc. These two datasets were collected approximately ﬁve years apart.
Table 5 shows the evaluation results. PEZD’s protection success rate
dropped by less than 5 % for the CUMUL attack. Even against stateof-the-art DNN attacks, the PEZD defense success rate dropped by less
than 10 %. This suggests that PEZD does not require signiﬁcant eﬀort to
update traﬃc traces during deployment regularly. Our explanation for
the degraded performance of PEZD is that the diﬀerence in traﬃc traces
in the DS-14 dataset is smaller than in the DS-19 dataset. We calculate
Cosine distances of 0.76 and 0.69 for the DS-19 and DS-14 datasets,
respectively. The smaller diﬀerences between traﬃc traces may lead to
smaller diﬀerences in the distribution of dummy packets. Note that we
calculate the diﬀerence between unmonitored websites since we select
unmonitored websites as the traﬃc trace pool.

Fig. 14. Calculate intra-similarity for undefended, WTF-PAD, FRONT, FRONTU, Surakav, AAP, TBP, and PEZD datasets based on the Cosine distance.

The Cosine similarity is shown in Eq. (3),
𝐴⋅𝐵
‖𝐴‖‖𝐵‖
∑𝑛
𝑖=1 𝐴𝑖 × 𝐵𝑖
= √
√
∑𝑛 ( )2
∑𝑛 ( )2
×
𝑖=1 𝐴𝑖
𝑖=1 𝐵𝑖

Traﬃc trace pool

similarity = cos(𝜃) =

(3)

6.3. Implementation

where 𝐴 and 𝐵 are vectors. Cosine distance 𝐷 = 1 - 𝑆(𝐴, 𝐵), where 𝑆 is
Cosine similarity. A larger Cosine distance represents a larger diﬀerence
for a given pair of traﬃc traces. We randomly select one hundred pairs of
traﬃc traces from a website to calculate the Cosine distance and average
it as the Cosine distance of the website. We average the Cosine distance
of all websites as a ﬁnal diﬀerence representation for undefended, WTFPAD, FRONT, Surakav, and PEZD datasets. The DS-19 dataset is used for
the experiments. Cosine distances are shown in Fig. 14.
The cosine distance between traﬃc traces of the same website for
PEZD is larger than for FRONT, WTF-PAD, AAP, TBP, FRONT-U, and
Surakav. Speciﬁcally, the cosine distance of PEZD is 0.16, 0.17, 0.18,
0.14, 0.11, and 0.07 higher than that of FRONT, WTF-PAD, AAP, TBP,
FRONT-U, and Surakav, respectively. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
traﬃc traces of the website can hinder attackers from discovering unique
patterns in the website.
In addition, we use the non-linear dimensionality reduction algorithm t-SNE [50] to visualize the eﬀect of defenses on the inter-websites.
T-SNE embeds high-dimensional features into a low-dimensional space.
We map each traﬃc trace to a 2D space, as shown in Fig. 15. We can
observe that website categories are clearly separated for the undefended
traﬃc, and traﬃc traces from the same website exhibit cohesion. In contrast, PEZD greatly disrupts the clustering of the same website, with a
haphazard distribution of traﬃc traces. On the other hand, WTF-PAD,
FRONT, Surakav, AAP, TBP, and FRONT-U fail to disperse the trafﬁc traces completely, and some traﬃc traces from the same website
continue to exhibit aggregation. Speciﬁcally, for WTF-PAD, Surakav,
FRONT, and TBP, the traﬃc traces of label 32 demonstrate cohesion.
Furthermore, for Surakav, traﬃc traces labeled 50, and 78 exhibit strong
cohesion. While for FRONT, it is more obvious that traﬃc traces from
the same category are aggregated.
To understand how PEZD aﬀects the feature importance in the classiﬁer’s decision-making process, we conducted a LIME analysis (see Appendix A).

In this section, we will discuss potential problems in the implementation and give explanations.
Traﬃc trace pool: PEZD implementation defense requires the assistance of a traﬃc trace pool, which, with its size of a few tens of MB,
can be placed in the Tor directory server. When a user requests relay
information from the Tor directory server, the location information of
the dummy packet is sent to the user along with the relay information.
Alternatively, the traﬃc trace pool can be placed within clients and Tor
bridges to generate dummy packet location information. In addition, we
can utilize existing tools such as Tor Browser Selenium [51], which is a
Python library that allows for automated operation of the Tor Browser
using selenium drivers. Furthermore, collecting these traﬃc traces does
not impose a signiﬁcant network burden on the Tor network. Tor is used
by millions of people every day, and some websites need to handle millions of requests, while we only need to collect 10,000 traﬃc traces.
Furthermore, our study also shows that these collected traces do not
need to be updated frequently.
Implementation cost: PEZD only needs to use less than 2 KB of data
to describe the extracted location information, which is very feasible for
Tor. Tor client needs to load about 8 MB of data when starting up Tor for
relay discovery [28]. In addition, we calculate that the computational
cost required to extract all dummy packet location information on a CPU
(Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-12700H laptop) is about 0.06 milliseconds. Note
that the Tor directory server can generate location information before
the user requests it, which does not add latency. In contrast, Surakav requires some 186 milliseconds to generate reference traﬃc traces on the
same CPU. In terms of computational overhead, PEZD is 3000× lower
than Surakav. In addition, the generation and removal of dummy packets operate at the network layer. In practical implementation, this process can be facilitated by leveraging obfs4proxy [52], a pluggable transport [53] protocol provided by Tor. It is important to note that these
dummy packets do not impact real network communication.

6.2. PEZD traﬃc trace pool maintenance

6.4. Limitations and future work

PEZD requires collecting traﬃc traces to generate defense information, whether the traﬃc traces in the traﬃc trace pool need to be up-

With the application of DNN models to WF attacks, most DNN-based
attacks use only the packet direction sequences as the input to models.
11

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. 15. T-SNE visualization for undefended, WTF-PAD, FRONT, Surakav, AAP, TBP, FRONT-U, and PEZD. Each color represents one website class. The number
indicates the label in the dataset.

This also leads most defenses to focus only on the direction of packets,
ignoring packet timing information [18,22–25,28,29,45]. Some recent
works [10,13] utilize the timing features of packets to identify the websites visited by users. Intuitively, PEZD injection of dummy packets does
destroy the timing features of traﬃc traces. However, PEZD cannot generate accurate dummy packet timestamps. As a result, it cannot be evaluated for its eﬀectiveness in defending against WF attacks that use timing
features. Although our current defense cannot be directly applied to WF
attacks utilizing timing features, extensions to address such attacks can
be developed by optimizing the transmission timing of dummy packets or by incorporating the Adaptive Padding [39] algorithm to disrupt
timing features. Future work will investigate the joint perturbation of
packet direction and timing features.
Additionally, some traditional attacks also use burst features as the
feature set [6]. While not explicitly designed to do so, PEZD does impact
burst features to some extent. The addition of dummy packets increases
the size of existing bursts in the original traﬃc and creates new burst
features. For stronger perturbation burst features, we can extend our
approach to disrupt the feature by modifying a previous single dummy
packet location to send dummy packets at successive locations in the
same direction.
Finally, although previous probability-based methods for generating
dummy packets with diﬀerent distributions have not been signiﬁcantly
successful, this does not preclude the possibility that probability can
be used in conjunction with or in place of our method to further enhance defense performance. We remain open to exploring probabilistic
approaches in our future work.

PEZD oﬀers better protection performance than FRONT, WTF-PAD, and
Surakav with similar overhead. In the closed-world setting, it reduces
the accuracy of the state-of-the-art attack, Var-CNN, from 97.56 % to
19.39 %, while FRONT only reduces it to 82.92 %, WTF-PAD to 93.93 %
and Surakav to 69.93 %. In the open-world setting, PEZD also shows
lower precision and recall than FRONT, WTF-PAD, and Surakav. Furthermore, PEZD supports the injection of dummy packets only on the
client-side for eﬀective defense. In addition, we also show that PEZD
does not require signiﬁcant eﬀort to maintain during deployment.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hengheng Xiong: Data curation, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology; Dapeng Man: Supervision; Huanran Wang: Writing
– review & editing; Jingwen Tan: Writing – review & editing; Jiguang
Lv: Writing – review & editing; Wu Yang: Supervision.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements

7. Conclusion
This project was supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(Grant No. 2021YFB3101401), Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China (Grant No. TD2022F001), Joint Funds of
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U2003206,
No. U20B2048, No. U21B2019, No. U22A2036), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62272127).

In this paper, we propose PEZD, a practical and eﬀective zero-delay
defense. PEZD aims to hinder attackers from discerning a website’s
unique patterns by injecting dummy packets with diverse distributions
into the traﬃc. It exploits the distribution of outgoing packets from different websites to randomize the distribution of added dummy packets.
12

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Fig. A.1. Visualization of the number of important features within intervals. The number of feature importance indicates how many signiﬁcant features fall within
an interval, with each interval having a length of 1000.

Appendix A. Analyzing PEZD Using LIME

[8] A. Panchenko, F. Lanze, J. Pennekamp, T. Engel, A. Zinnen, M. Henze, K. Wehrle,
Website ﬁngerprinting at internet scale, in: 23rd Annual Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium, NDSS 2016, San Diego, California, USA, February 2124, 2016, The Internet Society, 2016.
[9] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, M. Wright, Deep ﬁngerprinting: undermining
website ﬁngerprinting defenses with deep learning, in: Proceedings of the 2018
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2018,
Toronto, ON, Canada, October 15-19, 2018, ACM, 2018, pp. 1928–1943. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243768
[10] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, S. Devadas, Var-CNN: a data-eﬃcient website ﬁngerprinting attack based on deep learning, Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol. 2019 (4) (2019)
292–310. https://doi.org/10.2478/POPETS-2019-0070
[11] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. van Goethem, W. Joosen, Automated website ﬁngerprinting through deep learning, in: 25th Annual Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium, NDSS 2018, San Diego, California, USA, February 1821, 2018, The Internet Society, 2018.
[12] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, H. Federrath, Website ﬁngerprinting: attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial naïve-bayes classiﬁer, in:
Proceedings of the First ACM Cloud Computing Security Workshop, CCSW 2009,
Chicago, IL, USA, November 13, 2009, ACM, 2009, pp. 31–42. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1655008.1655013
[13] M.S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K.G. Gangadhara, M. Wright, Tik-Tok: the
utility of packet timing in website ﬁngerprinting attacks, Proc. Privacy Enhanc.
Technol. 2020 (3) (2020) 5–24. https://doi.org/10.2478/POPETS-2020-0043
[14] R. Nithyanand, X. Cai, R. Johnson, Glove: a bespoke website ﬁngerprinting defense,
in: Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, WPES
2014, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, November 3, 2014, ACM, 2014, pp. 131–134. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2665943.2665950
[15] C.V. Wright, S.E. Coull, F. Monrose, Traﬃc morphing: an eﬃcient defense against
statistical traﬃc analysis, in: Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium, NDSS 2009, San Diego, California, USA, 8th February - 11th
February 2009, The Internet Society, 2009.
[16] X. Luo, P. Zhou, E.W.W. Chan, W. Lee, R.K.C. Chang, R. Perdisci, HTTPOS: sealing
information leaks with browser-side obfuscation of encrypted ﬂows, in: Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2011, San
Diego, California, USA, 6th February - 9th February 2011, The Internet Society,
2011.
[17] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, M. Wright, Toward an eﬃcient website
ﬁngerprinting defense, in: Computer Security - ESORICS 2016 - 21st European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Heraklion, Greece, September 26-30,
2016, Proceedings, Part I, 9878 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2016,
pp. 27–46. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45744-4_2
[18] M.S. Rahman, M. Imani, N. Mathews, M. Wright, Mockingbird: defending against
deep-learning-based website ﬁngerprinting attacks with adversarial traces, IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021) 1594–1609. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.
2020.3039691
[19] K.P. Dyer, S.E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, T. Shrimpton, Peek-a-boo, I still see you: why
eﬃcient traﬃc analysis countermeasures fail, in: IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, SP 2012, 21-23 May 2012, San Francisco, California, USA, IEEE Computer
Society, 2012, pp. 332–346. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2012.28

We randomly selected six samples from category 8 to showcase the
LIME results. For each traﬃc trace, we considered individual packets
(+1 or −1) as features and analyzed the range of the top 100 most
important features, as shown in Fig. A.1.
The LIME analysis reveals a stark contrast between undefended and
PEZD-defended traﬃc. For undefended traﬃc, 80 % of the most important features are concentrated within the ﬁrst 1000 packets. This
observation clearly indicates that website ﬁngerprinting attacks predominantly rely on the header features of the traﬃc. In contrast, traﬃc
defended by PEZD shows no discernible trend of dependence on speciﬁc
features. The distribution of the most important features varies significantly across diﬀerent traﬃc traces. This reﬂects the eﬀectiveness of
PEZD from the side, that is, it is diﬃcult for the model to learn the
speciﬁc features of traﬃc to generalize to other traﬃc sequences in the
same category.
References
[1] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, P.F. Syverson, Tor: the second-generation onion
router, in: Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Security Symposium, August 9-13, 2004,
San Diego, CA, USA, USENIX, 2004, pp. 303–320.
[2] A. Mani, T. Wilson-Brown, R. Jansen, A. Johnson, M. Sherr, Understanding tor usage
with privacy-preserving measurement, in: Proceedings of the Internet Measurement
Conference 2018, IMC 2018, Boston, MA, USA, October 31 - November 02, 2018,
ACM, 2018, pp. 175–187.
[3] Tor Project, Users - tor metrics, https://metrics.torproject.org/userstats-relaycountry.html, Last accessed on 2023-05-06.
[4] X. Cai, X.C. Zhang, B. Joshi, R. Johnson, Touching from a distance: website ﬁngerprinting attacks and defenses, in: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’12, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2012, p. 605–616. https://doi.org/10.1145/2382196.2382260
[5] T. Wang, I. Goldberg, Improved website ﬁngerprinting on Tor, in: Proceedings of
the 12th annual ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, WPES 2013,
Berlin, Germany, November 4, 2013, ACM, 2013, pp. 201–212. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2517840.2517851
[6] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, I. Goldberg, Eﬀective attacks and provable defenses for website ﬁngerprinting, in: Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security
Symposium, San Diego, CA, USA, August 20-22, 2014, USENIX Association, 2014,
pp. 143–157.
[7] J. Hayes, G. Danezis, k-Fingerprinting: a robust scalable website ﬁngerprinting technique, in: 25th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 16, Austin, TX, USA,
August 10-12, 2016, USENIX Association, 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
13

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

[20] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, I. Goldberg, A systematic approach
to developing and evaluating website ﬁngerprinting defenses, in: G. Ahn, M. Yung,
N. Li (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, November 3-7, 2014, ACM, 2014,
pp. 227–238. https://doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660362
[21] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, CS-BuFLO: a congestion sensitive website ﬁngerprinting defense, in: Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, WPES 2014, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, November 3, 2014, ACM, 2014,
pp. 121–130. https://doi.org/10.1145/2665943.2665949
[22] A.M. Sadeghzadeh, B. Tajali, R. Jalili, AWA: adversarial website adaptation, IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021) 3109–3122. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.
2021.3074295
[23] S. Shan, A.N. Bhagoji, H. Zheng, B.Y. Zhao, Patch-based defenses against web ﬁngerprinting attacks, in: AISec@CCS 2021: Proceedings of the 14th ACM Workshop on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security, Virtual Event, Republic of Korea, 15 November
2021, ACM, 2021, pp. 97–109. https://doi.org/10.1145/3474369.3486875
[24] D. Li, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, J. Wang, Minipatch: undermining DNN-based website ﬁngerprinting with adversarial patches, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 17 (2022)
2437–2451. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2022.3186743
[25] C. Hou, G. Gou, J. Shi, P. Fu, G. Xiong, WF-GAN: ﬁghting back against website
ﬁngerprinting attack using adversarial learning, in: IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications, ISCC 2020, Rennes, France, July 7-10, 2020, IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCC50000.2020.9219593
[26] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, T. Engel, Website ﬁngerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks, in: Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, WPES 2011, Chicago, IL, USA, October
17, 2011, ACM, 2011, pp. 103–114. https://doi.org/10.1145/2046556.2046570
[27] J. Gong, T. Wang, Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website ﬁngerprinting,
in: 29th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 2020, August 12-14, 2020,
USENIX Association, 2020, pp. 717–734.
[28] T. Wang, I. Goldberg, Walkie-Talkie: an eﬃcient defense against passive website ﬁngerprinting attacks, in: 26th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Security 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada, August 16-18, 2017, USENIX Association, 2017,
pp. 1375–1390.
[29] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, A. Houmansadr, Defeating DNN-based traﬃc analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial perturbations, in: 30th USENIX Security
Symposium, USENIX Security 2021, August 11-13, 2021, USENIX Association, 2021,
pp. 2705–2722.
[30] J. Gong, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, T. Wang, Surakav: generating realistic traces for
a strong website ﬁngerprinting defense, in: 43rd IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, SP 2022, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2022, IEEE, 2022,
pp. 1558–1573. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833722
[31] J.K. Holland, N. Hopper, RegulaTor: a straightforward website ﬁngerprinting defense, Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2022 (2) (2022) 344–362.
https://doi.org/10.2478/POPETS-2022-0049
[32] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J.J. Huang, Y. Chen, TBP: tree structure burst-sequence padding
defense against website ﬁngerprinting, in: 2023 IEEE International Performance,
Computing, and Communications Conference (IPCCC), IEEE, 2023, pp. 99–108.
[33] N. Mathews, J.K. Holland, S.E. Oh, M.S. Rahman, N. Hopper, M. Wright, SoK: a critical evaluation of eﬃcient website ﬁngerprinting defenses, in: 44th IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy, SP 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 21-25, 2023, IEEE,
2023, pp. 969–986. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179289
[34] L. Qiao, B. Wu, S. Yin, H. Li, W. Yuan, X. Luo, Resisting DNN-based website ﬁngerprinting attacks enhanced by adversarial training, IEEE Trans. Inform. Forensics
Secur. 18 (2023) 5375–5386. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2023.3304528
[35] T. Dahanayaka, G. Jourjon, S. Seneviratne, Dissecting traﬃc ﬁngerprinting CNNs
with ﬁlter activations, Comput. Netw. 206 (2022) 108770. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.COMNET.2022.108770
[36] Z. Yang, X. Xiao, B. Zhang, G. Hu, Q. Li, Q. Liu, AAP: defending against website
ﬁngerprinting through burst obfuscation, in: International Conference on Advanced
Data Mining and Applications, Springer, 2023, pp. 107–121.
[37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in:
2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016,
Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, IEEE Computer Society, 2016, pp. 770–778.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
[38] X. Gu, B. Song, W. Lan, M. Yang, An online website ﬁngerprinting defense based
on the non-targeted adversarial patch, Tsinghua Sci. Technol. 28 (6) (2023)
1148–1159. https://doi.org/10.26599/TST.2023.9010062
[39] V. Shmatikov, M. Wang, Timing analysis in low-latency mix networks: attacks and
defenses, in: Computer Security - ESORICS 2006, 11th European Symposium on
Research in Computer Security, Hamburg, Germany, September 18-20, 2006, Proceedings, 4189 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2006, pp. 18–33.
https://doi.org/10.1007/11863908_2
[40] M Perry, G Kadianakis, Circuit padding developer documentation, https://github.
com/torproject/tor/blob/main/doc/HACKING/CircuitPaddingDevelopment.md,
Last accessed on 2023-05-06.
[41] W. De la Cadena, A. Mitseva, J. Hiller, J. Pennekamp, S. Reuter, J. Filter, T. Engel, K. Wehrle, A. Panchenko, TraﬃcSliver: ﬁghting website ﬁngerprinting attacks
with traﬃc splitting, in: CCS ’20: 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Virtual Event, USA, November 9-13, 2020, ACM, 2020,
pp. 1971–1985. https://doi.org/10.1145/3372297.3423351

[42] S. Henri, G. Garcia-Aviles, P. Serrano, A. Banchs, P. Thiran, Protecting against
website ﬁngerprinting with multihoming, Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol. 2020 (2)
(2020) 89–110. https://doi.org/10.2478/POPETS-2020-0019
[43] M. Wang, A. Kulshrestha, L. Wang, P. Mittal, Leveraging strategic connection
migration-powered traﬃc splitting for privacy, Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol. 2022
(3) (2022) 498–515. https://doi.org/10.56553/POPETS-2022-0083
[44] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Díaz, R. Greenstadt, A critical evaluation of website ﬁngerprinting attacks, in: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, November 3-7, 2014,
ACM, 2014, pp. 263–274. https://doi.org/10.1145/2660267.2660368
[45] A. Abusnaina, R. Jang, A. Khormali, D. Nyang, D. Mohaisen, DFD: adversarial
learning-based approach to defend against website ﬁngerprinting, in: 39th IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, INFOCOM 2020, Toronto, ON, Canada, July
6-9, 2020, IEEE, 2020, pp. 2459–2468. https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM41043.
2020.9155465
[46] G. Srivastava, R.H. Jhaveri, S. Bhattacharya, S. Pandya, Rajeswari, P.K.R. Maddikunta, G. Yenduri, J.G. Hall, M. Alazab, T.R. Gadekallu, XAI for cybersecurity: state of the art, challenges, open issues and future directions, CoRR (2022).
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2206.03585
[47] M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 13-17, 2016, ACM, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.
2939778
[48] Alexa, The Web Information Company, https://www.alexa.com, Last accessed on
2024-10-21.
[49] J. Smith, L. Dolﬁ, P. Mittal, A. Perrig, QCSD: a QUIC client-side websiteﬁngerprinting defence framework, in: 31st USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX
Security 2022, Boston, MA, USA, August 10-12, 2022, USENIX Association, 2022,
pp. 771–789.
[50] L. van der Maaten, G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-SNE, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9
(86) (2008) 2579–2605.
[51] G. Acar, M. Juarez, i. contributors, tor-browser-selenium - Tor Browser automation
with Selenium, 2023, (https://github.com/webfp/tor-browser-selenium).
[52] Yawning Angel, obfs4 - The obfourscator, https://github.com/Yawning/obfs4, Last
accessed on 2024-10-21.
[53] Tor Project, pluggable transports, https://support.torproject.org/glossary/
pluggable-transports/, Last accessed on 2024-10-21.

Hengheng Xiong is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University. His main research interests include network security and artiﬁcial intelligence security.

Dapeng Man received the B.S. and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science and technology from Harbin Engineering
University in 2003, 2007 and 2009. He is currently an professor in Harbin Engineering University. His main research
interests include mobile computing security and IoT security.
He is a Member of CCF.

Huanran Wang received the bachelor’s degree from the
School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest
Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2011, and the master’s degree from the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in
2016. He is currently an associate professor in Harbin Engineering University, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin,
China. His main research interests include social networks,
privacy preserving and representation learning.

14

Computer Networks 272 (2025) 111716

H. Xiong et al.

Jingwen Tan is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University. Her main research interests include encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and website ﬁngerprinting.

Wu Yang received a Ph.D. degree in Computer System Architecture Specialty of Computer Science and Technology
School from Harbin Institute of Technology. He is currently
a professor and doctoral supervisor of Harbin Engineering
University. His main research interests include wireless sensor network, peer-to-peer network and information security.
He is a Member of ACM and Senior Member of CCF.

Jiguang Lv received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer
science and technology from Harbin Engineering University
in 2014 and 2018. He is currently an associate professor in
Harbin Engineering University. His main research interests
include mobile computing security and IoT security. He is a
Member of CCF.

15