IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

4435

Privacy-Preserving Lightweight Time-Series
Anomaly Detection for Resource-Limited
Industrial IoT Edge Devices
Lei Chen , Member, IEEE, Yepeng Xu , Ming Li, Bowen Hu , Haomiao Guo,
and Zhaohua Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Identifying anomalies directly on edge devices
rather than in the cloud, known as edge computing, is essential for Industry 4.0. However, the limited computing and
storage resources on edge devices render traditional cloudbased anomaly detection models ineffective. To solve this
issue, a privacy-preserving lightweight time-series anomaly
detection model, named PPLAD, is proposed for resourcelimited industrial Internet of Things (IoT) edge devices via
global and local similarity discrepancy. First, PPLAD directly uses data similarity instead of raw data as model
input, to achieve privacy-preserving. Second, PPLAD applies trainable Gaussian distribution rather than deep neural network as model structure, to achieve high timeliness
and low cost. Specifically, PPLAD constructs a trainable
Gaussian distribution with only one parameter for each
timestamp to model its similarity with neighbors. Third, a
global and local adversarial learning strategy is developed
to amplify the discrepancy between local similarity and
global similarity for each timestamp. Finally, the discrepancy is used to accurately identify timestamp-level anomalies. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this is the first work
to build an industrial anomaly detection model using only
learnable Gaussian distributions. Extensive experiments
on eight public industrial multisensor datasets and three
edge devices demonstrate that PPLAD outperforms several
state-of-the-art models.

detection models are often deployed on the cloud with powerful
resources [2]. In this case, edge devices periodically upload the
collected data to the cloud. The detection model in the cloud
identifies anomalies and then returns the results to edge devices. These models prioritize enhancing feature representation
and model accuracy (ACC) by building deep neural networks
with complex structures and huge parameters. Therefore, deep
neural network-based models are the dominant focus of current research. However, driven by fine-grained industrial smart
controls, an increasing number of Internet of Things (IoT) sensors are being used to perform more intensive data collection
and information perception. As a result, the volume of data
is growing rapidly, which causes substantial communication
overhead between edge devices and the cloud. Moreover, the
huge data volume further makes anomaly detection in the cloud
result in high latency and high costs. Therefore, identifying
anomalies directly on edge devices rather than in the cloud,
also known as edge computing, is a critical requirement for
Industry 4.0 [3]. However, limited computing and storage resources on edge devices make the current popular deep neural
network-based models powerless. Specifically, there are two
major challenges for existing models on resource-limited edge
devices [4].

Index Terms—Data privacy-preserving, edge devices, industrial Internet of Things, lightweight anomaly detection,
resource-limited, similarity discrepancy.

A. Challenges

I. INTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection is crucial and widely concerned
for costly industrial scenarios [1]. In the past, anomaly

Received 26 October 2024; revised 10 January 2025; accepted 20
January 2025. Date of publication 3 March 2025; date of current version 23 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62103143, in part
by the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 2024JJ5162 and Grant 2024JJ7179, and in part by the Scientific
Research Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department under Grant
22B0471. Paper no. TII-24-5638. (Corresponding author: Lei Chen.)
The authors are with the School of Information and Electrical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201,
China (e-mail: chenlei@hnust.edu.cn; xuyepeng@mail.hnust.edu.cn;
minglee@hnust.edu.cn; hubowen@mail.hnust.edu.cn; guohaomiao@
mail.hnust.edu.cn; zhaohua.liu@hnust.edu.cn).
The
source
code
of
PPLAD
is
available
at
https://github.com/infogroup502/PPLAD.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3538127

1) Balancing ACC, Timeliness, and Cost-Efficiency is Challenging: Anomaly detection on resource-limited edge devices

must simultaneously meet high ACC, high timeliness, and
low-resource consumption [5]. However, these goals are often
mutually conflicting and difficult to balance. For example, to
get high ACC, detection models often need to have strong
representational capabilities by building deep neural networks
with complex structures and huge parameters [6], [7], [8]. In this
case, these models demand long processing times and consume
substantial computational and storage resources. Conversely, to
achieve high timeliness, detection models usually lightweight
models with shallow structures and few parameters. Although
these models only consume less computational and storage
resources, but they have poor feature capture capability and
unsatisfactory detection ACC.
2) Data Privacy is Not Secure and Easily Exposed: In industrial scenarios, edge devices continuously collect sensor
temporal signals from the production process. These sensor data
contains highly valuable information and has strong privacy.
Currently, existing anomaly detection models for IoT edge devices directly take raw sensor signals as input data. However,

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

4436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

IoT edge devices are often insecure [9], [10] and lack powerful
protection mechanisms. In this case, external attacks can easily
steal the raw sensor signal data, resulting in a privacy leakage.
In more severe cases, attackers may compromise edge devices
and disrupt production processes.
B. Existing Solutions
As for the first challenge, some works [11], [12] use deep
neural networks as prototypes, employing parallelization or
compression techniques to reduce network layers and redundant
parameters, ultimately creating lightweight models that balance
ACC and timeliness. However, these models still have numerous
parameters and a deep structure, resulting in unsatisfactory
resource consumption and processing time. The other works
rely on shallow machine learning or statistical models, combined with other techniques or customized ACC optimization
strategies, to build hybrid lightweight models [13], [14], [15]
that balance ACC and timeliness. However, these models may be
unstable when encountering multisensor temporal signals with
complex feature patterns.
As for the second challenge, existing solutions [16], [17]
employ some security mechanisms to guarantee data privacy.
However, these models require additional encryption and decryption processing, which results in more computational, communication, and storage resource consumption and processing
time. In certain industrial scenarios, some privacy-preserving
technologies may not even be feasible on resource-efficient edge
devices.
In summary, performing anomaly detection with high speed,
high ACC, and low-resource consumption on resource-limited
edge devices remains a significant challenge.
C. New Insights
To fill this gap, this article tries to design a lightweight
anomaly detection model to achieve the desired goals. Specifically, two key bottlenecks need to be solved.
The first bottleneck is how to build a lightweight model
with high ACC, high timeliness, and low-resource consumption. Anomalies in industrial IoT systems occur infrequently,
typically spanning multiple timestamps, and exhibit distinct
characteristics compared to normal data, as shown in Fig. 1(a). It
implies that an abnormal timestamp is only similar to its adjacent
neighbors (local neighbors) and not to its distant neighbors
(global neighbors). On the contrary, a normal timestamp is similar not only to its local neighbors but also to its global neighbors.
Hence, the local-global similarity discrepancy offers a useful
criterion for distinguishing anomalies from normal timestamps,
as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Driven by this observation, we try to set up a tiny trainable Gaussian distribution with only one parameter for each
timestamp, so as to learn its local and global similarities.
Meanwhile, we design an adversarial learning mechanism to
amplify the discrepancy between global and local similarities for each timestamp. This mechanism works by simultaneously maximizing its local and global similarities. In this
scheme, the lightweight trainable Gaussian distribution with
only a parameter ensures high timeliness and low consumption, while the adversarial learning mechanism provides high
ACC.

Fig. 1. Illustration of the local and global similarity discrepancy.
(a) Anomaly in real-world UCR dataset. (b) Anomaly detection driven
by similarity discrepancy.

The second bottleneck is how to achieve flexible privacypreserving for multisensor temporal data without incurring additional overhead. A straightforward scheme is to use data similarity as an initial input rather than raw privacy data. In this scheme,
the initial similarity computation can either be outsourced to a
third-party security interface or flexibly integrated with other
models.
Based on these insights, a privacy-preserving lightweight
anomaly detection model, named PPLAD, is proposed for
resource-limited industrial IoT edge devices. First, PPLAD uses
data similarity as an initial input. Second, PPLAD employs
a tiny trainable Gaussian distribution for each timestamp to
learn both local and global similarities. Finally, PPLAD designs
an adversarial learning mechanism to amplify the discrepancy
between global and local similarities and use this discrepancy
to detect anomalies.
D. Contributions
The main contributions of this article are listed as follows.
1) A learnable Gaussian distribution-based lightweight
anomaly detection model, named PPLAD, is proposed
for resource-limited industrial IoT edge devices. Driven
by the global and local similarity discrepancy, PPLAD
employs the tiny learning structure and customized adversarial mechanism to achieve high timeliness, high ACC,
and low-resource consumption. To the best of authors’
knowledge, this is the first work to build an industrial
anomaly detection model using only learnable Gaussian
distributions.
2) PPLAD utilizes data similarity as the initial input, rather
than raw multisensor privacy data. This approach not only
protects data privacy but also enables flexible integration
with other models.
3) Extensive experiments on eight public industrial multisensor datasets and three edge devices (Thick PC, Thin
Jetson Xavier NX, Mirco Raspberry Pi 4b) demonstrate
that PPLAD outperforms several state-of-the-art (SOTA)

CHEN et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING LIGHTWEIGHT TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR RESOURCE-LIMITED INDUSTRIAL

TABLE I
RELATED WORK

4437

incorporates clustering learning and hashing to design an optimal multibranch tree structure. The DIF model [14] employs a
customized shallow neural network to improve the ACC of isolation forest. The calibrated oneclass classification-based anomalydetection (COUTA) model [15] designs multiple calibrated
mechanisms for one-class support vector machine (OCSVM).
Similarly, the VQ-OCSVM model [20] combines the vector
quantization and OCSVM. The federated unsupervised anomaly
detection (FedPCA) model [21] leverages principal component analysis (PCA), federal learning and alternating directions
method multipliers to boost ACC. Although these models deliver
superior timeliness and efficiency, their ACC often falters when
applied to industrial time series with complex feature patterns.
B. Privacy-Preserving Anomaly Detection

models. Notably, its detection time and model parameters
are only one-tenth of those in competing models.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we respectively summarize the related work on
lightweight anomaly detection and privacy-preserving anomaly
detection, as shown in Table I.
A. Lightweight Anomaly Detection
To achieve a balance between high ACC, high timeliness,
and low-resource consumption, existing lightweight models are
generally classified into two categories.
The first category directly compresses deep neural networkbased models with high ACC. For example, the patchbased anomaly detection (PatchAD) model [11] constructs a
lightweight two-branch contrastive network using an MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP)-based architecture inspired by the dual
attention contrastive anomaly detection (DCdetector) model [8].
Similarly, the lightweight neural network-based anomaly detection (ANNet) model [12] optimizes Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) blocks with MLPs. The lightweight deep neural
network-based anomaly detection (LightDNN) model [18] compresses the redundant parameters of the convolutional neural
network (CNN), and tests the performance on edge devices. The
reconstructed graph with global–local distillation (RG-GLD)
model [19] integrates graph neural networks(GNN) and knowledge distillation (KD) to enhance timeliness and reduce resource
consumption. Despite these advancements, compressed models
retain deep structures with numerous parameters, which limits
their potential for significant improvements in timeliness and
resource efficiency.
The second category enhances the ACC of shallow machine
learning or statistical models, which inherently offer high speed
and low-resource consumption. For instance, the optimal isolation forest-based anomaly detection (Optiforest) model [13]

To get privacy-preserving, most existing models utilize encryption, digital signatures, blockchain, and other protection
techniques to enhance security. For example, the federated
anomaly detection with noisy global density estimation (FADngs) model [17] uses a federated signature mechanism to
guarantee identity authorization and data privacy. Similarly,
the federated learning-based anomaly detection (FedAnomaly)
model [22] develops a novel collaborative learning protocol
to secure cloud-edge communications. The federated semisupervised class-rebalanced (Fed-SCR) model [23] applies the
federal learning to preserve data privacy. Meanwhile, the
blockchain-empowered anomaly detection (BCFL) model [24]
adopts a blockchain-enabled decentralized asynchronous federated learning framework. In addition, the Shagufta et al.
[16] designs a lightweight, aggregation-optimized encryption
scheme. The OP-ADIHT model [25] uses interval hash table
(ADIHT) and homomorphic encryption to construct a privacypreserving anomaly detection scheme. However, these models
often require encryption and decryption steps before performing
anomaly detection. Consequently, they require longer processing times or consume more computational and storage resources.
On resource-efficient IoT edge devices, some bulky privacypreserving solutions may not run smoothly, which results in
anomaly detection not working smoothly, or even not working
at all.
C. Summary
Coming to Industry 4.0, detecting anomalies directly on
industrial IoT edge devices is becoming increasingly critical.
However, the resource limitations of edge devices necessitate
the development of lightweight anomaly detection models with
minimal parameters and low-resource consumption, all while
maintaining high ACC. In addition, industrial IoT edge devices
in industrial scenarios are often deployed in insecure environments. This requires anomaly detection models to protect data
privacy without introducing significant additional overhead.
III. PROPOSED MODEL
A. Problem Statement
Suppose M sensors are employed to observe a dynamic production system over T times. The collected data is multisensor
temporal data, also known as a multivariate time series. Multisensor temporal data consists of both temporal and variable

4438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Overview of PPLAD model. (a) Initial similarity calculation. (b) Tiny trainable Gaussian distribution-based adversarial learning. (c) Global
and local similarity discrepancy-based anomaly scoring.

(spatial) dimensions. In the temporal dimension, the multisensor temporal data can be formulated as X = {xt ∈ RM ×1 }Tt=1 ,
where xt represents the observed value of M variables at the tth
timestamp. In the variable dimension, the multisensor temporal
m
data can be formulated as X = {xm ∈ R1×T }M
m=1 , where x
represents the observed values from T timestamps at the mth
variable.
Problem statement: This article aims to develop a lightweight
anomaly detection model. First, unlabeled historical multisensor
temporal data is used to train the anomaly detection model.
Second, the trained model is used to generate an anomaly score
for each to-be-tested timestamp
Scoret = PPLAD (xt )

(1)

where xt ∈ RM denotes the observed values of M variables
at the tth to-be-tested timestamp. Finally, the anomaly score
determines whether a timestamp is classified as an anomaly

1, if Scoret ≥ α
ȳt =
(2)
0, otherwise
where α is a preset threshold ranging from 0 to 1. If ȳt = 1, the
tth to-be-tested timestamp is labeled as an anomaly; otherwise,
it is classified as normal.
B. Overview
To detect anomalies directly on the resource-limited edge
devices, a trainable Gaussian distributions-based privacypreserving lightweight anomaly detection model, named
PPLAD, is proposed via global and local similarity discrepancy. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this is the first work
to build an industrial anomaly detection model using only
learnable Gaussian distributions. The overview of PPLAD is
illustrated as Fig. 2, which consists of the following three
components.
1) Initial similarity calculation: This component calls a
third-party security interface to generate the initial similarities of each timestamp with its local and global neighbors as input for the model.
2) Gaussian distribution-based adversarial learning: In this
component, a trainable Gaussian distribution with only
one parameter is constructed for each timestamp, so as to
model its global and local similarities based on initial similarities. Meanwhile, an adversarial learning mechanism

is designed to amplify the discrepancy between global
and local similarities.
3) Anomaly scoring: This component exploits the discrepancy between global and local similarities to determine if
a timestamp is an anomaly.
C. Initial Similarity Calculation
Unlike traditional models that directly use raw private data,
PPLAD utilizes data similarities obtained from third-party secure interfaces as model input to ensure privacy preservation.
These interfaces can be located on edge devices or in the cloud.
In this case, data privacy is not only preserved on insecure edge
devices, but also the coupling between multiple sensors can be
captured.
In this section, a similarity calculation strategy is designed
to serve as a recommended solution for third-party references.
First, for each timestamp, the M variables in the raw data
X ∈ RM ×T form a data vector xt ∈ RM ×1 . Second, a similarity
technique—such as distance similarity (Mean Squared Error,
MSE), probability distribution similarity (Kullback-Leibler divergence, KL), or vector similarity (Cosine)—is used to compute
the similarity between data vectors of any two timestamps.
Finally, the raw data is transformed into a similarity matrix
S ∈ RT ×T , where st ∈ RT ×1 represents the similarities between timestamp t and its T neighbors.
D. Gaussian Distribution-Based Adversarial Learning
Industrial sensor signals often show periodicity, seasonality, and trends. This suggests that a normal timestamp is not
only related to neighbor timestamps (local neighbors), but
also to distant timestamps (global neighbors). Conversely, outliers typically persist across multiple timestamps and show
significant deviations from normal values. This suggests that an
abnormal timestamp is only related to adjacent timestamps (local
neighbors). Therefore, the discrepancy between global and local
similarities for each timestamp is a useful metric for identifying
anomalies. Based on this insight, a trainable Gaussian distribution with only one parameter is constructed for each timestamp
to learn global and local similarities from the initial similarities,
as shown in Fig. 2(b). To enhance this process, a customized adversarial learning mechanism is designed to amplify the discrepancy between global and local similarities. In adversarial learning mechanism, local and global similarity learning are treated as
competing processes vying for the same Gaussian distribution.

CHEN et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING LIGHTWEIGHT TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR RESOURCE-LIMITED INDUSTRIAL

4439

possible
L1 =

t+LN/2
1 
[gt (i) − sit ]2
LN
LN

(5)

i=t− 2

where LN indicates the number of local neighbors and L1 is the
first train loss function.
Second, the area of local similarities is expected to be maximized within the overall distribution





LN
LN
L2 = 1 − Area t +
− Area t −
(6)
2
2

Fig. 3.

where Area(x) represents the area of the Gaussian distribution
in the range [−∞, x], L2 is the second train loss function.
4) Similarity Learning for Global Neighbors: First, the Gaussian distribution is expected to only fit normalized similarity of
each global neighbor as closely as possible

Global and local sampling.

L3 =
Local similarity learning wants to monopolize the Gaussian
distribution itself. Specifically, the Gaussian distribution for a
timestamp should perfectly fit the initial local similarities, and
the area occupied by the local neighbors in the Gaussian distribution should be as large as possible. On the contrary, global
similarity learning also wants to monopolize the Gaussian distribution itself. The Gaussian distribution is expected to fit only
the initial global similarities, and the area occupied by the global
neighbors is as large as possible. Through this adversarial learning, the Gaussian distribution adapts to fit both local and global
similarities simultaneously for normal timestamps. However,
for abnormal timestamps, such simultaneous fitting becomes
challenging. As a result, the discrepancy between global and
local similarities diminishes for normal timestamps but increases
for abnormal ones, enabling effective anomaly detection.
Taking the tth timestamp as an example, the adversarial learning process is stated as follows.
1) Global and Local Neighbor Sampling: Timestamps within
LN
the range [t − LN
2 , t + 2 ] are selected as local neighbors
for timestamp t. Meanwhile, timestamps with the ranges
LN
LN
GN
[t − GN
2 , t − 2 ] and [t + 2 , t + 2 ] are chosen as global
neighbors. The sampling process is shown in Fig. 3. Based on
the coordinates of local and global neighbors, the corresponding
initial similarities are extracted from st ∈ RT ×1 and normalized
as follows:
sit =

1
1 + exp−(sit )

(3)

where sit is initial similarity between timestamps i and t.
2) Trainable Gaussian Distribution: A private trainable
Gaussian distribution with only one parameter is constructed
for timestamp t, and expressed as follows:


1
(x − t)2
gt (x) = √
exp −
2σt2
2πσt

(4)

where x indicates the coordinate of a neighbor. σt indicates the
variance of this distribution, it is a trainable parameter and its
value is initialized by a common two-layer MLP network.
3) Similarity Learning for Local Neighbors: First, the variance σt is trained to make the Gaussian distribution only fit
the normalized similarity of each local neighbor as closely as

⎡

1
⎣
GN − LN

t− LN
2



t+ GN
2

(gt (i) − sit )2 +

i=t− GN
2



⎤
(gt (j) − sjt )2 ⎦

j=t+ LN
2

(7)
where GN indicates the number of global neighbors and L3 is
the third loss function.
Second, the area of global similarities is expected to be
maximized within the overall distribution


LN
L4 = 1 − 2 × Area t −
(8)
2
where L4 is the fourth loss function.
5) Adversarial Learning: In the abovementioned process, local similarity learning and global similarity learning constitute
two competitors who play against each other. Therefore, the final
loss function for adversarial learning is the sum of the local and
global losses
Loss = L1 + L2 + L3 + L4 .

(9)

E. Anomaly Scoring
After the PPLAD model is trained, a test timestamp t first uses
the PPLAD model to generate its Gaussian distribution. Then,
the discrepancy between global and local similarities serves as
the final anomaly score for timestamp t
Scoret = |L1 − L3 |.

(10)

where | · | means absolute value, L1 represents the Gaussian-fiterror for the local similarities of timestamp t, and L3 indicates
the Gaussian-fit-error for the global similarities of timestamp t.
Finally, (2) is employed to determine whether timestamp t is an
anomaly.
F. Algorithm and Analysis
The pseudocode for PPLAD is shown in Algorithm 1.
Complexity: The PPLAD model consists of four stages: initial
similarity calculation, Gaussian distribution-based adversarial
learning, anomaly scoring, and anomaly detention. In the first
stage, the initial similarity calculation is handled by a thirdparty library, and its complexity is, therefore, omitted. In the
second stage, a private, trainable Gaussian distribution is created

4440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

TABLE II
DATASET

Algorithm 1: PPLAD.

1) RQ-1 (ACC): Does our model outperform baseline models in detection ACC on multisensor temporal datasets?
2) RQ-2 (Deployability): Is our model easily deployable on
resource-constrained industrial IoT edge devices?
3) RQ-3 (Timeliness and resource consumption): How does
our model perform in terms of timeliness and resource
consumption on industrial IoT edge devices?
4) RQ-4 (Ablation): Does each innovative component of our
model contribute to overall performance?
5) RQ-5 (Case Study): Can PPLAD perform well in real
industrial environments?
B. Dataset

for each timestamp. Adversarial learning is then applied to this
distribution by maximizing both local and global similarities.
Specifically, the complexity of the sampling process is O(T ×
GN), the complexity of the Gaussian Construction is O(T ),
the complexity of the local similarity learning is O(T × LN),
and the complexity of the global similarity learning is O(T ×
(GN-LN)). Consequently, the overall complexity for this stage
is O(T × (2 × GN + 1)), where GN  T . In the third stage,
the discrepancy between local and global fitting is computed as
the anomaly score for each timestamp. Its complexity is O(T ).
In the final stage, each timestamp is determined whether to be
an anomaly, its complexity is O(T ). In summary, the overall
time complexity of the PPLAD model is O(T × GN), making
it linear and nearly linear given that GN  T .
IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Experimental Goal
We conduct extensive experiments to answer the following
four research questions.

The following nine publicly available real-world industrial
multisensor temporal datasets are selected for our experiments,
as shown in Table II.
1) HAI (HIL-based Augmented ICS Dataset): Multiple industrial signals from pumps, valves, pressure sensors, and
other common industrial equipment.
2) MSL (Mars Science Laboratory Dataset): Operating status
of multiple sensors or controllers on the Mars rover.
3) PSM (Pooled Server Metrics Dataset): 25-dimensional
monitoring information from eBay server machines.
4) PUMP (Pump Sensor Dataset): Inspection data from multiple sensors on pumps.
5) SKAB (Skoltech Anomaly Benchmark Dataset): Multisensor temporal signals obtained from industrial test
benches.
6) SMAP (Soil Moisture Active Passive Satellite Dataset):
NASA’s SMAP satellite signals that record moisture levels at varying soil depths.
7) SMD (Server Machine Dataset): Operational status from
multiple servers.
8) SWaT (Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) Dataset): 51dimensional data collected by multiple sensors in public
water treatment infrastructure.
9) WaDi (Water Distribution Dataset): 127-dimensional
monitoring data from an industrial control system.
C. Baseline, Metric, Environment
1) Baseline: Eight SOTA models are selected as the baselines, as listed in Table III. Among these, PatchAD, NPSR,
DTAAD, DIF, TFMAE, and DCdetector are deep models with
numerous parameters, while PPLAD, COUTA, and Optiforest
are lightweight models with fewer parameters.

CHEN et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING LIGHTWEIGHT TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR RESOURCE-LIMITED INDUSTRIAL

4441

TABLE III
BASELINE

2) Metric: To ensure a comprehensive evaluation, four
widely used metrics are employed: ACC, precision, recall, and
F 1-Score (F 1).
1) ACC measures the proportion of correctly predicted samples relative to the total number of samples.
2) Precision indicates the proportion of accurately predicted
normal timestamps among all predicted normal timestamps.
3) Recall reflects the proportion of actual normal timestamps
that are correctly identified.
4) F 1 provides a balanced evaluation by combining recall
and precision.
In general, these metrics range from 0 to 1, with higher values
indicating better anomaly detection performance.
3) Environment: The primary experiments are conducted on
a Windows 11 system equipped with an Intel Core i7-10700KF
CPU, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB VRAM),
and 64 GB of RAM. Deployment experiments are performed
on two resource-constrained IoT edge devices: Raspberry Pi
4b and NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX. The PPLAD model is
implemented in Python using PyCharm as the integrated
development environment. For the other models, official Python
implementations are obtained from the websites of respective
authors, as detailed in Table III.

D. RQ-1 (ACC)
To answer RQ-1, the PPLAD model is compared against seven
baselines across eight multisensor datasets.
1) Accuracy: Table IV presents the detection ACC of the
eight models across eight datasets. Bold text in the table denotes
the highest performance, while underlined text indicates the
second best. Several observations can be made from the table.
1) Overall performance: PPLAD achieves the best performance, followed by DCdetector, COUTA, PatchAD, DIF,
and DTAAD, while Optiforest and NPSR show the weakest performance.
2) Stability: PPLAD demonstrates the most stable performance across all four metrics, with DCdetector, DIF, DIF
following closely. Specifically, PPLAD achieves first or
second rankings across all datasets and all metrics.
3) Deep versus shallow models: Deep neural network-based
models (DIF, DCdetector, DTAAD, PatchAD) generally
outperform shallow models (Optiforest, COUTA).
However, PPLAD, despite being a shallow model, surpasses
several deep models. For instance, in the MSL dataset, PPLAD

achieves an ACC of 0.9919 and a recall of 0.9885, compared to
DTAAD’s ACC of 0.9242 and recall of 0.3754, and DCdetector’s
ACC of 0.9883 and recall of 0.9703.
2) Visualization: We visualize anomaly detection results of
nine models for timestamps 60 500 to 63 500 in the 1th variable
on the MSL dataset, as illustrated in Fig. 4. In this figure, the
black curve represents the real data, while the red curve corresponds to the predicted labels (peaks indicate outliers and valleys
denote normal values). Two key observations can be drawn from
Fig. 4. ACC: PPLAD, TFMAE, COUTA, and DCdetector exhibit
higher ACC compared to other models. For instance, within the
timestamps of 62 300 to 62 600, PPLAD, TFMAE, COUTA, and
DCdetector detection results closely align with the real labels,
while other models exhibit greater errors. False alarm: PPLAD,
COUTA, and DCdetector demonstrate fewer false alarms than
other models.
3) Conclusion: The experimental results show that the
PPLAD model achieves superior ACC and stability in anomaly
detection on industrial multisensor datasets.

E. RQ-2 (Deployability)
To address RQ-2, deployment experiments are conducted for
nine models on two edge devices: the Raspberry Pi 4b with
little resources and the Jetson Xavier NX with normal resources.
Specifically, the Raspberry Pi 4b is equipped with a 1.5 GHz
ARM Cortex-A72 processor and 2 GB of RAM, while the Jetson
Xavier NX has a 6-core Carmel ARMv8.2 processor with 8 GB
of RAM. In these experiments, deep models are initially trained
in the cloud before being deployed on edge devices for testing.
Meanwhile, the shallow models are deployed on the edge devices
directly. The deployment test results are illustrated in Fig. 5.
From the figure, two key observations can be made. Deployability: All models except the PatchAD are successfully
deployed on the edge devices, with lightweight models demonstrating greater ease of deployment. Convenience: In industrial
IoT environments, frequent changes in production processes
cause dynamic fluctuations in time signals. As a result, we need
to update the model regularly and keep its best performance.
For deep models, the update process requires fine-tuning in
the cloud with new data samples and then redeploying the
updated model to the edge devices. In contrast, lightweight
models can be updated directly on edge devices, consuming
fewer data samples and reducing communication overhead.
Summary: Shallow lightweight models are more easily deployable on resource-constrained Industrial IoT edge devices than
their deeper counterparts.

4442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

TABLE IV
ACCURACY ANALYSIS

Fig. 4.

Visualization of anomaly detection at timestamps 60500–63500 of 1th-variable on MSL dataset.

F. RQ-3 (Timeliness and Resource Consumption)
To answer RQ-3, the timeliness and resource consumption
of eight models are evaluated using the MSL dataset across
three deployment environments: a thick PC, a thin Jetson Xavier
NX, and a micro Raspberry Pi 4b. Table V lists the timeliness
and resource consumption of eight models, where “Ot” denotes
out-of-memory. From the table, several key findings can be
observed. Model parameters: The PPLAD model contains only

12.0Kparameters, significantly fewer than other models such
as COUTA (376.1K), PatchAD (2072.9 K), and DCdetector
(826.5 K). Timeliness: For training one epoch with a batch
size of 128, the PPLAD needs just 10.3 s, whereas PatchAD
takes 229.9 s, DCdetector requires 128.1 s, and COUTA takes
26.5 s. Similarly, PPLAD completes testing all timestamps in
0.9 s, outperforming PatchAD (154.5 s), COUTA (3.7 s), and
DCdetector (2.9 s). Computing resource consumption: Shallow
models show substantially lower CPU and GPU usage compared

CHEN et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING LIGHTWEIGHT TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR RESOURCE-LIMITED INDUSTRIAL

Fig. 5.

4443

Deployment results on two industrial IoT edge devices, where Raspberry Pi 4b on the left, Jetson Xavier NX on the right.
TABLE V
TIMELINESS AND RESOURCE CONSUMPTION

to deep models. For example, on the Raspberry Pi 4b, CPU
usage for PPLAD is 25.5%, while it is 57.4% for DCdetector
and 63.2% for NPSR. Storage resource consumption: Deep
models require substantially more storage. For example, on the
Jetson Xavier NX environment with only 8 G RAM, the RAM
Usage is 3.1 GB for deep DIF, 3.7 GB for deep DCdetector,
while only 1.1 GB for our PPLAD, and 0.8 GB for shallow
Optiforest. In summary: PPLAD demonstrates strong timeliness
and low-resource consumption, making it highly suitable for
resource-constrained industrial IoT edge devices.
G. RQ-4 (Ablation)
To address RQ-4, two ablation experiments are conducted to
evaluate key components of the PPLAD model. These experiments employ four multisensor datasets (HAI, PUMP, SMAP,
and SWaT), and three metrics (ACC, Recall, and F 1).
1) Input Similarity Calculation: The first key component is to
utilize data similarity from the third-party interfaces or other
models to replace the raw private data and thus achieve data
privacy protection. Therefore, this experiment assesses the impact of different initial similarity calculation methods on model
performance. Specifically, we design four contrasting models:
MSE-based distance similarity, Cosine-based vector similarity,
KL-based probability distribution similarity, and attention-based

association similarity. Fig. 6(a) shows the detection performance
of four models across four datasets. From the figure, we can find
that the performance of the four models is very similar across
the four datasets. It suggests that the PPLAD model is robust
to different initial similarity calculation methods. For example,
on the SMAP dataset, the ACC scores are 0.9909 for the MSEbased model, 0.9901 for the Cosine-based model, 0.9903 for the
KL-based model, and 0.9892 for the attention-based model.
Table VI further lists the integration results of PPLAD with
other models. From the table, the PPLAD model demonstrates
flexibility in integrating with other models and improving their
anomaly detection performance. For example, the trained DCdetector model is used to compute the initial neighbor similarities
for each timestamp. Then, these similarities are optimized by
the PPLAD model to better identify anomalies. Specifically, on
the SMAP dataset, the ACC score improves from 0.9843 with
the DCdetector model to 0.9892 with the integrated DCdetector+PPLAD model.
2) Adversarial Learning: The second key component is
an adversarial learning mechanism designed to amplify the
discrepancy between local similarity and global similarity. In the
adversarial learning mechanism, there are two adversarial parts:
similarity adversarial learning, and area adversarial learning.
Therefore, this experiment evaluates the effect of two adversarial
parts. Specifically, we design three competition models: only

4444

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

Two ablation experiment results. (a) Performance analysis for different initial similarity. (b) Performance analysis for adversarial learning.

TABLE VI
INTEGRATION WITH OTHER MODELS

similarity adversarial learning (first model), only area adversarial learning (second model), and similarity and area adversarial
learning (third model). Fig. 6(b) displays the detection ACC
of the three models. From the figure, two observations can be
obtained. Overall performance: The model combining similarity
and area adversarial learning (third model) outperforms the other
models across all metrics and datasets, as indicated by the highest bars in the figure. Comparison of the first and second models:
Each of these models has strengths in different contexts. For
instance, on the SWaT dataset, the first model achieves higher
scores for ACC, recall, and F 1. However, on the SMAP dataset,
the second model performs better across all three metrics. In
summary: The combination of similarity and area adversarial
learning yields the best results.
H. RQ-5 (Case Study)
To answer RQ-5, a drive system abnormality and fault simulation testbed is employed to perform this experiment, its process
is shown in Fig. 7.
1) Physical Testbed: The drive system abnormality and fault
simulation testbed comprises a motor, a gearbox, a magnetic
powder brake, a motor controller, an edge data collector, and control software. The testbed integrates a torque sensor, a three-axis

Fig. 7.

Physical testbed and anomaly detection process.

vibration acceleration sensor, and a current and voltage clamp
to collect signals for current, voltage, vibration, and torque.
2) Data Collection and Anomaly Generation: Based on this
testbed, signal data were collected over 60 s at a frequency
of 12.8 kHz. The collected data contains 6 variables: vibration
signals along the x, y, and z axes, a torque signal, and current and
voltage signals. With the aid of control software, false data injection attacks were applied to tamper with the real collected data.
Specifically, 3 s of data were tampered with every 12 s, repeated 4
times. Based on the abovementioned process, two datasets with
anomalies are generated. The first, a single-anomaly dataset,
contains only the tooth-break-failure anomaly. The second, a
mixed-anomaly dataset, includes both tooth-break-failure and
outer-ring-failure anomalies. Each dataset contains 768 000
timestamps, with 537 600 used for training and the remainder
for testing.
3) Experiment Results: Table VII summarizes the performance of all models on two datasets. Focusing on the single

CHEN et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING LIGHTWEIGHT TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR RESOURCE-LIMITED INDUSTRIAL

4445

TABLE VII
RESULTS OF ANOMALY DETECTION

anomaly dataset, PPLAD demonstrates superior anomaly detection performance compared to baseline models. For instance,
PPLAD achieves an ACC score of 0.9961 and an F 1 of 1.
In contrast, COUTA records an ACC score of 0.9581 and an
F 1 of 0.8925, while DCdetector achieves 0.9872 and 0.9648,
respectively. In addition, PPLAD exhibits the shortest detection
time of 2.1 s, significantly outperforming TFMAE (8.1 s) and
DTAAD (384.5 s), highlighting its lightweight nature, and high
ACC. Focusing on the mixed anomaly dataset, similar trends
are observed. PPLAD achieves an ACC score of 0.9929 and an
F 1 of 0.9801, outperforming competing models. Moreover, it
maintains a fast detection time of 1.7 s, considerably faster than
other approaches. In summary, PPLAD presents the efficiency
and effectiveness for anomaly detection in real-world settings.

V. CONCLUSION
This article proposes PPLAD, a privacy-preserving
lightweight anomaly detection model for resource-limited
industrial IoT edge devices. Unlike traditional deep neural
network-based approaches, PPLAD employs tiny learnable
Gaussian distributions to achieve high speed, low-resource
consumption, high ACC, and data privacy-preserving.
1) To preserve data privacy, the data similarity from third
party secure interfaces instead of raw privacy data is used
as the initial input of PPLAD.
2) To achieve high speed and low-resource consumption, a
trainable Gaussian distribution with only one parameter
is set for each timestamp to learn local and global similarities based on the initial similarity.
3) To ensure high ACC, an adversarial learning mechanism
is designed to maximize the discrepancy between local
similarities and global similarities.
To the best of authors’ knowledge, this is the first work to
build an industrial anomaly detection model using only trainable Gaussian distributions. Extensive experiments conducted
on eight public industrial multisensor datasets and three edge
devices (Thick PC, Thin Jetson Xavier NX, Mirco Raspberry Pi
4b) demonstrate that PPLAD outperforms several SOTA deep
models.
Despite its advantages, the performance of PPLAD is sensitive
to the ACC of the initialization similarity. Inaccurate initial similarity can significantly degrade performance. Future research
will focus on developing a mechanism to address this limitation.
In addition, another goal is to design a lightweight optimization

mechanism for the proposed model to automatically select appropriate parameters for different datasets.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Villalonga, G. Beruvides, F. Castaño, and R. E. Haber, “Cloud-based
industrial cyber–physical system for data-driven reasoning: A review and
use case on an Industry 4.0 pilot line,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16,
no. 9, pp. 5975–5984, Sep. 2020.
[2] A. Sgueglia, A. Di Sorbo, C. A. Visaggio, and G. Canfora, “A
systematic literature review of IoT time series anomaly detection solutions,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 134, pp. 170–186,
2022.
[3] S. Lu, J. Lu, K. An, X. Wang, and Q. He, “Edge computing
on IoT for machine signal processing and fault diagnosis: A review,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11093–11116,
Jul. 2023.
[4] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
[5] L. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Xie, L. Chen, and P. Dong, “TMANomaly:
Time-series mutual adversarial networks for industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2263–2271,
Feb. 2024.
[6] L.-r. Yu, Q.-h. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 295, 2024, Art. no. 111849.
[7] C.-Y. A. Lai, F.-K. Sun, Z. Gao, J. H. Lang, and D. Boning, “Nominality
score conditioned time series anomaly detection by point/sequential reconstruction,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, pp. 76637–76655,
2024.
[8] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “Dcdetector: Dual attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly detection,”
in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023,
pp. 3033–3045.
[9] M. Ul Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Anomaly detection in
blockchain networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 289–318, First Quarter 2023.
[10] I. Bala, I. Pindoo, M. M. Mijwil, M. Abotaleb, and W. Yundong, “Ensuring security and privacy in healthcare systems: A review exploring challenges, solutions, future trends, and the practical applications
of artificial intelligence,” Jordan Med. J., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 250–270,
2024.
[11] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, Y. Yang, W. Wang, and K. Yang, “PatchAD: A
lightweight patch-based MLP-mixer for time series anomaly detection,”
2024, arXiv:2401.09793.
[12] G. Sivapalan, K. K. Nundy, S. Dev, B. Cardiff, and D. John, “ANNet:
A lightweight neural network for ECG anomaly detection in iot edge
sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 24–35,
Feb. 2022.
[13] H. Xiang et al., “OptIForest: Optimal isolation forest for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 2379–2387.
[14] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023.

4446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 6, JUNE 2025

[15] H. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Jian, Q. Liao, and Y. Wang, “Calibrated one-class classification for unsupervised time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5723–5736, Nov. 2024.
[16] S. Mehnaz and E. Bertino, “Privacy-preserving real-time anomaly detection using edge computing,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2020,
pp. 469–480.
[17] B. D. D. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Tang, and Y. Zhuang, “FADngs: Federated learning for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
no. 2, pp. 2578–2592, Feb. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3350660.
[18] Q. Zhang, R. Han, G. Xin, C. H. Liu, G. Wang, and L. Y. Chen,
“Lightweight and accurate DNN-based anomaly detection at edge,”
IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2927–2942,
Nov. 2022.
[19] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
[20] J. Pang, X. Pu, and C. Li, “A hybrid algorithm incorporating vector
quantization and one-class support vector machine for industrial anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 8786–8796,
Dec. 2022.
[21] T.-A. Nguyen et al., “Federated PCA on Grassmann manifold for
IoT anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 4456–4471, Oct. 2024.
[22] S. Ma et al., “Privacy-preserving anomaly detection in cloud manufacturing via federated transformer,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 12,
pp. 8977–8987, Dec. 2022.
[23] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, and H. Hawash, “Privacy-preserved generative network for trustworthy anomaly detection in smart grids: A
federated semisupervised approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 995–1005, Jan. 2023.
[24] L. Cui et al., “Security and privacy-enhanced federated learning for
anomaly detection in iot infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18,
no. 5, pp. 3492–3500, May 2022.
[25] C. Zhang, W. Zuo, P. Yang, Y. Li, and X. Wang, “Outsourced privacypreserving anomaly detection in time series of multi-party,” China Commun., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 201–213, 2022.
[26] Y. Fang, J. Xie, Y. Zhao, L. Chen, Y. Gao, and K. Zheng, “Temporalfrequency masked autoencoders for time series anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2024, pp. 1228–1241.

Ming Li received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology from the College of
Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 2023.
She is currently a Lecturer with the School of
Information and Electrical Engineering, Hunan
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan,
China. Her research interests are in the areas
of parameter/state estimation, fault diagnosis,
modeling, decision-making, machine learning.

Lei Chen (Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
degree in computer science and engineering
and the Ph.D. degree in automatic control and
electrical engineering from Hunan University,
Changsha, China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Information and Electrical Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China. His current research
interests include anomaly detection, lightweight
design, time-series analysis, deep learning, information security of industrial control system, and Big Data analysis.

Zhaohua Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the M.Sc. degree in computer science and engineering and the Ph.D. degree in automatic
control and electrical engineering from Hunan
University, Changsha, China, in 2010 and 2012,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor of Automatic Control and Systems with the School of Information
and Electrical Engineering, Hunan University of
Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China. His
current research interests include intelligent information processing and control of wind turbines, computational intelligence and learning algorithm design, machine-learning aided fault
diagnosis and prognosis.

Yepeng Xu received the B.Eng. degree in automation from the Hunan Institute of Science
and Technology, Yueyang, China, in 2023. He is
currently working toward the master’s degree in
control science and engineering with the Hunan
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan,
China.
His current research interests include datadriven anomaly detection, deep learning, and
fault diagnosis.

Bowen Hu received the B.Eng. degree in automation in 2024 from the Hunan University
of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China,
where he is currently working toward the master’s degree in control science and engineering.
His current research interests include datadriven anomaly detection, deep learning, and
fault diagnosis.

Haomiao Guo received the B.Eng. degree in
automation from North China Electric Power
University, Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently working toward the master’s degree in
control science and engineering with the Hunan
University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan,
China.
His current research interests include data
mining, deep learning, and anomaly detection.