8968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

QoS-Enabled Wireless Split Federated Learning:
A Reinforcement Learning and
Optimization Approach
Latif U. Khan , Member, IEEE, Maher Guizani , Member, IEEE, Sami Muhaidat , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Moussa Ayyash , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Federated learning (FL) has various advantages,
including reduced communication overhead and improved privacy protection for situations involving frequent data production.
FL involves training local models on end devices before transferring them to the cloud or network edge for global aggregation.
End-devices can use this aggregated model to enhance their local
models. Until convergence is reached, this iterative procedure is
carried out repeatedly. FL has many benefits, but it also has several drawbacks. Constraints in computing resources are the most
notable. In general, end-devices lack the computational capacity
to learn local models effectively. To solve this issue, the split
FL (SFL) was developed. However, wireless resource limitations
and uncertainty also make SFL difficult to work. For SFL at
the network edge, we consider. a joint task-offloading, resource
allocation, and end-devices computing resources optimization
problem. Moreover, we consider the quality of service (QoS)
constraint in terms of latency for SFL. Because our problem
involves both continuous and binary variables, it is a mixedinteger non-linear programming problem and is challenging to
solve. We provide a solution based on optimization and a double
deep Q-network (DDQN) with dueling. We use comprehensive
simulations to validate the proposed approach. Our proposed
scheme, namely, DDQN+dueling, outperforms traditional DDQNbased schemes in terms of faster convergence and attaining QoS
for various configurations.
Index Terms—Federated learning, split federated learning,
double deep Q-network, resource-constrained consumer electronic devices.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N ORDER to achieve superior privacy-aware machine
learning for a variety of applications, federated learning (FL) has recently been the subject of substantial
research [1], [2], [3]. In FL, devices run local models iteratively and migrate their resultant local model to the nearby
edge or remote cloud, depending on the configuration, to

I

Received 31 December 2024; revised 27 April 2025; accepted 13 May 2025.
Date of publication 8 July 2025; date of current version 7 November 2025.
(Corresponding author: Latif U. Khan.)
Latif U. Khan is with the Department of Computer Science and
Information Technology, Abu Dhabi University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail:
latif.u.khan2@gmail.com; latif.khan@adu.ac.ae)).
Maher Guizani is with the Computer Science and Engineering Department,
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019 USA.
Sami Muhaidat is with the 6G Research Center, Khalifa University, Abu
Dhabi, UAE.
Moussa Ayyash is with the Department of CIMST, Chicago State
University, Chicago, IL 60628 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3587176

participate in the aggregation process. At the edge or cloud,
aggregation of local models from various nodes happens. Next
to aggregation, the global model obtained in the aggregation
process is shared with end-devices to further update their
local models. This process takes place iteratively until a
convergence is attained. FL is significant in wireless systems
primarily for two reasons. These include improved privacy
protection and effective communication learning for situations
where data generation occurs often (autonomous cars, for
example, create 40, 000 gigaoctet of data every day). As a
result, sending regularly generated data to the cloud under
these situations is quite difficult. FL works well in these
kinds of situations. FL has limitations, even though it makes
numerous advantages possible. Due to limited computational
resources, training local FL models at end devices is difficult.
Furthermore, it is difficult and entails numerous limitations
to share learning updates over a wireless channel. The FL
learning process will become less effective as a result of these
deficiencies.
In order to overcome the difficulty of computing resource
constraints, split FL (SFL) was introduced in [4]. In [4], split
FL (SFL) was introduced as a solution to the computing
resources constraint problem in FL. The performance of
SFL and FL over wireless networks was evaluated in the
work in [5]. An additional study in [6] suggested a hybrid
SFL and FL architecture. For their framework, they modeled wireless communication, and they used the simulation
findings to do important analysis. A particular federated
split learning architecture was designed and results were
given in the study in [7]. The use of federated learning,
split learning, and transfer learning for intelligent transportation system applications was presented by Otoum et al.
in [8]. We propose a novel dueling-based double deep Qnetwork for effective task-offloading and resource allocation
in SFL over wireless networks, which differs from the works
in [5], [6], [7], [8]. The summary of our contributions are
as follows:
• Joint task offloading and resource allocation framework:
We present a joint task offloading and resource allocation
framework for SFL over wireless networks with computing resource-constrained devices. This framework will
enable us to partially compute the SFL model at the enddevices and then, offload the rest of the learning task to
the network edge.

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH

•

QoS-aware problem formulation: We design a cost function that counts for both latency and energy. Moreover, we
formulate a problem whose objective is to minimize the
cost function via optimizing the local computing resource
variable, task offloading and resource allocation, and edge
computing resource allocation. We introduced a QoS
constraint in our problem formulation. This constraint
is to ensure that latency in sharing of learning updates
between the end-devices and edge servers should not
exceed the maximum threshold.
• Dueling-enabled DDQN for cost optimization of SFL:
Our problem has an NP-hard nature for many enddevices and edge servers. Therefore, it is very challenging
for us to use directly conventional convex optimization
techniques. Due to these limitations, we propose a
solution based on double deep Q-network and convex optimization. For optimizing end-devices and edge
servers computing resource, we use convex optimizers.
On the other hand, for task offloading and resource allocation, we use DDQN. Although DDQN performs well for
many scenarios, it might not be very stable and have good
performance for highly dynamic scenarios. Therefore, we
added the concept of dueling in DDQN to further improve
its performance. Our dueling-based DDQN scheme offers
significant performance improvement.
• Results: Finally, for a proof of concept, we present
extensive results to support our idea of QoS-aware SFL.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
Many works [1], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]
considered SFL. An overview of recent works is given in
Table I. The work in [5] considered both split learning and
federated learning. Based on their analysis, they proposed
SFL and analyzed it in detail. They validated their results
for MNIST, CIFAR-10, FMNIST, and HAM10000 datasets.
Another work [6] proposed a scheme, namely, hybrid SL
and FL that uses both SL and distributed learning over wireless networks. They formulated an optimization problem and
provided extensive convergence analysis. Finally, simulation
results were provided for various settings. The work in [7]
extensively studied both SFL and FL. Moreover, they provided
extensive simulation results. The work in [8] proposed the use
of SFL for intrusion detection system for intelligent transportation system. They used Canadian Institute of Cybersecurity
Intrusion Detection System (CICIDS2017) dataset for their
evaluation. According their analysis, their proposed scheme
achieved a good accuracy and suitable for use in end-devices
with resource constraints in IoT systems. Another work [9]
proposed the framework, namely, RingSFL. RingSFL is based
on split mechanism for better addressing client heterogeneity.
In contrast to vanilla FL, where a local model is learned by
an end-device, in RingSFL, a ring topology is formed. In a
ring topology, the end-devices communicate with the server
as well as with each other. Finally, the authors presented
extensive simulation results for validating their proposal. The
work in [1] proposed a hierarchical SFL that improves the
convergence speed but at the cost of communication resources.

8969

In detail, the authors presented a framework along with a
sequence diagram for flow of the process. They defined a
cost function that accounts for both latency and energy. They
optimized many parameters to minimize the formulated cost.
These parameters are task offloading, resource allocation,
end-devices computing resource management, transmit power
allocation, and relative local accuracy. They used a block
successive upper-bound minimization function for solution due
to its power nature of solving non-convex problems. Moreover,
they provided extensive convergence analysis. Another work
in [10] used multi-agent DRL for model partitioning and
aggregation control. The work in [11] increased the efficiency
of SFL. The work in [12] considered resource scheduling
and SFL. Different, as shown in Table I), from the works
in [1], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], our work
focuses on the wireless communication aspect (i.e., specially
we jointly consider task-offloading, resource allocation, and
computing resource optimization) of SFL. In SFL, there will
be many rounds of communications between devices and the
edge servers. We will formulate a problem to minimize the
training cost while satisfying the QoS in terms of latency.
The latency should not be more than the maximum allowed
threshold.
On the other hand, there are many works [13], [14],
[15], [16], [17] on the use deep reinforcement learning for
resource allocation and association in wireless networks.
Xiong et al. in [13] proposed the use of deep reinforcement learning for resource allocation in IoT edge computing
system. Their main objective is to minimize the long-term
weighted sum of completion time of jobs. Specifically, they
use deep Q-network with multiple replay memories. Another
work [14] used deep reinforcement learning for resource
allocation in blockchain-based resource allocation. The work
in [15] considered multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
for wireless networks resource management. They formulated
a problem to maximize the objective function by optimizing
users scheduling and power control decisions. Finally, they
provided extensive numerical results. The work in [16] considered deep reinforcement learning for resource allocation
in mobile edge networks. A cost function accounting for
the latency was defined. Their formulated problem aimed at
minimizing the cost function subject to many constraints. They
proposed a scheme using deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) for resource management to minimize the long term
reward. Similar to the previous works, the work in [17]
proposed a Q-value iteration based reinforcement learning for
resource management. Based on the works [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17], it evident that we can use reinforcement learning
for resource allocation and task offloading.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Fig. 1 illustrates a system of consumer electronics devices
with limited resources. In our system, there are devices with
limited computational power and thus they seem difficult
to train local FL model. These devices are represented by
the set S of S devices. There is a local dataset associated
with each device s. These local datasets are denoted by a

8970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORKS W ITH P ROPOSED W ORK

Fig. 1.

Split federated learning system model.

set Bs , ∀s ∈ S. Every device s has Bs data points. These
devices are aimed at participating in the learning process.
However, they have limited computing resources. Therefore,
these devices will compute a portion of the local model and
request the edge servers to learn their remaining models. There
is a set L of L edge servers for serving end-users. Note
that both end-devices and edge servers have limitations in
terms of computing resources. End-devices cannot completely
learn local models, therefore, they learn a part of their models
and share the partially learning model with the edge server.
The edge server will further learn the partial model. This is

the concept that is used by SFL. Even though SFL makes
a lot of advantages feasible, end devices and edge servers
must allocate wireless and computational resources effectively.
Furthermore, the devices involved in SFL must effectively
transfer their tasks to the edge servers. Here, first, wireless
SFL model is discussed.
A. Wireless SFL Model
In our system, a set S of S resource-constrained consumer electronics devices want to take part in a global

KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF THE K EY N OTATIONS

8971

power of all devices should not be greater than ℘MAX , the
upper limit.
S


℘s ≤ ℘MAX .

(4)

s=1

In addition to computing the partial local model, it is shared
with the edge server, which performs the remaining local
model computation. There are two methods for determining
the partly remaining local model at the network edge. One
way is to provide labels at the network edge and the other
way is to share back the data to end-devices for computing
the loss function using labels. In this work, we assume the
output labels are available at the network edge. After the edge
servers receive a partial local model, further computation takes
place at the network edge. It will share the gradients with the
devices in addition to computing at the edge. We take into
consideration an orthogonal frequency division multiple access
(OFDMA) for communication between end-devices and edge
servers. Since the availability of communication resources is
limited, it makes sense for SFL devices to reuse the resources
that are currently in use by cellular users. We can calculate
the transmission latency as:
⎞
⎛
⎜
strans (κ, υ) = ⎝

κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os
⎟

 ⎠, ∀s ∈ S, (5)
ps hs,l

Tr log2 1 +
p h +N 2


c∈C c c,b

model’s learning process. Due to limitations in communication
resources, only the set S of S will be included in the
learning process among S of S . Because of limitations in
computing power, each device learns a partial local model.
Let Ts (cs , bs , ts )∀s ∈ S be the learning task, where cs and bs
represent the computational resources required for learning a
specific local model for a single data point and entire local
dataset points, respectively. The local latency in computing
a partial model for a specific local model architecture is
determined by:
local
(℘) =
s

cs bs
, ∀s ∈ S,
℘s

(1)

where the computational resource allocated to device s is indicated by ℘s . Increasing local computing resources can lower
latency, but at the expense of high local energy consumption
(i.e., energy is proportional to the square of the device’s
running frequency)
local
(℘) = αs cs bs ℘s2 , ∀s ∈ S,
s

(2)

where αs represents device s’s effective capacitance coefficient. However, the processing resources of the local device
should adhere to the limitations.
℘min ≤ ℘s ≤ ℘max , ∀s ∈ S,

where Tr and Os are the bandwidth of resource block and
learning data overhead, respectively. As we are reusing the
resource blocks, therefore,
there will be an interference which

can be given by c∈C pc hc,b . Meanwhile, the noise power is
given by No2 . υ(s,r) and κ(s,l) are resource allocation and task
offloading variables, respectively. The value of task offloading
variable κ(s,l) = 1, when the task is offloaded to the edge
server and κ(s,l) = 0, vice versa. Similar to the task offloading
variable, the resource allocation variable υ(s,r) = 1 if the
resource block r is allocated to device s and υ(s,r) = 0,
vice versa. In our system, every edge server has a certain
capacity to serve end-users/end-devices. Such a limitation
can be given by:
S


κs,l ≤ κsmax , ∀l ∈ L,

(6)

s=1

where the maximum limit of serving by edge server can be
given by κsmax . Furthermore, the task of a single device should
be offloaded to a single edge server.
L


κs,l ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S,

(7)

l=1

On the other hand, there are limited communication
resources. Therefore, a resource block should not be assigned
to more than one device.
R


(3)

where the minimum and maximum limits are indicated by
℘min and ℘max , respectively. However, the total computing

o

υs,r ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S.

(8)

r=1

For sending learning updates to the edge servers, wireless
resource blocks are necessary. To send learning updates, the

8972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

number of resource blocks needed depends on the size of the
learning data, which is determined by the complexity of the
end-device model architecture. For an end-device, we employ
a single resource block [18].
S


υs,r ≤ 1, ∀r ∈ R.
⎞

κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os
⎟


 ⎠ps ,
ps hs,l

Tr log2 1 +
p h +N 2
c∈C c c,b

o

∀s ∈ S, (10)

After computation, a small cell base station shares the local
model with the remote cloud. The following equation can
be used to determine the number of rounds between the end
devices and the edge servers:
log(1/ε)
,
(11)
1−θ
where the local dataset dependent constant is . The relative
local accuracy is represented by θ . The interpretation of θ
differs from that of the local accuracy. In contrast to greater
values, lower values of θ are preferred, and vice versa. The
global accuracy is ε. As can be seen from (11), the global
rounds are dependent on θ ; that is, more global rounds will
often occur when θ is higher, and vice versa. Furthermore,
the maximum delay should not be exceeded by the maximum
threshold.
⎞
⎛
Ig (ε, θ ) =

κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os
⎟


 ⎠ ≤ φmax ,
ps hs,l
Tr log2 1 +  p h +N 2
c∈C c c,b

o

∀s ∈ ∫, r ∈ R.

(12)

Equation (12) is the QoS constraint that ensures that delay
should not be more than the maximum threshold. Therefore,
there is a need for efficient task-offloading and resource
allocation. Next, we present our problem formulation.
B. Problem Formulation
The first step in formulating a problem is to determine an
objective function. The cost of training the SFL model serves
as our goal function. In our situation, we write the objective
function taking into account both energy and delay. Initially,
we write energy consumption as follows: [1]:
total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) =

S
S


local
(1 + θ )strans (κ, υ) +
(℘)
s

S
S


local
(1 + θ )strans (κ, υ) +
(℘),
s
s=1

s=1

(13)
The concept of θ is used in (13), to represent how relative
local accuracy affects energy cost. Larger θ values will result
in larger costs, and vice versa. We now write the overall delay
as follows:
total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) =

S

s=1

strans (κ, υ) +

s=1

(15)

(9)

s=1

⎜
⎝

total (κ, υ, ℘, θ ) =

s=1

Now, write the transmission energy as:
⎛
⎜
strans (κ, υ) = ⎝

Similarly for (13), one can rewrite (14) as:

S

s=1

local
(℘)
s

(14)

It is evident from (15) that the cost in terms of latency
will increase with an increase in relative local accuracy. There
are many ways to improve the relative local accuracy. One is
to increase the number of local iterations. Additionally, one
can use more complex local model. Generally, both of these
approaches will enhance the performance but not necessary.
Also, for both of the aforementioned schemes, they need
additional computing resources. Now, we write the overall
cost as:

C(κ, υ, ℘, θ ) = βtotal + (1 − β)total ,

(16)

where β is the scaling constant, which can be used to scale
the energy and delay proportion when computing the cost
of learning the SFL model. The objective of our problem
formulation is to reduce the total cost of learning the SFL
model.
P − M : minimize C(κ, υ, ℘, θ )
κ,υ,℘,θ

subject to:
(3), (4), (6)−(9), (12).

(17)

The problem as formulated is a MINLP problem. Constraint
(3) denotes that the local computing resources should follow
the lower and upper limits. Equation (4) ensures that the total
computing resources should not be more than the maximum
available computing for all end-devices. Equation (6) ensures
the maximum possible number of end-devices served by edge
server. Equation (7) ensures a single device should be associated
with only one edge server. Equation (8) limits the allocation
of a maximum of single resource block to a single device.
Equation (12) is about the QoS in terms of latency. This limits the
delay of all devices should not exceed the maximum threshold
and thus ensure a sufficient QoS while learning SFL model.
The problem as posed is hard to solve directly. Furthermore,
standard optimization strategies are not applicable. As a result,
as discussed in the following section, we shall employ a
decomposition-based scheme.
IV. P ROPOSED O PTIMIZATION AND M ULTI -AGENT
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING S OLUTION
The formulated problem P-M is very hard to solve
using conventional convex optimization. The reason for this
complexity lies in the presence of both continuous (i.e.,
local computing resource variable) and binary variables (i.e.,
resource allocation and task offloading variables). Therefore,
we will use a decomposition scheme. This scheme will allow
us to separately solve local computing resource optimization
and joint resource allocation and task offloading. First, we
solve the local computing problem.

KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH

8973

A. Devices Computing Resource Allocation Problem
In this section, we discuss our local computing resource
allocation problem. One can write the local computing
optimization problem as follows:
P − DR : minimize C(℘)

(18a)

℘

subject to:
℘min ≤ ℘s ≤ ℘max , ∀s ∈ S,
S

℘s ≤ ℘MAX .

(18b)
(18c)

s=1

The goal of problem P-DR is to reduce the latency of
end devices when calculating partial local models. In problem
P-DR, we have one continuous variable ℘. The nature of the
formulated problem is convex. To prove the convexity, we can
check the objective function and the constraints. If we take
the twice derivative of the objective function and then check
it for its range of values for possible inputs. For all inputs, the
range of the twice derivative of the objective function will be
greater than or equal to 0. Based on this, we can say that the
objective function is convex. Meanwhile, the constraints are
linear inequality constraints. Therefore, one can say that the
problem is a convex optimization problem and can be solved
using a convex optimizer as shown in Fig. 3.
B. Joint Task-Offloading and Resource Allocation Problem
In this section, we present a joint task offloading and
resource allocation problem as follows:
P − TR : minimize C(κ, υ)

(19a)

κ,υ

subject to:
S


κs,l ≤ κsmax , ∀l ∈ L,

(19b)

κs,l ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S,

(19c)

s=1
L

l=1
R


υs,r ≤ 1, ∀s ∈ S,

(19d)

υs,r ≤ 1, ∀r ∈ R,

(19e)

s=1
s,r ≤ φmax , ∀s ∈ ∫, r ∈ R,

⎛
where

s,r

=

⎝

Deployment of agents and CVX optimizers.

has a significant computational complexity. Therefore, we
will use alternate scheme, i.e., reinforcement learning based
scheme.
To solve problem P-TR, we will use multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning (MARL), whose deployment is shown
in Fig. 2. Various agents are deployed at the end-devices
involved in SFL. The goal of MARL is to maximize the longterm reward. In problem P-TR, we want to minimize the cost
function. On the other hand, MARL is based on maximizing
the long-term reward. Therefore, we write the reward function
as s = C1 . In MARL, the long-term reward is the summation
of the instantaneous rewards of various devices.
s =

T−1


γ t s (t)

(20)

t=0

r=1
S


Fig. 2.

κs,l ∈ {0, 1}, υ ∈ {0, 1},
⎞
κ(s,l) υ(s,r) Os
Tr log2 1+ 

ps hs,l

2
c∈C pc hc,b +No

⎠.

(19f)
(19g)

Convex

optimization strategies are unable to solve the combinatorial
problem P-TR. A strategy based on relaxation and
decomposition can be used to solve P-TR [19]. Approximation
errors in the conversion of binary task-offloading and resource
allocation variables into continuous and then back to binary
variables are an inherent limitation of this approach. Using an
exhaustive search technique is another method to get around
this limitation [20]. The exhaustive search approach, however,

where γ t denotes the discount rate that shows the weight
of future reward. For γ t = 0, it is evident that we are
only considering a current reward without future rewards. For
γ t ≤ 1, it evident that the future rewards less important
compared to previous rewards in computing the long-term
reward and vice versa. For using MARL, there is a need
for formulation as a stochastic game. In our system, all the
users want to maximize their long-term reward by optimizing
task offloading and resource allocation. At a certain time t,
the reward is determined by the current state of the agent
itself and other agents states. For stochastic game formulation
S, G, A, P,  [21], we can write as follows:
• S denotes the set of S devices.
• G denotes the all possible states set.
• As denotes the action of device s. Furthermore,
→
the joint action vector can be given by −
a =
T
(a1 , a2 , a3 , . . . , aS ) ∈ ×s As .
• P denotes the state transition probability.
• s is the reward function of device s.

8974

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Proposed solution approach.

For our system, the end-devices have two kinds of tasks:
(a) selecting an edge server for task offloading and (b) resource
block selection. Therefore, the action space can be written as:
arls (t) = {κs,l (t), υs,r (t)}.

(21)

where κs,l (t) ∈ {0, 1}, κs,l (t) ∈ {κs,0 (t), κs,2 (t), . . . , κs,L−1 (t)}
and υs,r (t) ∈ {0, 1}, υs,r (t) ∈ {υs,0 (t), υs,1 (t), . . . , υs,R−1 (t)}.
The total states can be given by the product LR.
At a certain time t for a particular device s, the
actions of other devices are denoted by A−s (t) =
{arl1 (t), . . . , arls−1 (t), arls+1 (t), . . . , arls (t)}. It should be noted
that the immediate reward s (t) = (g, As , A−s ) of every
device s is dependent on its action As at the moment and the
actions of other devices A−s . Additionally, the stability of the
stochastic game can be determined using Nash Equilibrium. A
Nash Equilibrium is said to be achieved using the following:

 r r∗ 

r∗
r∗
(22)
 g, ar∗
ls , a−ls ≥  g, als , a−ls , ∀als ∈ A
We now model our stochastic game using a finite-state Markov
decision process (MDP). The device reward is dependent upon
the other device’s actions and its current state. As a result,
the Markov property is followed by the process. Lets consider
S, G, A, P,  to determine the MDP. Our solution should
be based on maximizing the reward. There are two ways to
select a reward for our work. One way is the choose the
throughput. Another way could be to take the reciprocal of
the cost function. Similar to many works on reinforcement
learning, one can use the C1 as a reward. In a typical stochastic
environment, we aim to learn a policy πs∗ : G → As . The

aim of this policy πs∗ : G → As is to maximize the long-term
rewards of agents. In MARL, device share their state space
using message passing using back haul communication links
or direct wireless links. Maximizing the value-state function
Vi (g, πs , π−s ) of every UE in every state yields the optimal
policy πs∗ :
Vs (g, πs , π−s ) = E

T−1






γ s (g(t), πs (t), π−s (t))  g(0) = g ,
t

t=0

(23)
where the expectation over all potential trajectories produced
by the joint policies πs and π−s is E. Where π−s =
(π1 , π2 , .., πs−1 , πs+1 , . . . , πS ) indicates the strategies of the
agents other than s. The discount factor is given by γ . The
value function while considering the Markov property can be
given by:
Vs (g, πs , π−s ) = us (g, πs , π−s )



+γ
Pgg (πs , π−s )Vs g , πs , π−s , (24)
g ∈G

where Pgg (πs , π−s ) is the state transition probability and
us (gt , πs , π−s ) = E[s (g, πs , π−s )]. For πs , the following
condition should be met if NE exists:




∗
∗
≥ Vs g, πs , π−s
,
Vs g, πs∗ , π−s

∀g ∈ G.

(25)

KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH

For mixed-strategy equilibrium based finite games, there
exist a Nash equilibrium to satisfy the following Bellman
optimality:


∗
Vi∗ (g, πs , π−s ) = Vi g, πs∗ , π−s






∗
∗
= max us g, as , π−s
+γ
Pgg as , π−s
ai ∈Ai

g ∈G



∗


Vs g , πs∗ , π−s .

(26)

g ∈G

∗ ) = max
∗
where Vs (g , πs∗ , π−s
as ∈As Qs (g, as ). Rewrite (25) as
follows:



∗
+γ
Vi (g, as , π−s ) = us g, as , π−s
g ∈G





∗
Pgg as , π−s
max Q∗s g , as .
as ∈As

(28)

Obtaining an information about the transition probability
(i.e., Pgg ) is very challenging. To address this difficulty, the
Q-value function Q∗s (g, as ) is computed for Q-learning as:
Qs (g, as ) = Qs (g, as ) + δ{us (gt , as , π−s )


+ γ max Qs g , as − Qs (g, as )},

(29)

where the learning rate, represented by δ, aids in calculating
the Q value. For fast convergence, the value of δ needs
to be chosen carefully. In this work,  greedy strategy is
considered. The action with the highest reward is chosen
with a probability of 1 − , whereas the random action is
chosen with a probability of . Small state and action spaces
are better suited for the previously mentioned Q-learning
approach. Large action spaces are not a good fit for Q-learning.
To overcome this challenge, one can apply Deep Q-network
(DQN). DQN is based on two neural networks: (a) the target
network and (b) the online network. In the training process, an
online network is frequently updated. Such frequent updating
of the online network might result in instability. To cater
for this, DQN uses a target network, which is updated less
frequently to improve the stability. The following loss function
is used to update the Q-network.

2 
DQN
, (30)
− Qs (g, as ; θ )
Ls (θ ) = Eg,as ,us (g,as ),g ys
where ys
= us (g, as ) + γ maxas ∈As Qs (g as ; θ − ).
−
θ denotes the weights of the target network. For selecting an
action as , online network Qs (g, as ; θ ) is utilized. The weights
of the online network are updated frequently. This frequent
update of the weights might result in unstable performance. To
address this, one can use periodic updates in the target network
to bring more stability. Different transitions are stored in
DQN

memory. In addition to current values, previous values are also
used in computation for good results and faster convergence.
As DQN uses both online and target networks for performance
enhancement, there are still some challenges in terms of over
optimistic estimation. To address this, one can use the concept
of Double DQN. DDQN is based on a different expression for
DQN
ys .


yDDQN
= us (g, as ) + γ Qs g , max Qs g as ; θ ; θ − . (31)
s
as ∈As

Solving the above MDP (i.e., 26) can be performed using
Q-learning which is based on finding the optimal Q-value
function, i.e., Q∗i (g, ai ).


∗
Q∗s (g, as ) = us gt , as , π−s


   ∗ ∗ 
∗
Vi g , πs , π−s , (27)
Pgg as , π−s
+γ

as ∈As

8975

DDQN determines the optimal value Qs (g, as ; θ ) using
both the target network and the online network. After that,
DDQN
is obtained using the discount factor and current
the ys
reward. Fig. 3 shows the overview of the proposed solution
approach. Although DDQN results in better performance,
one can use the concept of dueling to further improve the
performance of DDQN [21]. For dueling, one can split the
last layer of DDQN network into two networks to yield
advantage function and value function. These advantage and
value functions are used to compute the Q-value. Now, we
discuss the complexity of the proposed scheme. Our proposed
scheme uses convex optimization and DDQN with dueling.
The complexity of convex optimization is reasonable, and
it converges within reasonable iterations [22]. On the other
hand, in DDQN, mainly the complexity lies in the two
neural networks: (a) online network and (b) target network.
In our case, we use fully connected neural networks whose
complexity is low. Therefore, overall, we can say that our
proposed scheme has low complexity.
V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Simulation Settings
For simulations, we consider different number of consumer electronic devices generated randomly for various
runs. Meanwhile, the locations of the edge servers are kept
fixed. All the values in our analysis are computed using an
average of multiple runs (e.g., 30). The channel bandwidth
is taken as 180KHz. Transmit power ranges between 30dBm
and 50dBM for various runs. For path loss, we consider
a free space path loss model. The noise power density is
considered −174dBm/Hz. Various learning rates (i.e., δ =
0.0001, 0.001, 0.00001) are used for analysis. The number of
agents used for various runs and settings are 10, 15, and 20.
Our neural network consists of an input layer, two hidden
layers, and an output layer. Furthermore, for DDQN+dueling,
the last layer is split into two network, i.e., the value function
and the advantage function. These two values are then used
to compute the Q value. The number of resource blocks
considered in a system are equal to the number of agents
considered in the system.
B. Simulation Results
For a fair comparison, we consider various existing baselines as follows:

8976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 4. (a) Cumulative reward vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling, (b) cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling, and (c) steps needed to
reach QoS for various learning rates.

Fig. 5. (a) steps needed to reach QoS for various number of agents, (b) reward vs. episodes for various learning rates, (c) cost vs. episodes for various
learning rates.

Fig. 6. (a) Reward vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling using various existing baselines, (b) cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling using
various existing baselines, (c) cost vs. end-devices for fixed number of edge servers.

•

DDQN+Dueling: This refers to the proposed scheme that
consider dueling along with DDQN for performing joint
resource allocation and task offloading.
• DDQN: This refers to the proposed scheme that uses
DDQN for joint resource allocation and task-offloading.
• DDQN-Resource Allocation [23]: In this baseline,
resource allocation is performed using DDQN, whereas
the task-offloading is considered fixed.
• DDQN-Task-offloading [24]: In this baseline, taskoffloading is performed using DDQN, whereas the
resource allocation is considered fixed.
• DDQN-Task-offloading+Resource allocation [21]: In this
baseline, both task offloading and resource allocations are
performed using DDQN.
• Convex optimization [22]: This proposed scheme refers
to the use of convex optimization for local computing
resource optimization.
• Equal allocation: This baseline refers to the use of equal
computing resources for end-devices [25].

Fig. 4a shows the cumulative reward vs. episodes for DDQN
and DDQN+dueling schemes. For Figs. 4a and 4b, we
use 20 iterations within a single episode. In the case of
DDQN+dueling, the convergence is fast. Moreover, it is
apparent that DDQN+dueling outperforms DDQN in terms of
reward. The main reason for this performance enhancement
is the stable nature of the DDQN+dueling which divides
the last layer by two networks to compute the Q-value,
and thus more improved performance. Fig. 4b shows the
cost vs. episodes for DDQN and DDQN+dueling. Similar to
Fig. 4a, Fig. 4b illustrates that DDQN+dueling outperforms
DDQN. The performance in terms of cost converges fast
for DDQN+dueling. On the other hand, Fig. 4c and Fig. 5a
illustrate the performance of various baselines for attaining
a QoS. From Fig. 4c, it is clear that DDQN+dueling attains
the QoS in terms of latency very fast compared to DDQN
for various learning rates. We use a maximum of 100 steps
in every episode. It is evident from both Fig. 4c and Fig. 5a
that DDQN needs more steps compared to DDQN+dueling

KHAN et al.: QoS-ENABLED WIRELESS SFL: A REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND OPTIMIZATION APPROACH

8977

The cumulative reward is high for more number of agents (i.e.,
90 agents). The reason for this high reward lies in the fact that
more agents will result in high cumulative reward.
VI. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 7.

Reward vs. episodes for various agents for proposed scheme.

to reach QoS by all devices. For learning rate 0.001, both
DDQN and DDQN+dueling perform better. Fig. 5a shows
that DDQN+dueling outperforms DDQN for different number
of agents. For 15 agents, the number of steps is typically
higher compared to 10 agents. The reason for this lies in
the fact that for more agents, the steps will be generally
high. Furthermore, the reason for improved performance of
DDQN+dueling compared to DDQN is the consideration of
resource allocation, task-offloading and dueling.
Now, we study the effect of variations in learning rate
on the performance of DDQN and DDQN+dueling. Figs. 5b
shows reward vs. episodes for various learning rates. Note
here that the steps used in every episode are 20. We tested for
learning rates, 0.001, 0.0001, and 0.00001. For the learning
rate 0.00001, the performance is worst. This is because of the
fact that neural networks are not learning fast and might stuck
in local maxima. Therefore, there is a need for an effective
learning rate. For learning rate 0.001, the performance is
better and both DDQN and DDQN+dueling achieve faster
convergence. If we compare both DDQN and DDQN+dueling,
DDQN+dueling achieves faster. Similar to Fig. 5b, Fig. 5c
shows the cost vs. episodes for various learning rates using
DDQN and DDQN+dueling. This Fig. 5c shows a similar
trend of performance to Fig. 5b.
Now, we compare our proposed DDQN+dueling scheme
with many existing baselines for a fair comparison. Fig. 6a
shows the reward vs. episodes for different baselines. Among
all (i.e., DDQN-resource allocation, DDQN-task-offloading,
DDQN-task-offloading+resource allocation, DDQN+dueling),
DDQN+dueling outperforms and achieves faster convergence. Fig. 6b shows cost vs. episodes for various schemes.
Fig. 6b shows the same performance trend as Fig. 6a. Both
Figs. 6a and 6b show that the proposed scheme has a better
performance compared to all schemes, and thus a promising
scheme. Finally, we evaluate the performance of convex
optimization and equal computing resource allocation for a
various number of devices. We use 30, 36, 42, and 48 number
of devices for fixed 6 edge servers. For all devices (i.e.,
30, 36, 42, and 48), the proposed convex optimization scheme
outperforms the equal allocation scheme. Finally, we study
the scalability (i.e., performance of proposed scheme for high
number of agents) in Fig. 7. It is evident that proposed scheme
has a stable performance for an increase in number of agents.

In this paper, we have considered SFL and formulated a
cost optimization problem. We considered a QoS constraint for
learning in terms of latency to ensure SFL with low latency.
Our optimization is based on minimizing the cost of SFL. A
decomposition-based scheme is used to solve the formulated
problem. The end devices computing resource allocation
problem is solved using a convex optimizer, whereas the joint
task-offloading and resource allocation problems are solved
using DDQN+dueling. We proposed the use of DDQN for
joint task-offloading and resource allocation. Although DDQN
performs well, we added the concept of dueling to further
improve the performance so as to achieve faster convergence.
From this work, we concluded that our DDQN+dueling-based
solution can be extended to many applications/problems.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. U. Khan, M. Guizani, A. Al-Fuqaha, C. S. Hong, D. Niyato, and
Z. Han, “A joint communication and learning framework for hierarchical
split federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 268–282, Jan. 2024.
[2] L. U. Khan, A. Elhagry, M. Guizani, and A. El Saddik, “Edge intelligence empowered vehicular metaverse: Key design aspects and future
directions,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 120–126,
Jan. 2024.
[3] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
“Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
[4] C. Thapa, P. C. M. Arachchige, S. Camtepe, and L. Sun, “Splitfed:
When federated learning meets split learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, pp. 8485–8493.
[5] Y. Gao et al., “End-to-end evaluation of federated learning and split
learning for Internet of Things,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Rel. Distrib. Syst.
(SRDS), Shanghai, China, 2020, pp. 91–100.
[6] X. Liu, Y. Deng, and T. Mahmoodi, “Wireless distributed learning: A
new hybrid split and federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2650–2665, Apr. 2022.
[7] V. Turina, Z. Zhang, F. Esposito, and I. Matta, “Federated or split? A
performance and privacy analysis of hybrid split and federated learning
architectures,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. (CLOUD),
2021, pp. 250–260.
[8] S. Otoum, N. Guizani, and H. Mouftah, “On the feasibility of split
learning, transfer learning and federated learning for preserving security
in its systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 7462–7470, Jul. 2023.
[9] J. Shen et al., “RingSFL: An adaptive split federated learning towards
taming client heterogeneity,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 5462–5478, May 2024.
[10] W. Fan, P. Chen, X. Chun, and Y. Liu, “Madrl-based model partitioning, aggregation control, and resource allocation for cloud-edge-device
collaborative split federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 5324–5341, Jun. 2025.
[11] G. Zhu, Y. Deng, X. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Fang, and T. F. Wong,
“ESFL: Efficient split federated learning over resource-constrained
heterogeneous wireless devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 16,
pp. 27153–27166, Aug. 2024.
[12] S. T. Ahmed, V. V. Kumar, and J. Jeong, “Heterogeneous workload based
consumer resource recommendation model for smart cities: Ehealth
edge–cloud connectivity using federated split learning,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4187–4196, Feb. 2024.
[13] X. Xiong, K. Zheng, L. Lei, and L. Hou, “Resource allocation based
on deep reinforcement learning in IoT edge computing,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1133–1146, Jun. 2020.

8978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 3, AUGUST 2025

[14] Y. He, Y. Wang, C. Qiu, Q. Lin, J. Li, and Z. Ming, “Blockchain-based
edge computing resource allocation in IoT: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2226–2237,
Feb. 2021.
[15] N. Naderializadeh, J. J. Sydir, M. Simsek, and H. Nikopour, “Resource
management in wireless networks via multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 6,
pp. 3507–3523, Jun. 2021.
[16] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Chen, and L. Zhao, “Deep
reinforcement learning-based dynamic resource management for mobile
edge computing in Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4925–4934, Jul. 2020.
[17] F. Tang, Y. Zhou, and N. Kato, “Deep reinforcement learning for
dynamic uplink/downlink resource allocation in high mobility 5G
HetNet,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2773–2782,
Dec. 2020.
[18] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A joint
learning and communications framework for federated learning over
wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 269–283, Jan. 2021.
[19] R. S. Klein, H. Luss, and U. G. Rothblum, “Relaxation-based algorithms
for minimax optimization problems with resource allocation applications,” Math. Program., vol. 64, pp. 337–363, Mar. 1994.
[20] J. Nievergelt, “Exhaustive search, combinatorial optimization and enumeration: Exploring the potential of raw computing power,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Current Trends Theory Pract. Comput. Sci., 2000, pp. 18–35.
[21] N. Zhao, Y.-C. Liang, D. Niyato, Y. Pei, M. Wu, and Y. Jiang, “Deep
reinforcement learning for user association and resource allocation
in heterogeneous cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 5141–5152, Nov. 2019.
[22] S. P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[23] A. Iqbal, M.-L. Tham, and Y. C. Chang, “Double deep Q-network-based
energy-efficient resource allocation in cloud radio access network,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 20440–20449, 2021.
[24] H. Zhai, X. Zhou, H. Zhang, and D. Yuan, “Delay minimization in hybrid
edge computing networks: A DDQN-based task offloading approach,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15098–15108, Oct. 2024.
[25] L. U. Khan, M. Guizani, I. Yaqoob, A. Al-Fuqaha, A. Erbad, and
Z. Han, “Network virtualization empowered metaverse: A hierarchical
matching approach,” Techrxiv, Preprints, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.24049998.v1

Latif U. Khan (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree (with Distinction) in electrical engineering
from the University of Engineering and Technology,
Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer engineering from Kyung Hee University
(KHU), South Korea, in 2021. He is author of
two books: (a) Network Slicing for 5G and Beyond
and (b) Federated Learning for Wireless Networks.
He has reviewed over 200 times for the top ISIIndexed journals and conferences. He has authored
many most popular articles in the leading journals, such as IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS and
magazines (IEEE Communication Magazine, IEEE N ETWORK, and IEEE
Wireless Communications Magazine). His research interests include analytical
techniques of optimization and game theory to edge computing, end-to-end
network slicing, wireless federated learning, and digital twins. He is the
recipient of KHU Best Thesis Award.

Maher Guizani (Member, IEEE) received the master’s degree in electrical engineering from Purdue
university in 2016. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering with the
University of Texas at Arlington. He has experience
working in the automotive industry. He worked with
General Motors as a Calibration Engineer from 2016
to 2018. He worked with the Embedded Engineering
Department, PACCAR from 2018 to 2019. He also
worked with the Electrified Semi Truck Department,
Meritor from 2020 to 2022.

Sami Muhaidat (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON, Canada, in 2006. From 2007 to 2008, he
was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Toronto, ON, Canada. From 2008 to 2012, he was an
Assistant Professor with the School of Engineering
Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada. He is currently a Professor with Khalifa
University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. He was also a Visiting
Reader with the Faculty of Engineering, University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.

Moussa Ayyash (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and
computer engineering. He is currently a Professor
with the Department of Computing, Information, and
Mathematical Sciences and Technology, Chicago
State University, Chicago. He is also the Director
of the Center of Information and Security Education
and Research.