5100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Real-Time Threat Detection and AI-Driven
Predictive Security for Consumer Applications
Sugirtha Thayalan, Niranchana Radhakrishnan, T. V. Ramana ,
Ganesh Gopal Devarajan , Senior Member, IEEE, Marimuthu Karuppiah , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Maryam M. Al Dabel

Abstract—The growing use of artificial intelligence (AI) in
consumer applications, especially through smart devices and the
Internet of Things (IoT), presents both opportunities and security
challenges. Protecting user data and privacy is increasingly
critical as these technologies become part of daily life. Traditional
security models struggle with the large, real-time data generated
by these systems, leading to problems with accuracy, scalability,
and threat detection. To address this, we propose a novel
framework that combines Collaborative Federated Learning with
an edge-cloud architecture for predictive security. Our approach
features the Two-Stage Attention Integrated Graph-based Multisource Spatio-Temporal Data Fusion (2S-AGMSTDF) network,
which processes multiple data sources, including sensor inputs,
cyber activity, and user behavior patterns. Key components
include AKGCN for cyber feature embedding, a GCN-ResNetbased transformer (GRCMT) for spatial data analysis, and
an Attention-Based LSTM for temporal feature extraction.
By performing local computations at the edge for real-time
monitoring and using Federated Averaging at the cloud level,
our framework improves accuracy, scalability, and privacy. Realworld evaluations show its superior performance in anomaly
detection and predictive security compared to existing methods,
offering a robust AI-driven solution for consumer security.
Index Terms—Blockchain network, AI-driven security, smart
devices, IoT security, federated learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

S URBAN environments grow increasingly complex with
the rapid expansion of smart cities, and ensuring robust

Received 24 November 2024; revised 30 January 2025; accepted 13
March 2025. Date of publication 25 March 2025; date of current version
14 August 2025. (Corresponding author: Ganesh Gopal Devarajan.)
Sugirtha Thayalan is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Information Technology Tiruchirappalli,
Tiruchirappalli 620012, India (e-mail: sugirthat@iiitt.ac.in).
Niranchana Radhakrishnan is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Alliance School of Advanced Computing, Alliance University,
Bengaluru 562106, India (e-mail: niranchana.r@alliance.edu.in).
T. V. Ramana is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Jain University, Bengaluru 560004, India (e-mail: venkataramana.t@gmail.com).
Ganesh Gopal Devarajan is with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of
Science and Technology NCR Campus, New Delhi 201204, India (e-mail:
dganeshgopal@ieee.org).
Marimuthu Karuppiah is with the Presidency School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Presidency University, Bengaluru 560064, India
(e-mail: marimuthu.k@presidencyuniversity.in).
Maryam M. Al Dabel is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, College of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Hafr Al Batin, Hafar Al Batin 39524, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: maldabel@
uhb.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3554589

security in consumer applications has become a critical concern.
The integration of Internet of Things (IoT) devices, smart
applications, and advanced technologies such as artificial
intelligence (AI) and big data analytics holds significant
potential to improve predictive security and threat detection
in urban infrastructures. Although smart cities use connected
technologies to improve public services and streamline resource
management, security in consumer applications, particularly in
the context of IoT devices, remains an area of intense focus.
Ensuring the privacy and protection of user data while managing
evolving security threats is paramount for the future of urban
technology [1], [2].
Traditional security models, such as signature-based detection and anomaly detection, are often inadequate to address
the diverse and dynamic security challenges arising in consumer applications [3]. These models typically fail to account
for the rapidly evolving nature of cyber threats or the
multidimensional data generated by IoT devices, mobile
apps, and sensor networks [4]. Centralized data processing
frameworks, which rely on cloud-based systems, introduce
challenges such as scalability, data privacy, and latency in realtime applications. As a result, there is a growing need for
distributed AI-powered security solutions that can proactively
detect threats and predict vulnerabilities before they become
manifest [5].
Decentralization of data sources, such as cyber data from
social networks, sensor data from smart devices, and temporal
patterns in user behavior, creates opportunities and challenges
for predictive security [6]. These systems generate large
amounts of heterogeneous data that require sophisticated AIdriven frameworks capable of processing data efficiently while
ensuring privacy and low latency. One promising approach
is Collaborative and Distributed Federated Learning (FL),
which enables distributed data processing without sharing raw
data, preserving user privacy while enabling real-time threat
detection [7], [8].
Federated learning allows edge devices, such as mobile
phones, IoT sensors, and local servers, to collaboratively
learn from decentralized data while minimizing the risks of
data transfer [9]. In the context of AI-driven security, this
decentralized approach is ideal for consumer applications
where data privacy and low-latency processing are critical.
By performing local computations on the edge, the devices
process data efficiently and securely without relying on
centralized servers [10]. This framework improves real-time
security monitoring, improves scalability, and reduces latency,

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY

making it a viable solution for predictive threat modeling in
consumer electronics [11].
Despite its advantages, federated learning models still face
challenges. Traditional aggregation techniques, like Federated
Averaging (FedAvg), struggle to capture the complex, multisource data from diverse consumer applications. These models
may miss intricate relationships between cyber, spatial, and
temporal features, reducing predictive accuracy. Advanced
data fusion techniques integrating diverse data sources are
necessary to improve the accuracy in real time of security
models [12].
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for AI-driven
predictive security in consumer applications, specifically
designed to address the limitations of traditional federated
learning approaches. Our framework integrates collaborative Federated Learning with a multi-source spatial-temporal
data fusion network based on two stages of attention
(2S-AGMSTDF) to enhance real-time threat detection and
predictive security. The contributions of this paper include the
following.
• Collaborative Learning in Edge-Cloud Environments: A
federated learning framework where edge devices collaborate to detect security threats, processing data from
multiple sources (e.g., cyber, spatial, and temporal) and
updating a global model with an advanced particle swarm
optimization (PSO) based aggregation technique.
• Two-Stage Attention Integrated Graph-Based Multisource
Data Fusion: The 2S-AGMSTDF Network employs
attention mechanisms and graph neural networks to fuse
data from diverse sources, ensuring effective feature
extraction and real-time anomaly detection.
• Real-Time and Low-Latency Processing: By leveraging
edge computing and federated learning, our framework ensures real-time security monitoring with minimal
latency, ideal for dynamic IoT devices and smart devices.
• Global Aggregation With Advanced FedAvg: The modified Federated Averaging (FedAvg) method improves
traditional aggregation techniques, improving accuracy by
incorporating insights from various edge nodes.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews
the existing literature on AI-driven security in consumer
applications and IoT devices, highlighting challenges in realtime threat detection. Section III details the architecture of our
proposed framework, including the 2S-AGMSTDF Network
and global aggregation techniques. Section IV presents experimental setups and comparative analyses with existing models.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper and suggests future
research directions.

II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
Traditional models like statistical time-series analysis and
hotspot mapping have been foundational in urban technologies [13], but they fail to account for the non-linear and
heterogeneous nature of urban dynamics. Although useful for
localized insights, these methods cannot fully integrate diverse
IoT data, limiting scalability and real-time adaptability.

5101

Lv et al. [14] explored the challenges posed by the rapid
expansion of IoT devices, proposing the use of Network
Function Virtualization (NFV) and Virtual Network Functions
(VNF) to improve service quality. Their preference-based
routing mechanism customizes the VNF chaining process
to meet diverse consumer needs, demonstrating significant
improvements in service acceptance and VNF utilization.
Su et al. [15] examined vulnerabilities in consumer electronics (CE), specifically focusing on how power consumption
patterns can reveal running applications. Their work highlights
how dynamic power modulation can create predictable patterns
exploitable by adversaries, suggesting intelligent application
profiling as a potential solution to improve security.
Allifah and Zualkernan [16] addressed the security risks of
smart home devices based on the Internet of Things, proposing
a methodology to rank device security using the Analytic
Hierarchy Process (AHP). Their study emphasized the critical
role of network security and vulnerability management in
ensuring the security of IoT devices, offering a framework to
evaluate and prioritize security risks.
Yuan et al. [17] explored security flaws in IoT device
sharing platforms, specifically regarding authorization-data
management. They introduced SecHARE, a tool that automates patching of security vulnerabilities in IoT clouds,
demonstrating its effectiveness in mitigating risks without
disrupting functionality.
III. P ROPOSED 2S-AGMSTDF M ODEL
The proposed network model is designed to provide
real-time predictive security in smart city environments by
leveraging data from multiple sources within a distributed
AI-driven framework. This system integrates collaborative
federated learning within an edge-cloud architecture, where
edge nodes handle local data processing, while the cloud
aggregates and refines the security predictions using advanced
machine learning techniques.
In this work, we consider a network structure consisting
of N edge nodes, each responsible for processing localized
data collected from consumer applications and IoT devices
deployed throughout the urban environment. Each edge node
gathers three key types of data:
External Data: Collected from cyber sources such as social
media platforms, user behavior analytics, and network logs.
This data provides contextual information on potential threats,
social interactions, and online activity patterns that can be used
to detect security anomalies and predict cyber threats.
Spatial Data: Collected from physical sensors installed on
consumer devices, such as smart home appliances, security
cameras, and traffic sensors. This data offers insights into
physical space usage, user movement patterns, and anomalies
in traffic flow that may indicate suspicious behavior or vulnerabilities in smart city infrastructure.
Temporal Data: Data were collected over time, capturing
the temporal dynamics of user behavior, device interactions,
and security events. This data allows the system to recognize
short-term and long-term trends in cyber-security threats, such
as fluctuations in device activity or abnormal access patterns.

5102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

data present significant challenges for predictive security.
Safeguarding user data and ensuring privacy require advanced
AI models capable of processing heterogeneous and spatiotemporal data streams to detect and mitigate threats effectively.

Fig. 1.

Proposed framework.

In this work, we propose the 2S-AGMSTDF network,
designed to function in a distributed edge cloud environment
for real-time security monitoring. The system is optimized
for deployment on resource-constrained devices, balancing
computational efficiency and power consumption. Each edge
node processes localized data, including external, spatial,
and temporal information, using lightweight machine learning
models. The computational complexity at each edge node is
O(N-D), where N is the number of data points, and D is the
feature dimension. This allows the system to operate efficiently
on devices such as IoT gateways and smart appliances, with
an estimated memory footprint of 10 MB and a processing
time of 50 ms per prediction.
The data flow between edge and cloud components is
structured to ensure minimal latency and optimized resource
usage.
• Data Collection at Edge Nodes: IoT devices and smart
appliances continuously generate data, which is preprocessed locally to extract relevant spatial and temporal
features.
• Local Model Processing: Each edge node runs lightweight
AI models to detect anomalies and predict potential
threats in real time. This ensures a rapid response without
requiring constant cloud connectivity.
• Federated Learning and Model Updates: Instead of transmitting raw data to the cloud, federated learning enables
edge devices to train local models on their own data.
Only model parameters are shared with the cloud, reducing network congestion, and ensuring privacy-preserving
computation.
• Cloud Aggregation and Enhancement: The cloud server
receives model updates from multiple edge nodes and
performs Federated Averaging to refine a global model.
The updated model is then redistributed to the edge nodes
for continuous learning and improved accuracy.
• Security Insights and Threat Monitoring: The system
continuously adapts based on new threats detected at
the edge or cloud level, providing real-time security
intelligence across all connected devices.
This decentralized approach not only enhances scalability and
efficiency, but also minimizes communication overhead while
maintaining high security and privacy standards. Figure 1
shows the proposed architecture.

A. Threat Data Representation
k ∈ R denote the occurrence of a specific type
Let di,t
of threat k (e.g., cyberattack, anomalous device behavior)
detected in region ai at time t. If


1
2
K
di,t = di,t
∈ RK
, di,t
, . . . , di,t

represents the threat data for all K categories in region ai ,
the overall threat data of the system at time t can be written
according to Eqn. (1):


Dt = d1,t , d2,t , . . . , dN,t ∈ RK×N
(1)
The threat data over T time steps is given by Eqn. (2):
D = [D1 , D2 , . . . , DT ] ∈ RK×N×T

(2)

B. Local Feature Embedding at Edge Nodes
In our proposed framework, edge nodes process heterogeneous threat data using the 2S-AGMSTDF network. This
network integrates data from multiple sources, including sensor data from IoT devices, cyber metadata from applications,
and temporal patterns linked to user behavior. The processing
is divided into two stages:
1) Feature Embedding Stage:
• Cyber Feature Embedding: Using AKGCN for capturing relationships in cyber metadata.
• Spatial Feature Embedding: Using a GCN-ResNetbased cross-modulality transformer (GRCMT) to
extract spatial features from data from smart devices
and IoT sensors.
• Temporal Feature Embedding: Using an AttentionBased LSTM to model temporal dependencies in
user behavior and threat patterns.
2) Prediction Stage: The fused feature embeddings are
passed to a Sparse Attentive Backtracking LSTM (SABLSTM) for accurate prediction of real-time threats.
C. Edge-Cloud Collaboration for Predictive Security
Local computations on the edge enable real-time monitoring
of security threats, while Federated Averaging at the cloud
aggregates insights from multiple edge nodes. This ensures
scalable, privacy-preserving AI-based predictive security while
enhancing system accuracy through collaborative learning.
V. E XTERNAL F EATURE E MBEDDING U SING AKGCN

IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In the context of consumer applications, particularly those
powered by smart devices and Internet of Things (IoT)
platforms, the increasing volume and diversity of real-time

In this section, we describe how the AKGCN is used to
embed external features. Each edge node applies an AKGCN
to process external data, capturing the relationships between
urban entities.

THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY

5103

A. Model Function

E. Attention Mechanism for External Features

The model function f (·) processes historical data C and
external characteristics F Ext , producing the external embedding ĈT+1 to predict future events and is given by Eqn. (3):


ĈT+1 = f HeL , F Ext ∈ RK×N
(3)

The attention mechanism assigns importance to neighbors
based on external features and regional relationships. The
(l)
is calculated according to Eqn. (10):
attention score αin

B. Initialization of Features
a) Entity features: Each regional area is initially represented by an embedding based on its attributes, such as
historical data, which is represented as Eqn. (4):
He0 = C ∈ RN×d0

(10)
where a , Wq(l) , and Wk(l)

are learnable parameters, and 

denotes concatenation.

(4)

where N is the number of regions and d0 is the dimensionality
of the initial embedding.
b) External features: External factors such as traffic flow
and Points of Interest (POI) influence inside patterns. These
features are represented at each time step t according to
Eqn. (5):
FtExt ∈ RJ×N




(l) (l−1)
(l) (l−1) (l−1)
Wk rn hn
exp LeakyReLU a Wq hi
(l)



αin
= 
(l) (l−1)
(l) (l−1) (l−1)

Wk rk hk
k∈N(i) exp LeakyReLU a Wq hi

(5)

F. Message Passing and Aggregation
The aggregated messages for node i are computed according
to Eqn. (11):
(l)

(l)

αin Wv(l) hn(l−1)

mi =

(11)

n∈N(i)

G. Updating Region Embeddings

where J is the number of feature categories. Aggregating these
characteristics over T time steps resulted as per Eqn. (6):


(6)
FtExt = F1Ext , . . . , FTExt ∈ RJ×N×T

The embeddings for the region i are updated as per
Eqn. (12):

(l−1)
(12)
+ m(l)
h(l)
i = σ hi
i

C. Knowledge Graph Construction

H. Final Embedding

The knowledge graph captures spatial and semantic relationships between regions:
a) Adjacency matrix: The spatial relationships between
regions are represented by an adjacency matrix and are given
by Eqn. (7):

After multiple layers of graph convolution and attentionbased aggregation, the final external feature embedding for the
edge node j is calculated according to Eqn. (13):

(l+1,j)
(l,j) (l,j)
(13)
= σ A(j) Hext Wext
Hext

A ∈ RN×N

where Hext ∈ RNi ×de is the embedding, Ni is the number of
regions, de is the feature dimension, and A(j) is the adjacency
matrix.

(7)

where Aij = 1 if regions i and j are connected, and Aij = 0
otherwise.
b) Relation embeddings: The relationships between
regions are described by relation embeddings which is given
in Eqn. (8):
Hr(l) ∈ RR×dl

(8)

where R is the number of relationship types and dl is the
embedding dimensionality at layer l.
D. Graph Convolution
The graph convolution operation aggregates information
from neighboring nodes. For region i at layer l, the embedding
is updated as per Eqn. (9):
⎛
⎞
hi(l) = σ ⎝

(l) (l) (l−1) ⎠
αin
Wv hn
n∈N(i)

where:
(l−1)
• hn
is the embedding of neighbor n at layer l − 1,
(l)
• αin is the attention score,
(l)
• Wv is the learnable weight matrix,
• σ is an activation function (e.g., ReLU),
• N(i) is the set of neighbors of region i.

(9)

(l,j)

VI. S PATIAL F EATURE E MBEDDING AND F EATURE
F USION U SING GCN-R ES N ET BASED C ROSS M ODALITY
T RANSFORMER
Each edge node processed spatial data from sensors using
a GCN-ResNet-based Cross-Modality Transformer (GRCMT).
The GRCMT is a sophisticated framework designed to model
the spatial dependencies between different regions in an
urban environment. Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs)
combines graph convolutional networks (GCNs) to capture
local spatial dependencies, Residual networks (ResNet) to
stabilize the learning process over deep layers, and a crossmodality transformer to fuse information from various spatial
modalities, such as trend, period, and proximity. Each of these
modalities captures different aspects of spatial relations, and
the cross-modulality transformer brings them together, enhancing the richness of the spatial embeddings. Algorithm 2:
GCN-ResNet and Cross-Modality Transformer with SelfAttention and Multi-Head Attention.
The GCN-ResNet framework consists of graphconvolutional networks (GCNs) to learn the spatial structure of
each region and Residual Networks (ResNet) to introduce skip

5104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Algorithm 1 GCN-ResNet and Cross Modality Transformer
With Self-Attention and Multi-Head Attention
1: Step 1: GCN-ResNet for Trend, Proximity, and Period
Modalities
2: for each modality (trend, proximity, period) do
3:
for l = 1 to L do

(l)
(l)
{Graph
4:
Hmod,G ← σ D−1/2 Aspat D−1/2 Hmod
Wmod
Convolution} 

5:
Hmod,R ← σ Hmod,G + Hmod,previousG {ResNet
Connection}
6:
Hmod,previousG ← Hmod,R {Update Residual}
7:
end for
8: end for
9: Step 2: Multi-Head Attention for Trend, Proximity,
and Period Modalities
10: for each modality (trend, proximity, period) do
11:
for i = 1 to h do
12:
Qmod ← WQi Hmod
13:
Kmod ← WKi Hmod
14:
Vmod ← WVi Hmod

15:

headi ← softmax


Qmod Kmod
√
dk

Vmod

16:
end for
17:
MultiHeadmod ← Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )WO
18: end for
19: Step 3: Cross Modality Fusion
20: Hconcat
←
Concat(MultiHeadtrend , MultiHeadprox ,

MultiHeadperiod )
21: Hspatial ← FFN(Hconcat ) {Apply Feed-Forward Network
(FFN)}
22: Step 4: Return Final Spatial Embedding
23:
24: return

Hspatial

connections for stabilizing the learning process. This combined
framework is applied to three modalities: trend, proximity,
and period. The trend modality captures long-term patterns.
The proximity modality captures the spatial dependencies
between neighboring regions based on geographical proximity
or adjacency. The period modality captures cyclical or
recurring patterns in spatial features, such as daily or weekly
fluctuations.
VII. ATTENTION BASED C ONVOLUTION LSTM FOR
T EMPORAL F EATURE E MBEDDING
To extract the temporal feature, we proposed the Attentionbased ConvLSTM (ACL) architecture for embedding the
temporal feature. The aim is to improve temporal pattern
learning for attack prediction by combining the strengths
of ConvLSTM and the attention mechanism. Each edge
node processes its temporal data using an Attention-Based
ConvLSTM (ACL) architecture. The ConvLSTM captures the
sequential relationships across time steps, while the attention
mechanism selectively highlights the most relevant time steps.
This combination provides a rich, interpretable representation
of temporal attack trends, making it well suited for forecasting

Algorithm 2 Attention-based ConvLSTM (ACL) for Temporal
Feature Embedding in Prediction
1: Step 1: Initialize ConvLSTM kernels and attention
weights
2: Step 2: Initialize hidden state H0 and cell state C0
3: Step 3: For each time step t = 1 to T do:
4: 3.1 ConvLSTM
Step (Temporal Embedding):


5: ft ← σ Wf ∗ Xt + Uf ∗ H(t−1) + bf {Forget gate}
6: it ← σ Wi ∗
 gate}
 Xt + Ui ∗ H(t−1) + bi {Input
7: ĉt ← tanh Wc ∗ Xt + Uc ∗ H(t−1) + bc {Candidate cell
state}
8: Ct ← ft C(t−1) + it
ĉt {Update cell state}
9: ot ← σ Wo ∗ Xt + Uo ∗ H(t−1) + bo {Output gate}
10: Ht ← ot
tanh(Ct ) {Update hidden state}
11: Step 4: Attention Mechanism:
12: for each time step t = 1 to T do
13:
et ← tanh(We ∗ Ht + be ) {Compute attention score}
14: end for
15: Step 4.2: Compute attention weights:
exp(et )
16: αt ← T
{Normalized attention weights}
k=1 exp(ek )
17: Step 5: Compute context vector:

18: Htemporal = C ←
t αt ∗ Ht {Weighted sum of hidden
states}
19: Step 6: Return context vector C (temporal embedding)

future attack occurrences based on recent data. Algorithm 2:
Attention-Based ConvLSTM (ACL) for Temporal Feature
Embedding for IoT Data
Input:
• Temporal data: Xt = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XT } where Xt ∈ Rd
represents the extracted spatial features at time t
• Number of time steps: T
• Convolution kernel sizes for ConvLSTM gates:
Wf , Wi , Wc , Wo
• Attention weight matrix: We
Output: Context vector Htemporal = C (temporal embedding)
VIII. G LOBAL AGGREGATION AT THE
C LOUD U SING F EDAVG
After each edge node performs local data prediction, the
results are transmitted to a central cloud server for global
aggregation. The cloud server leverages Federated Averaging
(FedAvg) to combine the local model parameters from each
edge node, thus computing a global model. This process
ensures that the cloud aggregates knowledge from all edge
nodes and creates a more accurate global model.
The aggregation of the local model parameters is performed
by averaging the model weights from each edge node as per
Eqn. (14).
θ global =

1
N

N

θ (j)

j=1

where:
• θ (j) represents the model parameters at edge node j.

(14)

THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY

Fig. 2.

5105

Comparison of Performance Metrics: (a) Smart Home IoT Dataset and (b) Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset.

θ global represents the aggregated global model parameters.
Once the global model is computed using FedAvg, the cloud
server sends the updated global model back to each edge node.
Each edge node then updates its local model with the global
parameters, improving its local prediction accuracy based on
the collective data collected from the entire network.
This iterative process, where each edge node computes
locally, the cloud aggregates globally, and the global model
is distributed back to the edge, facilitates distributed and
collaborative learning. As a result, the system benefits from
the shared knowledge, which improves the accuracy of attack
prediction across the smart city infrastructure. This continuous
feedback loop ensures that prediction models evolve and
improve over time, making the system more effective in
anticipating attack patterns.
•

IX. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, we demonstrate the results for the proposed
2S-AGMSTDF network for predictive security in consumer
applications. The performance of the 2S-AGMSTDF model is
evaluated using various metrics and compared against several
baseline models. Our experiments are carried out on publicly
available datasets to assess the effectiveness of the proposed
model in real-time security monitoring and anomaly detection.
Evaluation metrics include mean absolute error (MAE), mean
squared error (MSE), and area under the curve (AUC) for
both the training and testing phases. We provide a detailed
analysis of the predictive power of the model compared to
baseline approaches such as ARIMA, Att-RNN, MiST and
GeoMAN, which are commonly used for anomaly detection
in IoT security applications.
A. Dataset
For our experiments, we used two widely recognized realworld datasets related to the security of consumer applications.

•

Smart Home IoT Dataset: This dataset contains sensor
data from smart home devices, including temperature,
motion and security camera data, as well as user behavior
logs. Provides information on potential security risks by
monitoring abnormal activities in the home environment.
• Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset: This dataset
includes network traffic data from IoT devices in a smart
city context. It contains both normal and anomalous
data, useful for detecting malicious activities and security
threats on connected devices.
Figure 2 shows the performance of the 2S-AGMSTDF
model in predictive security for IoT devices and smart platforms is demonstrated through various plots representing the
model’s real-time threat detection capabilities. These plots
allow for a detailed examination of the model’s prediction
accuracy, error distribution, and general performance over time
across multiple IoT devices or communities.
Actual vs. Predicted Threats with Error Bars: The first plot
represents a comparison between actual threat data, predicted
threat data, and absolute error for IoT devices on three specific
dates. As shown in the stacked bar graph:
The purple bars (actual data) represent the real-time threat
detection observed by IoT devices. The orange bars (predicted data) represent the threat levels predicted by the
2S-AGMSTDF model. Green bars (Error Data) represent
the absolute discrepancy between actual and predicted threat
values. This plot offers an immediate visual representation of
how well the model’s predictions align with real-world threat
data across different communities and over time.
For most IoT devices, the predicted threat levels (orange)
closely follow the actual threat levels (purple). This indicates that the 2S-AGMSTDF model is generally effective
in predicting threats in IoT devices. However, some devices
(represented by communities with larger green error bars)
show larger prediction discrepancies, particularly in areas with
higher threat variability. These errors might suggest that, while
the model is overall accurate, it faces challenges in regions

5106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

Comparison of Performance Metrics for Two Datasets.

where threat patterns are more volatile or data are more
complex. The prediction performance varies over time, as
demonstrated by the fluctuations in error between different
dates (June 1, June 15, and July 1). This suggests that while
the model is robust, it may benefit from fine-tuning for specific
time periods or device types.
Smart Home IoT Dataset: This graph compares the MSE
values of five different algorithms, including the proposed 2SAGMSTDF model, for different train-test ratios (0.7, 0.8, and
0.9). The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF shows a consistently lower
MSE compared to other algorithms like Random Forest, SVM,
XGBoost, and Neural Networks, suggesting that it is better at
predicting IoT sensor data for smart home security. The RMSE
plot for the Smart Home dataset confirms the trends observed
in the MSE plot. Since RMSE gives a better idea of error
magnitude in the same unit as the target variable, the proposed
model has a significantly lower RMSE across all train-test
ratios, showing it is a better fit for predicting abnormal
activities and security risks in smart home environments.
Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly Dataset: The same comparative analysis is applied to the Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly
Dataset. The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF again performs better in
minimizing MSE, which shows its effectiveness in detecting
anomalies in network traffic data from IoT devices. The lower
MSE indicates the ability of the proposed model to detect
security threats more accurately compared to the baseline
models. The RMSE plot for the Cybersecurity IoT Anomaly
Dataset indicates that the proposed 2S-AGMSTDF model
consistently delivers better performance than other algorithms.
This demonstrates its superior ability to capture complex
patterns in network traffic, a crucial task in cyber-security
anomaly detection.
The proposed 2S-AGMSTDF model consistently outperforms other algorithms in terms of both MSE and RMSE in
the two datasets, as shown in Fig. 3. This shows its robustness and suitability for predictive security in IoT devices,

Moving Average for Smart Home IoT Daily Attacks.

whether it is Smart Home IoT or Cyber-security IoT Anomaly
Detection. These comparative analyzes illustrate that while
baseline models such as Random Forest, SVM, XGBoost, and
Neural Networks offer reasonable performance, the proposed
2S-AGMSTDF outperforms them, particularly in terms of
accuracy and error minimization.
The first plot, which focuses on the moving average
daily attacks of the Smart Home IoT, shows how AI-driven
predictive security can track attack patterns over time. With
an attack rate 5%, the plot demonstrates occasional bursts
of attacks, with the 7-day moving average smoothing the
fluctuations to reveal underlying trends. This visualization
aligns with the concept of real-time monitoring in your
proposed framework, where the system needs to recognize
emerging attack patterns and provide insights for timely threat
mitigation. The moving average helps highlight any deviations
from the normal attack frequency, allowing AI models to
identify periods of heightened risk, which is essential for
predictive security in consumer applications. By observing
trends in attacks over time, the system can identify anomalies
and provide proactive security measures, ensuring a safer and
more reliable smart home environment. Figure 4 shows the
results for the moving average of the daily attacks of the IoT.
In Fig. 5, illustrating the results for daily attacks on cyber
security IoT with anomalies detected by Z-Score and Isolation
Forest, AI models are able to detect complex threats in real
time within IoT systems. With a higher attack rate of 10%, the
plot shows frequent attack occurrences, while the Z-score and
Isolation Forest methods help detect anomalies by identifying
unusual attack behavior. These AI-driven anomaly detection
techniques are crucial for predictive security, as they allow the
system to differentiate between normal fluctuations and potential threats. The Federated Learning approach discussed in
your abstract ensures that anomaly detection can be conducted
locally at the edge while maintaining privacy, with aggregated
insights shared at the cloud level for improved scalability.
Using statistical and machine learning-based techniques, this
framework improves the system’s ability to provide robust,
real-time threat detection and mitigation, ensuring a secure and
scalable IoT environment.
Although both GeoMAN and Att-RNN are effective in
handling spatio-temporal data, our approach offers significant
innovations in the following ways:
1) Two-Stage Attention Mechanism: Unlike GeoMAN,
which uses a spatial-temporal attention mechanism

THAYALAN et al.: REAL-TIME THREAT DETECTION AND AI-DRIVEN PREDICTIVE SECURITY

5107

Future work will aim to incorporate additional dynamic data
sources, such as real-time traffic patterns or environmental
sensors, and explore the use of transfer learning to adapt security models in various consumer applications. This research
contributes to future-proofing consumer applications, ensuring
their resilience against evolving cybersecurity threats in an
increasingly interconnected world.
R EFERENCES
Fig. 5.

Anomalies Detection on Cyber-security IoT Daily Attacks.

focused on individual dimensions of spatio-temporal
data, our network integrates a two-stage attention mechanism that processes both source-specific attention and
fusion attention. This hierarchical attention improves the
model’s ability to capture interactions across heterogeneous data sources.
2) Graph-Based Data Representation: Unlike Att-RNN,
which relies on sequence modeling of spatio-temporal
data, our model incorporates a graph-based representation to model spatial relationships explicitly.
3) Federated Learning Integration: Our framework uniquely
integrates federated learning within the edge-cloud
architecture, focusing on privacy-preserving real-time
anomaly detection. Neither GeoMAN nor Att-RNN
explicitly addresses privacy concerns or distributed computations in resource-constrained environments, making
our approach particularly suited for deployment in sensitive and decentralized IoT ecosystems.
4) Optimized for Multi-Source Data Fusion: Although both
GeoMAN and Att-RNN handle spatio-temporal data,
they do not explicitly focus on fusing heterogeneous
data types. The 2S-AGMSTDF network architecture
explicitly accounts for this by designing source-specific
encoders and a fusion attention module, which enhances
its ability to handle diverse data inputs effectively.
X. C ONCLUSION
This study introduces a comprehensive framework for
AI-driven predictive security within consumer applications,
particularly those based on smart devices and IoT devices.
By integrating data from various sources, including cyber
data, sensor data from devices, and user behavior patterns, the
2S-AGMSTDF Network provides real-time, proactive threat
detection, and predictive security. The use of Collaborative
Federated Learning ensures privacy-preserving AI while
enabling scalability and real-time response to security threats.
This framework demonstrates how AI can enhance security
monitoring and anomaly detection in consumer electronics,
supporting the development of reliable consumer platforms.

[1] P. Dai, Y. Huang, X. Wu, K. Li, H. Xing, and K. Liu, “Freshness
and security-aware cache update in blockchain-based vehicular edge
networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 108–121,
Feb. 2024.
[2] D.-J. Kim, N. G. B. Amma, and V. Sarveshwaran, “A novel split
learning-based consumer electronics network traffic anomaly detection
framework for smart city environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4197–4204, Feb. 2024.
[3] J. Liu and C. Zhang, “Effective analysis and intelligent decision making
of consumer electronics data based on machine learning under smart
city,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4205–4212,
Feb. 2024.
[4] G. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Li, P. Hui, and D. Jin, “Blockchain-based data
sharing system for AI-powered network operations,” J. Commun. Inf.
Netw., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–8, 2018.
[5] I. Bibi, A. Akhunzada, and N. Kumar, “Deep AI-powered cyber threat
analysis in IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 7749–7760,
May 2023.
[6] S. Yu, N. Jho, and Y. Park, “Lightweight three-factor-based privacypreserving authentication scheme for IoT-enabled smart homes,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 126186–126197, 2021.
[7] M. N. H. Nguyen et al., “Self-organizing democratized learning: Toward
large-scale distributed learning systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 10698–10710, Dec. 2023.
[8] M. Chen et al., “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent
progress and future challenges,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39,
no. 12, pp. 3579–3605, Dec. 2021.
[9] W. Iqbal, H. Abbas, M. Daneshmand, B. Rauf, and Y. A. Bangash,
“An in-depth analysis of IoT security requirements, challenges, and their
countermeasures via software-defined security,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 10250–10276, Oct. 2020.
[10] Q. Lin, S. Jiang, Z. Zhen, T. Chen, C. Wei, and H. Lin, “Fed-PEMC:
A privacy-enhanced federated deep learning algorithm for consumer
electronics in mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4073–4086, Feb. 2024.
[11] P. Liu, L. Jiang, H. Lin, J. Hu, S. Garg, and M. Alrashoud, “Federated
multimodal learning for privacy-preserving driver break recommendations in consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 4564–4573, Feb. 2024.
[12] W. Yamany, M. Keshk, N. Moustafa, and B. Turnbull, “Swarm
optimization-based federated learning for the cyber resilience of Internet
of Things systems against adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1359–1369, Feb. 2024.
[13] H. T. Dinh, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A survey of mobile
cloud computing: Architecture, applications, and approaches,” Wireless
Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 13, no. 18, pp. 1587–1611, 2013.
[14] J. Lv, B. Yi, A. Slowik, P. Li, and J. Chen, “VNF constituted consumer
application preference for high-quality service provision in IoT,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1071–1079, Feb. 2024.
[15] J. Su et al., “Trustworthy IAP: An intelligent applications profiler to
investigate vulnerabilities of consumer electronic devices,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4605–4616, Feb. 2024.
[16] N. M. Allifah and I. A. Zualkernan, “Ranking security of IoT-based
smart home consumer devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 18352–18369,
2022.
[17] B. Yuan et al., “Leakage of authorization-data in IoT device sharing: New attacks and countermeasure,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3196–3210, Jul./Aug. 2024.