IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

5018713

REDAD: A Reliable Distillation for Image
Anomaly Detection
Wenrui Hu , Wei Yu , Yongqiang Tang , Yuan Xie , and Wensheng Zhang

Abstract— The vanilla knowledge distillation (KD)-based
approach for image anomaly detection (AD) encounters three
main challenges: data shift, normality forgetting, and anomaly
overgeneralization. To effectively address these challenges,
we introduce REDAD, a reliable distillation strategy for AD,
which avoids intricate network designs. Initially, we incorporate
an adaptive teacher model (ATM) that dynamically adjusts
the teacher’s batch normalization (BN) statistics during the
distillation process, aligning the teacher with the target training
data distribution. Next, we introduce a normality remembering
enhancement (NRE) module, designed to compel the student to
learn the most challenging normal feature with high distillation
loss, thereby bolstering normality retention and reducing false
positives. Finally, we present a novel direction-guided regularization (DGR) technique to robustly enlarge the divergence
in abnormal feature pairs, preventing the oversight of abnormal regions, or false negatives. Comprehensive experiments on
the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D datasets show that REDAD
effectively resolves these three concerns, achieving superior AD
performance compared with its baseline model (exceeding 3.5%
(5.0%, 6.1%) in I-AUROC, 2.3% (1.6%, 1.5%) in P-AUROC,
and 3.2% (5.4%, 3.8%) in PRO). In addition, two real-world
industrial product inspection applications further underscore the
efficacy and utility of the proposed REDAD method.
Index Terms— Knowledge distillation (KD), self-supervised
learning, unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD).

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE objective of image anomaly detection (AD) is to
identify images that are irregular and precisely locate the
specific areas that deviate from normal patterns. This technique for detecting anomalies is used across multiple sectors,
including industrial inspection [1], [2], medical diagnostics [3],
[4], and video surveillance [5]. However, in real-world applications, the AD tasks often encounter challenges posed by the
scarcity of abnormal samples and the vast diversity of anomaly
types. To address this issue, unsupervised AD (UAD) methods
have emerged as a preferred solution as they minimize the need
for extensive annotated data [6].

T

Received 4 November 2024; revised 29 January 2025; accepted 13 February
2025. Date of publication 14 March 2025; date of current version 27 March
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62394330. The Associate Editor coordinating the
review process was Dr. Shiqian Chen. (Corresponding author: Wenrui Hu.)
Wenrui Hu and Wei Yu are with China Mobile Research
Institute, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: huwenrui@chinamobile.com;
yuweiyf@chinamobile.com).
Yongqiang Tang and Wensheng Zhang are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100089, China (e-mail:
yongqiang.tang@ia.ac.cn; wensheng.zhang@ia.ac.cn).
Yuan Xie is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (e-mail:
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3551571

Fig. 1. Issues in KDST-based AD. (a) General KDST method framework.
(b) Illustration highlighting normality forgetting and overgeneralization problems. (c) Example of normality forgetting with a normal sample. (d) Example
of anomaly overgeneralization with an abnormal sample.

Among various UAD methods, knowledge distillation (KD)
[7]-based methods establish a student–teacher (S-T) network
pairing to detect anomalies by pinpointing the feature-tofeature discrepancies [8], as shown in Fig. 1(a). During the
training phase, the teacher network, pretrained on an image
classification dataset like ImageNet, remains unchanged, while
the student network is trained exclusively using normal images
from the AD task. In the testing phase, the student network is
expected to mimic the teacher in normal feature regions but
diverge in abnormal regions, and this divergence is then used
to identify anomalies. Typically, cosine similarity is used as a
metric to gauge feature discrepancies, owing to its precision
in capturing relationships in both high- and low-dimensional
data [9]. The remarkable knowledge transfer and learning
guidance offered by KDST-based methods have propelled
them to the forefront of performance in the field [6]. Beyond
the standard configuration, methods such as STPM [10] and
MKD [11] enhance their effectiveness by incorporating multiscale features from various network layers into the distillation
process, thereby improving overall performance.
Despite the promising results of KDST-based methods, they
encounter three main issues: data shift, normality forgetting,
and anomaly overgeneralization. Regarding data shift, the
distribution of images in the AD task typically differs from
that of ImageNet. As the data distribution evolves in the
new task, the BN statistics in the student and teacher models
rapidly diverge, resulting in increased KD loss [12]. This divergence hinders the alignment of features between the teacher
and student models. With respect to the issue of normality

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

forgetting, the student model, being trained on amounts of
anomaly-free data, becomes sensitive to the nuanced patterns
in normal data due to the long-tail problem. This sensitivity
results in discrepancies in the normal feature representations
between the teacher and student models [refer to Fig. 1(b)],
thereby increasing the likelihood of false positives in AD
[refer to Fig. 1(c)]. To address this, MemKD [13] proposes a
normality recall memory to reinforce the normality in studentgenerated features, ensuring detailed patterns are accurately
captured. EfficientAD [14] introduces a hard feature loss
that focuses backpropagation on the output elements with
the highest loss, reducing false-positive detections on normal
images.
Anomaly overgeneralization arises when the student model,
due to its strong generalization capabilities, produces abnormal
feature distributions similar to those in the teacher’s domain
[refer to Fig. 1(b)] [15], [16]. This overgeneralization leads to
the oversight of abnormal regions [refer to Fig. 1(d)]. To tackle
this problem, various strategies have been devised. Both
AST [17] and ATSN [18] use an asymmetric student–teacher
structure to widen the gap in anomaly representations between
teacher and student. On the other hand, reliable direction
(RD) [19] introduces a reverse distillation approach featuring
a teacher encoder and a student decoder, fostering diversity in
anomalous representations. A network structure similar to RD
is also proposed in [4]. Some other works suggest that using
only normal data for training can lead to low sensitivity to
abnormal samples. Therefore, they use self-supervised methods by simulating anomalies to mitigate overgeneralization.
With the help of synthetic anomalies, CDO [15] collaboratively minimizes discrepancies in normal feature distributions
and maximizes those in synthetic abnormal feature distributions, which achieves remarkable performance. Operations
similar to CDO are also proposed in Pull&Push [16]. From
synthetically corrupted normal images, DeSTSeg [20] trains
a denoising student network to match the teacher network
feature of the same images without corruption. Therefore, the
two networks are reinforced to generate distinct features from
anomalous inputs.
This study proposes a reliable distillation strategy within the
pyramid KDST framework to simultaneously addressing the
three aforementioned issues. Inspired by exemplar-free class
incremental learning method [12], we introduce an adaptive
teacher model (ATM) to tackle the data shift problem. This
ATM updates the BN statistics of the teacher model while
keeping the rest of the model parameters fixed during the
training process, significantly minimizing KD loss. To counter
the normality forgetting problem, we propose a normality
remembering enhancement (NRE) module, influenced by the
online hard example mining (OHEM) technique [21]. Unlike
MemKD [13], which uses a memory-intensive mechanism
to retain normal information, NRE effectively directs the
student model to concentrate on more complex normal features
by identifying those with highest loss. Furthermore, unlike
EfficientAD [14], which uses a static mining factor, NRE
adopts a gradually decreasing factor to ensure training stability.
To tackle the challenge of anomaly overgeneralization,
we devise a direction-guided regularization (DGR) technique

with synthetic anomalies. Formally, let the normal feature
vector pairs for the student and teacher be denoted as (φns ,
φnt ), which are trained to align closely, the objective of DGR
is to augment the disparity between the perturbed abnormal
feature pair (φas , φat ). The DGR mechanism achieves this by
adjusting φas away from φat in a mirrored direction when the
cosine angle between φat and φnt is positive, and in the opposite
direction when negative. We call this method as RD, as it
effectively addresses the weaknesses of weak discrimination
or instability found in existing methods such as DeSTSeg [20]
and CDO [15], enabling the detection of both subtle and
pronounced anomalies. A more comprehensive description and
analysis can be found in Section III-G. It is crucial to note that
DGR does not require additional network architectures like
those mentioned in the aforementioned methods [17], [19],
[20], thus introducing no extra computational costs during
testing.
The contributions of this study can be summarized as
follows.
1) We identify and address three prevalent and independent
issues within the KDST-based methods. To this end,
we introduce a reliable distillation approach, termed
REDAD, which can simultaneously mitigate these three
challenges within the KDST framework. Furthermore,
REDAD enhances the performance of the KDST-based
methods without incurring additional network complexity or inference costs.
2) We design a novel DGR technique that effectively
amplifies the divergence of anomaly features between
the teacher and student models using self-supervised
training with synthetic anomalies.
3) Extensive experiments across diverse datasets demonstrate that REDAD outperforms the current state-ofthe-art KDST-based methods in both image-level and
pixel-level AD tasks.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II comprehensively reviews the related works. REDAD
is illustrated in detail in Section III. Section IV presents
thorough experiments, results, and analyses. Finally, Section V
concludes this article and discusses future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Unsupervised AD
Most UAD techniques can be broadly categorized into
two approaches: reconstruction-based and feature-embedding
methods [6]. Reconstruction methods, such as autoencoders [22], GANs [23], and denoising diffusion [24], assume
that anomalies in data cannot be accurately reproduced by
a neural network trained only on normal data. Therefore,
discrepancies in pixel-level reconstruction are used as indicators for detecting anomalies. Nevertheless, this assumption
is not always correct. Occasionally, networks may generalize
too much, resulting in false negatives when they mistakenly
reconstruct anomalies [25].
Currently, feature embedding-based methods are demonstrating superior performance. These approaches often leverage pretrained models to extract comprehensive feature

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

representations. Subsequently, statistical algorithms such as
multivariate Gaussian distribution [26], memory bank [27],
and normalizing flow [28], [29] are used to embed the
distributions of normal features. Anomalies are then identified by comparing the input features against the learned
distribution or the stored clustering centers. Despite recent
advances in anomaly localization, statistical algorithms often
struggle with high computational complexity and memory
consumption [25]. In addition, normalizing flows can suffer from training instability, compromising the flexibility of
density estimation [17]. Alternatively, KD-based methods [8],
[10], [15], [17], [19] have emerged as a promising approach.
These methods establish a teacher–student network pair and
detect anomalies by identifying discrepancies in feature representations between expert and apprentice domains, achieving
state-of-the-art results in AD.
B. Self-Supervised Mask Training
Despite the absence of genuine anomalous data for training
within the UAD framework, it is feasible to simulate pseudoanomalous data. This simulation enables the training of an
AD model in a self-supervised manner, thereby enabling it to
explicitly grasp the potential disparities between normal and
abnormal samples. Methods such as CutPaste [30] generate
pseudoanomalies by adding small patches to a normal image
and training a model to detect these anomalous regions. Similarly, DRAEM [31] overlays additional texture images as noise
onto normal images to generate abnormal regions, focusing
on creating textural anomalies. Building on DRAEM [31],
DeSTSeg [20] trains a denoising student encoder–decoder
using synthetically corrupted normal images, striving to align
with the features of uncorrupted images captured by the
teacher network. CDO [15] perturbs the input normal image
with Gaussian noise and maps the perturbed image into distinct expert and apprentice domains using respective mapping
functions. Alternatively, SimpleNet [25] generates synthetic
anomalies within the feature space, operating under the
assumption that defects may not exhibit significant commonality in the image space. In our system, we incorporate the
principles of DRAEM [31] for anomaly simulation and detect
synthetic anomalies within a KD framework.
C. BN Updating in KD
BN, a widely used technique in deep learning, may
encounter challenges in situations where the data distribution undergoes changes. To facilitate domain transfer, various
domain adaptation methods leverage normalization statistics,
as cited in [32], [33], and [34]. In the context of KD, the
BN statistics in both the student and teacher models can
diverge rapidly, resulting in an elevation of KD loss, as discussed in [12]. Recent studies have investigated the potential
of modifying the teacher model through meta-learning to
enhance knowledge transfer within the conventional KD
framework, as exemplified in [35]. Furthermore, research
on KD, specifically [36], suggests that updating the teacher
model’s normalization statistics with data used for student
training can yield performance improvements. Notably, while

Fig. 2.

5018713

Some samples of perturbed normal images.

teacher model modification has been explored in traditional
KD scenarios, our approach represents the first application
to AD.
III. M ETHOD
A. Problem Definition
For any image xi ∈ R H ×W ×3 in Xtrain ∪ Xtest , where Xtrain is
a set of anomaly-free training images and Xtest is a test query
set containing both normal and abnormal samples. The goal
of AD is to train a model to recognize and localize anomalies
in the query set.
B. Formulation of General KDST-Based Methods
We denote the pretrained teacher network as φ t and the
distilled student network as φ s . For an image xi , φ t and φ s
extract features from different hierarchies. We define L as the
subset including the indexes of hierarchies for use. The feature
map from level l ∈ L is denoted as φ l ∼ φ l (x) ∈ R Hl ×Wl ×Cl ,
where Hl , Wl , and Cl are the height, width, and channel
l
size, respectively. For an entry φh,w
∈ R Cl at location (h, w),
t,l
s,l
the distance between φh,w and φh,w can be formulated as
t,l
s,l
D(φh,w
, φh,w
) where D(·, ·) denotes a function for feature-tofeature discrepancy calculation. The KD process for the AD
task is to optimize D(φ t , φ s ) using the normal samples in
Xtrain .
Let p ∼ (h, w), and define pn and pa as the normal feature
and abnormal feature positions, respectively. The general KD
optimization loss can be succinctly expressed as
L

L gkd =

P

n

1 XX
s,l
1 − cos φ t,l
pn , φ pn .
N l=1 p

(1)

n

Here, the distance metric is based on cosine similarity, given
by D(·, ·) := 1 − cos(·, ·). The KDST-based methods assume
that the discrepancies between φ tpa and φ spa would not be
significantly affected and keep large during the KD process
which merely minimizes the discrepancies between φ tpn and
φ spn . However, because of the overgeneralization issue, the discrepancies between φ tpa and φ spa may also decrease, resulting
in high prediction uncertainty.
In KDST-based methods, convolutional neural networks
such as ResNet and its derivatives, which incorporate BN
layers, are commonly used as models for both φ t and φ s .
During the KD process, the parameters of φ t , including the
BN statistics derived from pretrained datasets like ImageNet,
remain unchanged, while the parameters of φ s are subject to
updates in the new AD task dataset. The divergence in BN
statistics between φ t and φ s leads to an increase in KD loss,
ultimately impeding the precise alignment of features between
the teacher and student models.

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of REDAD. (a) REDAD uses the general KDST framework, integrating a pretrained adaptive teacher network. During training, both
the teacher and student networks receive normal and synthetic anomaly images as input. (b) Module for computing anomaly maps in the inference stage.
(c) Feature flows throughout the distillation training process.

C. Simulated Anomaly Generation
As mentioned before, the DGR uses synthetic anomalous images for self-supervised mask training. In this study,
we adopt the same algorithm proposed in [31]. Random 2-D
Perlin noise is generated and binarized by a preset threshold
to obtain an anomaly mask m. An anomalous image xâ is
produced by replacing the mask area with a linear combination
of an anomaly-free image xn and an arbitrary image from
external data source z, controlled by an opacity factor γ ,
chosen at random within the interval [0.15, 1]. The process
is mathematically represented as
xâ = γ (m ⊙ z) + (1 − γ )(m ⊙ xn ) + (1 − m) ⊙ xn

(2)

where ⊙ signifies elementwise multiplication. This anomaly
generation occurs online during the training phase. Fig. 2
displays samples of perturbed normal images across various
datasets. We can see that the anomaly mask generated by
random Perlin noise is irregular, resembling actual anomalies.

Fig. 4. ATM modulates the teacher features by estimating normalization
statistics µBN and σBN and optimizing transformation parameters γBN and
βBN .

involves updating only the final linear layer [37]. We assign
the classification label for the synthetic anomaly image xâ
as 1 and that for the normal image xn as 0. Let yt (x) represent
the predicted probability of the teacher model for an input
image x. The cross-entropy contrast loss is then defined as
L ce = −

D. Formulation of REDAD
The overall architecture of REDAD is depicted in Fig. 3,
using the same design as general KDST-based methods without additional structural components. Distinctions arise during
the distillation optimization process, highlighted by three
key aspects, which address the three separate issues. First,
we introduce an ATM which updates the BN statistics of the
teacher model while fixed the rest model parameters during
the training process. ATM allows for significantly reduced
KD loss, thereby enhancing alignment of features between
the teacher and student models. Second, we incorporate an
NRE module, which supersedes the general feature distillation
in (1) by pinpointing normal feature pairs with low cosine similarity through a dynamically decreasing mining factor. Finally,
we devise a DGR technique to reliably widen the divergence in
the synthetic abnormal feature regions between the teacher and
student, efficiently mitigating the overgeneralization problem.
E. Adaptive Teacher Model
The ATM initially converts the pretrained teacher model into
a two-class classification model using linear probing, which

NBN


1 X
log yt xâi 1 − yt xni
2NBN i=1

(3)

where NBN is the batch size.
Subsequently, the ATM adjusts the teacher features by
estimating the normalization statistics µBN and σBN and optimizing the transformation parameters γBN and βBN , as depicted
in Fig. 4. Specifically, normalization centers and standardizes
the input x into x̄ = (x − µBN )/σBN using its mean µBN and
standard deviation σBN . The transformation converts x̄ into the
output x ′ = γBN x̄ + βBN , where the affine parameters for scale
γBN and shift βBN are optimized based on the loss.
F. Normality Remembering Enhancement
The NRE encourages the student model to focus on the
intricate features that currently mimic the teacher the least
within normal image regions. We designate these hard features
as pnh , and the NRE reformulates the general KD loss L gkd as
defined in (1), into a new expression
h

L Pn 


1 XX
s,l
1 − cos φ t,l
,
φ
L nre =
h
h
pn
pn
Nh l=1 h
pn

(4)

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5018713

Fig. 5.
Comparison with and without NRE. (a) Normal training image
with sampling regions. (b) Decreasing curve of the mining factor h. (c) and
(d) Anomaly score maps, respectively, without and with NRE at the tenth
training epoch. (e) t-SNE-generated projection of feature vectors within the
sampling regions [38].

where Nh is the total number of hard features. To identify
pnh , we calculate the h-quantile of the cosine similarity values
between the teacher and student features. Specifically, the
h-quantile represents the hth smallest cosine similarity value
among all the teacher–student feature pairs. This h-quantile
threshold, labeled as dh , allows for the computation of the loss
L nre as the average of all the distances D(φ tpn , φ spn ) for which
cos(φ tpn , φ spn ) < dh . Furthermore, we introduce a progressively
decreasing factor h ∈ [0, 1], defined as



πn E
2.
(5)
h = 1 + (h f − 1) 1 − cos
NE
Here, n E indicates the current training epoch index, N E the
total number of training epochs, and h f (the final value
of h) is empirically set to 0.001. The diminishing trajectory
of h is depicted in Fig. 5(b). The gradual decline of h
ensures a broader scope of feature distillation during the initial
stages of training, which contributes to a more stable training
progression.
Fig. 5(c) and (d) showcases a comparative analysis at the
tenth training epoch, contrasting the anomaly maps without
and with the application of NRE, respectively. Notably, the
inclusion of NRE enables the student model to swiftly concentrate on intricate features, including the screw thread (•),
screw head at the tip (⋆), and tail edge (×), while effectively
suppressing the unrelated background. Then the subsequent
training epochs necessitate further refinement for the student
model to harmonize challenging normal features with those
of the teacher model. In addition, Fig. 5(d) depicts the
t-SNE-based projection [38] of feature vectors after training
within the sampled intricate regions, where red denotes φ t,1 ,
green represents φ s,1 enhanced by NRE, and blue corresponds to φ s,1 without NRE. This visualization underscores the
capacity of NRE to facilitate closer alignment of intricate features between the student and teacher models. Consequently,
we posit that hard feature distillation by NRE can enhance the
student model’s ability to recognize normals, thereby reducing
the frequency of false-positive detections.
G. Direction-Guided Regularization
The DGR uses a feature direction regularization technique [39] to explicitly amplify the divergence of abnormal
feature pairs between the student and teacher models.

Fig. 6. Illustration of three types of DGR. (a) DD. (b) MDD. (c) RD.
(d) Qualitative comparison with an abnormal sample. The anomaly maps are
provided. (e) t-SNE projection of feature vectors within both an abnormal
region (⋆) and a normal region (•).

Recently, two principal forms of DGR are identified: denoising
direction (DD) and maximum discrepancy direction (MDD).
This study examines the inherent limitations of both DD and
MDD and introduces an innovative RD approach to counteract
these weaknesses.
1) Denoising Direction: In the DD approach, the synthetic
anomaly regions are treated as noise, prompting the student
network to denoise within the feature space. While previous
studies like DeSTSeg [20] have implemented denoising via an
encoder–decoder network, we redefine DD from a regularization perspective. Specially, both the normal image xn and its
perturbed version xâ are fed into the student network. The DD
regularization loss is then computed as follows:

L dd =

L Pâ 


1 XX
s,l
1 − cos φ s,l
pâ , φ pn̂
Nâ l=1 p

(6)

â

where pâ represents the position of the simulated abnormal
features, while pn̂ corresponds to normal features, both determined by the synthetic anomaly mask m.
s,l
L dd aims to align φ s,l
pâ with φ pn̂ . For distinct anomalies,
t,l
t,l
s,l
φ p differs from φ p . Since φ p is optimized to mimic φ t,l
pn̂ ,
â
n̂
n̂
s,l
t,l
we expect φ p to also exhibit differences from φ p . However,
â
â
t,l
in cases of subtle anomalies, φ t,l
pâ may resemble φ pn̂ , leading
to weak discrimination due to the approximation sequence
s,l
t,l
t,l
φ s,l
pâ → φ pn̂ → φ pn̂ → φ pâ . Fig. 6(a) demonstrates this issue
of weak discrimination, and Fig. 6(d) DD presents a case of
Capsules where a subtle anomaly is not detected.
2) Maximum Discrepancy Direction: In the MDD
approach, the objective is to directly optimize φ s,l
pâ to attain
t,l
the maximum distance from φ p , echoing the strategy used
â
in CDO [15] and Pull&Push [16]. Specially, xâ undergoes
simultaneous processing by both the teacher and student
networks, resulting in the MDD loss function defined as

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

follows:
L mdd =

Pâ 

L


1 XX
s,l
cos φ t,l
,
φ
.
pâ
pâ
Nâ l=1 p

(7)

â

Compared with DD, MDD offers superior discrimination
capabilities. However, in cases of subtle anomalies, MDD
s,l
may induce significant deviations between φ s,l
pâ and φ pn̂ . This,
in turn, may cause training instability and heighten sensitivity
to normal patterns. This instability is illustrated in Fig. 6(b),
while Fig. 6(d) MDD showcases an instance where numerous
delicate normal structures are erroneously detected, primarily
due to this heightened sensitivity.
3) Reliable Direction: To address the drawbacks of both
DD and MDD, we devise the RD regularization technique,
which seeks to uphold MDD’s high discriminative capability
while incorporating a directional constraint guided by the
t,l
similarity between φ t,l
pâ and φ pn̂ . Initially, we normalize the
s,l
t,l
t,l
s,l
t,l
feature vectors of φ t,l
pâ , φ pâ , and φ pn̂ to obtain e pâ , e pâ , and e pn̂ ,
respectively. Subsequently, we calculate the projections of et,l
pâ
t,l
s,l
t,l
t,l
t,l
s,l t,l
and es,l
pâ onto e pn̂ as qâ⊥n̂ = e pâ ·e pn̂ and qâ⊥n̂ = e pâ ·e pn̂ . Then,
t,l
we determine the direction consistency between et,l
pâ and e pn̂
t,l
t,l
using dâ|n̂ = sign(cos(et,l
pâ , e pn̂ )). Finally, we formulate the RD
loss as follows:


MDD
PC
z
}|
{
Pâ
L
}|
{
z



1 X X
cos et,l , es,l + ||q t,l − d t,l · q s,l ||2 
L rd =
2
pâ
pâ

â⊥
n̂
â|
n̂
â⊥
n̂
Nâ l=1 p

Algorithm 1 REDAD Pseudocode, PyTorch-Like
Input: T-S Models (φ t , θ t ) and (φ s , θ s )
Output: (φ t , θ t ), (φ s , θ s ) and Anomaly Map Sam
t
t
s
1 Train: Load (φ , θ ) and Initialize (θ )
2 for x n ← dataloader (Xtrain ) do
3
xâ , m = Perlin (xn ) ⇔ (2)
4
L ce = CE (yt (xâ ), yt (xn )) ⇔ (3)
5
L nr e = NRE (φ tpn , φ spn ) ⇔ (4)
6
φ tp , φ sp , φ tp = m ⊙ φ t (xâ ), m ⊙ φ s (xâ ), m ⊙ φ t (xn̂ )
â
â
n̂
7
etp , esp , etp = Normalize (φ tp , φ sp , φ tp )
â
â
n̂
â
â
n̂
8
L r d = DGR (etp , esp , etp ) ⇔ (8)
â
â
n̂
9
L r edad = L ce + αL nr e + β L r d ⇔ (9)
10
Backward (L r edad ) and Update (θ s ), ATM (θ t )
11 end
t
t
s
s
12 Test: Load (φ , θ ) and (φ , θ )
13 for x i ← dataloader (Xtest ) do
14
Sam = CalcAM (φ t (xi ), φ s (xi )) ⇔ (10)
15 end

H. Anomaly Score Calculation
In the inference stage, we feed each xi ∈ Xtest into both the
teacher and student networks. The multihierarchical features
φ t,l and φ s,l are extracted and resized to the same spatial
resolution as the first-layer feature map (H1 , W1 ). Then the
fused anomaly score can be calculated as

â

(8)
where PC stands for projection constraint. The mechanism of
RD is illustrated in Fig. 6(c). For subtle anomalies where
t,l
φ t,l
pâ and φ pn̂ align in the same direction, RD encourages
t,l
divergence between es,l
pâ and e pâ in the mirror direction, thereby
mitigating the instability observed in MDD. Conversely, for
larger anomalies where these vectors are oriented oppositely,
RD optimizes divergence along the direction of maximum discrepancy, thereby preserving MDD’s discriminative capacity.
Fig. 6(d) depicts the anomaly maps generated by DD,
MDD, and RD, respectively. Notably, RD-based regularization
demonstrates an ability to discern subtle anomalies more effectively than DD, while mitigating sensitivity toward delicate
normal structures, when compared with MDD. In addition,
Fig. 6(e) provides a comparative visualization of features for
both the abnormal and normal regions, using t-SNE [38].
In the abnormal region, the student features for RD (⋆) and
MDD (⋆) are more distant from the corresponding teacher
feature (⋆) than the student feature for DD (⋆). Conversely,
for the normal region, the student features for RD (•) and
DD (•) are closer to the teacher feature (•) than the student
feature for MDD (•). This comparative analysis underscores
the proficiency of RD-based DGR in addressing the inherent
limitations of both DD and MDD.
Finally, the total loss of REDAD is then expressed as
L redad = L ce + αL nre + β L rd
where α and β serve as regularizers.

(9)

sp =

L
X


s,l
1 − cos φ t,l
.
p , φp

(10)

l=1

The anomaly score map {s p | p ∈ (H1 , W1 )} is interpolated
to have the resolution of the input image size (H0 , W0 ) and
Gaussian filtered for smooth boundaries.
For the anomaly localization task, we can obtain the
anomaly mask with a threshold τ by
SAL (xi ) := { p|s p > τ, p ∈ H0 × W0 }.

(11)

For the image-level AD task, the maximum score of the
anomaly map is taken as the AD score
SAD (xi ) :=

max s p .

p∈H0 ×W0

(12)

The pseudocode for the train and test procedures of REDAD
is shown in Algorithm 1, where θ is the model parameter.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
1) Dataset Descriptions: The MVTec AD [1] comprises
15 datasets for AD, encompassing ten object classes and
five texture types, and serves as a widely recognized standard for benchmarking AD algorithms. The anomalies within
these datasets primarily consist of various structural changes.
The more recent VisA dataset [40] extends this concept
by incorporating a diverse array of objects characterized by
complex structures, multiple instances, and variations in scale.
VisA represents the largest open-source industrial AD dataset
to date, comprising 10 821 high-resolution color images of

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5018713

TABLE I
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND PRO ON THE MVT EC [1] DATASETS . AVG . T., AVG . O., AND AVG . A LL
A RE THE AVERAGE R ESULTS OVER THE T EXTURE , O BJECTIVE , AND A LL C ATEGORIES , R ESPECTIVELY. T HE T OP P ERFORMANCE
I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

12 different objects. The 3-D dataset MVTec3D AD [41]
creates a task to localize mainly geometric anomalies in 3-D
objects. MVTec3D includes 4147 scans captured by a 3-D
sensor from ten object categories, each providing both RGB
and point cloud data. When localizing geometry anomalies in
MVTec3D, we do not use 3-D scans, as the proposed REDAD
only requires RGB images as inputs.
2) Experimental Settings: We used the WResNet50 [42]
as the backbone in the S-T models, aiming for a balanced
tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency. We configured
L = 3, enabling the extraction of feature maps from the
outputs of the first three hierarchies. All the images in both
the training and testing datasets were resized to 256 × 256.
For data augmentation, we exclusively applied normalization
with the ImageNet mean and variance to the input images.
For optimization, we used the AdamW optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 32. In addition,
we adopted an exponential moving average (EMA) [43] with
a decay rate of 0.9 to update the student model parameters.
The training process encompassed 100 epochs. Regarding
the loss function (9), we assigned weights of 1 and 0.1 to
α and β parameters, respectively. The threshold τ in (11)
was determined as the globally optimal value based on the
F1-score, facilitating the accurate segmentation of abnormal
regions in qualitative evaluations. Finally, we used a Gaussian
filter with a standard deviation of σ = 4 to smooth the
anomaly score map, as described in Section III-H. Model
training and testing were conducted on a computer equipped
with an Intel1 Xeon1 CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU.
3) Evaluation Metrics: We adopted the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) based on
produced anomaly scores to calculate AD at image-level
performance (I-AUROC). Localization performance was evaluated using the AUROC at pixel level (P-AUROC) and
PRO [8]. For I-AUROC, P-AUROC, and PRO, a higher value
indicates better detection performance.
1 Registered trademark.

B. Comparisons to State-of-the-Art Methods
We conducted a comparative analysis of REDAD’s performance against several prominent competitors, including
CFlow [28], ReConPatch [27], DDAD [24], STPM [10],
MemKD [13], CDO [15], Pull&Push [16], DeSTSeg [20], and
EfficientAD [14]. Notably, CFlow exemplifies the normalizing
flow approach, while ReConPatch and DDAD represent the
cutting-edge memory bank-based and reconstruction-based
methodologies, respectively. STPM serves as the benchmark
for general KDST-based methods. CDO, Pull&Push, and
DeSTSeg are recognized as leading KDST-based approaches,
relevant to our DGR method, as elaborated in Section III-G.
EfficientAD combines KDST and reconstruction methods,
while MemKD integrates KDST and memory bank methods,
both achieving state-of-the-art performance. It is worth noting
that ReConPatch, MemKD, Pull&Push, and EfficientAD are
not publicly available, whereas the remaining comparison
methods are open-sourced.
As detailed in Tables I and II, REDAD exhibits superior performance across both the MVTec and VisA datasets.
Specifically, REDAD achieved notable improvements over the
baseline STPM, with a 3.5% enhancement in I-AUROC, a
2.3% increase in P-AUROC, and a 3.2% boost in PRO for the
MVTec dataset, and a 5.0% gain in I-AUROC, a 1.6% rise
in P-AUROC, and a 5.4% improvement in PRO for the VisA
dataset. When compared with its closest competitors, including CDO, Pull&Push, and DeSTSeg, REDAD demonstrates
superior anomaly image classification and anomaly pixel
localization capabilities. Furthermore, in comparison to stateof-the-art methods such as ReConPatch, DDAD, MemAD,
and EfficientAD, REDAD achieves comparable performance
in I-AUROC and the highest scores in P-AUROC. For the
3-D AD dataset MVTec3D, we only compared REDAD with
STPM, MmeKD, and CDO, as these were the only methods
that had tested the MVTec3D dataset in their work. It can
be observed in Table III that REDAD outperforms STPM by
6.1% in I-AUROC, 1.5% in P-AUROC, and 3.8% in PRO.
In addition, REDAD surpasses CDO in all three metrics.

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND PRO ON THE V IS A [40] DATASETS . T HE T OP P ERFORMANCE I S H IGHLIGHTED

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS IN T ERMS OF I-AUROC, P-AUROC, AND
PRO ON THE MVT EC 3D [41] DATASETS . T HE T OP
P ERFORMANCE I S H IGHLIGHTED

This exceptional performance in anomaly localization can be
attributed to two key aspects of our proposed method. First, the
NRE module enables the model to reinforce intricate feature
learning between the student and teacher models, thereby
reducing false alarms. Second, our DGR technique effectively
controls the distillation of synthetic anomalies between the
teacher and student models, thereby endowing the model with
high discriminative power for anomalies. In other words, when
facing scenes with complex detailed structures and subtle
defects, REDAD often outperforms other competitors.
To underscore the exceptional performance of REDAD,
Fig. 7 displays qualitative outcomes from selected samples
across the MVTec, VisA, MVTec3D, and our curated datasets
of vacuum flasks and wheel hubs. These results highlight
REDAD’s consistent efficacy in identifying a broad spectrum
of defects. This achievement is attributed to REDAD’s ability
to simultaneously address the prevalent challenges within the
KDST framework, including data shift, normality forgetting,
and anomaly overgeneralization, thereby ensuring its effectiveness across various industrial applications.

C. Issues’ Mitigation
We assessed the effectiveness of the proposed ATM, NRE,
and DGR modules in addressing issues present in general
KDST-based methods. The MVTec dataset is used, and the
texture and object categories are analyzed separately. Based

on the basic setting in (1), we integrated each of the three
modules separately, with the results depicted in Fig. 8.
1) Data Shift: As illustrated in Fig. 8(a), the implementation of ATM led to a notable reduction in KD loss. This is due
to the domain adaptation for the feature maps of the teacher
model by BN updating in ATM, and then they can be highly
aligned with the feature maps of the student model which
is learned using the MVTec datasets. The texture category,
specifically Grid, experienced a more significant decrease
compared with the object category, Bottle. This disparity is
attributed to texture category images being less similar to the
images in the pretrained ImageNet dataset than those in the
object category [see Fig. 7(a)].
2) Normality Forgetting: To verify the effectiveness of NRE
in remembering the normality, we analyzed the cumulative
histogram distribution (CHD) of normal feature similarity
between the teacher and student networks using the testing
datasets. Fig. 8(b) shows that the inclusion of NRE resulted
in a greater proportion of high similarity feature pairs than it
without NRE, indicating enhanced consistency of normality.
3) Overgeneralization: To verify the effectiveness of DGR
in overcoming anomaly overgeneralization, we analyzed the
CHD of anomaly feature similarity between the teacher and
student networks using testing datasets. For the abnormal
regions, Fig. 8(c) clearly demonstrates that the application
of DGR shifted the model’s focus toward lower similarity,
indicating a heightened level of discrepancy.
D. Ablation Studies
We conducted ablation studies to assess the individual
contributions of REDAD’s components, and the outcomes
using the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D datasets are presented
in Table IV. By contrasting Case 1 with Cases 2, 3, and 4,
it becomes evident that ATM, NRE, and RD individually
exhibit enhanced performance over the baseline KDST. This
observation underscores the efficacy of each component when
evaluated in isolation. Furthermore, in comparing Case 3 with
Case 4, our analysis reveals that NRE surpasses RD in imagelevel performance, whereas RD excels over NRE at the pixel
level. We hypothesize that NRE’s ability to efficiently address
the challenges associated with normalcy retention, as discussed
in Section III-F, significantly reduces false-positive detections,
thereby enhancing image-level AD. Concurrently, the explicit

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5018713

Fig. 7. Qualitative results of the proposed REDAD on (a) MVTec, (b) VisA, (c) MVTec3D, and (d) collected datasets of vacuum flasks and wheel hubs.
Original images, ground-truth masks, and anomaly maps are listed from top to bottom.

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDIES ON REDAD

Fig. 8. Issues’ mitigation verified using the MVTec dataset. The categories
of texture (top) and objects (bottom) are analyzed separately. (a) Loss plots to
verify the influence of ATM using grid (top) and bottle (bottom) categories.
(b) Similarity statistics of normal regions to verify the influence of NRE.
(c) Similarity statistics of abnormal regions to verify the influence of DGR.

utilization of synthetic anomalies through DGR effectively
improves anomaly pixel localization. Ultimately, in Case 7,

our integrated REDAD approach attains superior performance,
emphasizing the complementary nature and synergistic effects
of the three modules. In addition, we evaluated three types
of DGR methods—DD, MDD, and RD—in Cases 5, 6,
and 7, respectively. The outcomes affirm that the proposed
RD method outperforms others, reinforcing its reliability and
efficacy.

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

E. Comparison of Different Backbones and Resolutions
The choice of backbone architecture and image resolution
significantly affects the performance of localization
tasks [28]. This research evaluates various backbones,
such as ResNet18, ResNet34, ResNet50, ResNet101, and
WResNet50, at two resolutions, 256 × 256 and
512 × 512, using the MVTec dataset. The results
are shown in Table V. Our findings indicate that
WResNet50 at 256 × 256 offers the optimal balance between
accuracy and efficiency. Larger models with increased
parameters, such as ResNet101, even at 512 × 512, yield
minimal improvements or, in some cases, show no significant
enhancement in performance. Consequently, for this study,
we have selected WResNet50 operating at 256 × 256.

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT BACKBONES AND
R ESOLUTIONS U SING THE MVT EC DATASET

TABLE VI
C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON IN T ERMS OF I NFERENCE S PEED (FPS)
AND M ODEL S IZE (MB)

F. Complexity Evaluation
This study assesses the computational and memory complexity of the proposed REDAD, focusing on inference speed
and model size. STPM [10], CDO [15], Pull&Push [16],
and REDAD share identical network architectures during
inference; thus, their inference speeds and model sizes can
be considered equivalent. In contrast, DeSTSeg [20] and
MemKD [13] augment the fundamental student–teacher structure with additional components, theoretically resulting in
slower inference times compared with methods based solely
on the student–teacher framework. The inference speed of
the diffusion-model-based DDAD [24] largely depends on
the noise time step configuration, whereas ReConPatch [27],
which uses a memory-bank approach, depends on the memorybank’s dimensions. Given these dependencies, neither DDAD
nor ReConPatch is suitable for a fair comparative analysis.
Consequently, we selected CFlow [28] and EfficientAD [14]
as benchmarking counterparts.
The comparison of inference speeds and model sizes is
shown in Table VI. The inference speed was measured on
a computer with an Intel Xeon CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla
V100 GPU. All the models were assigned to the GPU for
inference acceleration, and the data input time was factored
in during the evaluation of each method’s inference speed.
The model size is defined as the size of all the floating point
parameters in the corresponding model. CFlow consists of a
feature-extraction network and a decoder. Since the decoder is
typically more complex, CFlow has a larger model size and a
slower inference speed than REDAD. EfficientAD integrates a
student–teacher architecture with a denoising decoder. Generally, this combination would result in a slower inference speed
and a larger model size compared with REDAD. However,
EfficientAD trains a lightweight patch description network
(PDN) to boost its inference speed. As a result, EfficientAD
demonstrates faster inference and a relatively efficient model
size. Therefore, to further enhance REDAD’s inference speed
and reduce its memory footprint, adopting a smaller and more
efficient backbone is a promising approach.
G. Parameters’ Analysis
This study analyzes three critical hyperparameters: the
anomaly localization threshold τ in (11), the hierarch param-

Fig. 9. Thresholds established using the globally optimal F1-score for each
category across the test datasets of MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D.

eter L, and the h-qunatile in (5). The metrics I-AUROC,
P-AUROC, and PRO are threshold-agnostic, thereby avoiding
bias in model performance evaluation. However, in practical
applications, setting a threshold is necessary to obtain final
AD results. Fig. 9 illustrates the thresholds established using
the globally optimal F1-score for each category across the
MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D test datasets. It can be observed
that the optimal thresholds relative to the F1-score fall within
the interval [0.5, 0.8]. Notably, the optimal thresholds for
MVTec3D lie within a narrower and higher range of [0.7, 0.8],
compared with those of MVTec and VisA. This phenomenon
can be attributed to the reduced background interference and
simpler targets with more pronounced defects in the MVTec3D
dataset [see Fig. 7(c)], leading to higher confidence in the
anomaly scores produced by the model. Consequently, the
selection of threshold τ in practical applications should consider specific scenarios. For instance, a high threshold, such
as 0.6 or 0.7, can ensure high precision in settings with clean
backgrounds and clear defects. Conversely, a lower threshold,
like 0.4 or 0.5, may be appropriate for complex backgrounds
or subtle defects to maintain high recall.
The hierarch parameter L also significantly influences
model performance. Lower level feature maps capture detailed
information from images, while higher level feature maps

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5018713

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT H IERARCHS

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT h-Q UANTILE

Fig. 10. Inspection of surface defects on vacuum flasks and car wheel hub.
(a) Inspection device of vacuum flasks, ① stripe light sources, ② camera,
③ vacuum flask, and ④ rotating rod. (b) Inspection device of wheel hub,
① robotic arm, ② camera, ③ blue planar light source and reflector, and
④ wheel hub.

extract coarser semantic features. REDAD uses a pyramid
structure to compare differences between teacher and student
model feature maps at various levels for AD. Table VII
presents the detection effectiveness under different hierarchs.
Using only the top-level feature map (L = 1) leads to a notable
decline in performance on the MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D
datasets, as many fine-grained anomalies go undetected. Conversely, incorporating all the stage feature maps (L = 5) does
not improve performance and even causes a slight decrease
due to increased noise from finer grained features. Therefore,
we selected L = 3 as the hierarch parameter to balance detail
and semantic information effectively.
The h-quantile of the cosine similarity values between the
teacher and student features is used to identify the hard
normal feature in the NRE module of the proposed REDAD.
In REDAD, a gradual decline of h is implemented [see (5)].
To demonstrate the benefits of this gradual decline, we compared it with fixed values of h. The results are presented in
Table VIII. Specifically, h = 1.0 indicates no hard example
mining, while h = 0 implies no utilization of normal features
for distillation. It is evident that when h = 0, the model
performance is significantly degraded, highlighting the importance of distillation using normal features. Comparing h =
1.0 and h = 0.1 reveals that excessive hard example mining
from the beginning of training leads to a decline in model
detection performance. In contrast, comparing h = 1.0 and
h = 0.5 shows that moderate hard example mining enhances
performance. The gradual hard example mining approach
adopted by REDAD achieves the best performance. This is
because the gradual decline of h ensures a broader scope of
feature distillation during the initial stages of training, thereby
contributing to a more stable training progression.

DATASET D ESCRIPTION AND P ERFORMANCE ON VACUUM
F LASKS AND W HEEL H UBS

TABLE IX

H. Real-World Applications
For additional validation, this study has compiled two
real-world industrial inspection datasets: vacuum flasks and
aluminum alloy car wheel hubs, both meticulously annotated
pixel-by-pixel. The used inspection equipment and exemplar
images are showcased in Fig. 10. Comprehensive details
regarding the datasets are provided in the central column of
Table IX. The study has amassed a collection that includes
30 varieties of vacuum flasks with six types of defects
and 20 types of wheel hubs with nine types of defects.

The image solution of both the datasets is 2448 × 2048.
To detect tiny defects, high-definition images were divided into
4 × 4 patches, which were then fed into the models during
both the training and testing phases. We used 6000 normal
images to train the models for both the vacuum flasks and
wheel hubs. The rest of images were used for testing. The
performance results are detailed in the rightmost column of
Table IX, and the visual detection results are displayed in
Fig. 7(c). The quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that the proposed REDAD method achieved impressive
performance in AD.
In real industrial production lines, high-speed processing is
essential due to the fast pace. Patch preprocessing, however,
can lead to increased processing time. On the contrary, without
patch preprocessing, it becomes challenging to detect minute
defects. Therefore, the decision on how to patch must consider
factors such as production speed, defect size, and hardware
resources. In addition, compared with the existing AD datasets,
our collected datasets exhibit significant interclass differences
between patches within the image dataset. Taking wheel
hubs as an example, different models of wheel hubs have
distinct structures. As the number of product models increases,
a substantial amount of normal images are required to train
the model, which imposes a heavier training burden. Furthermore, the introduction of new wheel hub models necessitates
retraining of the model, further complicating its deployment
and application.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we introduce REDAD, a reliable image
AD technique designed to address issues such as data shift,
normality forgetting, and anomaly overgeneralization present
in general KDST-based methods. REDAD consists of three
components: ATM, NRE, and DGR, each targeting the respective issues. The effectiveness of the synergistic effect of these
three modules has been validated through ablation experiments. Our method has undergone thorough testing on three
benchmark datasets (MVTec, VisA, and MVTec3D) for AD,

5018713

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

with outcomes showing considerable enhancements compared
to other leading methods. Specifically, compared with the
baseline model STPM [10], REDAD exceeds 3.5% (5.0%,
6.1%) in I-AUROC, 2.3% (1.6%, 1.5%) in P-AUROC, and
3.2% (5.4%, 3.8%) in PRO for the three datasets, respectively.
In addition, we analyze the impact of model structure, input
image resolution, number of hierarchical feature maps, and
anomaly localization threshold on model performance, as well
as conduct complexity evaluation, providing a more comprehensive evaluation. Furthermore, we validate REDAD on
two collected real-world industrial product inspection datasets,
confirming its effectiveness in practical applications.
Looking ahead, given the prevalence of data streams with
frequent product changes in industrial manufacturing, we plan
to incorporate REDAD into a continuous image AD learning
framework to accommodate such dynamic industrial environments. In addition, to meet the demand for lower inference
latency, we will further adopt a more lightweight backbone
to improve inference efficiency while maintaining detection
accuracy.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec
AD—A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[2] K. Liu, H. Wang, H. Chen, E. Qu, Y. Tian, and H. Sun, “Steel
surface defect detection using a new Haar–Weibull-variance model in
unsupervised manner,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 66, no. 10,
pp. 2585–2596, Oct. 2017.
[3] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
“Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, pp. 1–37, Dec. 2020.
[4] M. Liu, Y. Jiao, J. Lu, and H. Chen, “Anomaly detection for medical images using teacher–student model with skip connections and
multiscale anomaly consistency,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
pp. 1–15, 2024.
[5] A. Vijayan, B. Meenaskshi, A. Pandey, A. Patel, and A. Jain, “Video
anomaly detection in surveillance cameras,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Advancement Technol. (ICONAT), Jan. 2022, pp. 1–4.
[6] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024.
[7] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[8] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
[9] F. Tung and G. Mori, “Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1365–1374.
[10] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student–teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis.
Conf., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–14.
[11] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14897–14907.
[12] F. Szatkowski, M. Pyla, M. Przewi˛eźlikowski, S. Cygert, B. Twardowski,
and T. Trzciński, “Adapt your teacher: Improving knowledge distillation
for exemplar-free continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Workshops (ICCVW), Oct. 2023, pp. 3504–3509.
[13] Z. Gu et al., “Remembering normality: Memory-guided knowledge
distillation for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16401–16409.
[14] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “EfficientAD: Accurate visual
anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 127–137.

[15] Y. Cao, X. Xu, Z. Liu, and W. Shen, “Collaborative discrepancy
optimization for reliable image anomaly localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 10674–10683, Nov. 2023.
[16] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Chen, “Pull & push: Leveraging
differential knowledge distillation for efficient unsupervised anomaly
detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2176–2189, May 2023.
[17] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Asymmetric student–teacher networks for industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
pp. 2591–2601.
[18] J. Zhu, P. Yan, J. Jiang, Y. Cui, and X. Xu, “Asymmetric teacher–student
feature pyramid matching for industrial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13, 2024.
[19] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[20] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student–teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[21] A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and R. Girshick, “Training region-based
object detectors with online hard example mining,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 761–769.
[22] A. Vasilev et al., “Q-space novelty detection with variational autoencoders,” in Proc. MICCAI Int. Workshop Comput. Diffusion MRI,
Jan. 2020, pp. 113–124.
[23] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and
U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection
with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54,
pp. 30–44, May 2019.
[24] A. Mousakhan, T. Brox, and J. Tayyub, “Anomaly detection with
conditioned denoising diffusion models,” 2023, arXiv:2305.15956.
[25] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
[26] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. ICPR Int. Workshops Challenges, 2021, pp. 475–489.
[27] J. Hyun, S. Kim, G. Jeon, S. Hwan Kim, K. Bae, and B. J. Kang,
“ReConPatch : Contrastive patch representation learning for industrial
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 2041–2050.
[28] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
[29] J. Jiang, S. Wei, X. Xu, Y. Cui, and X. Liu, “Unsupervised anomaly
detection and localization based on two-hierarchy normalizing flow,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[30] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.
[31] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8310–8319.
[32] D. Wang, E. Shelhamer, S. Liu, B. A. Olshausen, and T. Darrell, “Tent:
Fully test-time adaptation by entropy minimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–15.
[33] S. Schneider, E. Rusak, L. Eck, O. Bringmann, W. Brendel, and
M. Bethge, “Improving robustness against common corruptions by
covariate shift adaptation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NIPS), 2020, pp. 11539–11551.
[34] Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Shi, J. Liu, and X. Hou, “Revisiting batch normalization for practical domain adaptation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2016, pp. 1–10.
[35] W. Zhou, C. Xu, and J. McAuley, “BERT learns to teach: Knowledge
distillation with meta learning,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2022, pp. 7037–7049.
[36] B. Heo, J. Kim, S. Yun, H. Park, N. Kwak, and J. Y. Choi,
“A comprehensive overhaul of feature distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1921–1930.

HU et al.: REDAD: A RELIABLE DISTILLATION FOR IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

[37] S. Kornblith, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Do better ImageNet models transfer better?” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2656–2666.
[38] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008.
[39] Y. Wang, L. Cheng, M. Duan, Y. Wang, Z. Feng, and S. Kong,
“Improving knowledge distillation via regularizing feature norm and
direction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Jan. 2023,
pp. 20–37.
[40] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pretraining for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022,
pp. 392–408.
[41] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3DAD dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” in
Proc. 17th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag. Comput. Graph. Theory
Appl., 2022, pp. 202–213.
[42] B. S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” in Proc.
Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2016, pp. 87.1–87.12.
[43] D. Brotons, T. Vogels, and H. Hendrikx, “Exponential moving average of
weights in deep learning: Dynamics and benefits,” Trans. Mach. Learn.
Res., pp. 1–27, Jan. 2024.

Wenrui Hu received the B.S. degree from the
School of Optoelectronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, in 2014.
He was an Associate Professor at the Precision
Perception and Control Research Center, Institute
of Automation, CAS. He is currently a Researcher
at China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing. His
research interests include computer vision, pattern
recognition, and artificial intelligence.

Wei Yu received the B.S. degree from the Department of Computer Engineering, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing,
China, in 1994, and the master’s degree from the
School of Computer Science and Technology, BUPT,
in 1997.
He was an Associate Professor at the School of
Computer Science and Technology, BUPT. He is
currently the Director of the Service Technology Department, China Mobile Research Institute,
Beijing. His research interests include telecommunication network, Internet, big data, and artificial intelligence.

5018713

Yongqiang Tang received the B.S. degree from
the Department of Automation, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China, in 2014, and the
Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China,
in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, CAS.
He has published more than 60 papers in major
international journals and conferences including the
ICML, NeurIPS, SIGKDD, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS
AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE
P ROCESSING (TIP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA (TMM), IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS), IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE), IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING (TGRS), IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY
(TCSVT), and IEEE J OURNAL OF B IOMEDICAL AND H EALTH I NFORMATICS (JBHI). His current research interests include machine learning, computer
vision, and data mining.

Yuan Xie received the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Beijing, China, in 2013.
He is currently a Professor at the School of
Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. He has published
more than 100 papers in major international journals and conferences including the ICML, NeurIPS,
CVPR, IJCAI, CIKM, ACMMM, IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE
I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON I MAGE P ROCESSING (TIP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA
(TMM), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING (TGRS),
and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECH NOLOGY (TCSVT). His current research interests include machine learning,
computer vision, and data mining.

Wensheng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree
in pattern recognition and intelligent systems
from the Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China,
in 2000.
He joined the Institute of Software, CAS, in 2001.
He is a Professor of machine learning and data
mining and the Director of the Research and
Development Department, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). He is also
with Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China.
His research interests include computer vision, pattern recognition, and
artificial intelligence.