168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Resource-Efficient Low-Rate DDoS Mitigation With
Moving Target Defense in Edge Clouds
Yuyang Zhou , Member, IEEE, Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Zhi Ouyang, Student Member, IEEE,
and Zongyao Chen , Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Edge computing (EC) and container technology have
been widely used to increase the flexibility of computing resources
and meet the real-time requirements for delay-sensitive applications. However, it has been shown that edge clouds suffer from
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, especially low-rate
DDoS (LDDoS) attacks, which can be stealthily crafted to evade
detection. Unfortunately, the existing techniques cannot provide
effective protection, and the amplifying resource consumption
and service delay incurred by defense greatly diminish the
efficiency of the security system. To tackle these problems, this
paper exploits Moving Target Defense (MTD) techniques and
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for mitigating the impact
of LDDoS attacks in a resource-efficient way by effectively
partially invalidating, avoiding, and tolerating malicious traffic
that improves the Web services’ security and quality with lower
overhead. We first design several lightweight MTD mechanisms
by utilizing the built-in functionalities of container-based applications. To further optimize resource utilization, we formulate the
interaction between attacks and MTD deployment as a Markov
decision process (MDP), and adopt a deep Q-network (DQN)
algorithm to achieve the best trade-off between effectiveness and
overhead. The simulations prove the effectiveness of the proposed
approach in LDDoS mitigation, with a significant improvement
of up to 31.7% in security and 26.95% in service quality when
compared with other practical strategies, and the experimental
results also demonstrate that our method exhibits the lowest
response time per request of 276.66 ms and the lowest webpage
load time of 1.413 s with only 2.44% additional memory usage in
comparison with previous works in the high workload scenario.
Index Terms—Low-rate distributed denial-of-service attacks,
moving target defense, resource efficient, deep reinforcement
learning, edge computing.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N RECENT years, cloud computing [1], [2] has been
considered an emerging paradigm because it enables end

Manuscript received 29 May 2023; revised 22 April 2024 and 24 May
2024; accepted 9 June 2024. Date of publication 13 June 2024; date of
current version 14 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62202097 and
Grant No. 62072100, in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
under Grant No. 2024T170143 and Grant No. 2022M710677, in part by the
Jiangsu Funding Program for Excellent Postdoctoral Talent under Grant No.
2022ZB137, and in part by the Southeast University-China Mobile Research
Institute Joint Innovation Foundation under Grant No. CMYJY-202100163.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was N. Zincir-Heywood. (Corresponding author: Guang Cheng.)
The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, also with Purple Mountain
Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China, and also with the Jiangsu Province
Engineering Research Center of Security for Ubiquitous Network, Nanjing
211189, China (e-mail: yyzhou@seu.edu.cn; chengguang@seu.edu.cn;
oyzhi@seu.edu.cn; solar1s@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3413685

users to access cloud services and resources anywhere and
anytime. Nevertheless, the emergence of real-time applications, especially Internet of Things (IoT) applications [3],
points to the fact that cloud computing cannot solely provide
efficient services for delay-sensitive requests. To deal with
this problem, edge computing (EC) [4] is proposed to meet
the real-time requirements and has been widely studied in
scientific and commercial fields of IoT [5]. Compared to
traditional cloud computing, EC has the advantage of lower
transmission delay, as the computation tasks are transferred
from the remote cloud center to edge clouds [6], which process
data in the proximity of IoT devices without requiring a large
amount of data exchange [7].
As the key to the success of cloud computing, virtualization
undoubtedly enhances the flexibility and utility of underlying
hardware, and provides stability in aspects of cost and resource
efficiency [8]. Due to the latest advances in lightweight virtualization techniques, containers [9] have been rapidly developed
and widely used, especially in microservices, IoT, and EC,
due to fewer resources and flexible deployment [10]. The
combination of EC and containers will provide the potential
to develop a wide range of new services and applications [11],
hence bringing innovation and driving new businesses.
Despite the advantages and broad applications of edge
computing, the number of security problems [12], [13], as
well as the difficulty in solving these issues in EC-assisted
applications, has dramatically increased with the continuous expansion of scale [14]. The rapid growth in IoT
devices, coupled with weak security protection, has promoted the IoT-based Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
attack [15], [16], [17], which remains one of the most challenging areas of research for the EC environment. Recent
research has shown that advanced attackers could elaborately
mimic the patterns of legitimate users to construct malicious
requests [18] and launch a DDoS attack in a stealthy fashion,
which is being called the Low-rate DDoS (LDDoS) attack [19].
Due to the strong concealment and destructiveness [20],
LDDoS attacks have the potential to produce more damage
(e.g., service interruption, service quality degradation, etc.)
without suitable detection and effective defense methods.
Therefore, LDDoS mitigation has become a crucial challenge, and it attracted researchers to propose methods that
can effectively defeat stealthy attacks. Most of the existing
DDoS mitigation methods (e.g., firewall [21], intrusion detection system [22], traffic redirection [23], etc.) rely on prior
knowledge about the attack characteristics, however, these

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

Fig. 1.

Bird’s-eye view of the proposed LDDoS mitigation approach.

methods suffer from efficiency and accuracy, which could be
insufficient and hysteretic in the LDDoS attack scenarios. This
prompts a need for proactive protection of the EC environment
to effectively defeat LDDoS attacks.
In the last few years, Moving Target Defense (MTD)
has emerged as a promising proactive solution for DDoS
mitigation [24], [25]. It aims to defend against cyberattacks
in a proactive manner by introducing uncertainty and unpredictability on the attacker side [26], [27]. MTD-based methods
usually modify the attack surface of the protected system,
to reduce the opportunity of being exploited by attackers,
forcing them to continually investigate the target system and
increasing their efforts to launch a successful attack [28].
However, there still exist several drawbacks in these
MTD-based studies. Prior work has been proposed against
flooding attacks, which cannot be directly applied to LDDoS
mitigation due to the considerable differences in attack
mechanisms [29]. Also, existing methods suffer from a lack
of strategic guidance for defense deployment, thus strong
attackers may bypass MTD techniques through long-term
exploration [30] and wage attacks successfully. Furthermore,
frequent MTD adaptations (e.g., network reconfiguration, virtual machine (VM) migration) may have negative effects on
the EC environment by reducing the quality of service (QoS)
on top of high overhead [31], which could be improved. These
reasons motivate us to achieve an effective balance between
resource use and security improvement with lightweight MTD
mechanisms and optimized strategies.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a novel LDDoS mitigation method, namely RE-MTD, for
preventing LDDoS attacks by establishing and deploying MTD
techniques in a resource-efficient way. Fig. 1 shows the bird’seye view of the proposed method. The key insight of this
work is to develop ever-changing network properties, thus

169

shifting the attack surface to confuse attackers. Specifically,
we establish lightweight MTD mechanisms based on the
built-in functionalities of the containers, to force attackers to
continuously chase the target. In order to achieve resourceefficient defense, we exploit deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) [32] to develop an adaptive and intelligent strategy
that dynamically mitigates the QoS degradation caused by
LDDoS attacks within limited edge resources. We first formulate the interaction between attack and defense deployment
as a Markov decision process (MDP). Then, we adopt a
deep Q-network (DQN) algorithm to obtain the best trade-off
between resource use and effectiveness. Finally, we conduct a
set of extensive simulations and experiments to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method. The main contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
• We present a novel LDDoS mitigation approach, namely
RE-MTD, to ensure enhanced security and acceptable
overhead by deeply exploiting MTD and DRL techniques.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first
MTD-based solution for defeating hard-to-detect LDDoS
attacks in a resource-efficient manner.
• We propose novel MTD mechanisms specifically
designed for the EC environment by leveraging the
intrinsic characteristics of containers. These lightweight
and flexible mechanisms can be developed and deployed
rapidly, and are effective in collaboratively mitigating
LDDoS attacks across a wide range of attack strengths
and scales.
• We introduce a DRL-based framework to facilitate
defense deployment within limited resource constraints.
We formulate the interaction between the LDDoS attacks
and the MTD mechanisms as an MDP, and we utilize a
DQN algorithm to solve the optimal policy, which allows
us to achieve resource-efficient defense by balancing
resource consumption and mitigation effectiveness.
• We evaluate our method through simulations and
real-world experiments. The results demonstrate that
RE-MTD can effectively mitigate LDDoS attacks,
even in resource-constrained environments. Furthermore,
RE-MTD outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in terms of both QoS and security, while imposing
less overhead.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
review the related work in Section II, and we provide the
threat model in Section III. Section IV demonstrates the
details of MTD mechanisms and Section V introduces the
DRL-based strategy. Section VI presents the evaluation results.
We discuss the limitations of our work and future challenges
in Section VII. Finally, we conclude in Section VIII. All the
notations used in this paper are shown in Table I.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
A. LDDoS Attacks in the EC Environment
DDoS attacks have always been a huge threat [14], and
attackers have been modifying their attack format to evade
detection [33]. In recent years, LDDoS has emerged as
a sophisticated attack [34]. This attack exploits specific

170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE I
L IST OF T ERMINOLOGIES W ITH T HEIR E XPLANATORY T ERMS

vulnerabilities through semantic methods and sends malicious
requests at a low frequency [35].
According to [36], LDDoS attacks can be divided into three
categories: The first is QoS attack that aims to deteriorate the
QoS of the victim. For example, in Shrew attack [37], the
attacker launches attack pulses based on the Retransmission
Timeout (RTO) mechanism of TCP sender [38], shutting off
most of the legitimate TCP sources and greatly diminishing the
QoS of normal users. The second is Slow DDoS attack which
targets Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) servers [39]. It
occupies hundreds of HTTP connections and prevents it from
processing further requests, significantly increasing webpage
loading time or rendering it inaccessible [40]. The third type is
Service Queue attack that directly affects the data processing
queue of the services. For example, the Low-Rate DDoS
attacks against Application Servers (LoRDAS) [41] repeatedly
insert malicious requests to occupy the service queue, so the
server cannot process other incoming packets.
We mainly focus on Slow DDoS mitigation in this paper
due to the development of IoT applications, especially mobile
Web applications in the EC environment.
B. LDDoS Mitigations in the EC Environment
Traditional DDoS detection methods [22], [42], [43] utilize
attack patterns, such as byte or packet sequence, to identify
malicious traffic using Machine Learning (ML) or Deep
Learning (DL) algorithms. Nevertheless, they may fail due to
the absence of typical features in LDDoS attacks.
To cope with this problem, researchers have presented other
mitigations against these attacks. For instance, Wu et al. [44]
explored the multifractal characteristics over a small scale
of network traffic to detect attack traffic by the algorithm
of multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MF-DFA).
Nevertheless, as attackers become aware of the detection
rules, the accuracy will continue to decrease. Tang et al. [45]
proposed an improved adaptive Kohonen Network clustering algorithm for TCP-targeted attack detection, which
can detect attack bursts and estimate the beginning and
end times of attacks. However, the clustering-based method
may misclassify attack traffic as benign. Besides, they also
proposed LtRFT [46], a Learning-To-Rank (LtR) based
scheme for mitigating LDDoS attacks targeted at flow tables in

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) environment. However,
this method cannot be applied to non-SDN scenarios. With the
formulation of the Slow DDoS attack scenario by queueing
theory, Li et al. [19] regulated the number of containers
for different users and proposed an attack mitigation method
based on resource allocation, but it lacks deployment guidance
with an optimized strategy. Fu et al. [47] utilized sequential information to build the frequency domain features and
proposed Whisper to detect malicious traffic in real time.
It was resistant to some attacks, but the feature extraction
and construction operations are consuming considerable costs.
Tripathi and Hubballi [41] utilized the Chi-Square distance
between the legitimate and attack traffic for the detection
of LoRDAS attacks against HTTP/2. In addition, an event
sequence analysis-based scheme was proposed by Tripathi [48]
to detect attacks with a real-time strategy, however, it cannot
maintain high accuracy once the characteristics of attack traffic
change.
C. MTD-Based Solutions
Recently, a series of MTD-based methods have been
proposed to defeat high-rate DDoS attacks in the cloud
environment. The main goal of these solutions is to force
attackers to chase the wrong targets with higher efforts and
costs, thereby keeping DDoS attacks away from the protected
system.
Debroy et al. [49] mitigated DDoS attacks by optimizing
the frequency of VM migrations in the SDN-enabled cloud
environment. However, this method suffers from heavy overhead. In a similar scenario, Zhou et al. [24] proposed an MTD
framework based on adaptive network configurations and a
signaling game model to improve the effectiveness. Although
this scheme optimizes the defense strategy based on game
theory, it may be ineffective against stealthy low-rate attacks.
To achieve lightweight DDoS defense in the EC environment, Zhou et al. [50] adopted container migrations and
utilized the Reinforcement Learning (RL) method to optimize
defense strategies, however, it does not have multiple defense
mechanisms or achieve a trade-off between effectiveness and
resources. Similarly, Zhang et al. [25] modeled the configuration mutation as a Markov decision process and defeated
DDoS attacks based on the solver of optimal network configurations. They also proposed a collaborative mutation-based
MTD (CM-MTD) method [51], which dynamically adjusts
network properties and invalidates different stages of the
cyber kill chain with DRL-based guidance. Nevertheless, these
methods are equipped with high computation resources. In
addition, Osei et al. [52] formulated an optimization problem
using a game-theoretic model for DDoS attack mitigation and
Kim et al. [32] exploited deep reinforcement learning to build
a moving target defense countermeasure framework. Although
these schemes protect network systems against DDoS attacks,
it does not guarantee the QoS of the deployed services.
Table II entails a comprehensive feature analysis and comparison of RE-MTD with state-of-the-art works. RE-MTD
is the individual approach that supports resource-limited
EC environment and lightweight defense deployments by

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

171

TABLE II
F EATURES C OMPARISON B ETWEEN RE-MTD AND S TATE - OF - THE -A RTS W ORKS

leveraging the inner characteristics of containers as MTD
mechanisms, and exploits the DRL algorithm to optimize
effectiveness against LDDoS attacks while reducing unnecessary overhead. The major drawback of the existing works is
that the static and deterministic patterns provide opportunities
for stealthy attackers to evade malicious traffic detection,
resulting in low accuracy and limited effectiveness. Also,
the previous MTD-based solutions were primarily designed
to mitigate high-rate flooding attacks with high economic
costs and resource consumption. Unlike the earlier works, REMTD establishes a proactive LDDoS attack-targeted method
to prevent and tolerate malicious requests without relying on
attack patterns. The proposed method enables multiple edge
servers to achieve resource-efficient defense while considering
a wide range of attack strengths and scales.

III. T HREAT M ODEL
In our investigation, we consider an edge cloud in which
exists a couple of containers to provide Web services for
legitimate users. We assume that the key infrastructure and the
service provider are trusted, while the attackers come from an
external network. To perform a comprehensive analysis and
develop effective countermeasures against these attacks, we
consider a threat model in terms of explicit assumptions about
the attack goal, implementation process, and capabilities the
attackers have.
A. Attack Goal
In general, attackers exploit the inherent vulnerabilities
of HTTP protocols and stealthily send attack requests to
fill the connection pool of container-based Web services.
Consequently, legitimate users’ HTTP connection attempts
would be denied, thereby downgrading their experiences or
further causing network paralysis.

Especially, we consider a rational and tactful attacker who
aims to maximize his/her damage to the EC environment in
this study. That is, the attacker will amplify the attack effect
as much as possible by carrying out LDDoS attacks based
on the controlled IoT devices, maximizing the number of
compromised service replicas or legitimate users that suffer
from these attacks.
B. Attack Process
To formally depict the details of the attack process, we
assume that the attacker performs a multi-round attack by following the Cyber Kill Chain (CKC), from early reconnaissance
to the actual attack, as follows:
• The attackers first utilize scan tools (e.g., Nmap and
ZMap) to perform reconnaissance on the edge cloud, but
may only obtain short-term and fragmentary results due
to the existence of MTD mechanisms.
• According to their existing knowledge and experience,
attackers assess the impact they will have on potential
victims prior to taking actions, and select appropriate
container instances as attack targets.
• The attackers then carry out LDDoS attacks on these
container-based Web services to accomplish their destructive goals via cyber weapons (e.g., SlowHTTPTest1 and
RU-Dead-Yet2 ).
• Following that, they evaluate the payoffs obtained from
launching attacks and move on to the next round of
reconnaissance.
C. Attacker’s Capabilities
The key to fighting a DDoS attack is resource competition,
the defender will never cope with it if the attacker owns
unlimited resources. Therefore, we focus on an attacker who
1 https://github.com/shekyan/slowhttptest
2 https://sourceforge.net/projects/r-u-dead-yet/

172

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

An overview of the proposed MTD-based mitigation mechanisms, including (a) service scaling, (b) service replicas, and (c) port hopping.

controls a botnet that consists of a certain number of IoT
devices, and we scope his/her capabilities as follows:
• We assume that the attacker can wage LDDoS attacks in
a stealthy fashion and has the ability to evade detection
at the very beginning of attacks.
• Given the limited resources that the attacker can afford,
he/she cannot compromise all the serving containers
among the edge cloud.
• According to the information collected during the reconnaissance phase, all attackers will strategically choose
targets to maximize their attack effect.
• Due to the different characteristics of attackers, their
behavior patterns will also be different. A cursory
attacker’s actions may be immutable during the attack,
while the actions of a tactful attacker may change based
on the continuous observation of the victims.
For the sake of not weakening the attacker’s ability, we
assume that he/she may know in advance that there exist
some defensive methods but not their specific deployment. In
addition, tactful attackers have the ability to adjust actions or
turn to another target, however, they may insist on taking the
same action on the initial target due to reconnaissance results
and comprehensive judgment.
IV. MTD-BASED M ITIGATION M ECHANISMS
In order to compromise the system from the external
network, the attacker has to identify potential targets and
explore weaknesses that can be exploited during the reconnaissance phase. To weaken the attacker’s inherent time and cost
advantages, MTD has emerged as a proactive defense mechanism that breaks the static nature by dynamically moving
the attack surface and creating uncertainty on the attacker’s
side. The existing MTD techniques have demonstrated their
effectiveness in greatly enhancing network resilience and
effectively protecting the system from attacks [53].
Due to the capabilities of elastic capacity provisioned in
the cloud, a lot of MTD techniques have been implemented
to defeat high-rate DDoS attacks, such as IP address randomization, topology mutation, and VM migration. Regardless
of the effectiveness of these solutions, the high resource
consumption makes them unsuitable for resource-constrained

edge computing scenarios, and the accompanying high latency
cannot meet the real-time requirements of IoT applications.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations of existing
work, we propose a few container-based mitigation methods
with lightweight properties, which can be flexibly deployed
with a small overhead. Specifically, we leverage dynamicity,
redundancy, and variability to design these MTD mechanisms
corresponding to the characteristics of Slow DDoS attacks, to
effectively maintain service availability and optimize resource
consumption. Fig. 2 shows an overview of the proposed MTDbased mitigation mechanisms.
A. Service Scaling
As we discussed in Section III, LDDoS attackers first
craft and send a massive number of requests. Then, they
exploit HTTP behavior to keep the request connections open
by sending each request body very slowly. In this case,
HTTP requests from legitimate users cannot be received and
processed by Web services. According to the characteristics
of filling HTTP connections by the Slow DDoS attack, we
exploit the dynamicity in the context of MTD to utilize service
scaling for dynamically defeating it.
The scaling of service enables service providers to consistently increase or decrease the desired computing and
storage resources of container-based applications, according
to resources needed to handle all incoming requests or
events. Despite the fact that it is primarily an operation and
maintenance technology, fluctuation in resources caused by
service scaling will directly affect the maximum number of
supported connections. When the defender scales up one of
the running Web services, it will be able to allow more parallel
HTTP connections. In contrast, the number of connections the
container can support will decrease as it has been scaled down
to release some resources.
Specifically, when the maximum number of connections
exceeds the capacity that an attacker can occupy (the attacker
owns limited resources), it is possible for the container to
process additional requests from legitimate users, thereby
ending the current LDDoS attack. Conversely, we can scale
down some idle containers to release unnecessary resources
if there is no attack. This feature enables us to flexibly

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

manipulate the resource consumption of the protected service
and achieve efficient defense by strategically scaling the
container. In addition, since service scaling has been built
into many container management systems (e.g., Kubernetes,
Docker Swarm, etc.), we can easily deploy this mechanism
in the EC environment, and exploit it to implement moving
target defense without deteriorating the QoS of the protected
application.
B. Service Replicas
Generally, a service replica is a copy of the running service
created from the template of the primary container-based
service. This technology fulfills the service provider’s purpose
by creating and deleting replicas on demand to reach the
desired number at any given time. In the proposed method,
replicas can be utilized to effectively release the negative
impact of malicious requests on the container due to its
redundancy to provide additional services.
As an example, we can create a replica of the high-load (or
compromised) Web service, and redirect half of the currently
active connections to the new container, thus generating a
connection pool with about half the load. After that, the
upcoming requests can be processed as long as the attacker
is unable to fill the enlarged connection pool further. Even
if the powerful attacker can increase its attack strength to
open new connections, we can also mitigate the attack by
creating multiple replicas. As another example, it is possible
to reduce the number of running replicas, in the case of little
attacking firepower and a large amount of idle resources,
effectively reducing resource consumption without affecting
defense performance.
Similarly, there have been corresponding technologies in
the container management systems that can help us quickly
implement this MTD mechanism. For example, an application deployment is usually composed of a set of pods
in Kubernetes, therefore, we can achieve service replication
by deploying multiple identical pods and routing different
requests to one of the corresponding pods [54].

173

This implementation of an SDN controller may bring extra
overhead and result in a single point of failure, while attackers
could break through the address translation once they receive
real IP addresses. Therefore, to mitigate the attack efficiently
without introducing additional risks, we adopt the method of
port hopping as the MTD mechanism to prevent attack traffic
from reaching the target.
In particular, the modified port number can be generated
using a hash function (e.g., SHA-256) with a shared session
key among legitimate users [57]. Besides, the Real-Time Clock
(RTC) is strictly synchronized via an external server with the
Network Time Protocol (NTP) [58]. In the container-based
EC environment, the port hopping mechanism can be realized
in a lightweight way (e.g., modification of configuration files
via the APIs of the management platform), to dynamically
change the port number of a particular service. As a result, the
LDDoS attacker will lose the information of the entry point
when it works, and will have to spend extra time and effort
to determine the new port number after the move. Fortunately,
with the help of the Web cache, the problem of dropping
existing connections caused by this movement will not be
easily perceived by users, and we discuss the time overhead
caused by port hopping in the reward function in Section V-A4.
V. DRL-BASED O PTIMAL MTD D EPLOYMENT
Despite the effectiveness brought by MTD mechanisms,
unreasonable deployment will weaken the effect and incur
additional resource consumption. Therefore, it is necessary to
optimize strategies for resource-efficient defense. As expected,
we aim to improve the resilience and survivability of protected
services against LDDoS attacks within the constraints of
limited edge resources. At the same time, according to the
different characteristics of the proposed MTD mechanisms,
fair and reasonable selection of them in different attack
scenarios is also essential in decision-making [59]. Due to
the advantages of dealing with continuous control problems,
especially in dynamic situations, we adopt the method of DRL
to solve the optimization problem of MTD deployment.

C. Port Hopping
Despite the capability of the above MTD mechanisms to
mitigate LDDoS attacks via resource scheduling, there is
still a chance that the radical attacker might concentrate all
their firepower to strike a specific target, leaving computing
resources unavailable for resisting attacks in the action phase.
Thus, it is necessary to design another MTD mechanism to
prevent the attack from causing further damage when it occurs
in the event of limited resources.
Unlike MTD mechanisms that rely on resource scheduling,
hopping-based mechanisms should move an entry involved in
the attack chain so that the LDDoS attack can be stopped
immediately. Although the existing methods can certainly
mitigate attacks, there are some unavoidable drawbacks in
part of them. For example, IP address randomization is useful
in preventing unauthorized attackers from achieving network
reconnaissance, but its deployment usually relies on SDN
architecture [55] or virtual-real IP address translation [56].

A. Problem Formulation and Environment Modeling
In this section, we first consider an edge cloud that provides
multiple container-based services for legitimate users. Then,
we formulate the interaction between LDDoS attacks and
the MTD deployment as an MDP problem, which can be
completely described through its state space, action space,
transition probabilities, and reward function as follows.
1) State Space: We denote the set of services deployed in
the edge cloud by N, written as N = {1, 2, . . . , N }, where
N indicates the maximum number of services that can be
accommodated. Also, we consider MTD operations in discrete
time steps T = {1, 2, . . . , T }, where T denotes the time
horizon. According to the basic idea of MDP, the system state
St is only related to the state and action of the previous time
step.
In our scenario, the intelligent agent is responsible for
observing the state of every service at the beginning of each

174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

time step, which can be represented as
sn (t) = {rn (t), cn (t), en (t), pn (t)}, n ∈ N,

(1)

where rn (t) is a binary value to indicate the running status
for the nth service, cn (t) denotes the number of current
connections, and en (t) represents the resource consumption
for computation and storage. In addition, pn (t) is the port
number at this time step. Thus, we can obtain that St =
{s1 (t), s2 (t), . . . , sN (t)}, where t ∈ T.
2) Action Space: We assume that the agent makes defense
decisions in an independent manner, implying that it may
decide to take different actions on specific services. An
intelligent agent can execute one of three MTD mechanisms
as described in Section IV. Hence, we can define the action
space for any state in St as


rep
hop
, t ∈ T,
(2)
At = Ãsca
t , Ãt , Ãt
Here, the action space is discrete. Specifically, Ãsca
=
t
sca , a sca , . . . , a sca } denotes the decisions of service scaling
{at,1
t,2
t,N
sca = 1 represents the capacity expanat time step t, where at,n
sca = −1 means scaling
sion of the n-th service whereas at,n
rep rep
rep
down this service. Similarly, Ãrep
= {at,1
, at,2 , . . . , at,N
}
t
denotes the actions of service replicas for all deployed
rep
services, where at,n = 1 denotes the creation of a copy for the
rep
= −1 represents deleting a replica.
n-th service whereas at,n
hop hop
hop
= {at,1
, at,2 , . . . , at,N
} shows a series
Furthermore, Ãhop
t
hop

of port hopping decisions on this edge cloud, where at,n = 1
triggers the change of the port number for the given service.
∗ = 0 indicates no action, that is,
It is worth noting that at,n
this MTD mechanism will not be implemented on this service
at this time.
3) Transition Probabilities: Let St × At × St+1 → [0, 1]
denote the state transition function. Hence, P (s  |s, a) is the
transition probability to s  at the next time step, given that the
current state St is s while the agent chooses action a ∈ At
in this time step. This probability depends on the state of the
system, the way the attacker wage LDDoS attacks, and the
actions taken by the defender. Especially, we will obtain a
binary transition probability for deterministic transition, which
can be expressed as


(3)
P s  |s, a ∈ {0, 1}, ∀s, s  ∈ St+1 , a ∈ At ,
For example, if the defender decides to remain static while
the attacker maintains current malicious connections, then the
system state will not have a transition and P (s  |s, a) = 0,
where a is an array of all zeros and s  = s. Another example
is the decision to change the port number in the absence of
attacks, which can directly determine the following system
state.
4) Reward Function: In MDP, the reward function motivates an agent to take appropriate actions in each state to help
the agent reach the optimum policy [60]. Bear in mind that our
goal is to maximize the resource efficiency of proposed MTD
mechanisms against LDDoS attacks. Thus, when a defensive
action is selected at time step t, we define the reward Rt
with four key factors, including service quality fluctuations,

container security status, additional deployment resources, and
time cost, which can be represented as
q

Rt = αRt + βRts − ζRte − ηRtc , t ∈ T,

(4)

where α, β, ζ, and η are coefficients for balancing the reward.
First, the reward
of service quality fluctuations is defined
N
Δčn (t)
q
n=1
by Rt = N
, where Δčn (t) ∈ (−1, 1) denotes
n=1 rn (t)
the change in the load rate (the ratio of the current number
of connections to the upper limit). Second,the reward of
N
φn (t)rn (t)
N
container security status is defined by Rts = n=1
,
n=1 rn (t)

where φn (t) is an indicator that represents whether this
container is in a secure state, if so, its value is assigned
as 1, otherwise its value is assigned as 0. Then, we can
define the reward of additional deployment resources as Rte =
N
n=1 Δen (t), where Δen (t) represents the difference in the
deployment resource consumption at time step t. Finally, the
reward of time overhead is defined as the number of hopping

hop
services, which can be expressed as Rtc = N
n=1 at,n .
Thus, the first part of the reward function in Eq. (4)
captures the number of requests made to the Web services,
providing motivation for the intelligent agent to execute
appropriate MTD mechanisms. It aims to minimize the impact
of malicious connections on normal requests and enhance
the overall QoS for legitimate users. The second part is an
indicator that reflects the security status of the specific service.
It drives the agent to choose a strategy at each step to strive
to prevent malicious traffic from reaching the victim and
maintain system security. Furthermore, the implementation of
MTD mechanisms necessitates additional computing resources
and introduces time overhead. Consequently, the objective
of the third part is to minimize the utilization of defensive
resources beyond the service requirements. Additionally, the
fourth part emphasizes the reduction of unnecessary time
overhead through the strategic planning of the port hopping
mechanism.
5) Convergence: The proposed MTD-based method aims
to learn a strategy π for maximizing cumulative rewards,
which can optimize resilience to LDDoS attacks and resource
utilization in the EC environment. Therefore, we define it as
the long-term value, thereby the value function V π can be
expressed as
T

π
π
V (s) = E
γ t−1 R(t|St = s) ,
(5)
t=1

where E() is the expectation operator and γ ∈ (0, 1) is a
discount factor that ensures the agent considers the future
consequences of making an action at each state. It can be also
shown by manipulating the reward series in Eq. (5) that the
long-term value satisfies the Bellman equation [61] as
 
(6)
V π (s) = R(s, a) + γE V π s  ,
where R(s, a) is the immediate reward received after taking
action a in state s and V π (s  ) is the value function for the
successor state s  .
Theorem 1: Given a finite state and action space MDP, for
every policy π and state s, we can have V π (s) ≤ V ∗ (s).

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

Proof: Suppose there exists a policy π that satisfies

V π (s) > V ∗ (s) for some states. Consider taking the optimal

policy π ∗ at state s, V ∗ (s) can be expressed as the maximum
expected return over all possible actions such that

  
(7)
V1∗ (s) = max R(s, a) + γE V1∗ s  ,
a∈At

Based on our assumption, V π (s) > V ∗ (s), thus

  
V π (s) > max R(s, a) + γE V ∗ s  ,
a∈At

π

(8)

a∈At

This inequality implies that there must exist an action whose
value function is greater than the maximum expected return
obtained by taking the action at state s according to the
optimal policy π ∗ . In other words, policy π is yielding a
higher expected return at state s compared to the optimal
action prescribed by π ∗ , which means that we can improve the
policy π ∗ by choosing a different action a at state s. However,
this contradicts the definition of the optimal policy, which is
designed to maximize the expected return at each state.
Therefore, the assumption that V π (s) > V ∗ (s) for some
state s cannot hold, and we can conclude that the value
function of any policy is less than or equal to the return of
the optimal policy, i.e., V π (s) ≤ V ∗ (s) for all states s.
Theorem 2: Given a finite state and action space MDP, there
exists a unique optimal value function V ∗ (s).
Proof: Assume that there exist two distinct optimal value
functions V1∗ and V2∗ for any state s. Considering the
difference between the two optimal value functions, we can
describe it as
(10)

By substituting V1∗ (s) and V2∗ (s) into the Bellman optimality equation, we can deduce that
 
 
 
(11)
D(s) ≤ γE V1∗ s  − V2∗ s  = γE D s  ,
Using the contraction mapping principle [62], the distance
between two value functions should reduce with each iteration.
Hence, we can show that the right-hand side of the above
equation is less than or equal to γD(s), such that
D(s) ≤ γD(s),

(12)

Since γ < 1, the only way for this inequality to hold
is when D(s) = 0, that is, V1∗ (s) = V2∗ (s). Thus, we
have proven the uniqueness of the optimal value function in
MDPs.
In the Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm, the learning
agent estimates an action-value function (alternatively, Q-value
function) to determine the optimal action in each state. We
define the action-value function such that
T

π
π
γ t−1 R(t|St = s, At = a) , (13)
Q (s, a) = E
t=1

where Q π (s, a) is the mathematical expectation of the longterm return that is generated by a strategy. According to the
goal of MDP, all actions selected by the optimal strategy will
result in the maximum return. Hence, we can describe the
optimum action-value function and the optimum policy by the
following equations, respectively.
Q ∗ (s, a) = max Q π (s, a),

Since the value function V π (s) when taking the policy π
can be computed based on Eq. (6), we can deduce that
 

  
R(s, a) + γE V π s  > max R(s, a) + γE V ∗ s  , (9)

D(s) = |V1∗ (s) − V2∗ (s)|,

175

π ∗ (s) = arg max Q π (s, a),
π

(14)
(15)

This means that for all actions selected by the optimal
strategy, that is, A(t) = π ∗ (s), will maximize the actionvalue function Q π (s, a) in Eq. (13), and satisfy Q ∗ (s, a) ≥
Q π (s, a), ∀s ∈ St , a ∈ At .
B. DQN-Based Resource-Efficient Defense Strategy
Although the optimal strategy can be acquired by solving
the MDP via dynamic programming or exhaustive search,
it is impossible to trace state transition probabilities mathematically because of dynamic defensive actions and complex
state space. Recently, RL has been proposed as a promising
solution that can be used to solve the optimization problem
via trial-and-error. For example, Q-learning is a well-known
RL algorithm based on temporal difference, which can learn
the optimal strategy by interacting with the environment in a
certain period of time and continuously maintaining a Q-value
table [63]. According to Bellman equation [61], the Q-value
can be expressed as
Q(St , At ) = (1 − λ)Q(St , At ) + λ[Rt + γ max Q(St+1 , At+1 )],

(16)
where λ denotes the learning rate, which affects the learning
speed of Q(St , At ).
However, the conventional Q-learning algorithm suffers
from several disadvantages, such as state space explosion,
overestimation of action values, and long convergence time.
It is impractical to adopt Q-learning for this attack-defense
scenario with a large state and action space. Fortunately, DRL
can effectively capture network dynamics while solving complicated optimization problems with a low time complexity,
thereby improving problem-solving efficiency. Hence, DRL
is a promising method to address the resource management
problem for MTD deployment.
In this regard, we import Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to
solve the MDP problem, in which the learning speed will not
be significantly affected by the dimension of state and action
space. The DQN algorithm transforms the update problem
of the Q-value table into a function fitting problem, and the
approximate value function is parameterized as
Qω (St , At ) ≈ Q(St , At ),

(17)

where ω is the model parameter of the neural network.
The objective function value in the network training process
gradually approaches the optimal Q value, thereby solving the
optimization problem rapidly.

176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 1: DQN-Based MTD Deployment
Initialize the Q-value network Qω (St , At ) with ω;


− = ω;
2 Initialize the target network Qω − (St , At ) with ω
3 Initialize the experience replay buffer B;
4 for episode = 1 to K do
5
Initialize and acquire the initial state S1 ;
6
for t = 1 to T do
7
Select an action At at the state St via the ε-greedy
policy;
8
Compute the immediate reward Rt via Eq. (4);
9
Obtain the next state St+1 via Eq. (3);
10
Store transition (St , At , Rt , St+1 ) in B;
11
if the capacity of B ≥ M then
12
Randomly select a batch of samples
{(Si , Ai , Ri , Si+1 )M
i=1 } from B;
13
if Si = ST then
 for terminal time step
14
yi = Ri ;
1

15
16
17
18

 for non-terminal time step
yi = Ri + γ maxa  Qω − (Si+1 , a  );
1 M (y − Q (S , A ))2 ;
Minimize L = M
ω i
i
i=1 i
Reset ω − = ω every C steps;
else

1) Algorithm: Here, we illustrate the MTD deployment
process in Algorithm 1. Specifically, at the beginning of
the training period, we initialize the Q-value network
with the parameter ω in Line 1. The target network
with the same parameter and the experience replay buffer
B are initialized in Line 2 and Line 3, respectively.
Subsequently, Line 4 starts the main loop of the proposed
algorithm, and the iteration starts from an initial state S1
until finishing T time steps, which is called an episode
(Lines 4-6).
In each episode, the agent utilizes ε-greedy policy for selecting an action At in Line 7. This implies that it can derive the
optimal strategies and avoid staying in local optimization. The
algorithm exploits with probability 0 ≤ ε ≤ 1 to take a random
action or chooses the optimal strategy with probability 1 − ε.
It is worth noting that ε initially remains high and gradually
decreases after having sufficient experience. Then, Line 8
obtains the immediate reward Rt according to Eq. (4) and
Line 9 receives the next state St+1 through the state transition.
Since Q-network follows an experience replay approach, the
transition (St , At , Rt , St+1 ) is stored in the replay buffer B in
Line 10.
In order to ensure stability, the agent will learn from experience and randomly select a batch of M samples from the replay
buffer at each time step in Line 12. Then, Line 13 determines
if any of the selected samples reached the termination status,
that is, whether this training episode ends at this time step.
If so, the target value is expressed as yi = Ri , otherwise,
it will be represented as yi = Ri + γ maxa  Qω− (Si+1 , a  ),
where γ is a discount factor and a  is an arbitrary action. After
that, Line 17 minimizes the 
loss function L at each time step,
M
1
2
which is defined as L = M
i=1 (yi − Qω (Si , ai )) . Finally,
Line 18 updates the parameter of the target network every C
steps.

2) Illustration: Consider six services with initial state S1 =
{s1 (1), s2 (1), s3 (1), s4 (1), s5 (1), s6 (1)} in an EC environment, where s1 (1) is the status of the first service that includes
a four-tuple and can be obtained by using Eq. (1). Among
these services, two of them (e.g., Service 2 and Service 5) are
being under LDDoS attacks, resulting in abnormal service
state (s2 (1), s5 (1)). If we exploit existing methods such
as [32], [52], the network configurations of victim services are
continuously changeable according to specific rules or algorithms, which cannot guarantee long-term effectiveness against
powerful attackers when they are aware of the adaptation
patterns.
Diversely, the proposed DQN-based strategy finds the
optimal defensive action via trial-and-error. It may select A1 =
hop hop
(a1,2
, a1,5 ) at the first time step and obtain the reward
R1 and state S2 using Eqs. (3) and (4). As the learning
phase progresses, it learns experience from the stored buffer,
and minimizes the loss function by using Eqs. (5)–(17) and
immediate reward at each time step. When attackers have
sufficient knowledge and keep waging attacks on these two
victim services until T time step, this strategy adjusts defensive
sca , a sca ) according to current Q-value
actions to AT = (aT
,2 T ,5
network Qω (ST , AT ) for reaching the best trade-off between
effectiveness and resource consumption. That is, it scales up
the victim containers within resource constraints to support
more connections and tolerate malicious requests without
compromising service quality. Therefore, we can obtain the
optimal suggestion for defense deployment according to the
DQN algorithm, which allows for improved robustness and
resilience against LDDoS attacks by determining effective
MTD mechanisms to prevent attack requests or tolerate malicious traffic with lower overhead.
Although this algorithm does not conduct attack detection,
changes in service status will become an important indicator
of assessing system security and rewards brought by actions.
Furthermore, the proposed method is not triggered by specific
events, but relies on time steps for decision-making. Thus,
a smaller time interval will help timely update and optimize
strategies. In practice, defenders may be required to continuously perform or change defensive actions during intense
attacks, or they may remain inactive for several time steps to
reduce resource usage in the event of low threat.
VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our LDDoS
mitigation mechanism through extensive simulations and
experiments. First, we introduce the values of main parameters
used in our simulation and discuss the results under different
attack scenarios. And then, we study the effectiveness and
resource consumption of the proposed MTD-based mitigation
mechanisms and compare them with other practical strategies
on the testbed under LDDoS attacks. Finally, we compare our
approach with the SOTA methods in real-world experiments.
A. Simulation Setup
First of all, we consider an edge cloud with multiple
container-based Web services deployed in our simulation.

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

TABLE III
K EY PARAMETERS U SED IN THE S IMULATION

Herein, we build the custom EC environment to train RL
agents based on OpenAI Gym [64], which is a widely used
Python-based toolkit for connecting agents to RL problems.
We utilize the official Gym API3 to model environments
as a Python env class, which enables us to create the EC
environment and Web service instances very easily.
In detail, we set the maximum capacity of services with
corresponding resource consumption on the edge cloud, and
the maximum number of connections for running a Web
service is also presented. We have specified the legitimate
access of normal users and the available range of the port
hopping mechanism in the env class. Besides, we simulate
LDDoS attackers to send malicious traffic from a certain
number of connections after preseted reconnaissance time in
the environment. It is worth noting that in order to analyze
the performance of the proposed method in different attack
scenarios, we have adopted different action configurations for
the potential attack targets and attackers’ characteristics.
Finally, we execute the proposed MTD mechanisms and
DQN algorithm in the simulated EC environment. In each
episode, the intelligent agent decides current defensive actions
and port configurations, and then distributes these decisions to
all services. Table III summarizes the key parameters in our
simulation-based experiments, and the main hyperparameters
of DNNs are shown in Table IV. Note that the appropriate
coefficients in the reward function are determined based on our
understanding of the task and by reference to Reference [25],
to guide the agent’s learning and improve its performance.
However, there may be other factors at play, such as the initial
state, action selection policies, and environmental changes.
Therefore, we discuss the limitations in Section VII.
DRL models often require an adequate number of training
iterations to converge to an optimal solution, therefore, it is
significant to ensure that it has sufficient time to converge
and stabilize its internal representations and weights, leading
to improved performance. Nevertheless, excessive episodes
may also result in high computational demands. To strike a
balance between the training time required and the available
computational resources, we performed 10,000 episodes of
training and ran a test at every 500 steps, which allows
for substantial learning while being mindful of practical
considerations. In each test, the summation of all rewards in
each episode without a discount factor is viewed as a return.
3 https://github.com/openai/gym

177

TABLE IV
H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR THE DQN A LGORITHM

In each test, the current policy was evaluated with the average
return during 10 episodes for reducing the uncertainty of the
environment. Specifically, we repeated the procedure for ten
training runs with random seeds from 1 to 10 to obtain the
results, and analyzed the performance of the proposed MTDbased mitigation under four different scenarios according to
the threat model in Section III.
In detail, we define these attack scenarios as follows.
• Attackers with a single and constant (S & C) target. In
this scenario, the LDDoS attackers will select a target
initially and continuously attack it until the horizon.
• Attackers with a single and variable (S & V) target. The
adversaries are able to dynamically select targets based
on their knowledge, and they can choose to attack current
services or adjust their targets at each step.
• Attackers with multiple and constant (M & C) targets.
The attackers in this scenario will spread their malicious
requests equally across multiple services.
• Attackers with multiple and variable (S & V) targets.
The attackers will allocate malicious requests to multiple
services according to different weights, which can be
changeable as needed over time.
B. The Impact of Attack Strength
The effectiveness of the proposed method is evaluated in
terms of the average return during the training phase. The
performance under different attack strengths is presented in
Fig. 3, where the x-axis represents the number of episodes,
and the y-axis denotes the average return obtained from the
test under the current episode.
Regarding Fig. 3, the average return gradually increases for
all the attack scenarios, from a negative value to the highest
return of 50 when defending against 10 attackers under M &
C and M & V scenarios. The increase implies the effective
training of the intelligent agent under different scenarios, and
especially, the average return value of 50 indicates that all
services are in a normal state with less resource overhead and
proves the resource efficiency of the proposed method against
low-intensity attacks. Although more attackers pose a more
significant challenge to defense methods, our solution still
exhibits positive effectiveness (e.g., the average return values

178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. The average return of the proposed method under different LDDoS attack scenarios. (a) Impact of different numbers of static attackers to wage
the same attack target, (b) Impact of different numbers of dynamic attackers to compromise a single attack target, (c) Impact of different numbers of static
attackers to simultaneously wage multiple attack targets, (d) Impact of different numbers of dynamic attackers to deliver attacks on multiple targets.

are more than 19 eventually when defeating 50 attackers) due
to the guidance from the DQN-based strategy.
Across all the cases in Fig. 3, we can see that the proposed
method incurs the lowest effectiveness against 50 attackers,
achieving the approximate return value of 24, 19, 20, and 22,
respectively. The underlying reason is that when there are 50
attackers, all available connections that the services can handle
are occupied according to the simulation setup, resulting in a
serious shortage of computational resources for defense. As
a result, the intelligent agent can only make decisions in a
limited action space and the strategy derived from the DQN
algorithm will tend to drive all containers to change their port
numbers, leading to a slight decrease in return. Given the
resource limitations and similar effectiveness of implementing
port hopping, we did not further discuss the returns in scenarios
with a higher number of attackers. Moreover, we assume that
all the legitimate users request services at a stable rate in our
simulation, however, there may exist a sudden surge of requests
from a part of newcomers in real scenarios. Therefore, we
discuss the limitations in Section VII.
Besides, the maximum return under single-target attack
scenarios is around 45 whereas that in multi-target attack
scenarios can reach up to 50. This may be attributed to two
reasons, the first is that the strategy space of the proposed
method is limited when dealing with single-target attacks,
because it is necessary to avoid damaging the security status
of other normal services. The second is that when the system
recovers from multi-target attacks, it will incur a higher return
based on the reward function. Another interesting observation
is that when defending against attackers with multiple and
constant targets, the effectiveness is almost the same, ranging
from 45 to 50 if there are no more than 40 attackers, as
illustrated in Fig. 3(c). This can be attributed to the attack
characteristic in which attackers evenly distribute malicious
requests, MTD techniques can fully utilize existing sufficient
resources to effectively resist attacks and improve security.
Note that the performance in most variable scenarios is lower
than that in constant scenarios. This phenomenon indicates that
attackers will be more threatening when they can dynamically
adjust their attack targets, and also proves the necessity of
designing MTD mechanisms to deal with them.
There is an interesting observation that in scenarios with a
constant attack target and a relatively small attacker population,
the proposed methodology has demonstrated remarkably similar

reward outcomes (can be seen in Fig. 3 (a) and (c)). For instance,
the proposed method achieved a return value of around 50 when
defending against 10, 20, and 30 attackers in the M & V scenario.
That is, our approach selects similar defensive actions under
relatively low attack intensity, resulting in comparable defensive
effectiveness. This phenomenon can be attributed to the fact
that in scenarios with a constant attack target, the proposed
method, when facing relatively low-intensity attacks, tends to
prioritize the service scaling and replication mechanisms through
the DQN algorithm to minimize unnecessary time overhead.
However, as the attack intensity increases and available resources
gradually diminish, the method shifts its focus to the port hopping
mechanism to ensure security. However, this observation has
not been observed in the multi-target scenarios, particularly in
the variable multi-target setting. In this case (can be seen in
Fig. 3 (d)), the defensive reward continually decreases as the
attack intensity increases with the number of attackers. The
underlying reasons for this are twofold. Firstly, the protected
targets need to be dynamically adjusted due to changes in
the attack strategy. Secondly, the resource scheduling for the
multi-target scenario is more complex, making it infeasible to
achieve high defensive rewards through similar defensive actions
alone.
C. The Impact of MTD mechanisms
To analyze the impact of different MTD mechanisms on
the effectiveness and to demonstrate the necessity of the three
mechanisms designed in this work, we individually evaluate
the performance of the three MTD mechanisms as well as their
combined application against the aforementioned four kinds of
attack scenarios in this section. Additionally, in low-intensity
attack scenarios where resources are relatively abundant, the
differences in defensive reward resulting from varying defensive actions cannot be fully manifested. Therefore, to validate
the importance of appropriate defensive action orchestration
with a high level of intensity, we compare the effect of service
scaling, service replicas, port hopping, and their combined
deployment in terms of the average return against 50 LDDoS
attackers.
As we can see from Fig. 4, the combined MTD mechanisms
have a significant advantage over any of a single mechanism,
achieving the average return value of around 28, 20, 20, and
26 on all attack scenarios. Especially, when dealing with the

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

179

Fig. 4. The comparison of the proposed MTD mechanisms under different LDDoS attack scenarios. (a) Impact of different defense mechanisms against
constant single-target attacks, (b) Impact of different MTD techniques to defeat variable single-target attacks, (c) Impact of different MTD mechanisms to
defend against constant multi-target attacks, (d) Impact of different defensive methods to mitigate variable multi-target attacks.

Fig. 5. The comparison of the proposed DQN-based MTD deployment strategy with two baseline strategies under different LDDoS attack scenarios.
(a) Comparison of different defensive strategies against constant single-target attacks, (b) Impact of different MTD strategies to defeat variable single-target
attacks, (c) Impact of different deployment strategies to defend against constant multi-target attacks, (d) Effectiveness of different strategies to mitigate variable
multi-target attacks.

constant single-target attack, there is a significant increase in
the average return (at most from −10 to 28) after switching
the port hopping to the combined mechanisms. The underlying
reason is that independently deploying an MTD mechanism
is ineffective in mitigating LDDoS attacks, whereas the combination of multiple MTD mechanisms can seamlessly work
together to strengthen the defense, thereby resulting in a higher
return value. Moreover, it is worth noting that both service
scaling and service replicas will bring negative returns across
all scenarios, achieving the return value of at least −5, −5,
−50, and −47, when defeating powerful LDDoS attacks. This
result discloses that the unreasonable MTD deployment may
not increase the effectiveness against attacks, but will cause
unnecessary waste of computing resources.
With more details, we further observe that the port hopping
is similarly effective to the combined mechanisms, achieving
an average return value of around 20 under the multitarget attack scenarios. Due to the settings of the simulation
environment, all available connections that the services can
handle are occupied, leaving insufficient idle computational
resources for scaling up or creating replicas when there are 50
attackers. Therefore, we cannot defend through the scheduling
of physical resources and must instead choose port hopping
to block LDDoS attack traffic. Although it may affect the
experience of current legitimate users, it effectively maintains
service availability under high-intensity attacks. Even in the
presence of a larger number of attackers, as defense remains
restricted to port hopping, the defensive rewards will be similar
to the scenario with 50 attackers. Since there is no significant
difference in returns, we did not further discuss scenarios
with a higher number of attackers in our study. Last but
not least, according to the results among all scenarios, we

can conclude that the proposed solution can optimize the
scheduling of different MTD mechanisms, thereby improving
resource efficiency significantly.
D. The Impact of Deployment Strategies
To further examine the effectiveness and overhead of our
approach, particularly the impact of different decision-making
methods, we consider the aforementioned attack scenarios
against LDDoS adversaries, and compare the proposed DQNbased policy with two baseline strategies as follows.
• Random strategy. The defender randomly performs an
action from the proposed MTD mechanisms on a random
service at each time step.
• Deterministic strategy. The defender selects a deterministic action on the victim services according to the current
system status and expert knowledge.
Similar to Section VI-C, we also set up an LDDoS attack
scenario with 50 attackers to investigate the Web performance
of the aforementioned strategies under high-intensity attack
conditions in this section. We first measure the number of connections induced by the different defense strategies, thereby
evaluating the Web service quality. Subsequently, we compare
the number of Web services protected by the proposed policy
and other baseline strategies across all edge environments.
Finally, we analyze the defensive resource utilization required
for deploying these strategies under varying attack scenarios.
1) QoS Evaluation: In order to verify the capability of
the proposed approach to maintain QoS while guaranteeing
efficient performance, we evaluate the average rate of available connections for all the Web services deployed on the
edge cloud. Fig. 5 depicts the QoS performance of different

180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE V
R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION OF THE D IFFERENT D EPLOYMENT S TRATEGIES W HEN D EFENDING AGAINST 50 LDD O S ATTACKERS

defensive strategies against four kinds of LDDoS attacks,
where three broken lines represent the random strategy, deterministic strategy, and DQN-based strategy.
As we can see, the deterministic strategy exhibits a gradual
upward trend and finally achieves an available connection rate
of 0.372, 0.392, 0.177, and 0.184 across four kinds of attack
scenarios. Similarly, the proposed DQN-based strategy also
reaches convergence as the time step increases, achieving the
available connection rate of 0.428, 0.45, 0.428, and 0.442,
respectively. This observation indicates that these strategies
will ensure sufficient resources for providing network services
to legitimate users. Meanwhile, the DQN-based strategy
achieves a higher available connection rate (at most a 26.95%
increase under the variable multi-target scenario) when compared with the deterministic strategy. This can be attributed to
the success of the DRL method in obtaining a better strategy
than that of acquiring expert knowledge, leading to higher QoS
within limited resources.
Nevertheless, the QoS of the random policy exceeds the
DQN-based policy in several time steps under the variable
single-target scenario, achieving at highest connection rate of
0.467, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). This is because the randomly selected action has a certain probability to significantly
increase QoS, but it may bring unnecessary overhead and
incur lower effectiveness. Furthermore, there is a dramatic
fluctuation in the QoS of the random strategy across all the
scenarios. Especially, the connection rate of this strategy fluctuates between 0.334 and 0.467 under the S & V scenario. The
underlying reason is that unreasonable defense deployment
driven by the random policy may affect the normal operation
of the Web service itself, causing instability in the QoS and
affecting the user experience. Therefore, we can conclude
that the proposed DQN-based strategy can help the defender
maintain a high level of QoS and provide users with stable
Web services even under high-intensity LDDoS attacks.
2) Security Evaluation: To intuitively exhibit the
performance of our approach against LDDoS attacks, we first
measure the average number of surviving services during 50
time steps. Then, the results under different attack scenarios
are compared with other strategies, as illustrated in Fig. 6.
As we can see, the DQN-based policy can protect more
services from attacks than the other two strategies in all
scenarios, achieving the average survivability rate of 0.98,
0.97, 0.97, and 0.95, respectively. Especially, the average
number of available services with our method is almost 1.5
times that under the random policy and the deterministic
strategy, when defending against attackers with multiple and
variable targets. And beyond that, the other two strategies can
prevent at most 63.8% of Web services from being attacked

Fig. 6. The comparison of different deployment strategies for implementing
the MTD mechanisms against powerful LDDoS attacks.

under this scenario. Due to the guidance of the DQN-based
strategy, our approach is capable of keeping more than 8
Web services running at all times. The results disclose that,
regardless of the behavior and preference of the attackers, the
resistance of the proposed method is significantly higher than
using other defensive strategies.
Another interesting observation is that the average
performance of the random policy is slightly higher (at most
a 4% increase under the M & C scenario) than that of the
deterministic strategy. The underlying reason may be that the
random strategy does not consider the negative effects it may
have on QoS (see Fig. 5) and happens to improve security due
to some extreme actions. In addition, the lower effectiveness of
the deterministic strategy suggests that consistently following
certain patterns, rather than dynamically selecting the optimal
defensive strategy, would negatively impact security.
3) Overhead Evaluation: To provide some additional
insights on the defense resource consumption against attackers
with different attack strengths, we report the resource usage
for the defense deployment according to these three strategies, which is presented in Table V. Note that the resource
consumption is quantitatively measured based on the resource
usage of the minimum service in Table III, that is, 1 means
that this strategy will use 0.1-core CPU and 0.5 GB RAM.
We observe that when compared with the multi-target scenarios, the defense resource consumption of all three strategies
is lower in the S&C and S&V scenarios. For example, the
random strategy incurs an average resource consumption of
28.46 under the S & V scenario while 42.79 units of defensive
resources need to be involved in the M & C scenario. The
reason for this observation may be that more resources need
to be mobilized to participate in defensive actions when
the targets are relatively scattered. Meanwhile, there is no

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

significant difference (at most 2.63 units of resources incurred
by the random strategy) in resource usage between the constant
scenario and variable scenario. This result may indicate that
the resource consumption needed for defense deployment is
not so much determined by the attacker’s behavior patterns
in selecting attack targets. Instead, it is largely influenced by
the intensity and scale of the attack. As another example,
attackers under the variable scenario may choose the same or
similar target as in a constant scenario over several time steps,
which will also lead to similar defensive actions and resource
utilization.
It is also worth noting that the random strategy consumes 31.09, 28.46, 42.79, and 40.85 units of resources on
average under all four kinds of scenarios, representing the
lowest resource utilization among all the strategies under
consideration. However, it is difficult to make this strategy
a high resource efficiency one due to the unstable QoS
and lower survivability brought by it. Although the resource
usage of the DQN-based strategy proposed in this paper
is only slightly higher than that of the deterministic strategy, it can be considered an acceptable overhead because
of its significant improvement in QoS (at most a 26.95%
increase) and security (at most a 31.7% increase) evaluated
in Sections VI-D1 and VI-D2. There is another observation
that the DQN-based policy consumes 45.24, 44.32, 49.8, and
49.6 units of defensive resources across all attack scenarios.
The resource usage of our method is very close to 50,
which is exactly the maximum amount of resources we can
afford in our simulations. This result proves that the proposed
approach can maximize the utilization of limited resources
and achieve a perfect balance between defense effectiveness
and resource utilization when defending against high-intensity
attacks.
E. Comparison With Previous Works
We conduct experiments in a real-world testbed and compare our approach with the SOTA methods as follows.
• OpenMTD [65]. It employs a hybrid approach that
integrates network address shuffling and port hopping
techniques to resist attacks. The high-frequency and lowfrequency mutation cycles are set at 30 and 120 seconds,
and the hopping period is 20 seconds.
• FastMove [66]. It protects Web servers from DDoS
attacks using a network address change mechanism
through multiple proxies, in which we set 10 replicas for
each Web server and a time interval of 10 seconds in our
experiments.
• CMDP-MOS [50]. It combines admission control and service migration to mitigate DDoS attacks. Also, it adopts
the constrained Markov decision processes (CMDP) to
model the optimization problem and presents an MTD
optimal strategy (MOS) algorithm to guide defense
deployment.
• ID-HAM [67]. It integrates host address mutation (HAM)
with deep reinforcement learning to slow down network
reconnaissance intelligently. In detail, it transforms the
real IP addresses of hosts into virtual ones by OpenFlow

181

switch and adopts an advantage actor-critic algorithm for
HAM.
In our experiments, the testbed is composed of a Dell
PowerEdge R630 server and a Dell PowerEdge R430 server.
Each Dell PowerEdge R630 has 24-core CPU, 64 GB of RAM,
and 4 TB hard disk storage, and Dell PowerEdge R430 has
4-core CPU, 16 GB RAM, and 120 GB disk storage. The
SDN controller is deployed using Ryu4 v4.3.4 on the Dell
PowerEdge R430 server, in which we also deploy several MTD
mechanisms and the intelligent agent as modules. For the edge
cloud deployment, we utilize OpenStack Queens Devstack5
in another server, and we deploy containerized services with
some built-in functions, including scaling up/down, creating
replicas, and container migration. In addition, the bandwidth
of each link is configured as 1 Gbps.
In summary, we include a controller and four edge clouds,
each with a capacity of 16GB RAM, in the testbed. We deploy
a free and open Web service namely bWAPP6 in each edge by
pulling the image from DockerHub. We use the Apache HTTP
server benchmarking tool7 to simulate normal user access
requests, where the number of concurrent connections varies to
represent different system loads. To evaluate the effectiveness
of these methods against high-intensity and large-scale attacks,
we launch LDDoS attacks on all running services by using the
SlowHTTPTest tool. Specifically, we utilize a 10-second time
interval and generate a total of 100 connections per second for
each edge cloud, and track the attack target if the port number
has been altered. In this scenario, without the implementation
of any defense mechanisms, all Web services would become
inaccessible due to being overwhelmed by a large volume of
malicious connections.
Furthermore, to assess the performance of various methods
under different resource constraint conditions, we configure varying numbers of concurrent user connections μ. For
instance, when μ = 200, the protected system has relatively
abundant available resources. Conversely, when the concurrency level reaches 800, the system must allocate a substantial
amount of resources to handle user requests, leaving only a
diminished portion for defense deployment.
1) Response Time: To analyze the effectiveness of different
defensive schemes, we evaluate the average response time
of each method on the server side by simulating a total of
10,000 normal requests and LDDoS attack requests lasting
for 300 seconds. The results under different system loads are
presented in Fig. 7, where the x-axis represents the percentage
of requests served, and the y-axis denotes the response time
obtained from the test within these parts of requests.
We can make the first observation that the response time of
all methods gradually increases as the number of concurrent
connections grows. This increase implies the impact of system
loads on the response time is significant when dealing with
attacks of equal intensity. We can also observe that the
proposed method consistently exhibits the lowest response
4 https://ryu-sdn.org
5 https://opendev.org/openstack/devstack
6 https://hub.docker.com/r/raesene/bwapp
7 https://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/programs/ab.html

182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. The request time of different schemes when defeating LDDoS attacks under different system loads, where μ represents the number of concurrent
connections. (a) Comparison of different defensive methods when requests come from 200 concurrent connections, (b) Impact of different approaches to
defeat attacks within 400 concurrent connections, (c) Impact of different solutions to defend against attacks under 600 concurrent connections, (d) Response
efficiency of different schemes to mitigate attacks when there are 800 concurrent connections.

time across various system workloads. Specifically, under
lower workloads such as the scenario with 200 concurrent
connections, the RE-MTD approach achieves a response time
of less than 100 ms for 93% of the requests. In contrast, the
FastMove, CMDP-MOS, and ID-HAM methods only respond
to requests within this timeframe for 2%, 11%, and 32%
of the requests, respectively. Notably, the OpenMTD method
fails to achieve this for any request. Moreover, under the
condition of 800 concurrent connections, the RE-MTD method
is able to effectively handle requests, with only 6% of requests
requiring 300ms or more response time. In contrast, the
other methods exhibit longer response times, particularly with
FastMove, where 97% of requests fail to complete within
300ms. This substantiates that the proposed approach can
effectively mitigate attacks, which prevents the Web service
from being overwhelmed by a large number of connections
initiated by attackers, even in the presence of limited available
resources. As a result, it is capable of effectively safeguarding
legitimate user access and can operate efficiently under varying
resource constraint conditions.
Furthermore, there is another interesting observation that
the advantage of RE-MTD over other methods also gradually
expands as the number of concurrent connections increases.
For instance, when handling 80% of the requests, compared
to the second-best method, RE-MTD reduces the response
time by approximately 40 ms, 70 ms, 120 ms, and 130 ms
for concurrent connection counts of 200, 400, 600, and
800, respectively. The underlying reason may be that the
proposed method in this study incorporates Web service
quality as a crucial component of the reward function in the
MDP modeling. Additionally, the MTD mechanisms devised
in this study, such as service scaling and service replicas,
do not differentiate between attack-induced states and highload states. Consequently, while other MTD methods may
be limited to addressing attacks, RE-MTD adopts a broader
global perspective. Even under high workload conditions
where there are insufficient defensive resources, it leverages the DQN algorithm to output the optimal strategy,
thereby maximizing service performance within the current
resource constraints. As such, RE-MTD not only effectively
handles the malicious connections generated by attacks, but
also simultaneously optimizes the load balancing and system
performance for the substantial volume of legitimate user
requests.

Fig. 8. The comparison of time per request experienced by users when
equipped with different defensive schemes.

2) Quality of Experience: In order to assess the user
experience from the user’s perspective during webpage access,
we measured both the average response time per request
and the webpage loading duration in our experiments. As
depicted in Fig. 8, we can observe that as the system workload
increases, the speed at which the Web service responds to user
requests slows down, consistent with the results obtained from
our server-side testing (see Fig. 7). This is attributed to the
increased processing pressure on the server due to a higher
number of concurrent connections, resulting in longer response
times for each request.
Nevertheless, we note that RE-MTD still exhibits the lowest average response time, reaching 68.36 ms, 136.50 ms,
215.98 ms, and 276.66 ms for 200, 400, 600, and 800
concurrent connections, respectively. Particularly in the high
workload scenario (μ = 800), RE-MTD outperforms alternative approaches such as OpenMTD and FastMove. By
reducing the response time by over 1 second, RE-MTD is able
to ensure a favorable user experience even when there are
insufficient defensive resources available. This phenomenon
can be attributed to the fact that OpenMTD and FastMove
methods lack defense designs specifically targeting low-rate
attack scenarios and the fixed frequency of adaptations is not
efficient in defending against dynamically evolving attackers.
As a result, malicious connections impede the response of
legitimate requests.
Fig. 9 illustrates the webpage loading times when deploying
different defense methods, with each subplot representing a

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

183

TABLE VI
M EMORY U SAGE R ATIOS OF D IFFERENT S CHEMES W HEN D EFENDING AGAINST LDD O S ATTACKS U NDER D IFFERENT W EB S ERVER L OADS

Fig. 9. The average load time of Web services when deploying different
solutions under different service loads. (a) Comparison of different methods
when requests come from 200 concurrent connections, (b) Impact of different
schemes on the load time within 400 concurrent connections, (c) Impact of
different approaches on dealing with 600 concurrent connections, (d) Web
performance of different solutions when there are 800 concurrent connections.

different system workload level. The dark blue shaded area
represents the loading time of the first byte, while the light
blue bars indicate the loading time of the full webpage. As
the RE-MTD method simultaneously considers both defense
effectiveness and service quality in its defensive decisionmaking, we also observe that it exhibits significant advantages
over other approaches in terms of the loading times of both the
first byte and the complete webpage across various workload
conditions. This demonstrates the excellent scalability of
the proposed method under different scenarios. Particularly,
when μ = 800, RE-MTD completes the loading of the full
webpage within 1413 ms. In contrast, ID-HAM and CMDPMOS require approximately 1800 milliseconds, FastMove
takes over 2100 milliseconds, and OpenMTD approaches
nearly 2500 milliseconds. In terms of the loading time of
the first byte, the proposed method requires only 362ms,
while FastMove and OpenMTD take 679 ms and 815 ms,
respectively, which is nearly 1.9 times and 2.3 times that of
RE-MTD. The underlying reason could be that ID-HAM and
CMDP-MOS are more inclined towards eliminating and blocking attacks, thereby neglecting performance optimization in
resource-constrained scenarios. On the other hand, OpenMTD
and FastMove employ fixed time intervals for network address
shuffling or port hopping, which inadvertently provide opportunities for strategically-minded attackers and result in longer
load time because of malicious connections.

3) Resource Consumption: Due to the limited resources of
edge devices, it is essential to develop defense methods that are
highly resource-efficient. Therefore, in this section, we evaluate the memory usage of the aforementioned defense methods
under different system workloads and present experimental
results in Table VI.
As we can see, the memory overhead required for deploying various methods increases noticeably as the number of
concurrent connections grows. This substantiates that under a
fixed total resource capacity, a higher volume of user requests
will result in more constrained resources available for defense.
FastMove exhibits the highest or near-highest memory usage
rate in all scenarios, reaching 49.79%, 64.08%, 79.33%,
and 92.62%, respectively. Particularly in the high workload
scenario (μ = 800), FastMove even reaches a maximum
memory usage ratio of 98.37%, imposing a significant burden
on the normal operation of the system. This can be attributed
to FastMove directly creating 10 replicas for each Web service
without dynamic adjustments during runtime, thus consuming
a substantial amount of system resources.
Furthermore, we can make an observation that CMDPMOS performs better than OpenMTD at lower workloads,
but it consumes more system resources at higher workloads,
with an average increase of 3.91% in memory usage ratio at
μ = 800. The underlying reason for this could be the different
MTD mechanisms employed by the two methods. Specifically,
OpenMTD utilizes network address shuffling and port hopping to prevent attackers from probing and targeting real
services, while CMDP-MOS employs admission control and
container migration for collaborative defense across multiple
edge servers. Therefore, at lower workloads, CMDP-MOS
filters out malicious connections through its admission control mechanism, while OpenMTD requires resource-intensive
address and port adjustments. However, at higher workloads,
CMDP-MOS may utilize container migration to transfer the
promised service to another server, introducing higher system
resource consumption.
There is another important observation that ID-HAM
exhibits the lowest resource overhead, with memory usage
rates of 11.57%, 44.62%, 49.01%, and 76.19% at μ =
200, 400, 600, and 800, respectively. The proposed method
in this paper follows closely, requiring only an additional
2.44%, 2.54%, 5.97%, and 2.44% of memory usage, respectively, without incurring further memory consumption due to
changes in resource constraint conditions. Similarly, this can
be attributed to the differences in MTD mechanisms. Since

184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

the host address mutation module of ID-HAM is deployed
on the SDN controller and switches, there are no additional
resource overheads on the Web service side. On the other hand,
the container scaling and replica creation mechanisms of REMTD are deployed on the service side, inevitably resulting
in increased overheads. However, ID-HAM specifically targets
the network reconnaissance phase and lacks a defense mechanism designed to counter LDDoS attacks. Its higher request
response time and webpage loading time indirectly indicate
its disadvantage in terms of defense effectiveness. In contrast,
RE-MTD addresses the limitations of existing MTD methods,
demonstrating the ability to dynamically maintain service
availability even under high workloads and low resource
availability conditions. Given the advantages of the proposed
method in terms of defense effectiveness and service quality
assurance, as well as its efficient deployment under various
resource constraint conditions, we conclude that this approach
is capable of addressing LDDoS attacks in a highly resourceefficient manner.
VII. L IMITATIONS AND O PEN I SSUES
Despite the very promising results achieved by the proposed
MTD-based method, it is clear that such an approach exhibits
some limitations. First, as previously discussed, resource competition is actually the most critical part of the confrontation
between the attacker and the defense, the proposed method
cannot withstand a radical and powerful attacker whose
resource ownership is far greater than that of the defender.
In this case, the attacker may send malicious requests to all
serving containers simultaneously, limiting the dimensions of
action space. Note that this is the result of extreme resource
inequality between both sides rather than a vulnerability of
the approach itself. Therefore, we can solve it via cooperative
defense among multiple edges, which can be investigated in
the future.
The proposed approach focuses on effective defense against
external attacks in the EC environment. Nevertheless, the
MTD-based solution may fail when the adversary gains sufficient knowledge of the target system, and especially in the case
that he/she is an insider attacker who has access to sensitive
resources and privileged system accounts. Thus, it might be
very difficult to defeat these attacks because legitimate users
and insider attackers cannot be distinguished especially at the
beginning of attacks. Further, this attacker can amplify the
attack effect by blocking the MTD functionality and hijacking
other nearby edges. Fortunately, some solutions have been
proposed to deal with the insider threat, such as security
information and event management or zero trust policy. In this
respect, it is also a challenge to seamlessly integrate MTD with
existing defensive methods to maximize resource efficiency.
Another limitation of our approach may be its performance
would be affected by the network environment or user behaviors. In this work, we assume that the network environment is
relatively stable and legitimate users access Web services in
a consistent frequency. However, both increased demand and
network upgrades can result in significant changes in network
availability and performance. Although this is not caused by

offensive and defensive actions, it may significantly affect the
effectiveness of the proposed method in the real world. A
more detailed model formulation may be a possible solution,
in which we can incorporate random noise into the description
of the environment, and utilize data-driven approaches to
automatically determine the parameters to fit the practical
scenario.
In the end, although our approach is not bulletproof, we
believe that it significantly improves the security of the EC
environment and ensures the QoS under LDDoS attacks in a
resource-efficient manner.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Owing to the advantages of MTD techniques, existing work
has shown that MTD-based solutions can mitigate DDoS
attacks in a more proactive and effective way. However, most
of the recent studies were not suitable for hard-to-detect
LDDoS attacks, which are usually launched by stealthy attackers. In addition, the high resource consumption of current
solutions limits their deployment in the EC environment.
To cope with the aforementioned challenges, we have
exploited MTD to defeat LDDoS attacks in a proactive
manner, by continuously shifting the network properties and
dynamically misleading attackers. In detail, we have first
designed three lightweight MTD mechanisms via the built-in
functionalities of the container-based applications. We have
then considered optimizing the MTD deployment by exploiting
MDP and a DQN algorithm to achieve resource-efficient
defense. The simulations demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method and its advantages over other practical strategies in terms of performance and overhead. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first to overcome the challenge
of LDDoS attacks through the deployment of MTD. This
approach allows one to significantly improve edge security
without high resource consumption.
In future work, we plan to investigate a distributed collaborative defense framework among multiple edge clouds
to resist cyber attacks. Based on diverse MTD mechanisms
and flexible virtualization technologies, edge servers will
be able to jointly defend against large-scale DDoS attacks
without encountering resource bottlenecks. Another future
development is to extend our work to defeat more advanced
attackers, who may be capable of developing attack strategies
through reinforcement learning. We aim to defeat intelligent
LDDoS attackers while optimizing the efficiency and resource
consumption of defense.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Al-Dhuraibi, F. Paraiso, N. Djarallah, and P. Merle, “Elasticity in
cloud computing: State of the art and research challenges,” IEEE Trans.
Services Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 430–447, Apr. 2018.
[2] P. Kumar and R. Kumar, “Issues and challenges of load balancing
techniques in cloud computing: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2019.
[3] F. Metzger, T. Hoßfeld, A. Bauer, S. Kounev, and P. E. Heegaard,
“Modeling of aggregated IoT traffic and its application to an IoT cloud,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 679–694, Apr. 2019.
[4] Q. Duan, S. Wang, and N. Ansari, “Convergence of networking and
cloud/edge computing: Status, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 148–155, Dec. 2020.

ZHOU et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT LOW-RATE DDoS MITIGATION WITH MTD IN EDGE CLOUDS

[5] K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Guo, and J. Wu, “Green Industrial Internet
of Things architecture: An energy-efficient perspective,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 48–54, Dec. 2016.
[6] Y. Wu, “Cloud-edge orchestration for the Internet of Things:
Architecture and AI-powered data processing,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12792–12805, Aug. 2021.
[7] Y. Zhang, X. Lan, J. Ren, and L. Cai, “Efficient computing resource
sharing for mobile edge-cloud computing networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1227–1240, Jun. 2020.
[8] C. Xu, X. Ma, R. Shea, H. Wang, and J. Liu, “Enhancing performance
and energy efficiency for hybrid workloads in virtualized cloud environment,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 168–181,
Mar. 2021.
[9] C. Pahl, A. Brogi, J. Soldani, and P. Jamshidi, “Cloud container
technologies: A state-of-the-art review,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput.,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 677–692, Sep. 2019.
[10] R. Zhou, Z. Li, and C. Wu, “An efficient online placement scheme for
cloud container clusters,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 5,
pp. 1046–1058, May 2019.
[11] L. Ma, S. Yi, N. Carter, and Q. Li, “Efficient live migration of edge
services leveraging container layered storage,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 2020–2033, Sep. 2019.
[12] R. Gupta, I. Gupta, A. K. Singh, D. Saxena, and C.-N. Lee, “An IoTcentric data protection method for preserving security and privacy in
cloud,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 2445–2454, Jun. 2023.
[13] R. Gupta, D. Saxena, I. Gupta, and A. K. Singh, “Differential and
TriPhase adaptive learning-based privacy-preserving model for medical
data in cloud environment,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 217–221,
Dec. 2022.
[14] J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Toward edge-assisted Internet of Things:
From security and efficiency perspectives,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 2,
pp. 50–57, Apr. 2019.
[15] I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “A
survey of IoT-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical
infrastructures and services,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 3453–3495, 4th Quart., 2018.
[16] M. Du and K. Wang, “An SDN-enabled pseudo-honeypot strategy for
distributed denial of service attacks in Industrial Internet of Things,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 648–657, Jan. 2020.
[17] Q. He et al., “A game-theoretical approach for mitigating edge
DDoS attack,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 2333–2348, Aug. 2022.
[18] R. Gupta, D. Saxena, I. Gupta, A. Makkar, and A. K. Singh,
“Quantum machine learning driven malicious user prediction for cloud
network communications,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 174–178,
Dec. 2022.
[19] Z. Li, H. Jin, D. Zou, and B. Yuan, “Exploring new opportunities to
defeat low-rate DDoS attack in container-based cloud environment,”
IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 695–706,
Mar. 2020.
[20] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance and
features: Mitigating the low-rate TCP-targeted DoS attack via SDN,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444, Jan. 2022.
[21] L. Zhou, H. Guo, and G. Deng, “A fog computing based approach to
DDoS mitigation in IIoT systems,” Comput. Secur., vol. 85, pp. 51–62,
Aug. 2019.
[22] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Jiang, and M. Dai, “Building an efficient intrusion
detection system based on feature selection and ensemble classifier,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 174, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 107247.
[23] Z. Liu, H. Jin, Y.-C. Hu, and M. Bailey, “Practical proactive DDoS-attack
mitigation via endpoint-driven in-network traffic control,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1948–1961, Aug. 2018.
[24] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, and S. Yu, “An SDN-enabled proactive defense
framework for DDoS mitigation in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 5366–5380, 2021.
[25] T. Zhang et al., “How to mitigate DDoS intelligently in SD-IoV: A
moving target defense approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 1097–1106, Jan. 2023.
[26] J.-H. Cho et al., “Toward proactive, adaptive defense: A survey on
moving target defense,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 709–745, 1st Quart., 2020.
[27] J. Tan et al., “A survey: When moving target defense meets game theory,”
Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 48, May 2023, Art. no. 100544.
[28] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, and Z. Chen, “Cost-effective
moving target defense against DDoS attacks using trilateral game and
multi-objective Markov decision processes,” Comput. Secur., vol. 97,
Oct. 2020, Art. no. 101976.

185

[29] N. Agrawal and S. Tapaswi, “Defense mechanisms against DDoS attacks
in a cloud computing environment: State-of-the-art and research challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3769–3795,
4th Quart., 2019.
[30] M. Yu, T. Xie, T. He, P. McDaniel, and Q. K. Burke, “Flow table security
in SDN: Adversarial reconnaissance and intelligent attacks,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2793–2806, Dec. 2021.
[31] S. Sengupta, A. Chowdhary, A. Sabur, A. Alshamrani, D. Huang, and
S. Kambhampati, “A survey of moving target defenses for network
security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1909–1941,
3rd Quart., 2020.
[32] S. Kim et al., “DIVERGENCE: Deep reinforcement learning-based
adaptive traffic inspection and moving target defense countermeasure
framework,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 4834–4846, Dec. 2022.
[33] Z. Liu et al., “Jaqen: A high-performance switch-native approach for
detecting and mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with programmable
switches,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur. 21),
2021, pp. 3829–3846.
[34] K. Doshi, Y. Yilmaz, and S. Uludag, “Timely detection and mitigation of
stealthy DDoS attacks via IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2164–2176, Oct. 2021.
[35] M. Yue, J. Li, Z. Wu, and M. Wang, “High-potency models of LDoS
attack against cubic+ red,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 4950–4965, 2021.
[36] V. D. M. Rios, P. R. Inacio, D. Magoni, and M. M. Freire, “Detection
and mitigation of low-rate denial-of-service attacks: A survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 76648–76668, 2022.
[37] M. Yue, M. Wang, and Z. Wu, “Low-high burst: A double potency
varying-RTT based full-buffer shrew attack model,” IEEE Trans.
Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2285–2300, Oct. 2021.
[38] R. Xie et al., “Disrupting the SDN control channel via shared links:
Attacks and countermeasures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 2158–2172, Oct. 2022.
[39] C. Kemp, C. Calvert, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and J. L. Leevy, “An approach
to application-layer DoS detection,” J. Big Data, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 22,
2023.
[40] M. Ghaznavi, E. Jalalpour, M. A. Salahuddin, R. Boutaba, D. Migault,
and S. Preda, “Content delivery network security: A survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2166–2190, 4th Quart., 2021.
[41] N. Tripathi and N. Hubballi, “Slow rate denial of service attacks against
HTTP/2 and detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 72, pp. 255–272, Jan. 2018.
[42] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “Flowguard: An
intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, Oct. 2020.
[43] J. Li, L. Lyu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, and X. Lyu, “FLEAM: A federated
learning empowered architecture to mitigate DDoS in industrial IoT,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4059–4068, Jun. 2022.
[44] Z. Wu, L. Zhang, and M. Yue, “Low-rate DoS attacks detection based
on network multifractal,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 13,
no. 5, pp. 559–567, Oct. 2016.
[45] D. Tang, X. Wang, X. Li, P. Vijayakumar, and N. Kumar, “AKNFGD: Adaptive Kohonen network based fine-grained detection of
LDoS attacks,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 273–287, Feb. 2023.
[46] D. Tang, Y. Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate the
low-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled flow
tables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157,
2023.
[47] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[48] N. Tripathi, “Delays have dangerous ends: Slow HTTP/2 dos attacks into
the wild and their real-time detection using event sequence analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1244–1256,
Jun. 2024.
[49] S. Debroy et al., “Frequency-minimal utility-maximal moving target
defense against DDoS in SDN-based systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 890–903, Jun. 2020.
[50] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Chen, and S. Jiang, “Toward proactive
and efficient DDoS mitigation in IIoT systems: A moving target defense
approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2734–2744,
Apr. 2022.
[51] T. Zhang et al., “When moving target defense meets attack prediction
in digital twins: A convolutional and hierarchical reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3293–3305,
Oct. 2023.

186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

[52] A. B. Osei, S. R. Yeginati, Y. Al Mtawa, and T. Halabi, “Optimized
moving target defense against DDoS attacks in IoT networks: When
to adapt?” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2022,
pp. 2782–2787.
[53] G. Mani et al., “Machine learning based resilience testing of an address
randomization cyber defense,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput.,
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 4853–4867, Dec. 2023.
[54] K. Toczé, A. J. Fahs, G. Pierre, and S. Nadjm-Tehrani, “VioLinn:
Proximity-aware edge placementwith dynamic and elastic resource
provisioning,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2023.
[55] S.-Y. Chang, Y. Park, and B. B. A. Babu, “Fast IP hopping randomization
to secure hop-by-hop access in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 308–320, Mar. 2019.
[56] X. Xu, H. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Chang, “An adaptive IP
hopping approach for moving target defense using a light-weight CNN
detector,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2021, Art.
no. 8848473.
[57] K. Zeitz, M. Cantrell, R. Marchany, and J. Tront, “Changing the game:
A micro moving target IPv6 defense for the Internet of Things,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 578–581, Aug. 2018.
[58] R. E. Navas, H. Sandaker, F. Cuppens, N. Cuppens, L. Toutain, and
G. Z. Papadopoulos, “IANVS: A moving target defense framework for
a resilient Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun.
(ISCC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[59] J. Tan, H. Jin, H. Hu, R. Hu, H. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “WF-MTD:
Evolutionary decision method for moving target defense based on
Wright-Fisher process,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 4719–4732, Dec. 2023.
[60] A. H. Anwar, C. A. Kamhoua, N. O. Leslie, and C. Kiekintveld,
“Honeypot allocation for cyber deception under uncertainty,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3438–3452, Sep. 2022.
[61] X. Li, L. Dong, L. Xue, and C. Sun, “Hybrid reinforcement learning
for optimal control of non-linear switching system,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9161–9170, Nov. 2023.
[62] Y. Gao, A. Abate, L. Xie, and K. H. Johansson, “Distributional
reachability for Markov decision processes: Theory and applications,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, early access, Dec. 11, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TAC.2023.3341282.
[63] K. Zhong, Z. Yang, G. Xiao, X. Li, W. Yang, and K. Li, “An
efficient parallel reinforcement learning approach to cross-layer defense
mechanism in industrial control systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2979–2990, Nov. 2022.
[64] G. Brockman et al., “Openai gym,” 2016, arXiv:1606.01540.
[65] R. Poschinger, N. Rodday, R. Labaca-Castro, and G. Dreo Rodosek,
“Openmtd: A framework for efficient network-level MTD evaluation,”
in Proc. 7th ACM Workshop Moving Target Defense, 2020, pp. 31–41.
[66] N. Bandi, H. Tajbakhsh, and M. Analoui, “FastMove: Fast IP switching
moving target defense to mitigate DDoS attacks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Depend. Secure Comput. (DSC), 2021, pp. 1–7.
[67] T. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Kuang, and L. A. Grieco, “How to
disturb network reconnaissance: A moving target defense approach
based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 18, pp. 5735–5748, 2023.

Yuyang Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in electronic information engineering from
the Nanjing University of Science and Technology
in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace security
from Southeast University in 2021, where he is
currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow with
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. He
has published in some of the topmost journals
and conferences like IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS,
and ACM CCS, and is involved as a reviewer and a technical program
committee of several journals and conferences in the field. His major research
interests include moving target defense, DDoS mitigation, and intrusion
detection. He is a member of CCF.

Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
University, Nanjing, China, in 1994, the M.S. degree
in computer application from the Hefei University
of Technology in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer network from Southeast University in
2003, where he is a Full Professor with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering. He has authored
or coauthored seven monographs and more than
100 technical papers, including top journals and
conferences like IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND
S ECURITY, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, and
IEEE INFOCOM. His research interests include network security, network
measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a Distinguished Member of
CCF.

Zhi Ouyang (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in information security from the Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications in
2021. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University. His research interests include
moving target defense, cyber deception, and network
security.

ZongYao Chen (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in information security from Hainan
University in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
master’s degree with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Southeast University. His major
research interests include moving target defense,
android malware detection, and reverse engineering.