6066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

RLpatch: A Robust Low-Overhead Website
Fingerprinting Defense Method Based on
Reinforcement Learning Within Sensitive Regions
Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE, Siyang Chen , Yuxing Wei, Dong Jin , Xiaobin Tan , Member, IEEE,
Xiaofeng Jiang, and Jian Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Website Fingerprinting (WF) attacks have posed
a serious threat to the anonymity of the onion router (Tor)
communication system, as attackers can passively pry into the
encrypted traffic and infer the website visited by users. To defend
against WF, recent studies focus on adversarial perturbations.
However, most of them suffer from a high bandwidth overhead
and a low defense performance. To address this problem, our
basic idea is to generate perturbation only on the sensitive
regions, which can effectively mask the website’s fingerprint, thus
misleading the WF attack models and reducing the bandwidth
overhead. In this paper, we formulate a joint optimization
problem of perturbation position and magnitude by confining the
perturbations within sensitive regions, which is rarely considered
in the literature. We propose a robust low-overhead WF defense
method based on reinforcement learning (RL), named RLpatch.
RLpatch identifies the common sensitive regions of various
surrogate models and adjusts perturbation according to the
query result from a query WF model. It further employs the
positional frequency of perturbations to generate a common
perturbation paradigm for different traces of a same website.
Experimental results show that RLpatch achieves higher defense
performance, lower bandwidth overhead and better robustness
against adversarial training compared to the state-of-the-art
methods.
Index Terms—Traffic analysis, website fingerprinting, reinforcement learning, adversarial defense.

I. I NTRODUCTION
O MITIGATE the threats of online monitoring and examination, an increasing number of Internet users are relying
on using privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs) [1], such as

T

Received 10 February 2025; revised 24 June 2025 and 17 August 2025;
accepted 22 August 2025. Date of publication 26 August 2025; date of current
version 5 December 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U23A20275) and the Open Project
Program of Guangxi Key Laboratory of Digital Infrastructure (Grant No.
GXDIOP2024001). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was P. Yu. (Corresponding authors: Dong
Jin; Jian Yang.)
Shuangwu Chen, Siyang Chen, Xiaobin Tan, Xiaofeng Jiang, and
Jian Yang are with the Department of Automation, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail:
chensw@ustc.edu.cn;
csy1366@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
xbtan@ustc.edu.cn;
jxf@ustc.edu.cn; jianyang@ustc.edu.cn).
Yuxing Wei is with the Guangxi Key Laboratory of Digital Infrastructure,
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Information Center, Nanning 530028,
China (e-mail: weiyustar@163.com).
Dong Jin is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, 230088, China (e-mail:
kingdon@ustc.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3602964

Tor [2] and VPN [3], to encrypt the transmission content
and conceal communication relationships when browsing the
website. Although these PETs reduce privacy threats to some
extent, a local attacker can still pry into which website the
user is visiting via the website fingerprinting (WF) attack
[4], which poses a significant challenge to the anonymity of
users’ browsing activities. Recently, Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) based WF attack models have achieved remarkable
effectiveness in website identification [5]. It is necessary to
develop an effective defense method against DNN-based WF
attacks.
Previous defenses are mainly divided into obfuscation
and regularization defenses. Obfuscation defenses mislead
attackers by randomly injecting dummy packets and padding
time delay [6], [7]. Regularization defenses interfere with
attackers by shaping traffic traces into a fixed pattern to
conceal traffic characteristics [8]. However, these defenses
induce a high bandwidth overhead and introduce extra time
delay. Recently, adversarial learning based WF defenses have
revealed that adding tiny adversarial perturbations to the
original traffic traces could confuse the DNN-based WF attack
models [4], [9]. Compared to the previous defenses, they
achieve a high defense performance and a low bandwidth overhead. To achieve real-time defense, some recent adversarial
learning based WF defenses like [10] dynamically determine
packet injection based on each ongoing packet. However,
they need to determine the perturbations in time, which may
degrade the user’s browsing experience. Moreover, existing
adversarial learning based WF defenses have rarely considered
the generalization capability of the defense model. As a
result, these defenses may be effective against the known
WF attack models used for training, but may struggle to
maintain the performance when facing unseen WF attack
models.
To overcome the existing drawbacks, we aim to develop
an effective WF defense method that can achieve real-time
defense with a low bandwidth overhead but also ensure strong
generalization capability across different WF attack models.
We have an insight that WF attack models tend to pay
more attention to some sensitive regions of a traffic trace for
website identification, which often represent the distinctive
fingerprints of a website. By introducing perturbations in the
common sensitive regions of multiple WF attack models,
it is possible to reduce overall bandwidth overhead and

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

deceive unseen models. We can further offline train a common
perturbation paradigm specifically tailored for each website
and apply the perturbation to all the live traffic of the
website.
In light of the above idea, we propose a robust lowoverhead WF defense method, named RLpatch. By analyzing
the impact of different regions of traffic traces on the WF
attack models’ decisions, RLpatch can pinpoint the sensitive
regions. Afterwards, RLpatch employs reinforcement learning
(RL) to adjust the positions and magnitude of the adversarial
perturbations according to the query results from a query
model. Rather than querying indiscriminately all positions of
the entire trace, RLpatch focuses its query and generate perturbations just on the sensitive regions. To enhance the robustness
against adversarial training, we introduce a disturbance factor, which is unknown to the attackers, into the reward to
increase the diversity of the perturbations. Finally, RLpatch
aggregates multiple perturbations of a website into a common
perturbation paradigm, which serves as a defense strategy
for all traffic traces of the corresponding website. Based on
the injection positions and the number of dummy packets
specified by the perturbation paradigm, RLpatch can achieve
real-time defense for the traffic traces of the corresponding
website.
• We devise a perturbation generator which confines
the perturbations within the sensitive regions that are
most critical for website identification of multiple
surrogate models. Injecting perturbations in these sensitive regions can effectively deceive the closed-box
WF attack model and reduce the bandwidth overhead, which however is rarely considered in the
literature.
• We propose an RL-based framework to learn the optimal
perturbation position and magnitude under the guidance
of reward signal from a glass-box query model. To
enhance the robustness against adversarial training, we
introduce a random disturbance factor into the reward,
which could induce diverse perturbations even for the
same website.
• We develop a perturbation aggregation method to find
a common perturbation paradigm for different traces
of the same website, which enables us to conduct
real-time dummy packet injection. By aggregating various perturbations, this paradigm further enhances the
defense performance against closed-box WF attack
models.
• We conduct extensive experiments using two widely
used datasets to evaluate the performance. Experimental
results show that RLpatch achieves a lower attack success
rate, lower bandwidth overhead and stronger robustness
against adversarial training compared to the state-of-theart methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II briefly reviews the related work. Section III
describes the preliminaries and challenges. Our motivation
is introduced in Section IV. Section V gives the details of
our proposed adversarial WF defense method. Section VI
presents some comparative experiments to demonstrate the

6067

effectiveness and robustness of our method. Section VII
discusses the deployment issues and limitations of our defense.
The conclusion is drawn in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. WF Attacks
WF attacks in the early stage leveraged expert knowledge
to analyze the unique statistical features of different target
websites, and employed machine learning classifiers such as
KNN [11], random forest [12], and improved support vector
machine [13] to identify target websites. Hermann et al.
[14] were the first to propose the concept of WF attacks,
which utilized the frequency distribution of packet lengths
to classify websites. However, due to the fixed size (512
bytes) of Tor cells, the recognition accuracy was still far
from satisfactory. Wang et al. [11] combined various features
including packet ordering, the number of incoming/outgoing
packets, and burst count into a multidimensional feature vector,
and utilized a KNN classifier to identify the network traffic.
To make a step forward, Hayes and Danezis [12] analyzed
the importance of different statistical features using random
forests, significantly reducing the number of input features.
Penchenko et al. [13] proposed CUMUL, which extracted a
fixed number of cumulative packet length features from traffic
traces and identified website using an RBF kernel-based SVM.
Recent WF attacks usually achieved high recognition accuracy by utilizing deep learning methods to learn the sequence
features of target websites automatically with side-channel
information. Rimmer et al. [15] employed three types of DNN
architectures, namely SDAE, CNN, and LSTM, for website
fingerprinting. Afterwards, Sirinam et al. [16] developed a
more complex CNN based WF model, which further improved
the attack accuracy. They also examined the effectiveness
of the proposed model against WF defense. Bhat et al.
[17] designed a complex Var-CNN architecture to extract the
temporal information of traffic traces as meta-features, which
were fused with sequence features. Shen et al. [18] proposed
a traffic aggregation matrix (TAM) based WF method by
combining temporal features with sequential features.
Moreover, several recent studies have extended traditional
WF attacks to specific scenarios. Yuan et al. [19] introduced
class incremental learning into WF attacks, enabling the attack
model to continuously expand its monitoring scope by learning
new website classes. Zou et al. [20] proposed Deep Quadruplet
Fingerprinting (DQF), which combines metric learning and
meta-learning techniques to effectively tackle the few-shot
learning problem in WF attacks. Meng et al. [21] have begun
to address the challenges of the multi-tab WF attacks.
B. WF Defenses
To defeat WF attackers, defenders employ strategies such
as adding dummy packets and delaying packets to alter the
traffic patterns generated during website visits, thus confusing
the attacker’s classifier. We divide WF defense methods into
three categories: obfuscation defenses, regularization defenses
and adversarial defenses.

6068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF N OTABLE WF D EFENSE

Fig. 1.

(1) Obfuscation Defenses: The obfuscation defenses
attempted to confuse attackers’ classifiers by introducing
uncertainty. By injecting random number of dummy packets
or padding random delay between packets, they could ensure
that the traffic patterns generated by different users even when
visiting the same website were different. The representative
method was WTF-PAD, an adaptive defense system proposed
by Juarez et al. [6], which filled in idle segments of traffic
with packets to disrupt the burst characteristics of traffic traces.
Gong and Wang [7] observed that the initial portion of a
traffic trace was critical for WF classification, so they inserted
random packets into the heads of traffic traces to increase
the difficulty for attackers to identify the traffic. However,
the research in [16] has shown that deep learning based WF
methods exhibit a certain degree of immunity against the
obfuscation defense.
(2) Regularization Defenses: The basic idea of regularization defenses were designed to match the traffic pattern of
a target website with that of another pre-defined website.
Some regularization defenses, such as CS-BUFLO [22] and
Tamaraw [23] aimed to hide fine-grained traffic features
by shaping all website traffic into a unified pattern. Other
regularization defenses like W-T [24] and Palette [25] clustered similar traffic into groups and generated similar traffic
patterns within the clusters, making it difficult for attackers
to distinguish between websites in the same cluster. However,
regularization defenses could result in extremely high time and
bandwidth overhead, making them impractical for deployment
in Tor.
(3) Adversarial defenses: Adversarial defenses represented
a new direction in WF defense design, exploiting the inherent
vulnerabilities of deep neural networks. By injecting small
adversarial perturbations into the traffic, these defenses aimed
to mislead WF models, often with minimal bandwidth overhead compared to previous WF defense methods.
The earliest adversarial approach in WF defense scenario,
named Mockingbird, was proposed in [26]. It generated
perturbations by minimizing the distance between the traffic
trace of the original website and that of a target website.
However, this method lacked adaptability for real-time traffic,
as it required the complete traffic trace until the session ended
to generate the perturbations. To address this issue, Nasr et al.
introduced Blind [27], which generated real-time perturbations
by determining whether to inject perturbations based on the
current traffic trace and injecting appropriate perturbations
while meeting network traffic constraints. However, Blind also
lacked feasibility during real-time injection, as it needed to

The threat model of WF attack and defense.

evaluate each coming packet, leading to significant computational overhead and time delays.
To enable flexible real-time perturbation injection,
Dolos [28] proposed generating a universal perturbation for
each website. This perturbation is pre-calculated offline and
applied online to indicate where and how many dummy
packets should be injected. However, a limitation of Dolos
was that it required glass-box access to the attacker’s model
architecture and parameters, which may not be a realistic
assumption in practical scenarios. To address the glass-box
assumption, AWA [29] introduced a transfer-based adversarial
approach. In this approach, a glass-box model was used as
surrogate model to generate universal perturbations, which
are then transferred to unknown WF attack models for
performance evaluation. Specifically, AWA randomly selected
two websites and trained a GAN network to minimize
the distributional differences between the two websites.
Due to poor defense accuracy of transfer-based approach,
Minipatch [30] introduced a query-based approach to generate
adversarial perturbations, assuming that the defender can
query the output of the attackers’ WF model for given inputs.
It utilized a simulated annealing algorithm and queried to
find appropriate perturbation positions and sizes, offering
better bandwidth efficiency and defense performance than
previous methods. However, Minipatch was ineffective against
WF attacks involving retraining the classifier. Acup3 [31]
and Kimerapad [32] were proposed to attempt to solve this
problem, and achieved some success, but they could not strike
a good balance between bandwidth overhead and defense
performance.
In summary, by comparing the advantages and disadvantages of previous works, we found that these methods are
either limited by high computational and bandwidth overhead or by the adaptability in real-world deployment. Our
approach aims to achieve good defense performance with low
bandwidth overhead while meeting the requirements of realtime injection, closed-box effectiveness, and robustness against
adversarial learning in real-world scenarios. We compare the
key properties of WF defense methods against the challenges
mentioned in Section III-D to our proposed method in Table I.
III. P RELIMINARIES AND C HALLENGES
A. Threat Model
Fig. 1 illustrates a typical WF attack and defense scenario.
Users access a website using the Tor network to conceal
their browsing activities. We follow the same assumption
as in prior works [14], [15], [16], where the attackers are
local eavesdroppers positioned between the user and the Tor

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

TABLE II
C APABILITIES OF ATTACKERS AND D EFENDERS

Fig. 2.

An example of perturbation injection for burst sequence.

entry node. They can passively capture the encrypted traffic
generated by the users’ website browsing but cannot actively
modify, discard, or decrypt the packets. Potential attackers
might be network eavesdroppers, local network operators, or
ISPs (Internet Service Providers). By analyzing side-channel
information from the traffic traces, such as packet size,
timestamp and direction, the attackers can pry into which
website the users are visiting.
Before launching the WF attack, the attackers operate their
own Tor client to collect the traffic of each website in the
monitored set. Then the attackers train a classifier based on
their collected traffic. Once the classifier is well-trained, the
attackers monitor and collect users’ traces and use the classifier
to identify them as belonging to the websites in the monitored
set.
On the defense side, we assume the defenders know the
set of sensitive websites the users wish to protect (aligned
with the attackers’ monitored set), and can collect traffic traces
accordingly. The defenders have access to public glass-box
WF models for generating perturbation paradigms, and can
inject dummy packets into live traffic without delaying original
packets. They have the prior knowledge of which website the
users are accessing but they can only observe current traffic
bursts and not future patterns.
To ensure a rigorous evaluation, we adopt the widely used
single-tab and closed-world setting where users only visit a
website in the monitored set at a time. As this assumption
benefits the attacker, it sets a higher bar for the defense. If
our method performs well under such strict conditions, it is
expected to be more robust in real-world scenarios with multitab and open-world setting where attacks are inherently more
difficult. In this scenario, the capabilities of the attacker and
defender are summarized in Table II.

6069

B. Traffic Representation
In the Tor network, all packets are padded to a fixed size for
encryption and transmission. Accordingly, the original traffic
trace is denoted as a direction sequence p = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ],
where pi = 1 indicates an outgoing packet and pi =
−1 indicates an incoming packet. The defenders may inject
dummy packet both in the client side and in the Tor entry side
to break the sequential patterns. However, injecting oppositedirection dummy packets, e.g., a dummy incoming packet
between two outgoing packets or a dummy outgoing packet
between two incoming packet, may interrupt the transmission
process and cause an additional time delay, thus degrading the
quality of users’ browsing experience. To avoid this problem,
defenders prefer to inject same-direction dummy packets at the
tail of a traffic burst (i.e., continuous packets with the same
direction) [26], [30], [33]. The original traffic trace can be
represented as a burst sequence x = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bl ], where |bi |
indicates the packets number and the sign of bi indicates the
packet direction of the i-th traffic burst. Here, bi > 0 represents
outgoing burst and bi < 0 represents incoming burst. Fig. 2
shows an example of packet injection for burst sequence.
The injected dummy packets have the same direction as the
burst, ensuring that the communication between users and the
website is not disrupted.
C. Adversarial Perturbation Based WF Defense
Existing adversarial WF defenses are all inspired by
adversarial learning, where adding small, well-designed perturbations into the correctly classified input can mislead
DNN-based classifier. Given a clean burst sequence x , its
corresponding ground-truth label, denoted as y, belongs to the
monitored set Y = {1, 2, . . . , K }. Let f b denote the closedbox WF attack model, both the structure and parameters of
which are unknown to the defenders. The aim of WF attackers
is to map the burst sequence x to its correct label y, i.e.,
fb : x → y. Conversely, the defenders aim to generate a
perturbed sequence x adv to deceive the attack model f b , i.e.,
f b (x adv ) = y, where x adv is defined as:
x adv = x + q  δ,

(1)

where q = [q1 , . . . , ql ] is a binary mask sequence with the
same length as x , indicating the actual injection position of the
perturbations. If a perturbation is added behind the i-th burst,
qi = 1. Otherwise, qi = 0. δ = [δ1 , . . . , δl ] determines the
magnitude of perturbations, where each element δi specifies
the number of dummy packets injected behind the i-th burst.
q  δ represents the perturbation sequence inserted into x ,
where  denotes the Hadamard product.
By jointly optimizing q and δ, we aim to maximize the
misclassification probability of the attack model f b while
keeping a low bandwidth overhead. Formally, the optimization
problem can be formulated as:


(2)
x ∗ = arg max E(x ,y) ∈D L f b (x adv ), y ,
q δ 1 <β

where the constraint q  δ1 < β ensures that the total
amount of injected dummy packets does not exceed a

6070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

predefined budget β. D is the set of traffic traces that
are protected from WF attack. L(·) measures the deviation
between the predicted label of f b (x adv ) and the actual
label y.
D. Challenges
To solve the above problem, several realistic challenges
must be addressed:
• Zero Delay and Low Overhead (C1): During the WF
defense, padding dummy packets may increase the bandwidth overhead, while delaying the transmission packets
may increase the time overhead. In the Tor network,
since users still have a high expectation for smooth
network experiences, bandwidth and time overheads are
crucial considerations in the design of WF defense
mechanisms. However, most existing defense methods,
such as [22] and [24], insert perturbation throughout the
traffic traces, which may cause intolerable delays and
significant bandwidth overhead. Thereby, a practical WF
defense solution is expected to achieve zero delay and
keep a low bandwidth overhead, that is, β in Eq. (2) is
expected to be small.
• Effectiveness under Closed-Box Setting (C2): In a
practical scenario, the attackers may employ diverse
tactics for conducting WF attacks, i.e., the structure
and parameters of the attack model f b in Eq. (2), are
unknown to the defenders. It is challenging to generate an effective adversarial perturbations against such
a closed-box attack model. Existing defense researches,
such as [26] and [31], directly transfer the adversarial
perturbation generated from a given glass-box model to
a closed-box attack model. However, due to the discrepancies in attack models, the transferability of adversarial
perturbations across different models is often limited,
resulting in a poor defense performance under closed-box
setting.
• Robustness against Adversarial Training (C3): The
WF defense methods are mostly implemented through
pluggable transports (PT) [34] to adapt to Tor network.
Attackers can collect defense traffic traces using the
same defense settings as users and retrain their attack
models to penetrate the established WF defenses.
Yet, current methods such as [27] and [30], are
not robust enough to adversarial training, because
they lack a user isolation policy to ensure that
users visiting the same website are assigned different
perturbations.
In summary, the above challenges necessitate that the
WF defense method should be low-overhead, effective and
robust.
IV. M OTIVATION
Existing studies typically assume that each region of a traffic
trace has an equal impact on the decision-making of WF
attack model. As a result, the perturbations have to act on the
entire traffic trace, greatly increasing the bandwidth overhead.
However, we have an insight that only a few sensitive regions

Fig. 3.

Heatmaps of two burst sequences for different WF attack models.

can actually affect the decision-making of WF attacks. As
shown in Fig. 3, we employ the Grad-CAM method [35] to
generate a heatmap that highlights the contribution of different
regions of a burst sequence on the decision-making of WF
attack models. The regions with warm colors, i.e., red or
yellow, have a great impact on the WF model’s decision,
while the regions with cool colors, i.e., blue, have a small
impact. Fig. 3 reveals that the WF attacks may focus on
several critical regions of the burst sequence, which play a
more important role in WF than other regions. These regions
are usually associated with the loading of website styles
(i.e., CSS, JavaScript, fonts, · · ·), the response of specific
user requests, and the transmission of specific resources,
which often represent the unique fingerprint of a specific
website. Injecting perturbations into these regions can erase
the distinctive fingerprint of the traffic trace and mislead
the WF attack model. That is, these regions may be highly
sensitive to perturbations, where even a small perturbation
can lead to a significant change of the WF model’s decision.
These finding inspires us to apply perturbations only on a few
sensitive regions, rather than on the entire trace, which could
significantly reduce the number of dummy packets as well as
the bandwidth overhead, thus addressing C1.
From Fig. 3, we also find that different websites may have
different sensitive regions, but different WF attack models may
share some common sensitive regions for the same website.
These common sensitive regions are very likely to be crucial
for various WF attack models, even for the unknown closedbox WF attack models. This findings inspire us to injecting
perturbations into the common sensitive regions for enhancing
the defense performance against the closed-box WF attack
models, thus addressing C2.
In Fig. 3, if we not only erase the distinctive fingerprint
of website1 in the region between the 360th and 420th burst,
but also add perturbations in the region between the 100th
and 200th burst, we can make the perturbed sequence of
website1 look like website2, so as to deceive the potential WF
attackers. Here, website2 is the imitation target. In practice,
to enhance the robustness of defense model, different users
may randomly choose their own imitation targets, which
are usually not available to the attackers. In this way, even
when the attackers use the same defense model to collect
the perturbation samples for adversarial training, they can
hardly get the same adversarial samples as the defenders, thus
addressing C3.

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

Fig. 4.

6071

An overview of RLpatch.

V. M ETHODOLOGY
A. System Overview
In light of the above insights, we develop a WF defense
framework named RLpatch which aims to achieve good
real-time defense performance within sensitive regions under
closed-box setting. The workflow of RLpatch is illustrated
in Fig. 4, which can be divided into two stages: training
stage and implementation stage. In the training stage, the
collected traffic traces of target websites in the monitored set
are represented as burst sequences, which are used for defense
model training. The RL agent is designed for locating the
sensitive regions where the perturbations should be applied on,
and the generator is responsible for determining how to inject
the perturbation within the given sensitive region. Here, we
can choose a strongest glass-box WF attack model we know
as the query model to defeat. The query model assesses the
effectiveness of the crafted perturbations and drives the RL
agent to improve the defense performance. During the training,
the RL agent can learn an optimal perturbation policy through
numerous rounds of interactions with the query model.
In the implementation stage, we can generate an adversarial perturbation for each samples of a website using the
well-trained RL agent. Accordingly, we can get different
perturbation sequences for the same website. The common
perturbation paradigm generator is designed for producing
a uniform perturbation paradigm for a website. Once the
common perturbation paradigms are generated, the real-time
injection phase no longer requires the involvement of the
RL agent, as these common perturbation paradigms can
serve as a fixed configuration deployed to the PT proxy
of both the user and Tor entry node. In this way, the
PT proxy can dynamically switch the perturbation paradigm
just according to the website that users are visiting. Every
time the user or the Tor entry node has a packet burst to
send, the PT proxy can directly determine the number of
dummy packets for injecting according to the selected perturbation paradigm and the current burst position. Afterwards,
the dummy packets are injected to the tail of the current
packet burst and sent together with the real packets until
the website is loaded, thus achieving zero-delay perturbation
injection.

B. Training Stage
1) Design of Perturbations Generator: For a given sensitive region, the generator is responsible for crafting an
adversarial perturbation. Suppose a sensitive region starts from
position c with a length of k, i.e., the c-th to (c + k − 1)th burst of the raw sequence x. Accordingly, the binary mask
sequence for such sensitive region is denoted by

1 if c ≤ i < c + k
(3)
q c [i ] =
0 otherwise.
According to Eq. (1), the perturbed sequence is x +q c δ. The
remaining problem is to determine the perturbation magnitudes
δ within the sensitive region. To achieve this, an intuitive idea
is to explore every possible perturbation at each position of
the sensitive region. However, the vast search space makes it
almost impracticable to apply in practice.
To address this problem, we employ the gradient feedback
from a glass-box surrogate WF attack model, whose structure
and parameters are accessible, to guide the direction of
perturbation generation, rather than blindly trying all possible
perturbation magnitudes. Because the gradient of surrogate
WF attack models actually represents the direction that can
increase the deviation between the predicted result and the
ground-truth result. Adding perturbations along the gradient
direction may induce great errors in WF attack model’s
predicted results, thus deceiving the WF attackers. Meanwhile,
to enhance the generalization ability of the defense model
against C2, we can synthesize the gradients from n surrogate
WF attack models which are different from the query model to
find a common direction that can effectively deceive a broader
range of attack models. Let fis denote the i-th surrogate WF
model. The normalized gradient is defined as
 s

n
fi (x + q c  δ), y
i=1 ρi ∇δ L

 ,
g = n
(4)
 i=1 ρi ∇δ L fis (x + q c  δ), y 1
where ρi denotes the weight of the i-th surrogate model and
∇δ L(·) denotes the gradient of deviation function L(·) with
respect to the perturbation magnitude δ. As the surrogate
model is glass-box, the value of ∇δ L(·) is calculable.
In practice, we can obtain the optimal perturbation
magnitude through an iterative way. Here, we leverage

6072

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Design of RL agent.

the Momentum Iterative Fast Gradient Sign Method (MIFGSM) [36] to iteratively adjust the perturbation. Let t denote
the iteration round. Initially, both the perturbation δ 0 and
gradient g 0 are set to 0. During the iteration, we adopt the
accumulated gradient to smooth the fluctuation of gradient,
which is updated as follows:
g t = μ · g t−1 + g t ,

(5)

where g t is the feedback gradient at the t-th interaction with
the surrogate models, which can be calculated by Eq. (4), and
μ represents the attenuation coefficient, which is used to adjust
the impact of the previous gradients on the current gradient.
Along the gradient direction, we accordingly adjust the
perturbation by:
g t ),
δ t = δ t−1 +  · sign(

(6)

where sign(·) represents the gradient direction, and  is
the perturbation step size. For a given sensitive region, the
perturbation magnitude δ is determined by the step size .
In particular, a large  may induce excessive dummy packet
injections, but a small  leads to too many iterations.
Notably, the direction of the generated perturbation may
be opposite from the direction of the raw burst sequence.
Such inconsistency may interrupt the actual data transmission
and introduce extra delay as aforementioned in Section III-B.
Thereby, we should further calibrate the perturbation by
dropping the opposite-direction perturbation as follows:

0 if δ t [j ] < 0 and x [j ] > 0,
(7)
δ t [j ] =
0 if δ t [j ] > 0 and x [j ] < 0.
The perturbed sequence is then given by:
x adv
= x + q c  δt .
t

(8)

Afterwards, we have to input x adv
into the surrogate models
t
to get g t+1 for a next iteration. The above iteration process
would be continued until the gradient g t remains relatively

unchanged or the maximum number of iterations is reached,
when the generated perturbation is considered optimal.
The sensitive regions c and perturbation size  determine
where to add perturbation and how many dummy packets to
inject, respectively. For a specific combination of c and ,
we can generate an x adv by iteratively interacting with the
surrogate models. Thereby, the remaining crucial problem is
to figure out optimal c and , which would be discussed below.

2) Design of RL Agent: Since different positions may
require different perturbations, we have to optimize the perturbation position and magnitude jointly. To achieve this, we
employ RL to learn the optimal perturbation policy under the
guidance of reward signal from the strongest glass-box query
model f q . For a burst sequence x , the RL agent gives an
action of perturbation position c and size , and the generator
then produces an adversarial perturbation sequence x adv . By
interacting with the query model, we can acquire the corresponding reward, i.e., the defense performance. Afterwards,
we can fine tune the parameters of RL agent to steer the
selection of c and  towards the direction of maximizing the
reward.
The related state, action and reward are defined as follows.
State: The state s represents the burst sequence x inputted
to the RL agent.
Action: The action a = (c, ) is defined as the perturbation
position and step size. The RL agent has to learn two policies:
position policy and size policy.
The position policy decides where to add the perturbation
in the burst sequence can mislead the closed-box WF model.
As depicted in Fig. 5, we employ an autoencoder-like structure [37] named WFUnet, whose shape is like a ‘U’, to learn
the position policy WFUnet utilizes an encoder composed
of convolution layers and max-pooling layers to extract the
high-level features of input burst sequences and a decoder
composed of upsampling layers and convolution layers to
output the feature map. Each element in the feature map
measures the contribution of corresponding burst on decisionmaking of WF attack. The length of feature map is same with
the input burst sequence. We employ the decoder of WFUnet
to generate a separate feature map Mi for each surrogate model
fis , providing different insights into the sensitivity of each
position. The overlapped sensitive regions of all feature maps
represent the distinctive fingerprint of a specific website, which
could be also used for WF recognition by other closed-box
models. By aggregating all feature maps, we can calculate the
mean sensitivity of each position as follows:
Ppos =

1
n

n

softmax(Mi ),

(9)

i=1

where softmax(·) normalize the feature map to [0,1]. A greater
Ppos [j ] indicates that adding perturbation in j-th position of
burst sequence x is more likely to mislead the WF attack
model. Therefore, such position should have a higher likelihood to be selected as the start position of sensitive region.
We can utilize a categorical distribution function to model the
position policy, as it is well-suited for representing the agent’s
probabilistic choices over a discrete set of positions. In this
way, the start position c of sensitive regions can be sampled
from c ∼ Cat(Ppos ). The length of a sensitive region depends
on the number of continuous elements in the feature map
greater than a specific threshold. As different surrogate models
have different impacts on the gradient, we need to pay more
attention to the surrogate models that exhibit higher sensitivity
to the burst sequence. The weight ρi defined in Eq. (4) is set

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

to nMi

j =1 Mj

, where Mi is the mean value of all elements in

the feature map fis .

With such feature map, we further employ a fully connected
network (FC) to learn a perturbation size policy, which
establishes a mapping relationship between the perturbation
positions and the perturbation size. Specifically, the perturbation step size  is selected from a series of discrete values.
The probability distribution of selecting different step sizes is
represented as:


(10)
Psize = softmax FC(Ppos ) .

Similarly, we employ the categorical distribution function to
model the magnitude policy. The step size  can be sampled
from  ∼ Cat(Psize ).
Reward: The agent is trained to identify sensitive regions
within the input burst sequence x, where perturbations can be
generated and applied to maximize the likelihood of causing
misclassification of the query model.
To achieve this, we define the reward R based on the
misclassification probability of the perturbation. Due to
the existence of C3, the attackers and defenders may use
the same reward function to generate similar perturbation
samples and penetrate the defense via adversarial training. In
particular, if directly applying the output of query model, i.e.,
L(f q (x adv , y)), as the reward, when the attackers query the
same WF model as the defenders, they can easily penetrate
the defense through adversarial training.
To address the problem, we should introduce randomness
into the reward function to create diverse perturbations for
the same burst sequence. Specifically, we multiply the output
of query model by a disturbance factor, which is randomly
initialized by the defenders. The reward is defined as:


(11)
ηi · f q x adv , yi ,
R=
yi ∈Y ,yi =y

where ηi ∈ (0, 1] is the disturbance factor, and f q (x adv , yi )
denotes the output probability that the query model misclassified the perturbed sequence x adv with a ground-truth label
y as the label yi . Each defender may set its own disturbance
factor, which is usually unknown to the attackers. Varying the
disturbance factor may change the misclassification results as
well as the direction of perturbation generation. In this way,
the defenders can generate diverse perturbations for the same
raw sequence, thus addressing C3.
In some specific scenarios, the defenders may specify a
target website label ŷ (ŷ = y), that is, make the attack model
misclassify the sequence x to a certain target label ŷ. In
this case, the defenders can generate distinct perturbations
by selecting different ŷ, which is generally not accessible to
the attackers, ensuring the robustness against the attackers’
adversarial training. Thereby, the reward can be defined as
R = f q (x adv , ŷ) for the targeted scenario.
3) Policy Update: During model training, for each raw traffic sequence x , the generator crafts an adversarial perturbation
x adv based on the action a = (c, ) of the RL agent. By
interacting with the query model, we can evaluate the effectiveness of such perturbation using the reward defined in Eq. (11).

6073

Afterwards, the RL agent would refine its perturbation policy
denoted by πθ where θ is the parameter set of RL agent. The
aim of RL agent is to learn a set of optimal parameters θ∗ to
maximize the expected reward, which is formulated as:
θ∗ = arg maxJ (θ),
θ

(12)

where J (θ) = Eπθ [R(s, a)] represents the expected reward
based on state s and action a under the current policy
πθ . To maximize J (θ), we have to figure out the policy
gradient ∇θ J (θ), which provides the direction for parameters
updating. Here, we employ the Monte Carlo Method [38] to
approximate ∇θ J (θ) by averaging the rewards over different
actions for the current policy πθ . Specifically, we sample N
actions {a1 , a2 , . . . , aN } from the policy πθ and obtain the
corresponding rewards {R1 , R2 , . . . , RN } through the query
model, thus forming a series of state-action-reward tuples
(s, a1 , R1 ), (s, a2 , R2 ), . . . , (s, aN , RN ). The policy gradient
is estimated by:
∇θ J (θ) ≈

1
N

N

∇θ log πθ (ai |s)Ri .

(13)

i=1

where ∇θ log πθ (ai |s) is calculated using the back propagation algorithm since the policy πθ is estimated by the WFUnet
and FC network.
With such policy gradient, the agent can update its policy
parameters θ using the gradient ascent method. θ is updated by
θ ← θ+α·∇θ J (θ), where α denotes the learning rate. A large
gradient ∇θ J (θ) may result in a large reward R, indicating that
such perturbation would mislead the WF attack model towards
the direction away from the ground-truth label. In this way,
updating the parameters along the policy gradient direction
would increase the reward during the training process. The
above training process would be continued until the gradient
∇θ J (θ) remains relatively unchanged, when the perturbation
policy is considered to be optimal. The complete process of
policy update is presented in Algorithm 1.
C. Implementation Stage
The well-trained RL agent cannot be directly deployed in
practice. Because the decision making of RL agent requires
a prior knowledge of the complete traffic sequence x , which
however cannot be obtained in advance especially for an
ongoing session where the proxy and the client are interacting
with each other. In other words, we can know which website
the client is visiting but cannot know the complete traffic trace
for a real-time defense scenario. Actually, even visiting the
same website may induce different samples of traffic traces,
due to the diversity of user behavior and the dynamic of
network condition. In particular, with such well-trained RL
agent, we craft an adversarial perturbation sequence v =
x adv − x for each individual sample x in the training set. We
can accordingly acquire a series of various perturbations for
w
the same website w denote by V w = {v w
1 , v 2 , . . .}. The pregenerated perturbations designed for one trace may not work
well on other traces of the same website. A straightforward
idea is to overlay all perturbation sequences from website w.

6074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 Crafting Adversarial Perturbation
Input: burst sequence x , truth label y, query model f q ,
surrogate models fis (i = 1, 2, ...n), maximum number of
query Z, number of samples N, learning rate α
1: Initialization policy parameter θ;
2: for each burst sequence x do
3:
for z = 1, 2, . . . , Z do
4:
Calculate feature maps M;
5:
Calculate position policy and perturbation size policy
using Eq. (9), (10);
6:
for i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
7:
Sample actions a = (c, );
8:
Calculate binary mask q c by Eq. (3)
9:
Calculate
x adv
by
Eq.
(5),
(6),
(7), (8);
10:
Calculate reward Ri ;
11:
end for
12:
Calculate policy gradient ∇θ J (θ) by Eq. (13);
13:
Update the agent parameter θ = θ + α · ∇θ J (θ);
14:
if(f q (x adv ) = y) then break;
15:
end for
16: end for

This method may achieve a high defense performance, as
it covers a wide range of vulnerabilities within the model.
However, it may also result in a very high bandwidth
overhead.
To address this issue, in the implementation stage, we
attempt to find a common perturbation paradigm for a website
which could be effective across different traffic traces for the
same website, rather than generate a perturbation for each
single traffic trace. Our basic idea is to aggregate different
perturbations for the same website based on their positional
frequency. The procedure of our method consists of three
steps:
Frequency calculating: Intuitively, if the well-trained RL
agent decides to pad perturbation at the same position for most
of the samples in V w , such position would be the vulnerable
point for website w. In light of this, we employ a frequency
metric Freiw to quantify how often a perturbation is added at
a specific position i, which is defined as:
|V w |

Freiw =

j =1

I (vjw [i ]),

(14)

where I (·) is an indicator function. If vjw [i ] = 0, I (·) = 1,
otherwise I (·) = 0. A larger Freiw indicates that the position
i is more likely to induce successful perturbation.
Perturbation sort: We rank all positions according to
its frequency Fre w in a descending order and only retain
the top H positions with the highest frequency, which form
a list B w . These positions in B w represent the common
sensitive regions for all samples of website w, which are most
commonly associated with successful perturbation. Padding
perturbation only at these positions is more likely to deceive
unknown WF attack model which may also concentrate on

Algorithm 2 Perturbation Paradigm Generation
Input: Perturbation sequence set V w , surrogate models
fi (i = 1, 2, ...n), accuracy threshold λ
Output: The Perturbation Paradigm U w of website w
1: Initialize U w by 0;
2: Calculate Freiw for each position i by Eq. (14)
3: Rank all positions in descending order of Freiw and select
the top H positions to form a list B w
4: Calculate the average perturbation size D w
5: Initialize the accuracy E = 1
6: for each position i ∈ B w do
7:
Update U w [i ] = D w [i ]
8:
Evaluate the accuracy Eb of current U w in all the
surrogate models
9:
if E − Eb > λ then
10:
E = Eb ;
11:
else
12:
U w [i ] = 0;
13:
end if
14: end for

these characteristic positions, thus enhancing the performance
against C2.
Perturbation aggregation: We can aggregate all perturbations of all samples in v w as follows:
⎧ w
| w
⎨ |V
j =1 vj [i]
w
, if i ∈ B w ,
D [i ] =
(15)
Freiw
⎩ 0, otherwise,
which is actually the average perturbation at these top-ranking
positions. Actually, injecting perturbation at all position in
v w may still cause a high bandwidth overhead. Thereby, we
employ an iterative method to further sift out a common perturbation paradigm U w . U w is initialized by 0. In each iteration,
we select a position i from the list B w based on the frequency
order and retrieve the corresponding perturbation size from
D w . Append D w [i ] to U w , i.e., U w [i ] = D w [i ]. Afterwards,
we can evaluate the effectiveness of current U w by padding
the perturbation U w into all samples in v w and assessing
their defense performance with the surrogate models. If the
decrease of the attack success rate induced by the perturbation
U w exceeds a threshold λ, retain U w [i ]; otherwise, drop it.
The main procedure of perturbation paradigm generation is
described in Algorithm 2. The above process iterates over the
list B w .
In the real-world implementation, the defenders need to
gather traffic traces of each monitored website, and offline
generate the common perturbation paradigms using RLpatch.
Afterwards, these perturbation paradigms are deployed on
the PT proxies of both the client side and Tor entry node.
The PT proxies can select corresponding the perturbation
paradigms according to the website visited by the clients.
As the perturbation paradigms give which positions and how
many dummy packets to inject, the PT proxy add perturbation
to the live Tor traffic in the corresponding burst position until
the session ends.

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

VI. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

6075

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE FOR D IFFERENT D EFENSE M ETHODS

In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to verify
the effectiveness of RLpatch. For performance comparison, we
compare RLpatch with state-of-the-art (SOTA) WF defense
methods in terms of defense performance, bandwidth overhead
and robustness. To make our work reproducible, we have made
our code publicly available on Github.1
A. Experimental Settings
WF Dataset: We select the public available Siranam
dataset [16] and Rimmer dataset [15] for performance evaluation, as done in most previous studies. The Siranam dataset
consists of directional sequences from 95 monitored websites,
each of which contains 1000 instances, chosen from the top
100 Alexa-ranked websites. The Rimmer dataset includes
100 monitored websites, each with 2500 examples. Similar
to [26], we preprocess the data by removing instances with
fewer than 50 packets or starting with incoming packets. After
filtering, 460 instances per website are retained in Siranam
dataset, and 1000 instances per website in Rimmer dataset.
Since the traffic traces collected by the attackers and defenders
may differ, we divide the datasets into three parts: defenders’
training set, attackers’ training set, and testing set. Specifically,
in the Siranam dataset, 200 instances per website are used to
train the defenders’ surrogate and query models, another 200
for the attackers’ model, and the remaining 60 for testing. In
the Rimmer dataset, 400 instances per website are used for
both training sets, and 200 for testing.
Attack Models: To evaluate the effectiveness and other
properties of RLpatch on different DNNs-based WF attack
models, we adopt four representative DNN-based WF attack
models, namely AWF [15], DF [16], VarCNN [17], and
TF [39], which have been widely used in the existing studies
of WF defense. Note that the defense should be effective to
various models the attacker may adopt in real-world scenarios.
Therefore, it is realistic for the defenders to choose multiple
surrogate models to enhance the generalization capability of
the perturbations.
Evaluation Metrics: We employ two metrics: attack success
rate (ASR) and the bandwidth overhead (BWO) to evaluate
the performance of defense methods. ASR refers to the classification accuracy of the perturbed sequence on the attacker’s
WF model. The decline in ASR before and after applying
defense represents the strength of the defense. Overall, a
lower ASR indicates stronger defense effectiveness. BWO is
defined as the ratio of the additional bandwidth, caused by
the injected dummy packets introduced by the defense, to the
original bandwidth of the real packets. Furthermore, we use
the average number of queries (ANQ) as the metric to
assess the query counts required for our method to generate
appropriate perturbations.
Baselines: To comprehensively evaluate the defense
performance of RLpatch, we compare it with seven SOTA
WF real-time defense methods. Specifically, we select two
representative methods, i.e., WTF-PAD [6] and Palette [25]
1 https://github.com/chenxiailian/RLpatch-WF

from the categories of obfuscation defenses and regularization
defenses respectively. Additionally, we choose five adversarial
defense methods. Among them, AWA [29] and Dolos [28]
are pioneering works on adversarial WF defense, which use
universal perturbations to meet the real-time requirements
and reduce the BWO to an acceptable level. Minipatch [30]
achieves a high defense performance under glass-box setting
but struggles with unseen closed-box WF model and adversarial training. Acup3 [31] and KimeraPAD [32] focus on
enhancing robustness against adversarial training. We use ASR
and BWO to measure the defense capability under various
practical scenarios.
To ensure a fair comparison, we conduct experiments using
the same training and testing datasets and the same attackers’
WF models. In the offline training phase, we generate perturbation paradigms using the defenders’ training dataset for
each website. In the testing phase, we apply the perturbations
to each trace in the testing dataset using different defense
methods. In this way, we can obtain a corresponding perturbed
testing dataset for each defense method. Meanwhile, we use
the attackers’ training dataset to train different attack models.
These models are used to evaluate the ASR and the BWO in
each perturbed testing dataset.
B. Comparison With Baselines
Overall Performance under Glass-Box Setting. We compare the ASR and BWO of our method with other defense
methods when the defenders have prior knowledge of the WF
attack models frequently used by the attackers. This scenario
represents the upper bound of defense performance. We
generate perturbations on known glass-box surrogate models
and evaluate the accuracy of the perturbed samples on the same
attackers’ target WF attack models. Specifically, we first use
the defenders’ training dataset to train the surrogate models
and the query models. Afterwards, for each trace in the testing

6076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

dataset, we add the corresponding perturbation generated by
each defense method to the trace to obtain a new perturbed
trace, thus generating the perturbed testing dataset specific to
the method. Finally, we use the target WF attack models to
test the ASR and the BWO of each perturbed testing dataset.
The final results are shown in Table III.
From the results, we can observe that WTF-PAD has the
worst defense performance because its random perturbations
fail to disrupt the attacker’s classification patterns. Moreover,
we can find that the camouflage defense Palette has an ASR
similar to some adversarial defense methods, but because it
needs to pad the traffic trace into a similar pattern, it has
a higher BWO. Adversarial defense methods AWA, Dolos,
Acup3, and KimeraPAD have similar ASR and BWO levels,
indicating that their defense performances are comparable.
We find that Minipatch even reduces the ASR on AWF to
6.2%, with a lower bandwidth overhead than the previous
methods. By limiting the size and number of perturbations,
Minipatch forces the perturbations to be added only in the
positions that significantly affect the model’s decision-making,
thus reducing bandwidth overhead. Furthermore, we also find
that our proposed RLpatch outperforms all the aforementioned
methods, including Minipatch, in terms of ASR on the Siranam
and Rimmer datasets. RLpatch strategically focuses its perturbation on sensitive regions that are consistently identified
across various surrogate models, enabling RLpatch to generate
effective perturbations with fewer dummy packet injections.
RLpatch not only refines the perturbation in the sensitive
region but aggregates different perturbation patterns for the
same website, thus enhancing the effectiveness of the defense.
Furthermore, by comparing the results on the Siranam and
Rimmer dataset, we find that the defense performance on the
Rimmer dataset is not as good as that on the Siranam dataset.
This may be due to the larger size of the Rimmer dataset,
which favors DL-based attack methods and enhances their
classification capabilities.
Overall Performance under closed-box setting. To evaluate
the effectiveness of well-trained defense models under a
closed-box setting, we ensure that the surrogate and query
models used for training are different from the attack model
used for evaluation. In this setting, the defenders have no
knowledge of the attackers’ target model. This scenario
represents the lower bound of defense effectiveness. We do
not use WTF-PAD and Palette in this experiment because
their mechanisms are model-agnostic. In this experiment, for
RLpatch, we select two out of the four available WF attack
models as the surrogate models, use another one as the query
model, and treat the remaining one as the unseen closed-box
model. Specifically, we generate perturbations in the glassbox setting using the surrogate model and query model. Once
these perturbations are generated, we apply them in the testing
dataset to create perturbed dataset and employ a target WF
attack model that is unseen during training to test the ASR.
The experiments are conducted on both the Siranam and
Rimmer datasets for all adversarial defense methods.
Fig. 6 presents the ASR under closed-box settings. We
find the ASRs in this experiment are all lower than those

Fig. 6.

The ASR against different closed-box WF models.

in previous experiment where the attack model is known to
the defenders. The above result indicates that the disparity
between the actual attackers’ and the training models may
induce the decline of defense performance. We also observe
that Minipatch achieves the highest ASR among these defense
methods. This result reveals that Minipatch can only generate
effective perturbation against the query model. When the
attackers’ model differs from the query model, the defense
performance drops sharply. In contrast, the defense methods
including AWA, Acup3, KimeraPAD and Dolos rely on gradient information of surrogate model to generate perturbations.
Since this gradient direction may exhibit some similarities
across different WF models, these methods perform slightly
better against unseen models than Minipatch through transferability. Compared to these approaches, RLpatch utilizes the
weighted gradients from multiple surrogate models to generate
perturbations in the identified sensitive regions. This shared
perturbation direction enhances the generalization capability of
the perturbations to deceive unseen models, thereby achieving
the lowest ASR in the closed-box WF models.
Combined with the previous results, we can conclude that
our defense method effectively improves the performance
under both glass-box and closed-box settings, demonstrating
its effectiveness and generalization capability across different
attack models.

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

6077

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE AGAINST A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

Untargeted scenario

(a)
(b) Targeted scenario

Robustness to Adversarial Training. As mentioned in
C3, the attackers may have the ability to retrain their WF
attack models by generating perturbed traffic traces using the
same defense models. However, the configuration parameters
of the defense models are not accessible to the attackers.
To penetrate the defense, the attackers could set different
variants of configuration parameters to conduct adversarial
training. Specifically, the attackers can retrain their WF models
based on the perturbation traces generated using different
configuration parameters.
We conduct an experiment to simulate adversarial training
and test the ASR of defense methods against DF attacks.
we vary the configuration parameters to obtain various perturbation traces for adversarial training. Since WTF-PAD,
Palette and Dolos may introduce additional bursts, we focus on
AWA, KimeraPAD, Acup3, Minipatch, and RLpatch for this
experiment. Specifically, in the targeted scenario, we randomly
select the cluster head for Acup3 and change the target label
for AWA and RLpatch. In the untargeted scenario, we use
different random seeds for Minipatch and KimeraPAD, while
selecting different disturbance factors for RLpatch. For the
testing set, we apply a unique configuration parameter of
the defense method to generate a perturbed testing dataset. For
the attackers’ training datasets, we apply multiple configuration parameters to generate multiple perturbed datasets, which
are used for retraining the attackers’ target WF model. We
evaluate the ASR and BWO when the attackers’ target WF
model is trained with varying numbers of perturbed datasets.
The experimental results are shown in Table IV.
We can observe that the ASR in the targeted scenario is
generally higher than that in the untargeted scenario. This
result indicates that changing the target label could increase
the randomness of perturbation, thereby enhancing robustness
against adversarial training. As the number of configuration
variants used for adversarial training increases, it is intuitive
to find an increasing trend in ASR. Since more configuration
variants usually indicate more diverse perturbation traces for
model retraining, the attackers are more likely to learn the
perturbation pattern that is possibly employed by the defenders. Moreover, we find that the ASR of Minipatch exceeds
96.1%, exhibiting the poorest robustness when the number
of configuration variants exceeds 2. This is because attackers
can still generate similar perturbation traces as defenders even
when using different random seeds to bypass the defense

Fig. 7.

ASR and BWO by varying c,  and ρ.

of Minipatch. Our results show that RLpatch achieves lower
ASR at a lower BWO than the evaluated methods in both the
targeted and untargeted scenarios, demonstrating a more efficient overhead and effective defense performance. Therefore,
RLpatch can effectively mislead the attackers’ classifier while
incurring minimal additional communication overhead. The
attackers can hardly select the same target label or the same
disturbance factor as the defenders, making it challenging to
generate the same perturbation traces. Although the attackers
may penetrate our defense by introducing enough configuration variants, excessive configuration variants significantly
escalate the cost of the attack, as attackers need to expend more
time and resources to collect and process the traffic traces for
model training. Consequently, RLpatch still presents a barrier
to WF attackers.

C. Ablation Study
Performance on Different Surrogate Models. To evaluate
the impact of different surrogate models on RLpatch, we
compare the performance for a single surrogate model to that
for multiple surrogate models in Siranam Dataset. We choose
one of the WF models as the target WF model and test the
ASR when the perturbations, generated by either a single or
multiple surrogate models, are applied to the testing dataset.
Table V presents the defense performance under different
target WF models. We find that generating perturbations using
multiple surrogate models generally achieves better defense
performance than using a single surrogate model. Due to
the diversity of models, different WF attack models may
have different decision boundaries and sensitive regions. The
sensitive regions identified by multiple WF models are more
likely critical for the classification decisions of WF target
model than those identified by a single model, leading to
a lower ASR. However, these regions may need to inject
more perturbations to deceive the multiple WF attack models,
which causes a higher bandwidth overhead, but still within an
acceptable range (below 15%). Moreover, we also find that
complex models, such as VarCNN and TF, are more resistant
to RLpatch. In contrast, the simple model AWF can be easily
defeated even when using a single surrogate model.

6078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON A MONG D IFFERENT S URROGATE M ODELS

1 The former number represents the recognition accuracy of surrogate model, while the later number represents the recognition accuracy of attackers’ model.

Fig. 8. ASR and BWO of different sensitive regions. ①: the sensitive regions
of a randomly selected trace. ②: the sensitive regions of all traces ③: the
sensitive regions aggregated by RLpatch.

Performance on Different Policy. To verify the effectiveness of each policy, we conduct experiments by adding
each component individually. We select the DF as the target
WF attack model to defeat in an untargeted scenario. First,
we assign the same model weights to each of multiple
models and set the perturbation step size to 0.2 to test the
defense performance when applying only the position policy c.
Next, we adjust the model weight parameter ρ according to
feature maps while keeping the perturbation step size constant.
Finally, we incorporate the perturbation policy  into the overall learning process. The results in Fig. 7 show that when only
position policy is applied, the ASR is 5.7% with a BWO of
15.1%. Both the ASR and BWO decrease after incorporating
the model weight parameter ρ for adjustment, indicating that
adjusting ρ effectively enhances defense performance. With
the addition of the perturbation magnitude policy, we observe
a further reduction in both the ASR and BWO, underscoring
the importance of the perturbation magnitude  to the overall
defense performance.
Performance for different sensitive regions. To verify
the effectiveness of the perturbation aggregation method, we
conduct experiments by covering different sensitive regions to
apply perturbations. For each website, we add perturbations
by ① covering the sensitive regions of a randomly selected
trace; ② covering the sensitive regions of all traces; ③ covering
the sensitive regions aggregated by RLpatch. Specifically, the

generations of different sensitive regions are as follows: ①
We randomly select a trace from each website’s traces and
generate a common perturbation paradigm of the website
using its sensitive region. ② We cover all sensitive regions
of the training traces of the same website by overlaying their
perturbation positions and taking the maximum perturbation
magnitude at each position. ③ RLpatch aggregates the sensitive regions based on positional frequency to construct a
common perturbation paradigm for each website. We apply
these generated perturbation paradigms to testing dataset,
which consists of previously unseen traffic traces of the
same website, and evaluate their ASR and BWO against
the target DF model. The comparison results are shown in
Fig. 8. It can be seen that although adding perturbation on all
sensitive regions can significantly reduce the ASR to 1.5%,
it may lead to an unacceptable BWO of 184.6%. In contrast,
covering the sensitive regions of a single trace yields poor
defense performance, achieving a much higher ASR of 16.4%,
but a lower BWO of 14.7%. Due to variations in network
environments and user behavior, the sensitive regions often
differ across traces of the same website, and perturbations
tailored to one trace may not generalize effectively. Whereas,
RLpatch slightly increases the ASR to 7.6%, but significantly
reduces the BWO to 14.1%, demonstrating its effectiveness
and practicality for real-world deployment. By retaining only
some key sensitive regions, RLpatch achieves strong defense
performance across diverse traffic traces of the same website
while maintaining a low BWO.
D. Effects of Hyperparameters
We investigate the impact of key parameters on RLpatch,
including the disturbance factor η, learning rate α and threshold λ.
Disturbance factor η. It controls the perturbation generator to create diverse perturbations for different clients. To
evaluate the impact of the disturbance factor on the defense
performance, we randomly generate five different vectors
for η. We use DF as the target model and run RLpatch
with each η to generate corresponding perturbations. The
experimental results are presented in Table VI. We can observe
that the ASRs are all below 5% while the BWOs are all below
13.2% for all disturbance factors. Moreover, all the ASRs and
BWOs vary by less than 2% across all disturbance factors.
This variation indicates that RLpatch’s defense performance is

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

6079

TABLE VI
T HE I MPACT OF D ISTURBANCE FACTORS AND L EARNING R ATE

Fig. 10.

Performance for different number of training samples.

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON B ETWEEN U NDIRECTIONAL
AND B IDIRECTIONAL PADDING

Fig. 9.

ASR and BWO vary with threshold λ.

E. Implementation Results
largely unaffected by choice of disturbance factor η, thereby
demonstrating its robustness and reducing the need for finegrained hyperparameter tuning.
Learning rate α. The learning rate α is weight coefficient
to control the magnitude of the policy gradient change. To
explore the effects of different learning rates on the defense
performance, we design five sets of experiments with α
ranging from 10−4 to 10−2 . We use DF as the target model
and run RLpatch with each α to generate corresponding
perturbations. The corresponding perturbation results against
the DF attacks are presented in Table VI. As we can observe,
by setting the learning rate to be 10−3 , RLpatch achieves
the testing best defense performance against the DF model.
Moreover, the results also reveal that RLpatch is well resistant
to each attack model across different learning rates, since the
overall variation in performance remains relatively modest.
This indicates that RLpatch is not overly sensitive to the exact
choice of learning rate α and can maintain effective defense
within a reasonable range.
Threshold λ. It determines whether a candidate perturbation
should be retained based on its contribution to reducing the
ASRs of surrogate models during the perturbation aggregation
process. A higher λ results in more stringent filtering, allowing
only perturbations in sensitive regions with stronger defense
effects to be preserved. We fix the other parameters of RLpatch
and increase λ from 0 to 0.1. We observe that RLpatch
demonstrates an escalation in ASR and a decline in BWO
across all models as λ increases. As the threshold λ is set
higher, RLpatch is more likely to retain only the perturbation
with strong effects on defense performance, while dropping the
perturbations with weak effects, which may lead to a decline
in ASR. In contrast, the corresponding BWO diminishes as
λ rises due to fewer retained perturbations. Therefore, an
appropriate threshold should be selected to balance ASR and
BWO.

We further discuss additional properties of our defense
when deployed in real scenarios, including the effects of
unidirectional padding, training sample counts and open-world
setting.
Performance on Undirectional Padding. We conduct experiments to assess the viability of RLpatch’s padding deployment
strategy. When implementing unidirectional padding, we
adjust the corresponding constraints in the process of crafting
adversarial perturbations. Specifically, in the outgoing-padding
scenario, the values at even positions of the adversarial
perturbation sequence are set to zero, while in the incomingpadding scenario, the values at odd positions are set to zero.
We choose the DF as the target model for evaluation and
show the results in Table VII. The results indicate that the
ASR of unidirectional padding is higher than that of bidirectional padding, especially for incoming-padding. In contrary,
we find that padding only in the outgoing direction yields
results similar to the bidirectional padding, indicating that
the outgoing-padding primarily contributes to the perturbation
effect. The above results demonstrate that RLpatch can still
work well when only deploying RLpatch on the user side.
Performance on Data Efficiency. We investigate the impact
of the number of training samples during the reinforcement
learning process on defense performance, which may directly
affect the training time and the effectiveness of adversarial
perturbations. We use the DF, AWF, VarCNN, TF as target WF
models to defeat respectively, and run RLpatch with different
numbers of training samples. The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 10. We can observe that the ASR of RLpatch
decreases while the BWO increases as the number of training
samples increases from 10 to 70. This occurs because a
larger training sample size allows RLpatch to identify sensitive
regions more accurately for crafting adversarial perturbations,
thereby reducing the ASR. Moreover, since the same website
may produce different traffic traces, RLpatch requires to
inject additional dummy packets for modification. This further

6080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

open-world and multi-tab setting, RLpatch further lowers the
average ASR to just 6.1%. These results demonstrate that
RLpatch not only excels in closed-world and single-tab setting
but also maintains strong defense performance under complex
real-world conditions.
VII. D ISCUSSION
A. Practical Deployment

Fig. 11. ASR Comparison under closed-world & single-tab setting and openworld & multi-tab setting.

misleads the attacker’s WF model but inevitably leads to an
increase in bandwidth overhead.
Performance on Real-world Scenarios. In the above
evaluation experiment, we have demonstrated that RLpatch
outperforms state-of-the-art defenses in the closed-world and
single-tab setting, where WF attacks are trained as multiclass classification models over a fixed set of monitored
websites. Although this setting is favorable to attackers and
represents a challenging scenario for defenders, it does not
fully reflect the complexity of real-world usage patterns. To
further validate the practicality and robustness of RLpatch,
we evaluate its performance in a real-world scenario, where
users may visit websites outside the monitored set and operate
multiple browser tabs simultaneously, that is, on the openworld and multi-tab setting. Specifically, we select 50 websites
from the Rimmer dataset as the monitored set and another
50 websites as the unmonitored set. We first generate the
perturbed traces from the monitored set based on the original
traces and the corresponding common perturbation paradigm.
We then construct a multi-tab trace by merging a perturbed
trace from the monitored set with an unperturbed trace
from the unmonitored set. In this way, we create a testing
dataset that simulates the open-world and multi-tab browsing
behavior. Similarly, we generate a new testing dataset without
perturbations to serve as a baseline for comparison.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 11. Without any
defense, WF models can achieve high ASR in the closedworld and single-tab setting, ranging from 94.4% of AWF
to 98.4% of DF. However, in the open-world and multi-tab
setting, the average ASR drops to 30.5% across four different
WF attacks, indicating that concurrent browsing and visits
to unmonitored websites inherently increase the difficulty of
WF attacks. This is because multi-tab traffic traces become
interwoven, generating mutual noise among website sessions.
Such overlapping traffic patterns obscure site-specific features,
making it challenging for WF models to accurately extract
clean and distinctive characteristics. After applying RLpatch,
we observe a substantial reduction in ASR across all WF attack
models. In the closed-world and single-tab setting, RLpatch
reduces the average ASR to 8.9%. More importantly, in the

The defense requires the cooperation of both sides of the
network connection (for Tor, the client and the entry node).
Here, RLpatch assumes that a pluggable transport (PT) proxy
is deployed at both the client and the Tor entry node, with
synchronized perturbation paradigms to ensure that dummy
packets are injected at both ends. If potential synchronization
failures occur, one of the PT proxies cannot filter out the
dummy packets, leading to connection error.
However, two practical challenges remain to be addressed.
The first challenge is to determine how to correctly remove
dummy packets to recover normal communication. In our
work, since we add the dummy packets at the end of each
burst, the receiving side can discard them based on the
shared perturbation paradigm. However, if the transmission
path changes during delivery, packet reordering may occur. In
such cases, blindly removing packets at the end of a burst
could result in discarding legitimate data, triggering retransmissions and introducing additional delays. As a supplement,
we can employ a link-padding layer between the transport
and application layers to mark the dummy packets using a
defined flag in the protocol header. This flag can assist in the
identification and removal of dummy packets, thereby reducing
the risk of misinterpretation and ensuring robust delivery even
under unstable network conditions. The second challenge is
to determine when to start injecting dummy packets, as the
PT proxy cannot know the length of the current burst in
advance. If the client/server stops sending real packets for a
time interval, the current burst is considered to be ended and
we can start inserting dummy packets.
B. Training and Deployment Cost Analysis
We evaluate the computational costs associated with training
and implementation in real-world settings. Firstly, defenders
need to collect traffic traces to generate perturbations. Each
traffic trace is approximately 40 KB in size on average.
Assuming that the defenders intend to protect 100 websites and
collect 30 traces for each website, the total storage requirement
would be approximately 40 KB × 100 × 30 = 120 MB.
Afterwards, we measure the average training time, GPU
memory usage, and CPU utilization during both the training
and implementation stages. When using a single CPU core,
RLpatch requires approximately 15 minutes of training time
and 3000 MB of GPU memory on the Sirinam dataset to
generate a common perturbation paradigm for one monitored
website. On the Rimmer dataset, the training time increases
slightly to around 20 minutes with similar GPU memory.
Since training is performed offline, this time cost is considered
acceptable for practical use.

CHEN et al.: RLpatch: A ROBUST LOW-OVERHEAD WF DEFENSE METHOD

Finally, defenders need to deploy the generated common
perturbation paradigms to both the PT proxy on the client
side and the Tor entry node. Each perturbation paradigm file
is approximately 6 KB in size per website. Their lightweight
nature enables rapid updates and scalability, making it feasible
to support a large number of monitored websites without
imposing significant storage or transmission burdens on the
defenders’ infrastructure. Consequently, the deployment of
RLpatch remains practical and manageable even in resourceconstrained environments.
C. Limitation
While most state-of-the-art WF attacks operate on packet
direction sequences, some recent works have demonstrated that
comparable classification performance can also be achieved
using packet timestamps. However, our current defense mechanism is not designed to address attacks that rely primarily
on timing features. RLpatch focuses on modifying directionbased bursts by injecting dummy packets, but does not
manipulate packet timing characteristics such as inter-packet
delays or burst intervals. To defend against timing-based WF
attacks, future extensions of RLpatch may jointly optimize
direction and time features in future work. Moreover, RLpatch
focuses on adding tiny perturbation to mislead DNN-based
WF attacks. Non-DNN traffic analysis techniques that use
statistical features (e.g., packet counts, traffic volumes, and
connection duration) may not be protected by our defense.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces RLpatch, a robust low-overhead
defense method against WF attacks based on RL, which
focuses on generating perturbation within sensitive regions to
reduce the bandwidth overhead while keeping the effectiveness to mislead the WF attack models. RLpatch employs a
novel RL-based adversarial perturbation generation method to
identify the common sensitive regions of various surrogate
models and adjust perturbation to fit the traffic trace by a query
WF model for the feedback. By aggregating the perturbations
from the same website based on positional frequency, RLpatch
can generate a common perturbation paradigm to prevent the
traffic traces of the website from being accurately identified
by attackers. Experiments demonstrate that RLpatch can outperform other baseline WF defense methods on bandwidth
overhead and defense performance against SOTA WF attacks.
For future work, we will focus on designing an adaptive
defense mechanism to ensure that the defense remains effective even as Web traffic trace changes over time.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Harborth, S. Pape, and K. Rannenberg, “Explaining the technology
use behavior of privacy-enhancing technologies: The case of Tor
and JonDonym,” in Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol (PETs), 2020,
pp. 111–128.
[2] X. Deng, R. Zhao, Y. Wang, M. Zhan, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang,
“Countmamba: A generalized website fingerprinting attack via coarsegrained representation and fine-grained prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Security Privacy (SP), 2025, pp. 1363–1381.
[3] A. Maghsoudlou, L. Vermeulen, I. Poese, and O. Gasser, “Characterizing
the VPN ecosystem in the wild,” in Proc. Conf. Passive Active Meas.,
2023, pp. 18–45.

6081

[4] P. Krämer et al., “ProFi: Scalable and efficient website fingerprinting,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1271–1286,
Feb. 2024.
[5] B. Gao, W. Liu, G. Liu, F. Nie, and J. Huang, “Multi-level resourcecoherented graph learning for website fingerprinting attacks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 693–708, 2025.
[6] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. 21st ESORICS, 2016,
pp. 27–46.
[7] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
fingerprinting,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2020,
pp. 717–734.
[8] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a-boo,
I still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2012, pp. 332–346.
[9] J. Huang, W. Liu, G. Liu, B. Gao, and F. Nie, “WF-A2D: Enhancing
privacy with asymmetric adversarial defense against website fingerprinting,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensic Security, vol. 20, pp. 4739–4754, 2025.
[10] M. Jiang, B. Cui, J. Fu, T. Wang, L. Yao, and B. K. Bhargava,
“RUDOLF: An efficient and adaptive defense approach against website
fingerprinting attacks based on soft actor-critic algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensic Security, vol. 19, pp. 7794–7809, 2024.
[11] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2014, pp. 143–157.
[12] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website
fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
Secur.), 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
[13] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2016, Art. no. 23477.
[14] D.Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
naïve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop
(CCSW), 2019, pp. 31–42.
[15] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juárez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
“Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc.
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2017, pp. 1–15.
[16] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juárez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), 2018,
pp. 1928–1943.
[17] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-efficient
website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” in Proc. Privacy
Enhanc. Technol. (PETs), 2019, pp. 292–310.
[18] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting
website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in
Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023, pp. 607–624.
[19] Y. Yuan, Y. Du, and G. Cheng, “Class incremental website fingerprinting
attack based on dynamic expansion architecture,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1955–1971, Apr. 2025.
[20] H. Zou, J. Su, Z. Wei, S. Chen, C. Yang, and M. Chen,
“Toward an effective few-shot website fingerprinting attack with
quadruplet networks and deep local fingerprinting features,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput., early access, Apr. 22, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3563389.
[21] W. Meng, C. Ma, M. Ding, C. Ge, Y. Qian, and T. Xiang, “Beyond
single tabs: A transformative few-shot approach to multi-tab website
fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2025, pp. 1068–1077.
[22] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, and R. Johnson, “Cs-BuFLO: A congestion
sensitive website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. ACM Workshop
Privacy Electron Soc., 2014, pp. 121–130.
[23] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A
systematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS),
2014, pp. 227–238.
[24] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie-talkie: An efficient defense against
passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2017, pp. 1375–1390.
[25] M. Shen et al., “Real-time website fingerprinting defense via traffic
cluster anonymization,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), 2024,
pp. 3238–3256.
[26] M. S. Rahman, M. Imani, N. Mathews, and M. Wright, “Mockingbird:
Defending against deep-learning-based website fingerprinting attacks
with adversarial traces,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 1594–1609, 2021.

6082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[27] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Defeating DNN-based
traffic analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial perturbations,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2021,
pp. 2705–2722.
[28] S. Shan, A. N. Bhagoji, H. Zheng, and B. Y. Zhao, “Patch-based defenses
against Web fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell.
Secur., 2021, pp. 97–109.
[29] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, B. Tajali, and R. Jalili, “AWA: Adversarial website
adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3109–3122,
2021.
[30] D. Li, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, and J. Wang, “Minipatch: Undermining DNNbased website fingerprinting with adversarial patches,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2437–2451, 2022.
[31] L. Qiao, B. Wu, S. Yin, H. Li, W. Yuan, and X. Luo, “Resisting
DNN-based website fingerprinting attacks enhanced by adversarial
training,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5375–5386,
2023.
[32] M. Jiang, B. Cui, J. Fu, T. Wang, and Z. Wang, “KimeraPAD: A novel
low-overhead real-time defense against website fingerprinting attacks
based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2944–2961, Jun. 2024.
[33] C. Hou, G. Gou, J. Shi, P. Fu, and G. Xiong, “WF-GAN: Fighting back
against website fingerprinting attack using adversarial learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2020, pp. 1–7.
[34] M. H. M. Soleimani, M. Mansoorizadeh, and M. Nassiri, “Real-time
identification of three Tor pluggable transports using machine learning
techniques,” J. Supercomput., vol. 74, no. 10, pp. 4910–4927, 2018.
[35] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning
deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proc. IEEE. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2016, pp. 2921–2929.
[36] Y. Dong et al., “Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum,” in
Proc. IEEE. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2018,
pp. 9185–9193.
[37] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assist. Interv., 2015, pp. 234–241.
[38] D. Zhou, S. Gao, and F. Long, “Research on intrusion detection based on
Markov chain monte carlo method,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput,
Big Data Appl. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 184–189.
[39] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-Transformer:
Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.

Yuxing Wei received the bachelor’s degree in computer science and technology from the Guangxi
University for Nationalities in July 2013. He is
currently affiliated with the Information Center of
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. His research
interests include cloud computing, government
network systems, and network and data security.

Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
in 2011 and 2016, respectively, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the Department
of Automation, School of Information Science
and Technology. His research interests include
multimedia communications, future network, and
stochastic optimization.

Xiaofeng Jiang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in information science and technology from the
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 2008 and 2013, respectively, where
he is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Information Science and Technology.
His recent research interests include discrete-event
dynamic system, tensor analysis and big data, future
network, and cognitive communications.

Siyang Chen received the B.S. degree in
information science and technology from the
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 2019, where he is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include
network security and traffic analysis.

Jian Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2001
and 2006, respectively, where he is currently a
Professor with the School of Information Science
and Technology. His research interests include future
networks, distributed system design, modeling and
optimization, multimedia over wired and wireless
networks, and stochastic optimization.

Dong Jin received the B.S. degree in automation from the Hefei University of Technology,
Hefei, China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree
in electronic information from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, in 2023.
He is currently an Associate Research Fellow
with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei. His
research interests include network optimization,
industrial Internet, and AI-aided network intrusion
detection.

Xiaobin Tan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
and Technology of China, China, in 1996 and 2003,
respectively, where he is currently an Associate
Professor with the Department of Automation,
School of Information Science and Technology.
His research interests include future Internet
architecture, information security, and multimedia
communication.