Robustifying ML-powered Network
Classifiers with PANTS
Minhao Jin and Maria Apostolaki, Princeton University
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/jin-minhao

This paper is included in the Proceedings of the
34th USENIX Security Symposium.
August 13–15, 2025 • Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-939133-52-6
Open access to the Proceedings of the
34th USENIX Security Symposium is sponsored by USENIX.

Robustifying ML-powered Network Classifiers with PANTS
Minhao Jin
Princeton University

Abstract
Multiple network management tasks, from resource
allocation to intrusion detection, rely on some form of
ML-based network traffic classification (MNC). Despite their
potential, MNCs are vulnerable to adversarial inputs, which
can lead to outages, poor decision-making, and security
violations, among other issues.
The goal of this paper is to help network operators assess
and enhance the robustness of their MNC against adversarial
inputs. The most critical step for this is generating inputs that
can fool the MNC while being realizable under various threat
models. Compared to other ML models, finding adversarial inputs against MNCs is more challenging due to the existence of
non-differentiable components e.g., traffic engineering and the
need to constrain inputs to preserve semantics and ensure reliability. These factors prevent the direct use of well-established
gradient-based methods developed in adversarial ML (AML).
To address these challenges, we introduce PANTS, a
practical white-box framework that uniquely integrates
AML techniques with Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT)
solvers to generate adversarial inputs for MNCs. We also
embed PANTS into an iterative adversarial training process
that enhances the robustness of MNCs against adversarial
inputs. PANTS is 70% and 2x more likely in median to
find adversarial inputs against target MNCs compared to
state-of-the-art baselines, namely Amoeba and BAP. PANTS
improves the robustness of the target MNCs by 52.7%
(even against attackers outside of what is considered during
robustification) without sacrificing their accuracy.

1

Introduction

Managing networks involves tasks such as performance
routing, load balancing, and intrusion detection and is
extremely challenging due to the highly diverse, heavy-tailed,
and unpredictable inputs, i.e., network traffic. ML-based
network-traffic classification (MNCs) provides a compelling
alternative for handling these complex tasks more efficiently [17, 18, 26, 29, 30, 32, 47, 48, 61]. However, like other

USENIX Association

Maria Apostolaki
Princeton University

ML-based solutions [23, 50], MNCs are vulnerable to adversarial inputs, that is, inputs meticulously perturbed to deceive
the MNC. Attackers can exploit this to compromise critical
network infrastructure by subtly perturbing traffic characteristics like packet sizes and inter-arrival times, leading to
security breaches or downtime. Beyond being dangerous,
these attacks are particularly practical in the networking
domain, where multiple entities have access to network traffic.
What is critically lacking is a systematic framework for
network operators and MNC designers to enhance the robustness of MNCs against attackers. This involves identifying
adversarial inputs, meaning perturbations on original packet
sequences that deceive the target MNC into misclassifying
them. Operators can then use these inputs to: (i) refine and
optimize the MNC by exploring different models, architectures, or features; (ii) assess the attack surface of their MNCs,
understand the potential consequences and plan accordingly;
and (iii) use them to strengthen MNCs against realistic
threat models through re-training or fine-tuning. Critically,
operators will not use or take the framework seriously if the
generated adversarial inputs are (i) not realizable, meaning
they do not fall within a realistic attacker’s capabilities, or
(ii) do not retain the semantics of the original sequence,
meaning the ground-truth label of the perturbed inputs has
changed. More importantly, we show that adversarial inputs
that are non-realizable or non-semantics-preserving can hurt
the model’s accuracy when used in training.
While there are numerous tools for generating adversarial
samples in the Adversarial Machine Learning (AML)
literature [12, 14, 24, 37, 56] they are not directly applicable
to MNCs. First, AML tools are built for systems that are
end-to-end differentiable, which makes them unsuitable for
typical MNCs that include a feature engineering module to
transform packet sequences into feature vectors before they
are fed to the ML model. Although AML tools can generate
adversarial feature vectors, there is no guarantee these vectors
can be reverse-engineered into valid packet sequences. Even
if a valid packet sequence exists, the perturbations needed
to convert the original sequence into an adversarial one may

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7291

7292

34th USENIX Security Symposium

(e.g., feature engineering). Importantly, PANTS enhances
MNCs’s robustness against both white-box and black-box
attackers, even when their capabilities differ from or exceed
those considered during the robustification process.
We will open source PANTS and our evaluation materials
to facilitate further research and MNCs robustness (cf. 6).

2

Motivation & Limitations of Existing Work
100
Vulnerability (%)

exceed what a realistic attacker could achieve. Second, it is
uncertain whether AML-generated samples are preserving
the semantics of the original packet sequence while deceiving
the MNC. Although AML techniques often incorporate a perturbation budget (expressed as a norm), this concept does not
translate well to networking traffic. For example, perturbing
a VoIP flow (packet sequence) to resemble web browsing by
delaying packets might deceive a traffic classifier but degrades
the original flow’s performance, making the call unusable.
Critically, adversarially training an MNC with non-realizable
or non-semantics-preserving samples (i.e., directly using what
AML generates) will degrade the MNC’s accuracy without
significantly improving robustness as we show in §5.2.
Learning-based approaches such as Amoeba [35] use
reinforcement learning to directly generate adversarial traffic
sequences. Being black-box approaches, such tools are great
for attackers to fool ML-powered applications. However,
the lack of diversity in adversarial samples, their instability,
and training hardness make them less effective for assessing
and enhancing the robustness of MNCs from the network
operator’s perspective, as we show in our evaluation.
To address these shortcomings, this paper presents PANTS,
a framework to generate Practical Adversarial Network
Traffic Samples that are realizable for various threat models
and semantic-preserving. PANTS also enhances the target
MNC through a novel iterative augmentation training process
that leverages these samples. PANTS integrates traditional
methods for generating adversarial samples (AML), such
as Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [37] or Zeroth-order
Optimization (ZOO) [14], with formal methods, concretely
a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solver. The AML
perturbs the original inputs (packet sequences or features) in
a manner that maximizes their distance (e.g., loss for MLP)
from the original decision boundaries with a consistently
high success rate. The SMT solver finds packet sequences
that do not diverge too much from the AML’s output but are
realizable, consistent with the threat model and preserve the
semantics of the original packet sequence. To achieve this, we
encode the feature engineering, the threat model, and other
networking constraints needed for semantic preservation into
logical formulas. Among other optimizations, PANTS iteratively adds and removes constraints that come from the AML,
prioritizing those that have a substantial effect on confusing
the classifier. Finally, we integrate this generative process into
an interactive training process that enhances the target MNC.
We evaluated PANTS against three distinct ML-powered
network classifiers, each implemented with different models
and processing pipelines. PANTS finds adversarial, realizable
and semantic-preserving samples with 35.31% success rate in
median, that is 70% and 2x higher than two SOTA methods.
Despite being a white-box approach, PANTS works well
with gradient (e.g., transformer encoder) and non-gradient
(e.g., random forest) models and various processing pipelines,
including those containing non-differentiable components

Unprotected MLP
PANTS-robustified MLP
Adversarially-trained MLP

80
60

Unprotected TF
PANTS-robustified TF
Adversarially-trained TF

Better

40
20
0

0

20
40
60
Accuracy (%)

80

Unprotected CNN
PANTS-robustified CNN
Adversarially-trained CNN

Figure 1: MNCs are vulnerable to adversarial inputs (circles).
Traditional adversarial training sacrifices accuracy to reduce
vulnerability (star). PANTS iterative adversarial-training
reduces the vulnerability without hurting accuracy (cross).
To highlight the need for a framework that generates
adversarial inputs to help operators assess and mitigate the
vulnerabilities of their MNCs, we present a specific use case:
an ML-based classifier that exposes the network to a range of
exploits, from giving attackers an unfair advantage to causing
outages, regardless of the exact implementation of the MNC.
We then outline the essential properties required for such a
framework and explain why existing solutions are insufficient.

2.1

Motivating use case

Consider a network operator that uses an ML-based traffic
classifier to distinguish real-time applications (e.g., online
gaming). The operator uses this information to optimize
routing: real-time applications use fast but low-bandwidth network paths. This is one of the multiple network management
tasks for which network operators could use an ML-based
traffic classifier (built with Multilayer Perceptron-MLP,
Random Forest, Transformers [10, 18, 26, 34, 48]) and benefit
from its ability to learn complex patterns directly from
data. While highly useful, this MNC exposes the network
to various exploits. Two representative examples include
attackers controlling (i) the end hosts of the communication
or (ii) an in-network component. In the former case, a
malicious (or simply “rational”) application developer could
manipulate the traffic generated by her application to be
misclassified as gaming by the network’s MNC, hence
gaining an unfair performance advantage over competitors.
This could be achieved by subtly altering the size of some

USENIX Association

packets or delaying specific packets without significantly
impacting the overall performance of her application’s traffic.
In the latter case, a malicious or compromised router in-path
can increase the volume of traffic routed through the fast
but low-bandwidth path by subtly altering the non-real-time
traffic to cause the MNC to misclassify it as real-time. These
perturbations would result in congestion in the low-bandwidth
path, leading to delays or even downtime for actual real-time
traffic, which is vital for the network’s profitability.
ML network classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial inputs. Fig. 1 illustrates the likelihood of an attacker controlling
end hosts (e.g., a malicious app developer) to successfully
manipulate their traffic to cause an MNC to misclassify it (predict a favorable for the attacker label). The results show that,
despite the high accuracy of the models during testing, the
attacker can deceive classifiers implemented with MLP, CNN,
and a transformer with success rates of 81.12%, 94.25% and
99.80%, respectively. While we identified these manipulations
(adversarial inputs), hence the vulnerability of the MNCs using PANTS, which is a white-box approach with complete access to the MNC’s implementation, this does not diminish the
significance of the risk they pose. First, security through obscurity is never a sound strategy, and network operators should
be prepared for (or at least aware of) the worst-case scenario
where an attacker has complete knowledge of their system.
Second, black-box approaches [35] are also able to find examples that fool MNCs, albeit with less likelihood. That is to
show that adversarial examples are not random bugs but stem
from learning from non-robust features, i.e., relying on unrelated co-occurrences in data instead of true correlations [28].
Adversarial training trades accuracy for vulnerability.
Fig. 1 also shows the trade-off between inaccuracy and vulnerability in MNCs. Indeed, an operator could leverage authentic
(off-the-shelf) adversarial training to shield an MNC against
adversarial inputs. However, by doing so, she will sacrifice the
accuracy of the MNC, meaning the baseline performance of
the MNC in more common inputs will degrade. By authentic
adversarial training, we refer to training a robustified model
with the help of PGD [37]. During model training, the original training samples are substituted with their PGD-generated
adversarial counterparts in each training iteration.

2.2

Requirements

Next, we elaborate on the requirements of a framework
that generates adversarial samples and use them to enhance
the robustness of MNCs before we explain why existing
approaches fall short.
Adversariness & Semantic preservation . The framework
needs to generate inputs that are adversarial, meaning that
they are capable of misleading MNCs into producing an
incorrect classification. To ensure that the classification is indeed incorrect, these inputs should be created by meticulously
applying perturbations to the original labeled samples without

USENIX Association

altering their semantics. In other words, each adversarial
input should still represent the same underlying meaning or
class as the original, which is described as a set of constraints
on the adversarial input. The closest notion of semantics
in the image domain is the perturbation budget, which
sets a maximum allowable distance between the original
and perturbed image [37]. However, such a metric doesn’t
translate directly to the networking domain, where there are
dependencies across packets or features of each input, which
perturbations should respect. We assume that semantics can
be expressed as constraints on the variables of the input (not
only as a distance between the adversarial and the original),
and the framework should provide the means to respect them.
Realizability. The framework should provide mechanisms
to constrain the generated adversarial inputs according to
domain-specific rules and a configurable threat model, which
the operator will consider reasonable. Concretely, adversarial
samples must represent valid packet sequences — for example, TCP should never acknowledge a packet before it is sent.
Further, each adversarial input must be created by applying
perturbations that are within the capabilities of the threat
model to an original input. Optimizing the model by training
it on unrealizable inputs that it will never encounter is not only
wasteful but can also degrade its performance on common inputs, as we show in §5.2. For instance, an in-network attacker
cannot alter an encrypted packet in a way that evades detection, so examining such scenarios would be unproductive.
Generality. The framework needs to be able to work in
various classification pipelines. Unlike the image domain,
where end-to-end neural network-based (NN-based) models
play a dominant role in various tasks, networking applications employ a wide spectrum of classification models and
pipelines. Concretely, the framework needs to work for typical
MNCs, which include non-differentiable and non-invertible
feature engineering modules to extract statistical features from
the given packet sequence, followed by a differentiable or
non-differentiable ML model such as Multi-layer perception
(MLP) or Random Forest (RF) for classification. The framework should also work for MNCs that directly encode the
packet sequence into a sequence of packet length, packet direction, and inter-arrival times only. In the latter case, the encoded
sequence is fed into deep learning models such as Transformer
(TF) or convolutional neural network (CNN) for classification.

2.3

Limitations of existing work

Having described the requirements of a framework that aims
to help network operators, we explain why various lines of
work that generate synthetic or adversarial networking inputs
fail to satisfy them. We elaborate on works that generate
adversarial images (i.e., AML) in §3.2.
Synthetic data generation Networking-specific generative
models, such as NetShare [62] and NetDiffusion [31], have

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7293

demonstrated strong potential in generating synthetic traffic.
However, synthetic traffic is not adversarial—i.e., it should
not mislead the downstream applications such as an MNC.
In fact, such works aim to generate samples that match the
original distribution (per the fidelity definition), whereas
adversarial samples’ distribution is typically different from
the training distribution [12]. This distinction is critical, as
training with adversarial samples has been shown to produce
more robust models compared to merely increasing the
size of the training dataset [37]. As a result, NetShare [62]
is 92%(99%, 92%) less effective in robustifying RF (TF,
CNN) compared to PANTS and cannot robustify MLP, unlike
PANTS, as we show in Fig. 9 and Fig. 14. These works
may also face a semantics preservation issue: synthetically
generated traces from original malicious traces (e.g., shrew
attacks) might not achieve the malicious intent (e.g., cause
an outage); hence might not be truly malicious.
Black-box RL-based techniques While useful for aspiring
attackers, black-box RL-based approaches [22] for generating
adversarial examples against MNCs are incapable of meeting
our requirements. Amoeba [35], for example, trains an agent
to perturb each packet to maximize the likelihood that the altered flow will deceive the MNC. Amoeba fulfills the generality requirement as it is black-box, and can fulfill realizability if
trained with the right actions. Still, Amoeba’s outputs are not
always semantic-preserving and adversarial because there is
no way to guarantee those during inference. Also, as we show
in our evaluation, Amoeba’s generated adversarial inputs are
less effective in robustifying MNCs during adversarial training, possibly because it (over)exploits a vulnerability rather
than trying to find new ones. Ultimately, this strategy benefits
attackers but not operators seeking to enhance the MNC.
White-box gradient-based techniques Excluding AML,
which is discussed in detail in §3.3, BAP [41] stands out
as a notable white-box approach for adversarial generation,
particularly due to its focus on networking inputs. BAP
adversarially trains a generator to create perturbation on
every single packet of a packet sequence (e.g., delay, add
dummy bytes) such that the distance (e.g., loss) between the
predicted label and the ground truth is maximized. Because
BAP uses gradient for maximizing the distance, it does not
work for non-end-to-end differentiable MNCs, hence failing
the generality requirement. Further, by perturbing each
packet independently, BAP cannot enforce semantics, which
can be flow-wide. We compare against BAP in §5.
Robustness certification Ideally, network operators would resort to robustness certification [33,51,55,58,60] to understand
the vulnerability of their MNCs. Applying such techniques in
networking is not trivial, BARS [53], for instance, considers
the robustness guarantee for perturbations at the feature level
instead of the guarantee at the packet level and hence cannot incorporate threat models. Indeed, a small perturbation
in the flow, such as injecting a dummy packet in a small interarrival time, can easily exceed its robustness region in the

7294

34th USENIX Security Symposium

feature space. More importantly, though, certified robustness
cannot match the empirical robustness using adversarial training [40, 57], which is, in fact, more indicative of the real risk.

3

Overview

Our goal is to build a framework that generates adversarial
samples that can be used to assess and improve the robustness
of an MNC while fulfilling the requirements in §2.2. After
we formulate our problem, we elaborate on the opportunities
and challenges of traditional AML in solving it. Finally, we
explain the insights that drove our design.
Feature engineering

Dataset

AML

SMT

Threat model
Network & semantics
constraints

Model

PANTS
Robustified
model

Adversarial
dataset

Model Assessment

Model Fine-tuning

Figure 2: Overview of PANTS workflow. PANTS generates
adversarial inputs that are also used to iteratively train the
target MNC. PANTS receives the implementation of a MNC
together with a training dataset and a couple of rules that
constrain the generated inputs. At its core, PANTS features
an AML component that collaborates with an SMT solver.

3.1

Problem formulation

Consider an ML model f used to implement a network
classifier f : R n → Y where Y represents the set of possible
labels. We define x ∈ R n as the input to f . This can be the
result of a feature engineering function, denoted as φ on
a sequence of packets p= {p1 , p2 , ... , pk } from the set P
where each pi is a packet arrived at time i or a subset of the
sequence of packets p. Each packet can be represented by
various attributes, including its size flags, direction etc. We
assume that for every MNC, the following dataset D exists.
n
Let D = {(xi , yi )}m
i=1 be the dataset, where xi ∈ R are the
feature vectors obtained by applying φ to raw network data
and yi ∈Y are the corresponding label.1
We define a threat model as a set of perturbations, δ
(δ : P → P) on the original packet sequences, po , to generate
adversarial packet sequences pa , (pa = δ(po )). δ(po ) is
adversarial if f (φ(δ(po ))) ̸= f (φ(po )), meaning that the
perturbed flow will be misclassified by f and δ(po ) preserves
the semantics of po . Semantics are flow-level constraints on
1 Applying f directly on a truncated packet sequence is possible and a

simplification of the problem we describe.

USENIX Association

xo i.e., constraints that can be dependent on the whole packet
sequence, not just each packet independently.

3.3

Our goal is to design a framework that generates packet sequences pa from po such that pa are adversarial to f , semanticpreserving to po , and are within the capabilities of a threat
model. The framework requires white-box access to f , hence
is suitable for clouds and ISPs who develop tailored MNC solutions in-house to eliminate the need to share sensitive information externally (e.g., AT&T [5], Azure [45]) or third parties
developing MNCs (e.g., Cisco [8], Juniper Networks [6]).

While AML can generate an adversarial sample and generalize at least across some models, AML does not provide realizability and semantics preservation. At a high level, the root
cause of the problem is that AML finds adversarial inputs using backward reasoning (i.e., targets a change in the predicted
label), but semantics preservation and realizability require forward reasoning, i.e., are defined on the input [16,20]. In the image domain, this is not a problem as classifiers are end-to-end
differentiable: images are directly fed into the ML model for
classification, which is typically neural network-based. AML
modifies input pixels directly and independently from each
other (as they do not need to adhere to any rules beyond being
in a range) to increase the loss informed by the gradient. Such
techniques also include a budget to constrain just the pixelto-pixel distance from the original with no other obligation.
However, in the networking domain, the traffic is often processed by the feature engineering module, which generates
feature vectors that are fed to the ML model. While gradient
information can still guide the modification of each feature to
increase loss, it is unclear how to map modifications to the feature vector into the corresponding packet sequence as the feature engineering is non-differential and non-invertible. In fact,
there is no guarantee that a perturbed feature vector would
have a corresponding valid packet sequence as AML changes
each feature independently, making contradicting decisions.
For example, suppose an ML-powered intrusion detection
system whose feature set includes both minimum and maximum packet inter-arrival times (min_iats, max_iats). Since
AML does not understand the two features are dependent,
in other words, that min_iat ≤ max_iats must always hold, it
is possible for AML to decrease the value of max_iats and
increase min_iats such that min_iats > max_iats. In this case,
while the generated feature vector might be adversarial in that
it might be misclassified by the intrusion detection system,
it is not a realizable sample, i.e., there is no packet sequence
that would ever result in this feature set. In short, using the
perturbed feature vectors is like defending against an impossible attack. While one can try to use a mask [44] to only allow
AML to change a subset of the features that are not dependent, that would reduce the inputs that AML can find. Indeed,
while AML can run with as few as a single feature there is no
guarantee that the generated sample would be adversarial.
Even if the target model does not use (non-differentiable)
feature engineering or if one somehow finds a packet
sequence that is consistent with the AML adversarial feature
vector, the packet sequence might still fall outside the capabilities of the threat model or violate any network constraints, or
break the semantics of the original flow. For example, suppose
the threat model only allows injecting dummy packets (but
not removing), and flow duration f1 and packets per second f2
are two features extracted by the feature engineering module.
The number of packets can be derived from #packets = f1 / f2 .

Network flow
Feature
Engineering

ML classifier

Result

…
- Delay
- Add a dummy packet after
-…

…
Adversarial flow

Figure 3: Given a network flow p, the perturbation δ is
applied to generate an adversarial flow δ(p), which causes
the ML model to return a wrong output.

3.2

The promise of Adversarial ML

At first glance, adversarial ML (AML) seems to be the
right approach for our problem definition and requirements.
First, AML generates adversarial inputs against ML-based
systems, typically in the image domain. Concretely, given
a trained ML classifier with model parameters θ, an original image sample x with its ground truth label y, PGD
perturbs x to be an adversarial sample by iteratively running
xt+1 = Πx+S (xt +αsgn(∇x L(θ,xt ,y))), x0 = x. L(·) is the
target loss function, measuring the distance of the predicted
label of xt and y, and Πx+S represents the capability of attack,
which is usually defined as ℓ∞ -ball distance around x. The
perturbation starts from the original sample x. In each iteration, the sample xt is moved by α following the direction of
the gradient of L. After modification, the intermediate value
is projected to be within the attack capability by clipping it to
a predefined ℓ∞ -ball distance around x. In each iteration, we
expect L(θ,xt+1 ,y) > L(θ,xt ,y) to have higher possibility to be
misclassified. Second, AML is quite general, despite using
gradient. In fact, there are AML methods that do not rely
on a gradient or whose gradient information is inaccessible
to the attacker, such as ZOO [14]. ZOO uses a combination
of techniques, such as coordinate descent and importance
sampling, to estimate the gradient for getting adversarial
samples. Although it was initially designed for black-box
attacks against NN-based models, it can be extended to attack
other models such as Random Forest and XGBoost [1, 2, 9].

USENIX Association

Adversarial ML limitations

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7295

Selected
features

PANTS
Original packet
sequence
Features

…

[ , , …, ]

①

AML

②

(PGD/ZOO)
Perturb features to
maximize loss

④

Adversarial
features

[ , , …, ]

⑤

[ , ]

Feature engineering

③

SMT Solver

Feature
Selector

Is there a pkt sequence
for the features?

⑥
Feature
Engineering

ML Model

Adversarial and
Realizable packet
sequence

Adversarial?
If Yes

Features

[ ,

⑧

, …, ]

Yes

Threat model
Network & semantics
constraints

…
Predicted
label

⑦

Realizable packet
sequence

…

Figure 4: PANTS combines AML with an SMT solver to generate adversarial and realizable samples (flows), which are used
to assess and enhance robustness.
If #packets derived from the adversarial features is less than
the number of packets in the original flow, even though one
can find an adversarial packet sequence consistent with the
adversarial features, it still falls outside the capabilities of
the threat model. Similarly, for a deep NN that is directly
accepting the packet sequence as input, the AML-generated
adversarial sequence could change the interarrivals in a way
that is impossible for any congestion control algorithm or in
a way that makes the corresponding application unusable.

3.4

PANTS: Adversarial ML for networking

To address the inherent challenges in applying AML to
MNCs, we integrate a formal-method component to ensure
the realizability and semantics-preservation of the produced
adversarial samples. Our first insight is to use logical formulas
to model the feature-engineering process that turns packet
sequences into feature vectors and sequence-level constraints
for MNCs with no feature-engineering, effectively encoding
input dependencies. Further, we encode threat-model capabilities, networking rules and semantics into flow-wide or
packet-level constraints and ask an SMT (Satisfiability Modulo Theories) solver to find a packet sequence that satisfies
them. If the answer is “UNSAT”, the adversarial features are
not realizable under the given threat model, semantic, and networking constraints. Observe that SMT supports both forward
and backward reasoning, hence can connect the requirements
for adversariness with realizability and semantics. Critically,
this makes PANTS extensible to any definition of semantics.
As feature engineering modules and semantics definition
can be arbitrarily convoluted, a naive serial combination of
AML with SMT will also fail because most of the AMLgenerated samples would not have a corresponding packet
sequence that is realizable. Our second insight to address this
challenge is that not all AML-generated features need to be
honored for the sample to be adversarial. We design an op-

7296

34th USENIX Security Symposium

timization loop containing an AML component (e.g., PGD or
ZOO), an SMT solver, and the target MNC, which iteratively
checks whether a subset of the AML-produced adversarial
features (or perturbations) can result in a realizable packet
sequence until enough adversarial and realizable samples are
collected. Instead of trying every possible subset of features,
our third insight is to identify the most vulnerable adversarial
features i.e., those that are both easy to tweak based on the
threat model and important enough for the target ML model
to affect its output. Critically, though, PANTS might opt out
of constraints that make the generated samples adversarial
but not constraints that make samples realizable or semantics
preserving, which are always satisfied.

4
4.1

Design
PANTS end-to-end view

We provide an end-to-end view of how PANTS generates
adversarial packet sequences, shown in Fig. 4. The procedure
includes 8 steps, starting from feeding in the original packet
sequence to getting the adversarial and realizable packet
sequence returned by PANTS.
1 Given an original packet sequence, we use the feaStep ⃝:
ture engineering module in the target application to extract its
2 After getting the features, PANTS uses the
features. Step ⃝:
canonical AML methods (PGD, ZOO) to generate an adversarial feature vector (sample). The generation process interacts
with the ML classifier to ensure the adversariness of the generated sample. Note that the generated adversarial features are
not strictly required to be within a predefined ℓ∞ -ball distance
around the original features since the capability of the attacker
(threat models) for the networking applications is different
3 Given the
from the image domain described in §3.2. Step ⃝:
generated adversarial feature, PANTS runs an iterative process
to find (multiple) adversarial and realizable packet sequences
using a feature selector and an SMT solver. The feature selec-

USENIX Association

tor first determines the importance of each feature in keeping
4 The feature selecthe generated features adversarial. Step ⃝:
tor begins to construct a selected feature list by considering
one new feature each time, starting by appending the most
important feature and proceeding in descending importance
5 Given the selected features, we encode these
order. Step ⃝:
features’ dependencies, threat model constraints, and networking constraints into formulas and query the SMT solver to find
6 If the SMT solver
a packet sequence to satisfy them. Step ⃝:
returns “UNSAT”, i.e., it cannot find a packet sequence, the
feature selector pops out the latest appended feature from the
4
selected feature list. The iterative process continues to step ⃝
5
to append the next most important feature and repeat step ⃝
6 until the first k most important features are considered.
and ⃝
7 The packet sequence(s) found by the SMT solver
Step ⃝:
are guaranteed to be realizable since the threat models are
encoded into the satisfiable formulas. Finally, we need to confirm the adversariness of these realizable packet sequences.
We feed these packet sequences into the feature engineering
module again to get the corresponding feature vectors. Step
8 We feed these feature vectors into the ML classifier to get
⃝:
the predicted label. We compare the prediction result with the
ground truth label of the original packet sequence. If they are
different, the realizable packet sequences found by the SMT
solver are adversarial, and the feature vectors correspond to
realizable packet sequences. Note that these packet sequences
are very likely to be adversarial, given that the feature selector
prioritizes the use of the most important features.

4.2

SMT formulations

PANTS incorporates an SMT solver for generating adversarial
and realizable packet sequences. Concretely, the SMT solver
encapsulates constraints for feature dependencies, the threat
model, networking rules, and semantics, determining their satisfiability, i.e., whether a sample satisfying these constraints
exists.
To provide a clearer illustration of this encoding, let’s
consider a concrete example. Consider an original network
− +
flow that only has three packets, p= {p+
1 , p2 , p3 } where
{+,−}

pi
= (∆ti , li ){+,−} . {+,−} represents the direction of
the packet, where + means packets sending from the connection initiator to the receiver (forward packet) and − vice versa.
ti and li represent the inter-arrival time and packet length for
each packet pi . For this example, let us assume that the adversarial features generated by the AML component specify the
following: the average inter-arrival time is k, the maximum
inter-arrival time is m, and the average packet length is j. Assume that the threat model includes delaying and appending
dummy payload to forward packets, but to preserve the semantics meaning of the flow, the accumulative delay cannot
exceed 20% of the original duration.
For this example, we thereby define four variables
∆t1′ , ∆t3′ , l1′ and l3′ . They are representing the delay and

USENIX Association

+
the appended payload for p+
1 and p3 . The perturbed
−
+
flow p’ can be formulated as p’= { p̄+
1 , p2 , p̄3 } =
′
′
+
−
′
′
+
{(∆t1 + ∆t1 ,l1 + l1 ) ,(∆t2 ,l2 ) ,(∆t3 + ∆t3 ,l3 + l3 ) }. Then,
the formula for the SMT solver is


(∆t1 +∆t1′ +∆t2 +∆t3 +∆t3′ )/3 = k





(∆t1 +∆t1′ = m)∨(∆t2 = m)∨(∆t3 +∆t3′ = m)





(∆t1 +∆t1′ ≤ m)∧(∆t2 ≤ m)∧(∆t3 +∆t3′ ≤ m)

(l1 +l1′ +l2 +l3 +l3′ )/3 = k



∆t1′ ≥ 0∧∆t3′ ≥ 0∧l1′ ≥ 0∧l3′ ≥ 0





l1 +l1′ ≤ 1500∧l3 +l3′ ≤ 1500



 ′
∆t1 +∆t3′ ≤ 0.2×(∆t1 +∆t2 +∆t3 )

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Equation (1), (2), (3) and (4) force the generated packet
sequences to be adversarial by being consistent with the average (equation (1)), maximum (equation (2),(3)) inter-arrival
times and the average of packet length (equation (4)) that
AML specification. Equation (5) ensures that the packet sequence complies with the threat model, which includes delaying and appending dummy payload to the forward packets.
Equation (6) and (7) formulate the network and semantics
constraints.

4.3 Adversarial packet sequence identification
Feature importance determination(line 1 - line 5 in Alg. 1).
Adhering to all features in the adversarial feature vector that
the AML specified could be too computationally expensive
for the SMT solver or even infeasible. Critically, though, not
all features are equally important in keeping the packet sequences adversarial. For instance, given an adversarial vector
of two concrete values generated by the AML component,
there is often a packet sequence that adheres to only one of
them while still being adversarial. Building on this insight,
we design a feature importance ranking algorithm that helps
PANTS identify feature subsets that play a more important
role in the sample’s adversariness, thereby streamlining and
accelerating the search process. Since AML methods are designed to perturb features to maximize the chance that they
will be misclassified, the features that have been changed the
most play a more important role in adversariness. Thus, after
normalizing all the features, the importance of each feature is
determined by the difference between the adversarial and the
original value of that feature. Using this importance ranking,
we can prioritize adversarial-feature constraints, which are
crucial to keeping the flow adversarial.
Find adversarial and realizable packet sequences using
iterative testing (line 19 - line 28 in Alg. 1). After quantifying feature importance, PANTS leverages this information
to maximize the likelihood of quickly identifying adversarial
and realizable samples. Rather than starting with the full set

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7297

MLP
RF

80
60
40

5
10
15
20
Number of most important features (k)

(a) End-host attacker

30
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

of adversarial-features constraints or testing random permutations—both of which would significantly increase computational overhead in the SMT solver—PANTS employs the
following algorithm to optimize the process.

MLP
RF

20
10
0

5
10
15
20
Number of most important features (k)

(b) In-path attacker

Figure 5: The impact of k in ASR (i.e., in PANTS ability to
generate examples) against MLP and RF. The ASR increases
with k, but levels off once k reaches a certain threshold.
Starting with an empty feature list, we iteratively test
whether adding the formulas of the next most important
(not already explored) feature fi results in a conforming
packet sequence output from the SMT solver. If it does, fi is
appended to the selected features list. Otherwise, the feature
is not selected. By adding more and more features, the found
packet sequences are more likely to be adversarial. Even after
the SMT solver finds a packet sequence that is adversarial, the
algorithm continues appending more features until it appends
k features, to cover a wider spectrum of adversarial examples.
The exact value of k can be set and easily fine-tuned by
the user. Concretely, PANTS finds more diverse adversarial
examples as one increases k (up to a point), as we observe in
Fig. 5, but will also take longer to compute them. In practice,
one only needs to avoid setting k too low, making half the
number of features a reasonable default.
Thanks to these two key logics, PANTS is able to identify adversarial packet sequences. The algorithm details are
depicted in Alg. 1.

4.4

PANTS’ SMT optimizations

While preferentially enforcing subsets of adversarial features improves scalability, there are scenarios where the SMT
solver’s limitations become a more difficult bottleneck. For
example, there will be cases in which finding an adversarial
example requires adhering to all feature constraints or cases
where the most significant feature constraint is so complex
that the solver struggles. The complexity depends on many
factors, such as the length of the packet sequence, the formulation of capabilities, the number of features to be solved, and
the difficulty of solving each feature. In this section, we focus
on optimizing the packet sequence length and the formulation
of capabilities.
Network flow chunking and parallelization. A longer
packet sequence requires more variables to formulate, which
implies a much larger search space for the SMT solver.
We address this problem with a combination of a timeout

7298

34th USENIX Security Symposium

Algorithm 1 find adv pkt sequences with iterative testing
Require: original_sample
▷The original and benign packet sequence
Require: adv_features
▷Adversarial features generated by AML
Require: k
▷Configured number of important features
Ensure: solutions_set
1: function F EATURE _R ANK(original_sample, adv_features)
2:
original_feature = feature_engineer(original_sample)
3:
sorted_feature_list = sort(abs(adv_features - original_features))
4:
return sorted_feature_list
▷Sorted by importance descending order
5: end function

6:
7: function SMT_S OLVER(selected_features, original_sample)
8:
if SMT can find solutions consistent with selected_features then
9:
return solutions
10:
else
11:
return null
12:
end if
13: end function
14:
15: sorted_feature_list ← ()
16: selected_features ← ()
17: solutions_set ← ()
18: sorted_feature_list ← Feature_Rank(original_sample, adv_features)
19: for i in 1:k do
20:
selected_features.append(sorted_feature_list[i])
21:
solution ← SMT_Solver(selected_features, original_sample)
22:
if solution is null then
23:
selected_features.remove(sorted_feature_list[i])
24:
else
25:
solutions_set.append(solution)
26:
Check adversariness for this solution
27:
end if
28: end for

mechanism, network flow chunking, and parallelization.
We first set a time budget for the SMT solver. If the SMT
solver cannot find packet sequences within a timeout window,
we decrease the computation complexity by dividing a flow
into several chunks evenly. The SMT solver is used to find
the packet sub-sequences for each chunk. Since each chunk
has fewer packets than the whole flow, it is more likely that
the SMT solver will be able to find solutions within the
timeout limits. After splitting a flow into multiple chunks,
some features are difficult to formulate strictly. For example,
when working on a complete flow, it is easy to formulate
the maximum packet length feature. After splitting the
flow into multiple chunks, the maximum packet length can
appear in any chunk. Strictly formulating this feature would
require a complicated algorithm, which is in conflict with
our motivation to decrease computation complexity and is
unnecessary for our use case. To solve this problem, we
consider three different types of features. For the first type
of features, satisfying their formulas for each sub-sequence
will likely result in satisfied formulas for the whole sequence.
For example, such features are {max, mean, median, min,
std} of {interarrival times, packet length} and number of
{packets, bytes} per second. For these features, SMT solves
their formulas per chunk. For the second feature type, the
accumulation of each chunk’s feature values is equal to that
of the whole flow. One typical example is the total duration.
For these features, the SMT solver is finding sub-sequences in
f eature
each chunk consistent with #chunks
. For other features which
exhibit convoluted correlations between the sub-sequences

USENIX Association

and the whole sequence, such as the number of unique
packet lengths, we are not aiming to be consistent with the
whole-flow formulas when finding the sub-sequences for
each chunk. The number of chunks has minimal impact on
ASR. Indeed, we found that even doubling their number
(from 10 to 20 chunks) changes ASR by 3%. That is because
once the solver is able to find sub-sequences for each chunk,
continuing to split into smaller chunks does not improve ASR.
Finally, PANTS’ use of the solver is highly parallelizable,
facilitating further speed ups. Indeed, the solver for each
original input, chunk, and even set of adversarial features of
a given instance can run independently.
Inefficient formulation of capabilities can be simplified.
Unfortunately, not all the capabilities can be formulated
efficiently. The capability to inject packets at any position is
one of them. The underlying reason is that multiple dummy
packets can be injected at any position. Each combination
requires an invocation of the SMT solver. For example,
− + −
given a flow with four packets, f = [p+
1 ,p2 ,p3 ,p4 ], injecting
− + ∗+ −
∗+
+ − + − ∗+
packet p5 by [p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 , p5 ] or [p+
1 , p2 , p3 , p5 , p4 ]
∗+
can cause different solutions on p5 when asking the
packet sequence to comply with the features of backward
flow interarrival times. Suppose a threat model that allows
injecting at most j packets and the packet sequence length is
k; formulating this capability into formulas requires SMT to
j
run ∑m=0 m+k
times to cover all combinations. Therefore,
m
packet injection at any position is very inefficient, and we consider simplifying the formulation to increase the generation
speed. Although packet injection at any position requires the
SMT solver to find packet sequences multiple times, injecting
packets at the end of the flow is efficient since there is only
one injection position. Thereby, the SMT solver only needs
to run once. We leverage the flow chunking and simplify the
implementation of any-position injection by injecting only at
the end of each chunk. As we increase the number of chunks,
the number of packets per chunk is decreased and the final
effect is closer to packet injection at any place.
Fig. 12 shows the sample generation speed after the
discussed optimizations. PANTS generates ~1.7 samples/sec,
which is efficient, considering MNCs are rarely re-trained.

4.5 Iterative Adversarial Training with PANTS
Adversarial training is often used to enhance the robustness
of ML models. During authentic adversarial training, an
AML method (e.g., PGD) replaces each benign sample with
an adversarial one for the insufficiently trained version of the
model. While useful, this method can hurt the accuracy of
an ML model [25, 46] and only applies to NN-based models.
To avoid these shortcomings, we design an alternative way of
adversarial training, in which we augment the training dataset
with adversarial samples generated for the sufficiently trained
model to fine-tune it. This methodology is model-agnostic,
meaning that it can work with any processing pipeline. We

USENIX Association

also find in §5.2 that this training methodology improves
robustness without hurting the model’s accuracy.
For robustification, PANTS generates multiple adversarial
samples for each benign counterpart in total to cover diverse
adversarial samples. Using PANTS, we generate around 1.16180 samples for each benign sample during robustification
based on different threat models, applications and ML models.
Along with adversarial samples, we include non-adversarial
ones generated by PANTS. This is beneficial for training
because the non-adversarial samples are closer to the decision
boundary compared to their benign counterpart, despite being
correctly classified. Including those samples can help form a
more refined decision boundary.

5

Evaluation

In this section, we evaluate PANTS in two ways. First, we
evaluate PANTS’ capability in generating adversarial realizable and semantic-preserving flows and compare it with two
baselines, Amoeba [35] and BAP [41]. We find that PANTS
is 70% more likely to find such flows compared to Amoeba
in median and 2x more likely compared to BAP. Second,
we evaluate the effectiveness of PANTS-generated samples
in improving the robustness of the targeted MNCs. We find
that PANTS is 142% more effective in improving robustness
compared to Amoeba without sacrificing the model accuracy.
Interestingly, we empirically find PANTS enhances the
model’s robustness even against attackers that have different
(and even strictly more) capabilities than what was assumed
during sample generation. We begin by introducing the
evaluation setup before discussing some key findings.

5.1

Setup

Applications & Datasets. We evaluate PANTS in three
MNCs with diverse objectives, flow statistical patterns, and
classification granularity, providing a representative sample
of networking applications. We evaluate several implementations of each MNC, including the exact implementation
described in the paper from which each dataset is sourced.
VPN: VPN traffic detection aims at identifying flows
that are VPN among encrypted traffic flows [18, 21, 38, 43].
ISCXVPN2016 [18] is one of the commonly used labeled
datasets and includes both VPN and non-VPN traffic. The
dataset contains more than 20 million packets grouped into
8,577 bi-directional flows. Of those, 71% are non-VPN, and
the rest are VPN flows.
APP: Application identification aims at predicting the
application that given traffic serves and is useful for network
management tasks such as anomaly detection and resource allocation [26, 36, 39, 52, 54]. UTMobileNetTraffic2021 [26] is
a commonly used dataset that includes mobile traffic from 18
popular applications (e.g., Dropbox, Google Drive, Facebook).
The selected dataset contains 7,134 bi-directional flows.

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7299

QoE: Quality of Experience inference aims at inferring
QoE metrics like resolution and video bitrate from packet
traces [13, 27, 42, 48, 59]. QoE inference is useful for stakeholders, such as ISPs and service providers, due to the rise
in the use of Video Conferencing Applications (VCAs).
VCAML [48] is the dataset that contains a large number
of single-directional video conferencing flows in a per-second
granularity from Google Meet, Microsoft Teams, and Cisco
Webex. The total number of samples is 37,274, which includes
11 different resolutions, such as 720p, 360p.
The features extracted by the feature engineering module
for different applications are listed in the Appendix in §B.
Application implementations. For each application, we
train four commonly used ML classifiers independently. They
are Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Random Forest (RF), Transformer (TF) and Convolutional Neural-Network (CNN) to
cover multiple ML approaches, and processing pipelines (i.e.,
end-to-end differentiable or not). The details of the hyperparameters used for each model are explained in the Appendix
in §C. Table 1 shows the performance of these three MNCs.
For each dataset, the training set (Dtrain ) and the testing set
(Dtest ) are following a 80%:20% random split. ML models are
trained on Dtrain , and the performance is evaluated on Dtest .
Application
APP
VPN
QOE

Accuracy
(Vanilla)
[0.7666, 0.8206]
[0.8902, 0.9400]
[0.7819, 0.8221]

Accuracy
(In-path/End-host robustified)
[0.7400, 0.8136]
[0.8596, 0.9375]
[0.7898, 0.8173]

Table 1: Performance of vanilla ML classifiers for each
application. Our trained models demonstrate reasonably
good accuracy for each application. After robustification via
PANTS, the robustified ones’ accuracy doesn’t drop.
Attacker’s capability. We evaluate two threat models that
correspond to attackers located at the end host and in-path.
The attackers at the end host (i.e., server or client) can delay
packets, inject packets, and append dummy payload to the
existing packets of one direction. To preserve the flow’s
semantics, we consider that the end-host attacker can only
delay the flow up to 20% of the original flow’s duration,
inject at most 20 packets, and append dummy payload to
at most 20% of the packets. The in-path attackers can only
delay packets of one direction at most 20% of the original
flow’s duration. We selected these two models because
they represent realistic and rational attackers, but thanks to
PANTS flexibility one can easily add more threat models by
adding the relevant constraints as we do in Fig. 11.
Baselines. Since there is no related framework that aims
to help the operator assess and enhance the robustness of
MNCs, we compare PANTS against the SOTA adversarial
generation methods, Amoeba and BAP and a synthetic data
generator, NetShare.

7300

34th USENIX Security Symposium

Amoeba [35] is an RL-based proposal to attack MLbased censorship. Although designed for a different goal,
Amoeba also generates adversarial samples against applications that are end-to-end differentiable and that include a
non-differential or non-invertible module. Amoeba supports
packet delay, dummy payload appending, and packet split into
multiple ones. For a fair comparison, we extend Amoeba’s
capability to comply with the two evaluated threat models.
We also train Amoeba’s agent to respect the flow’s semantics.
We explain the details of our extension in the Appendix in §D.
BAP [41] is to train a generator to create perturbations for
each packet. Since BAP does not support applications that
include non-differential and non-invertible components, we
only consider it for TF and CNN (i.e., not with MLP and
RF). The original implementation of BAP can only support
perturbing every packet, so we extend BAP by adding a mask
during training and inference to ensure reliability (e.g., only
act on forward packets). Although BAP supports per-packet
constraints, it does not support flow-wide constraints such
as those needed for semantics preservation.
NetShare [62] is a GAN-based synthetic data generator
specialized in producing high-fidelity network packet traces.
After NetShare is trained on raw packet sequences, it can
generate synthetic ones that closely match the distribution
of the original data. NetShare can successfully match the
convoluted data distribution from backbone traces such as
CAIDA [4] and data center traces such as UNI1 [11].
Success Metric. To quantify the robustness of MNCs, we
report the Attack Success Rate (ASR), defined as the ratio
of realizable, semantic-preserving adversarial samples to the
total original samples for each technique, following standard
practice [12]. ASR provides a meaningful measure of
robustness, as it directly evaluates a system’s resilience under
stress and adversarial conditions. We also report accuracy
for completeness and to assess performance under typical
conditions. Accuracy refers to the proportion of successful
classifications on the original test set (not adversarial),
which is drawn from the same data source (hence the same
distribution) as the training set.2
Testbed. Appendix §E details the used CPU/GPU machines.

5.2

Key Findings

Finding 1: PANTS is 70% more likely to find adversarial
samples compared to Amoeba in median and 2x more likely
compared to BAP.
We compare PANTS with Amoeba and BAP in their ability
to generate adversarial flows under two threat models against
three MNCs implemented with four models and report the
2 High ASR is orthogonal to high accuracy. MNCs can both have high
accuracy and ASR, meaning that they perform well under standard conditions
(high accuracy), but are susceptible to attacks (high ASR).

USENIX Association

PANTS

MLP

RF

TF

50
25
0

CNN

(a) APP End-host attacker

RF

TF

10
RF

TF

(d) APP In-path attacker

25

CNN

RF

TF

CNN

60

10
0

MLP

(c) QOE End-host attacker
ASR (%)

20

MLP

50

0

CNN

20
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

MLP

75

(b) VPN End-host attacker

30

0

ASR (%)

50

0

BAP

75
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

100

Amoeba

MLP

RF

TF

(e) VPN In-path attacker

CNN

40
20
0

MLP

RF

TF

CNN

(f) QOE In-path attacker

Figure 6: The attack success rate (ASR) of PANTS, Amoeba and BAP for various ML models, applications and threat models.
PANTS has a much higher ASR compared to Amoeba and BAP, demonstrating its ability to effectively generate adversarial
samples, which can be used for debugging, fine-tuning, and robustness assessment.
ASR. As we observe in Fig. 6, PANTS clearly outperforms
baselines in all cases. More specifically, PANTS achieves
a 35.31% ASR (median across all cases), whereas Amoeba
and BAP achieve 19.57% and 10.31%, respectively. BAP’s
inefficiency stems from its inability to incorporate semantic
constraints, e.g., flow-level constraints. Amoeba outperforms
BAP (despite being a black-box approach), but PANTS is still
51% more likely than Amoeba to identify adversarial samples
under the end-host threat model (median) and 2x more likely
under the in-path threat model. This highlights that while
Amoeba is effective at uncovering adversarial examples
in scenarios with abundant opportunities (i.e., for stronger
attackers), it struggles when such examples are less apparent.
Further, PANTS’s ASR is more consistent across runs in
all the test cases. This is important as an operator is unlikely
to trust the assessment of a tool that reports a different ASR
in every run i.e., varying levels of vulnerability for a given
MNC. Concretely, the average standard deviation across all
the test cases is 0.77 for PANTS, while for Amoeba 3.12 and
for BAP 2.61. For some cases, specifically, Amoeba and BAP
show much higher fluctuations in ASR compared to PANTS.
For example, Amoeba’s ASR on attacking TF ranges from
76.15% to 93.45% and BAP is from 43.89% to 54.25%
while PANTS’ ASR only ranges from 99.75% to 100.0%
as we observe in Fig. 6a. The large variance in Amoeba’s
results stems from a well-known problem in RL: its inherent
instability of training. BAP also struggles with instability
when training the perturbation generator but is better than
Amoeba. For PANTS, randomness is limited only stemming
from (i) PGD restarts used in MLP and RF [37]; and (ii) CPU

USENIX Association

fluctuations affecting the SMT solver’s computation speed.
Finding 2: Iterative augmentation with adversarial, realizable, and semantics-preserving samples improves the
robustness of an MNC without hurting its accuracy.
To evaluate our iterative adversarial, we compare four approaches for robustifying MNCs. First, we include authentic
adversarial training, which integrates PGD into the training
process. Next, we include three versions of our iterative augmentation explained in §4.5, where adversarial examples are
generated by PGD, PANTS, and Amoeba. Examples generated by PANTS and Amoeba are also semantic-preserving.
Fig. 7 shows the accuracy and ASR of the robustfied ML
models against end-host attackers under the application APP.
Authentic adversarial training enhances the robustness of the
models against attacks from PANTS (Fig. 7a) and Amoeba
Fig. 7b, but hurts their accuracy. In contrast, iterative augmentation (our approach) maintains the models’ high accuracy (as
shown in Table 1) and could improve robustness subject to the
quality of the generated samples. Concretely, when samples
are generated by PGD, iterative augmentation does not help in
robustifying the targeted models. When samples are generated
by Amoeba, iterative augmentation robustifies models against
samples generated by Amoeba. Finally, when samples are
generated by PANTS (i.e., as in the complete PANTS framework), iterative augmentation makes models robust against
both PANTS and Amoeba. Fig. 8 and Fig. 16 offer a more
detailed view of this result by plotting the improvement of
ASR as a MNC is under the iterative robustification process.
clearly, ASR decreases more dramatically when samples are

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7301

80

60
40

50

(a) Accuracy of RF

0

80

(a) Attacked by PANTS

0

20

40
60
Accuracy (%)

80

(b) Attacked by Amoeba

60

ASR (%)

ASR (%)

30

MLP
RF
TF
CNN

80

40

MLP
RF
TF
CNN

20

S2

S3

S4

0
Vanilla

S5

(a) Robustified for defending
end-host attackers.

S1

S2

S3

(b) Robustified for defending
in-path attackers.

Figure 8: ASR calculated by PANTS while the MNC is
trained for the i-th time leveraging a dataset augmented with
adversarial samples produced by PANTS. MNCs are getting
more robust against adversarial inputs over time. For the
results using Amoeba’s samples for augmentation, please
refer to Fig. 16 in the Appendix.
generated by PANTS compared to Amoeba.
Finding 3: PANTS improves the robustness tested MNCs
142% more than Amoeba and ~40X more than NetShare.
Attacked
by
Robusified by

PANTS

Amoeba

BAP

PANTS
Amoeba

57.65%
20.89%

49.98%
36.89%

50.52%
7.50%

Table 2: Average robustness improvement. PANTSrobustified models are 142% more robust on average
compared to Amoeba-robustified ones.
After robustification, we use again PANTS, Amoeba and
BAP to re-attack (spawn adversarial inputs for) the robustified
models M ′ to re-evaluate models’ vulnerability. We train
′
a new agent for Amoeba on Dtrain
to fool each robustified
′
model M . Fig. 10 shows the ASR using PANTS, Amoeba,

7302

40

0

X66

NetShare
PANTS

20
X1

X44
X59
Number of samples

X66

(b) Vulnerability of RF
100

70
NetShare
PANTS

60
X1

X40
X60
Number of samples

(c) Accuracy of CNN

X73

75
50
NetShare
PANTS

25
0

X1

X40
X60
Number of samples

X73

(d) Vulnerability of CNN

Figure 9: Accuracy and ASR when training two APP
implementations with synthetic data generated by NetShare
and adversarial data by PANTS. NetShare cannot improve
the robustness of MNCs. Similar results for the other two
implementations are reported in Fig. 14 in the Appendix.

10

20
0
Vanilla S1

X1

80

50

Figure 7: The accuracy and ASR for the vanilla and
robustified models using different ways of robustification.
PANTS-robustified models are robust against both PANTS
and Amoeba without sacrificing model accuracy.
100

60

40

0

40
60
Accuracy (%)

NetShare
PANTS
X44
X59
Number of samples

20
20

70

60

20
0

60

80
ASR (%)

80
ASR (%)

100

ASR (%)

100

Unprotected CNN
PANTS-robustified CNN
Amoeba-robustified CNN
PGD-robustified CNN
Adversarially-trained CNN

ASR (%)

Unprotected TF
PANTS-robustified TF
Amoeba-robustified TF
PGD-robustified TF
Adversarially-trained TF

Accuracy (%)

Unprotected RF
PANTS-robustified RF
Amoeba-robustified RF
ZOO-robustified RF

Accuracy (%)

Unprotected MLP
PANTS-robustified MLP
Amoeba-robustified MLP
PGD-robustified MLP
Adversarially-trained MLP

34th USENIX Security Symposium

or BAP to find adversarial samples from the vanilla, PANTS,
and Amoeba robustified models for the end-host threat model
(refer to Fig. 15 for the in-path threat model). These results
show that PANTS-robustified models are generally robust
against the attack from PANTS, Amoeba and BAP, while
Amoeba-robustified models are only robust against Amoeba.
Table 2 shows the robustness improvement when robustified
by PANTS and Amoeba and evaluated with PANTS, Amoeba
and BAP. PANTS-robustified models are 52.72% more robust
on average than the vanilla ones while Amoeba-robustified
ones are only 21.76% more robust. PANTS-robustified
models outperform Amoeba-robustified by 142%.
We also compare PANTS’s ability to robustify MNCs
with NetShare, which (similar to PANTS) generates synthetic data, albeit non-adversarial. Fig. 9 and Fig. 14 show
APP’s accuracy and ASR for end-host threat model implemented with PANTS when using the same amount of
data generated by PANTS and NetShare for robustification.
PANTS-robustified models have slightly lower accuracy than
NetShare-robustified ones. However, the accuracy of PANTSrobustified models is still high, meaning that they are accurate
enough against common inputs and they are more robust
against adversarial perturbation than NetShare-robustified
ones. NetShare can hardly improve the models’ robustness.
Finding 4: PANTS can improve the robustness of MNCs
even against threat models outside those used during
adversarial training.
We evaluate PANTS ability to robustify MNCs against
a more diverse set of attackers, including attackers that are
strictly stronger than what was used during robustification. To
this end, we construct 16 attackers, shown in Fig. 11, which

USENIX Association

Unprotected (vanilla)

MLP

RF

TF

50
25
0

CNN

(a) APP Attacked by PANTS

RF

TF

25
RF

TF

25

(d) APP Attacked by Amoeba

RF

TF

CNN

60

10
0

CNN

MLP

(c) QOE Attacked by PANTS
ASR (%)

50

MLP

50

0

CNN

20
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

MLP

75

(b) VPN Attacked by PANTS

75

0

ASR (%)

50

0

Robustified by Amoeba

75
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

100

Robustified by PANTS

MLP

RF

TF

40
20
0

CNN

(e) VPN Attacked by Amoeba

MLP

RF

TF

CNN

(f) QOE Attacked by Amoeba

20
0

TF

CNN

(g) APP Attacked by BAP

ASR (%)

40

ASR (%)

ASR (%)

20

10

0

TF

CNN

(h) VPN Attacked by BAP

40
20
0

TF

CNN

(i) QOE Attacked by BAP

Figure 10: ASR for the vanilla, PANTS-robustified and Amoeba-robustified models for the end-host threat model. PANTSrobustified’s ASR is the lowest. Similar results for in-path threat model are reported in Fig. 15 in the Appendix.
vary on the attacker’s access to the model and their capabilities. The notation w(b) refers to the white-box(black-box)
attacker, while the (α, β, γ, δ) represents an attacker who can
delay packets with at most α%, append payload for at most
β% packets, inject at most γ packets, and split at most δ%
packets.3 Fig. 11 reports the ASR for MLP and CNN for
the application APP before and after each model has been
robustified by PANTS. Observe that all models are robustified against the end-host attackers described in §5.1 (i.e., a
(20, 20, 20, 0) attacker), meaning that many of the attackers
tested are stronger. Importantly, PANTS is able to improve
the robustness of these models even against strictly stronger
attackers. For instance, PANTS-robustified MLP is 72% more
robust than the vanilla version against an attacker that can
delay, inject and append twice the amount of the attacker used
for robustification and can also split packets. This happens because during adversarial training, even assuming a weaker or
different adversary, the model is guided away from non-robust
features (i.e., features that are not strongly correlated with
the output but rather coincidental or dataset-specific) towards
meaningful and resilient features which encapsulate genuine
semantics [28].
3 For each packet, we only allow to split at most once to prevent a packet

split into too many small fragments.

USENIX Association

While PANTS-robustified models demonstrate considerable robustness improvement against PANTS, Amoeba and
BAP (as discussed in Findings 3 and 4), we do not claim that
PANTS-robustified models are robust against any possible
attacks. First, the ASR for PANTS-robustified models doesn’t
drop to 0, meaning that these attack methods can still find
adversarial samples against the robustified models, albeit less.
Second, PANTS assessment is empirical and does not provide
theoretical guarantees that the robustified models are robust
against the full spectrum of perturbation.
Finding 5: PANTS is practical and efficient to use, generating ~1.7 samples/sec, which is 8X faster than Amoeba.
Thanks to PANTS optimizations for improving the scalability of the SMT solver, including chunking, parallelization,
and capability approximations as discussed in §4.4, PANTS
is both practical and efficient. Fig. 12 shows the generation
speed for PANTS and Amoeba under our two threat models
and all applications and implementations. PANTS generates
~1.7 samples/sec, that is 8X faster than Ameoba which generates ~0.2 samples/sec. We acknowledge that this comparison
is nuanced, as (unlike PANTS) Amoeba requires training a
model prior to generating adversarial samples. To ensure fair-

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7303

MLP

generation speed
(samples/sec)

before
after

CNN

w(20, 20, 20, 0)
w(40, 40, 40, 0)
w(39, 6, 8, 0)
w(28, 19, 36, 0)

4

PANTS
Amoeba

2

0
MLP

w(34, 38, 19, 0)
w(28, 25, 0, 0)

RF

TF

CNN

(a) End-host attacker
generation speed
(samples/sec)

w(40, 40, 40, 40)
w(21, 5, 25, 15)
w(16, 40, 19, 20)
b(20, 20, 20, 0)
b(40, 40, 40, 0)
b(1, 25, 30, 0)

4

PANTS
Amoeba

2
0
MLP

b(24, 22, 19, 0)
b(30, 6, 18, 0)

RF

TF

CNN

(b) In-path attacker

b(3, 6, 12, 0)
b(40, 40, 40, 40)

Figure 12: The generation speed for PANTS and Amoeba
under different ML models, threat models and applications.
PANTS is 8X faster than Ameoba when generating samples.

b(4, 23, 29, 24)
b(20, 11, 1, 6)
0

50

0

100

100

ASR (%)

MLP 36.34% 32.86% 74.2% 81.12%

ness, we report the amortized time, for generating adversarial
examples for as many inputs as there are in each dataset and
we run experiments in exactly the same machines (described
in Appendix in §E). While the overall speed of PANTS clearly
outperforms Amoeba, we observe that PANTS’s speed for
MLP and RF under the in-path threat model is relatively slow
(~0.3 samples/sec). This is because the in-path threat model,
together with complex feature engineering, introduces a more
complex set of constraints and narrows the range of potential
solutions.
Finding 6: Transferability provides an opportunity to
robustify a MNC without white-box access.
There are use cases in which a network operator will not
have access to the MNC, e.g., because the MNC is designed
by a third party and its details are secret. While this is not our
target setting, thanks to the transferability of adversarial samples PANTS might be able to help the network operator e.g.,
by providing examples in which the target MNC misclassified.
Transferability is the fraction of adversarial samples,
crafted for one implementation of a MNC, that successfully
deceive another implementation. Concretely, suppose we eval-

7304

34th USENIX Security Symposium

RF 36.52% 41.8%

66.5% 95.54%

TF 87.76% 99.8% 67.05% 91.96%

60
40

Transferability (%)

Generated against

80

Figure 11: The ASR of two APP implementations for various
threat models, before and after they were robustified by
PANTS against our end-host attacker (20,20,20,0). PANTS
improves the robustness of MNCs against threat models
that are different or even stronger than what was considered
during robustification.

20
CNN 94.25% 100.0% 70.44% 93.08%
CNN

TF
RF
Adversarial for

MLP

0

Figure 13: Transferability results for end-host threat model
for the application APP using PANTS’ generated adversarial
samples. Most of the ASR are higher than 50%, indicating
that the adversarial samples generated for one implementation
of an MNC are adversarial for others.

uate the transferability of the adversarial samples generated
′
from MA to MB , we first construct the test set Xtest_A_B
⊆ Xtest
that both MA and MB can correctly classify. Then we use
′
PANTS to generate adversarial samples for Xtest_A_B
using
MA and evaluate its adversariness against MB . Fig. 13 shows
the transferability result between MLP, RF, TF and CNN for
end-host threat model tested for the application APP. Most of
the ASR (outside the diagonal) is above 50%, showing that
PANTS can be useful even without full access to the MNC
implementation. To benefit from it, the operator would need
to train a proxy model and find adversarial samples against it
using PANTS. According to Fig. 13, the adversarial samples
against the proxy model are likely to be adversarial against
the target one.

USENIX Association

6

Conclusion

This paper presents PANTS, a practical framework to help
network operators evaluate and enhance the robustness
of ML-powered networking classifiers. PANTS combines
canonical AML methods, such as PGD, with an SMT solver
to generate adversarial, realizable, and semantic-preserving
packet sequences with a high success rate. Our comprehensive
evaluation in three MNCs across multiple implementations
shows that PANTS outperforms baselines in generating
adversarial samples by 70% and 2X in ASR. Importantly,
by integrating PANTS in an iterative adversarial training
pipeline, we find that PANTS can robustify MNCs against
various attack methodologies by 52.72% on average.

Acknowledgement

References
[1] Adversarial-robustness-toolbox for scikit-learn randomforestclassifier. https://github.com/Trusted-AI/
adversarial-robustness-toolbox/blob/main/n
otebooks/classifier_scikitlearn_RandomFore
stClassifier.ipynb.
[2] Adversarial-robustness-toolbox
for
xgboost.
https://github.com/Trusted- AI/advers
arial-robustness-toolbox/blob/main/noteboo
ks/classifier_xgboost.ipynb.
[3] azure. https://azure.microsoft.com/.
[4] The caida ucsd anonymized internet traces.
https://www.caida.org/catalog/datasets
/passive_dataset. Accessed: 2022-01-30.

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their informative and
insightful feedback. This work was supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) through Grants CNS-2442625,
CNS-2319442 and a Princeton NextG Innovation Award.

[5] Harnessing data and ai for business value.
https://about.att.com/innovationblog/2
022/data-ai-part-1.html.

Ethics Considerations

[7] scikit-learn. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/.

We evaluate PANTS and all baselines on public datasets avoiding any privacy concerns. PANTS and other baselines are not
used to perturb live network traffic or an online system, thus
avoiding ethical concerns. Our primary goal in proposing
PANTS is to assist network operators in evaluating and enhancing the robustness of MNCs to defend against adversaries.

Open Science
We release all artifacts.
First, we release all code and scripts from data processing, MNC training and inference, and PANTS (SMT, AML,
including integration with PGD and ZOO) via both Zenodo
(https://zenodo.org/records/14728507) and GitHub
(https://github.com/jinminhao/PANTS). In terms of
secondary artifacts, we share all parameters and configurations used for MNC training and PANTS. We also release the
trained MNC models, including both vanilla and robustified
versions.
Furthermore, we provide adversarial samples generated
by PANTS for each application and model as references. Any
artifacts related to the model and data are shared via Zenodo.
We already use public datasets to ensure reproducibility,
and the references to these datasets are provided in the paper.
That said, we also release the dataset after pre-preprocessing.

USENIX Association

[6] Mist ai and cloud. https://www.juniper.net/us/e
n/products/mist-ai.html.

[8] Solution overview artificial intelligence/machine
learning for intent-based networking – primer.
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/co
llateral/enterprise-networks/digital-netwo
rk-architecture/nb-06-cisco-dna-ai-ml-pri
mer-cte-en.html.
[9] Shahad Alahmed, Qutaiba Alasad, Maytham M.
Hammood, Jiann-Shiun Yuan, and Mohammed Alawad.
Mitigation of black-box attacks on intrusion detection
systems-based ml. Computers, 11(7), 2022.
[10] Nagender Aneja, Sandhya Aneja, and Bharat Bhargava.
Ai-enabled learning architecture using network traffic
traces over iot network: A comprehensive review.
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
2023:8658278, Feb 2023.
[11] Theophilus Benson, Aditya Akella, and David A Maltz.
Network traffic characteristics of data centers in the wild.
In Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference
on Internet measurement, pages 267–280, 2010.
[12] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017 ieee
symposium on security and privacy (sp), pages 39–57.
Ieee, 2017.
[13] Giovanna Carofiglio, Giulio Grassi, Enrico Loparco,
Luca Muscariello, Michele Papalini, and Jacques

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7305

Samain. Characterizing the relationship between
application qoe and network qos for real-time services.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2021 Workshop
on Network-Application Integration, NAI’21, page
20–25, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[14] Pin-Yu Chen, Huan Zhang, Yash Sharma, Jinfeng Yi,
and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Zoo: Zeroth order optimization
based black-box attacks to deep neural networks
without training substitute models. In Proceedings of
the 10th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and
security, pages 15–26, 2017.
[15] Jacob Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[16] Edsger Wybe Dijkstra. A Discipline of Programming.
Prentice Hall PTR, USA, 1st edition, 1997.
[17] Rohan Doshi, Noah Apthorpe, and Nick Feamster.
Machine learning ddos detection for consumer internet
of things devices. In 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW), pages 29–35, 2018.
[18] Gerard Draper-Gil, Arash Habibi Lashkari, Mohammad Saiful Islam Mamun, and Ali A. Ghorbani.
Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related features.
In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, pages 407–414, 2016.
https://doi.org/10.5220/0005740704070414.
[19] Dmitry Duplyakin, Robert Ricci, Aleksander Maricq,
Gary Wong, Jonathon Duerig, Eric Eide, Leigh Stoller,
Mike Hibler, David Johnson, Kirk Webb, Aditya Akella,
Kuangching Wang, Glenn Ricart, Larry Landweber,
Chip Elliott, Michael Zink, Emmanuel Cecchet,
Snigdhaswin Kar, and Prabodh Mishra. The design
and operation of CloudLab. In 2019 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 19), pages 1–14,
Renton, WA, July 2019. USENIX Association.
[20] Robert W Floyd. Assigning meanings to programs. In
Program Verification: Fundamental Issues in Computer
Science, pages 65–81. Springer, 1993.
[21] Ping Gao, Guangsong Li, Yanan Shi, and Yang Wang.
Vpn traffic classification based on payload length
sequence.
In 2020 International Conference on
Networking and Network Applications (NaNA), pages
241–247, 2020.
[22] Tomer Gilad, Nathan H. Jay, Michael Shnaiderman,
Brighten Godfrey, and Michael Schapira. Robustifying
network protocols with adversarial examples. In

7306

34th USENIX Security Symposium

Proceedings of the 18th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics
in Networks, HotNets ’19, page 85–92, New York, NY,
USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[23] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy.
Explaining and harnessing adversarial
examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
[24] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian
Szegedy.
Explaining and harnessing adversarial
examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
[25] Julia Grabinski, Paul Gavrikov, Janis Keuper, and
Margret Keuper. Robust models are less over-confident.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:39059–39075, 2022.
[26] Yuqiang Heng, Vikram Chandrasekhar, and Jeffrey G.
Andrews. Utmobilenettraffic2021: A labeled public
network traffic dataset. IEEE Networking Letters,
3(3):156–160, 2021.
[27] Md. Faisal Murad Hossain, Mahasweta Sarkar, and
Syed Hassan Ahmed. Quality of experience for video
streaming: A contemporary survey. In 2017 13th
International Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing Conference (IWCMC), pages 80–84, 2017.
[28] Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras,
Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander Madry.
Adversarial examples are not bugs, they are features.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
2019.
[29] Junchen Jiang, Rajdeep Das, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan,
Philip A Chou, Venkata Padmanabhan, Vyas Sekar,
Esbjorn Dominique, Marcin Goliszewski, Dalibor
Kukoleca, Renat Vafin, et al. Via: Improving internet
telephony call quality using predictive relay selection.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference,
pages 286–299. ACM, 2016.
[30] Junchen Jiang, Vyas Sekar, Henry Milner, Davis
Shepherd, Ion Stoica, and Hui Zhang. Cfa: A practical
prediction system for video qoe optimization. In NSDI,
pages 137–150, 2016.
[31] Xi Jiang, Shinan Liu, Aaron Gember-Jacobson, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Paul Schmitt, Francesco Bronzino,
and Nick Feamster. Netdiffusion: Network data augmentation through protocol-constrained traffic generation.
Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., 8(1), feb 2024.
[32] Rakesh Kumar, Mayank Swarnkar, Gaurav Singal, and
Neeraj Kumar. Iot network traffic classification using
machine learning algorithms: An experimental analysis.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 9(2):989–1008, 2022.

USENIX Association

[33] Linyi Li, Tao Xie, and Bo Li. Sok: Certified robustness
for deep neural networks. In 2023 IEEE symposium
on security and privacy (SP), pages 1289–1310. IEEE,
2023.
[34] Xinjie Lin, Gang Xiong, Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li,
Junzheng Shi, and Jing Yu. Et-bert: A contextualized
datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification. In Proceedings of
the ACM Web Conference 2022, pages 633–642, 2022.
[35] Haoyu Liu, Alec F. Diallo, and Paul Patras. Amoeba:
Circumventing ml-supported network censorship via adversarial reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
13th International Conference on emerging Networking
EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT), 2023.
[36] Manuel Lopez-Martin, Belen Carro, Antonio SanchezEsguevillas, and Jaime Lloret. Network traffic classifier
with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for
internet of things. IEEE Access, 5:18042–18050, 2017.
[37] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig
Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.
[38] Yongwei Meng, Tao Qin, Haonian Wang, and Zhouguo
Chen. Tpipd: A robust model for online vpn traffic
classification. In 2022 IEEE International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications (TrustCom), pages 105–110, 2022.
[39] Andrew W. Moore and Denis Zuev. Internet traffic
classification using bayesian analysis techniques. SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., 33(1):50–60, June 2005.

[43] Ali Parchekani, Salar Nouri, Vahid Shah-Mansouri,
and Seyed Pooya Shariatpanahi. Classification of
traffic using neural networks by rejecting: a novel
approach in classifying vpn traffic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.03665, 2020.
[44] Xiao Peng, Weiqing Huang, and Zhixin Shi. Adversarial attack against dos intrusion detection: An
improved boundary-based method. In 2019 IEEE
31st International Conference on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence (ICTAI), pages 1288–1295, 2019.
[45] Olga Poppe, Tayo Amuneke, Dalitso Banda, Aritra De,
Ari Green, Manon Knoertzer, Ehi Nosakhare, Karthik
Rajendran, Deepak Shankargouda, Meina Wang,
et al. Seagull: An infrastructure for load prediction
and optimized resource allocation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.12922, 2020.
[46] Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Ashish
Kapoor, and Aleksander Madry. Do adversarially robust
imagenet models transfer better? Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33:3533–3545, 2020.
[47] Rahul Anand Sharma, Ishan Sabane, Maria Apostolaki,
Anthony Rowe, and Vyas Sekar. Lumen: a framework
for developing and evaluating ml-based iot network
anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments
and Technologies, pages 59–71, 2022.
[48] Taveesh Sharma, Tarun Mangla, Arpit Gupta, Junchen
Jiang, and Nick Feamster. Estimating webrtc video
qoe metrics without using application headers. In
Proceedings of the 2023 ACM on Internet Measurement
Conference, pages 485–500, 2023.

[40] Jay Nandy, Sudipan Saha, Wynne Hsu, Mong Li Lee,
and Xiao Xiang Zhu. Towards bridging the gap between
empirical and certified robustness against adversarial
examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05096, 2021.

[49] Payap Sirinam, Mohsen Imani, Marc Juarez, and
Matthew Wright. Deep fingerprinting: Undermining
website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning.
In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC conference
on computer and communications security, pages
1928–1943, 2018.

[41] Milad Nasr, Alireza Bahramali, and Amir Houmansadr.
Defeating DNN-Based traffic analysis systems in
Real-Time with blind adversarial perturbations. In 30th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21),
pages 2705–2722. USENIX Association, August 2021.

[50] Robin Sommer and Vern Paxson. Outside the closed
world: On using machine learning for network intrusion
detection. In 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, pages 305–316, 2010.

[42] Ashkan Nikravesh, David Ke Hong, Qi Alfred Chen,
Harsha V. Madhyastha, and Z. Morley Mao. Qoe
inference without application control. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Workshop on QoE-Based Analysis and
Management of Data Communication Networks,
Internet-QoE ’16, page 19–24, New York, NY, USA,
2016. Association for Computing Machinery.

USENIX Association

[51] Vincent Tjeng, Kai Xiao, and Russ Tedrake. Evaluating
robustness of neural networks with mixed integer
programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07356, 2017.
[52] Petr Velan, Milan Cermák, Pavel Čeleda, and Martin
Drašar. A survey of methods for encrypted traffic
classification and analysis. International Journal of
Network Management, 25:355 – 374, 2015.

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7307

[54] Pan Wang, Xuejiao Chen, Feng Ye, and Zhixin Sun.
A survey of techniques for mobile service encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning. IEEE Access,
7:54024–54033, 2019.

[57] Eric Wong, Leslie Rice, and J Zico Kolter. Fast is better
than free: Revisiting adversarial training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.03994, 2020.
[58] Kaidi Xu, Zhouxing Shi, Huan Zhang, Yihan Wang,
Kai-Wei Chang, Minlie Huang, Bhavya Kailkhura,
Xue Lin, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Automatic perturbation
analysis for scalable certified robustness and beyond.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:1129–1141, 2020.
[59] Suying Yan, Yuchun Guo, Yishuai Chen, Feng Xie,
Chenguang Yu, and Y. Liu. Enabling qoe learning
and prediction of webrtc video communication in wifi
networks. 2015.
[60] Greg Yang, Tony Duan, J Edward Hu, Hadi Salman,
Ilya Razenshteyn, and Jerry Li. Randomized smoothing
of all shapes and sizes. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 10693–10705. PMLR, 2020.
[61] Zhiyuan Yao, Yoann Desmouceaux, Mark Townsley,
and Thomas Heide Clausen. Towards intelligent load
balancing in data centers. CoRR, abs/2110.15788, 2021.
[62] Yucheng Yin, Zinan Lin, Minhao Jin, Giulia Fanti, and
Vyas Sekar. Practical gan-based synthetic ip header
trace generation using netshare. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM 2022 Conference, SIGCOMM ’22,
page 458–472, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association
for Computing Machinery.

7308

34th USENIX Security Symposium

80
70
NetShare
PANTS

60
50

[55] Shiqi Wang, Huan Zhang, Kaidi Xu, Xue Lin, Suman
Jana, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and J Zico Kolter. Beta-crown:
Efficient bound propagation with per-neuron split
constraints for neural network robustness verification.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:29909–29921, 2021.
[56] Yulong Wang, Tong Sun, Shenghong Li, Xin Yuan, Wei
Ni, Ekram Hossain, and H Vincent Poor. Adversarial
attacks and defenses in machine learning-empowered
communication systems and networks: A contemporary
survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
2023.

Robustification via synthetic data augmentation

ASR (%)

A

Accuracy (%)

X1

X44
X59
Number of samples

Accuracy (%)

(a) Accuracy of MLP

NetShare
PANTS

50
25
X1

X44
X59
Number of samples

X66

(b) Vulnerability of MLP
100

80
70
NetShare
PANTS

60
50

75

0

X66

X1

X44 X81 X116 X147 X168
Number of samples

(c) Accuracy of TF

ASR (%)

[53] Kai Wang, Zhiliang Wang, Dongqi Han, Wenqi Chen,
Jiahai Yang, Xingang Shi, and Xia Yin. Bars: Local
robustness certification for deep learning based traffic
analysis systems.

50
NetShare
PANTS
0

X1

X44 X81 X116 X147 X168
Number of samples

(d) Vulnerability of TF

Figure 14: Model (MLP and TF) accuracy and ASR when
using synthetic data by NetShare and adversarial samples by
PANTS for robustification.
Fig. 14 shows the accuracy and vulnerability of MLP and
transformer when robustifying using synthetic data generated
by NetShare.

B

Features used in different applications

Different features are extracted from the feature engineering
module among applications. Table 3 presents a summary
of the features employed for each dataset. The selection of
features is following the corresponding paper or the given
script from the released dataset.

C

Hyperparemeters of ML models

To simplify the application setup, for each kind of ML
classifier, we use the same architecture and hyperparameters
for all the applications. The MLP is set with 4 hidden
layers with 200 neurons each. It is trained with 500 epochs,
and the optimizer is SGD. Since VPN detection is binary
classification, a sigmoid function is used as the last activation
layer, and the loss function is defined as binary cross entropy.
Other applications are multi-class classification, hence we are
using softmax function and the loss function is cross entropy.
RF is implemented by Scikit-learn [7]. The maximum depth
of trees is set as 12 and other parameters are set as default.
The TF is borrowed from the idea of BERT [15]. It has 4
attention heads, 2 hidden layers and the intermediate size is
256. The CNN is derived from DF [49] which is previously
designed for website fingerprinting. It has four sequential
blocks where each includes two convolution layers and one

USENIX Association

Application
VPN Detection (VPN)
Application
Identification (APP)
VCAs QoE
Inference (QOE)

Features
{sum, min, max, mean} of {bi-directional, forward, backward} flow interarrival times
{min, max, mean, std} of {active, idle} durations
Number of {packets, bytes} per second
{sum, min, max, mean, std} of {forward, backward} flow interarrival times
{sum, min, max, mean, std} of packet length of the {forward, backward} flow
Number of total {forward, backward} packets
{min, max, mean, median, std} of {packet length, interarrival times}
Number of {bytes, packets}
Number of {unique packet length, microbursts}

Table 3: Description of the used dataset and features extracted by the feature engineering module for each application. An active
duration is defined as the amount of time that flow is active before going to idle. An idle duration is defined vice versa [18].
A flow is active when the interarrival times are less than a threshold (0.1s in our case).
max pooling layer, followed by three fully-connected layers.
For both TF and CNN, only the first 400 packets for each
packet sequence are encoded into the input. Packet sequences
whose length are less than 400 will be padded with 0 for input
format consistency. Both of them are trained with 200 epochs.

D

Capability extension of Amoeba

For a fair comparison, we extend Amoeba’s capability to comply with the two evaluated threat models. First, we identify
perturbable packets. Since the attacker’s capability can only
perturb a single direction of packets instead of bi-direction, we
modify the action function to work on either forward or backward packets. Then, we extend the action space of Amoeba to
support more perturbations. The original action space has two
features, representing the delay and the modified packet length
of the given packet. We extend it by adding an integer to represent the number of injected packets after this packet. When the
threat model assumes an end-host attacker, this newly added
feature executes after each packet. We find that most of the
adversarial samples generated by Amoeba are in conflict with
the semantics constraints such as constraint of accumulative
delay and maximum number of injected packets. We just add
a hard budget to force the agent not to break this constraints.
We found that this would help to improve Amoeba’s ASR
compared to simply dropping all the adversarial sequences
which break these flow-wise constraints. Further, for the applications that require multi-class classification, we modify the
reward function. Amoeba’s original reward function only considers binary classification. Therefore, when targeting multiclass classification, we changed the reward function to crossentropy. The agent can get a large reward when perturbing
the original sample to cause misclassification.

E

Cloudlab machines [19]. Each machine has two Intel Xeon
Silver 4114 10-core CPUs at 2.20 GHz and 192GB ECC
DDR4-2666 memory. The rest of the experiments related
to Amoeba rely on GPU training, which is running on two
Azure machines [3]. Each one uses 16 vCPUs from AMD
EPYC 7V12(Rome) CPU, 110GB memory, and an Nvidia
Tesla T4 GPU with 16 GB GPU memory. Please note that the
training and inference of Amoeba is on the CPU machines
(same as PANTS) when comparing the computation overhead
with PANTS.

F

Robustness of the PANTS- and Amoebarobustified models

Fig. 15 shows the robustness of using PANTS, Amoeba
and BAP to attack PANTS- and Amoeba-robustified models
under the in-path threat model.

Testbed specification

For consistent evaluation, all the experiments using PANTS
to generate adversarial samples are running on the cluster of

USENIX Association

34th USENIX Security Symposium

7309

Unprotected (vanilla)

10
TF

0

CNN

(a) APP Attacked by PANTS
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

20
10
MLP

RF

TF

20
0

CNN

MLP

RF

TF

ASR (%)

4
2
TF

1
0

CNN

(g) APP Attacked by BAP

TF

CNN

(h) VPN Attacked by BAP

RF

TF

CNN

1.0
0.5
0.0

CNN

(e) VPN Attacked by Amoeba
2

MLP

(c) QOE Attacked by PANTS

5

6
ASR (%)

TF

10

0

CNN

(d) APP Attacked by Amoeba

0

RF

40

(b) VPN Attacked by PANTS

30

0

MLP

ASR (%)

RF

10

MLP

RF

TF

CNN

(f) QOE Attacked by Amoeba
ASR (%)

MLP

60
ASR (%)

20

0

Robustified by Amoeba

20
ASR (%)

ASR (%)

30

Robustified by PANTS

4
2
0

TF

CNN

(i) QOE Attacked by BAP

Figure 15: ASR for the vanilla, PANTS-robustified and Amoeba-robustified models for the in-path threat model. Similar to the
observations in fig. 10, PANTS-robustified’s ASR is lower, demonstrating PANTS’s ability to generate adversarial samples that
effectively robustify target models. For the dataset QOE, using Amoeba for robustification is skipped since it cannot effectively
generate enough adversarial samples.

80

ASR (%)

60

MLP
RF
TF
CNN

40
20
0
Vanilla S1

S2

S3

S4

S5

ASR (%)

30

20

10

MLP
RF
TF
CNN

0
Vanilla

S1

S2

S3

(a) Robustified for defending (b) Robustified for defending
end-host attackers
in-path attackers

Figure 16: ASR by using Amoeba to attack the ML model
when it is in iterative Amoeba-robustification process.

7310

34th USENIX Security Symposium

USENIX Association