10588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Robustness Matters: Pre-Training Can Enhance the
Performance of Encrypted Traffic Analysis
Luming Yang , Lin Liu , Jun-Jie Huang , Member, IEEE, Jiangyong Shi , Shaojing Fu , Yongjun Wang,
and Jinshu Su , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Models with large-scale parameters and pre-training
have been leveraged for encrypted traffic analysis. However,
existing researches primarily focused on accuracy, often overlooking the role of large-scale pre-trained parameters in enhancing
robustness. While machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
models trained from scratch can achieve high accuracy, they
exhibit limited robustness. When subjected to network noise in
real-world, their identification results can fluctuate significantly,
which is unacceptable. Unfortunately, current robustness evaluation methods neglect samples diversity and employ unreasonable
noise settings. This field still lacks a reasonable quantitative
description of models robustness. In this paper, we propose
the PA-curve to display the distribution of sample’s correctdecision stability, which can simultaneously reflect the model’s
accuracy and robustness. By calculating the area under the PAcurve, called PA-area, we enable the quantitative assessment
of robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. Furthermore, we
design a pre-trained model based on packet length sequence,
and pre-trained it on TB-scale traffic. By fine-tuning on limited
labeled training data, it can achieve downstream analysis tasks.
We conduct experiments on five encrypted traffic datasets with
different tasks. Besides accuracy, we analyzed the robustness
of the pre-trained model and existing methods under common
network disturbances, including packet loss, retransmission, and
disorder. Experimental results demonstrated that, compared to
ML-based and DL-based models trained from scratch, the pretrained model can not only achieve high accuracy, but also exhibit
greater resilience to network noise. The source code is available
at https://github.com/Shangshu-LAB/BERT-ps
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic analysis (ETA), robustness,
pre-trained model, network noise.

Received 3 March 2025; revised 15 August 2025; accepted 7 September
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version
9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62472431, Grant 62201600, and
Grant 62372462; and in part by the Science Research Plan Program through
the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT) under Grant ZK2250 and Grant ZK22-56. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was Dr. Yue Zhang. (Corresponding
author: Lin Liu.)
Luming Yang is with the Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091,
China, and also with the National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: yang lm108@nudt.edu.cn).
Lin Liu, Jun-Jie Huang, Jiangyong Shi, Shaojing Fu, and Yongjun
Wang are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, National
University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail:
liulin16@nudt.edu.cn; jjhuang@nudt.edu.cn; shijiangyong@nudt.edu.cn;
fusj nudt@163.com; wwyyjj1971@126.com).
Jinshu Su is with the Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091, China
(e-mail: sjs@nudt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3613970

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the widespread adoption of encryption protocols
such as TLS/SSL, the proportion of encrypted traffic
is gradually increasing. Encryption is a double-edged sword:
while it effectively protects user privacy, it poses significant
challenges to network monitoring and supervision. Due to the
ineffectiveness of port filtering and deep packet inspection
(DPI), artificial intelligence (AI) driven analysis is now the
mainstream of encrypted traffic analysis. Traditional machine
learning (ML) methods [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]
rely on expert knowledge, while deep learning (DL) methods
[9], [10], [11], [12] apply representation learning to extract
features automatically. In recent years, our community has also
proposed several pre-trained models [13], [14], [15], [16], [17],
[18] for network traffic analysis. They undergo self-supervised
pre-training on large amounts of unlabeled data to learn
general knowledge, and then utilize a small amount of labeled
data to learn task-specific knowledge by supervised fine-tuning
(SFT). This approach can achieve high accuracy with limited
training data. Researchers have been introducing more and
more learnable parameters to enhance models’ capabilities,
thereby further improving encrypted traffic analysis accuracy.
Encrypted traffic analysis encompasses various tasks,
including application identification, website fingerprinting, and
malware detection, each varying in difficulty. Models with
large-scale parameters often yield higher accuracy for more
challenging tasks. However, ML-based, DL-based, and pretrained models all yield satisfactory results in many cases.
From an accuracy perspective, more complex pre-trained models may not be necessary.
Besides accuracy, model robustness is also critical yet often
overlooked for encrypted traffic analysis. Network environment may undergo complex changes due to the joint effect
of various factors [19], such as traffic burst [20], [21], traffic
engineering [22], [23], partial network failures [24], [25], and
network updates [26], [27]. Some methods can achieve high
accuracy in specific network environments, but are not robust.
As illustrated in Table I, when subjected to different levels
of network noise, their identification results exhibit significant
deterioration, which is unacceptable. We desire models that not
only possess high accuracy, but also exhibit strong robustness
to ensure consistent performance in diverse and noisy network
environments.
In encrypted traffic analysis, some studies [28], [29],
[30], [31], [32] only evaluate their model’s robustness using
accuracy under noise, and others [19], [33], [34], [35], [36],

W

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

TABLE I
T HE I DENTIFICATION ACCURACY U NDER PACKET L OSS

Fig. 1. The local robustness of samples varies depending on the location
in the sample space. The model partitions the space into distinct decision
regions, which are represented by different colors. For x1 , which lies far from
decision boundaries, its neighborhood remains entirely within one decision
region (cA ), resulting in greater resistance to perturbations. For x2 , which is
close to decision boundaries, its neighborhood spans multiple decision regions
(cA , cB , etc.), making the output more sensitive to perturbations.

[37] focus on improving model’s robustness through techniques such as data augmentation. Unfortunately, they still
lacks a reasonable quantitative description of model’s robustness. Specifically, there are the following issues:
• Neglecting Sample’s Diversity. Existing approaches
[19], [31], [32], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43] typically
use the accuracy under noise to measure the model’s
robustness, without considering the differences across
samples. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1, samples far
from decision boundaries exhibit stronger robustness than
those near the boundary. The model’s robustness should
reflect the overall distribution of local robustness, which
cannot be only measured by the accuracy under noise.
• Unreasonable Noise Settings. Some existing works [28],
[29], [30], [33], [34], [35], [36], [44], [45] only introduce perturbations in the feature space rather than the
raw data during robustness evaluation. Different features
are typically not distributed independently but exhibit
correlations. Consequently, noise added to the feature
space may not accurately reflect real-world perturbations
of network flows. Artificial noise fails to accurately
mimic perturbations in network flows, leading to unreasonable robustness evaluations that do not generalize to
real-world.
Moreover, robustness evaluation metrics should also account
for accuracy, as robustness without accuracy is meaningless.
In this paper, we propose a new robustness evaluation
metric, called PA-curve, to display the distribution of sample’s
correct-decision stability and then calculated the PA-area
value. They can capture the relationship between accuracy and

10589

identification probability difference within the sample space,
thus providing a more comprehensive quantification of the
model’s robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. Specifically,
for the PA-curve, the more right-side, the more robust; the
more up-side, the more accurate. In addition, we also design a
pre-trained model BERT-ps based on packet length sequence,
and pre-trained it on TB-scale traffic. By fine-tuning on limited
labeled training data, BERT-ps can achieve specific encrypted
traffic analysis tasks, effectively. Experimental results demonstrate that BERT-ps not only achieves higher accuracy but
also stronger resilience to network noise compared to MLbased models and DL-based models trained from scratch.
These findings highlight the practical significance of exploring
pre-trained models with large-scale learnable parameters for
encrypted traffic analysis.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) For robustness analysis, we propose a new robustness
evaluation metric called PA-curve. We can apply the PAcurve to show the local robustness distribution in the
sample space with certain noise disturbances, and then
calculate the area under the PA-curve named PA-area as
an indicator to measure both the model’s accuracy and
its robustness.
2) To analyze the pre-training impact on robustness,
we design a pre-trained model based on packetlength sequences for encrypted traffic analysis, named
BERT-ps . By pre-training on massive unlabeled data,
BERT-ps can learn relevant knowledge of network
traffic, and achieve superior performances on specific
analysis tasks through supervised fine-tuning.
3) We conduct extensive experiments on five public
datasets. Compared to existing methods, BERT-ps with
pre-trained parameters can not only achieve higher accuracy, but also have stronger robustness under network
noise.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
give a review of related work in Section II. In Section III, we
introduce three perturbations and a novel metric for robustness.
In section IV, we introduce the design details of BERT-ps .
Then, we describes experimental setting in Section V and
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approaches in section VI. Discussions are presented in Section VII. Finally, we
concludes this paper in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
As the development of encryption, there are many
approaches for encrypted traffic analysis, which are mainly
based on machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL).
A. ML-Based Methods
These methods rely on expert knowledge to select artificial
features and apply ML algorithms. Taylor et al. [2], [3]
presented AppScanner, which only applies side-channel data
to build fingerprints for Android apps. FlowLens [5] proposed
by Barradas et al. collects features of packet distributions
at line speed and classifies flows directly on the switches.
Xu et al. [8] introduced path signature into encrypted traffic
classification based on packet-length information. Anderson

10590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

and McGrew [1], [4] developed supervised machine learning
models that take advantage of a unique and diverse set of
encrypted network flow features including TLS handshake
metadata, DNS contextual flows and HTTP contextual flows.
As for TLS/SSL encrypted traffic, TLS/SSL message
sequence is also widely applied for identification [46], [47],
[48], [49], [50]. Korczynski and Duda [46] first proposed
Markov chain fingerprints for application traffic flows based
on TLS/SSL message. On this basis, Shen et al. [47], [48]
observed that the application attribute bigram contributes to
application discrimination, and proposed an attribute-aware
encrypted traffic classification method based on the secondorder Markov Chains. Pan et al. [49] proposed an HTTPS
application classification method using weighted ensemble
learning, named WECN. Liu et al. [50] proposed the MaMPF
for encrypted traffic classification which makes use of length
block sequence (LBS) from the power-law division of packetlength sequence and the relative probability of all applications.
But these methods cannot analyze other types of encrypted
traffic except TLS/SSL.
B. DL-Based Methods
These methods automatically extract features from raw
network traffic by representation learning. Liu et al. [9]
designed an RNN-based end-to-end Flow Sequence Network
(FS-Net), which jointly learns the representative features from
the raw flow sequences and classifies them together. Shen
et al. [10] constructed Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) as an
representation based on the packet-length and packet direction.
To leverage large-scale unlabeled data for traffic representations, several pre-trained models [13], [14], [15], [16], [17],
[18] have been proposed in recent years. PERT proposed
by He et al. [13] and ET-BERT proposed by Lin et al.
[14] learn deep contextual datagram-level representations from
unlabeled traffic data by masked language modeling. Inspired
by computer vision, Flow-MAE [16] and YaTC [15] utilized
the masked auto-encoder (MAE) pre-training approach to
encode network flows from byte matrices Zhou et al. [18]
proposed TrafficFormer, which introduces a fine-grained multiclassification task to enhance its representation capabilities
in the pre-training stage. Instead of Transformer, NetMamba
[17] applied Mamba architecture for comprehensive traffic
representation to address efficiency issues.
C. Robustness of Traffic Analysis
Beyond accuracy, robustness has become an increasingly
important consideration in network traffic analysis. A common
approach for robustness testing involves introducing random
perturbations in the feature space, such as Gaussian noise
[30] or Laplacian noise [29]. Similarly, studies on adversarial robustness [34], [35], [36] often focus on perturbations
within the feature space. Wang et al. [44] proposed BARS, a
general robustness certification framework for deep-learningbased traffic analysis systems based on boundary-adaptive
randomized smoothing. RBLJAN [37] assesses robustness by
randomly inserting bytes into packets. However, such artificial noise differs significantly from real-world perturbations,
potentially misleading robustness evaluations.

Several studies have evaluated model’s performance in
different network environments. In robustness testing, Zhao
et al. [31], [32] introduced packet loss, retransmission, and
disordering, while [43] incorporates transmission delay. Moreover, [39], [40], [41], [42] assess analytical performance under
varying traffic replay rates. After investigating real diverse
network environments, Rosetta [19] leverages TCP-aware traffic augmentation mechanisms and self-supervised learning to
understand implicit TCP semantics, and hence extracts robust
features of TLS flows. These studies primarily use accuracy
under network noise as the metric, which does not account for
local robustness difference in sample space.
Additionally, other research explores robustness in network
traffic analysis concerning concept drift [32], [33], [51], [52],
adversarial samples [28], [34], [35], [36], [45], and label
noise [53].
III. R EVISITING ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION
In this section, we first introduce three common types
of network disturbances subjected to network flows, and
then introduce new comprehensive metrics, PA-curve and
PA-area, for measuring model’s robustness.
We define a network flow with n packets as x =
hP1 , P2 , · · · , Pn i, where Pi is the i-th packet. The identification
model for encrypted traffic analysis can be defined as a
function f : X 7→ Y where X is the sample space and
Y = {c1 , c2 , · · · , cm } is the label space.
A. Noise Impact on Network Flows
Network environment may undergo complex changes due to
the joint effect of various factors [19], such as traffic burst [20],
[21], traffic engineering [22], [23], partial network failures
[24], [25], and network updates [26], [27], etc. Network noise
is ubiquitous in real-world network environments, particularly
under conditions of complex network topologies and high
traffic loads. Encrypted traffic analysis is typically deployed
in real-world network environments, making it essential to
account for the impact of noise on analysis results. We define
ε is a specific perturbation from the network noise Υ(σ) with
noise parameter σ, i.e. ε ∼ Υ(σ). For a network flow x and a
perturbation ε, the disturbed sample is expressed as x̃ = x ⊕ ε
where ⊕ indicates the perturbation addition operations.
The transmission patterns of network flows are susceptible
to network noise, which can result in packet loss, retransmission, and disorder. These phenomena introduce perturbations
to the network flow data (such as packet-length sequences). In
detail, there are three common impacts of network noise on
network flows, which are defined as follows:
• Packet Loss: Due to the performance limitations of network device, some packets may not be captured, leading
to missing packets in the collected network flow. For
packet loss perturbations, we assume that each packet is
lost with a probability of σ. We defined the perturbation
of packet loss as Υloss (σ).
• Packet Retransmission: There are many types of error
during TCP transmission, such as corrupted packets, timeout, etc. If the sender does not receive an acknowledgment

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

(ACK) from the receiver before the re-transmission timeout, it will re-transmit the packet to ensure reliable
transmission. For packet re-transmission perturbations,
we assume that each packet is re-transmitted with a
probability of σ. We defined the perturbation of packet
re-transmission as Υretrans (σ).
• Packet Disordering: Due to network environment fluctuations, the order in which packets are sent and received
may be inconsistent. The packets of captured network
flows may be out of order. For packet disorder perturbations, we assume that each packet has a probability
of σ swapping with the next packet. We defined the
perturbations of packet disorder as Υdisorder (σ).
Due to the error correction and check mechanisms inherent
in network protocols, network noise typically does not affect
the content of the packets. Therefore, this study focuses solely
on the perturbation introduced by network noise to packet
transmission patterns in network flows.
In addition, packet loss, retransmission, and disorder are
three common impacts of network noise on packet-length
sequences. They are widely employed as network noise settings for robustness evaluations in existing studies [19], [31],
[43]. Our work aims to establish a quantitative and systematic
robustness evaluation metric for encrypted traffic analysis. As
a result, it requires relatively standardized and interpretable
noise settings.
B. Local Robustness in Sample Space
Robustness should reflects the ability of a system to resist
environment change without adapting its initial configuration
[54]. As for traffic analysis, the robustness refers to whether
the analysis model can stably output correct results when
the network flow sample is perturbed by network noise. In
addition, we consider the robustness of the model only if
it can achieve acceptable accuracy. If the model has a poor
identification performance, the robustness is meaningless.
Essentially, the analysis model divides the sample space into
different regions, each corresponding to a class. For a trained
model, the spatial structure of these regions is typically complex. For network flow samples, some are far from the region
boundaries, while others are closer. Samples that are farther
from region boundaries tend to be more robust. Robustness can
be reflected by the probability that the model can stably output
correctly in the sample’s neighborhood. Therefore, inspired by
certified robustness [55], we can measure the robustness of a
sample by analyzing the distribution of different classes within
its neighborhood, i.e., the probability distribution of perturbed
samples falling into different class regions.
For a network flow x ∈ X with class c ∈ Y, the model
judges within its neighborhood to be a category yi with the
confidence probability pi . Among them, we set the classes
with the highest and second-highest confidence probabilities
as cA and cB corresponding to pA and pB , respectively. As for
x with the perturbation Υ(σ), cA and cB can be expressed as
follows:
cA = arg max P{ f (x ⊕ ε) = c|ε ∼ Υ(σ)},
c∈Y

cB = arg max P{ f (x ⊕ ε) = c|ε ∼ Υ(σ)}.
c∈Y\{cA }

(1)

10591

As long as pA > pB , it indicates that perturbations within
the neighborhood can produce the correct output. In addition,
the greater the difference between pA and pB , the more stable
the output will be. Therefore, the robustness of the sample can
be measured by ∆p = pA − pB .
However, it is impossible to exactly evaluate the region
boundaries of sample space or to exactly compute pA and pB
for a neural-network-based classifier [55]. Instead, we estimate
∆p based on Monte-Carlo method, which is guaranteed to
succeed with arbitrarily high probability. To ensure the reliability, in practice, we apply the binomial proportion confidence
interval [56] to calculate the lower bound of pA and the upper
bound of pB , i.e., pA and pB .
We apply Clopper-Pearson method [57] to estimate the
proportion confidence interval. When only the experiment
number n and the success number k are known, we estimate
the lower and upper bound (p and p) of a success probability
p = nk as follows:
α



α
Fβ−1
; n − k + 1, k ≤ p ≤ Fβ−1 1 − ; k + 1, n − k
(2)
2
2
where Fβ−1 (·) is the inverse cumulative distribution function
(ICDF) of the beta distribution. More detail about the principle of the binomial proportion confidence interval base on
Clopper-Pearson method is illustrated in Appendix A.
Algorithm 1 Calculation of ∆ p̂ Based on Monte Carlo Method
Require: The sample x and the network noise Υ(σ);
The Monte Carlo sample number N;
The confidence coefficient 1 − α;
Ensure: ∆ p̂
counts = {c : 0|c ∈ Y};
for i = 1toN do
c0 ← f (x ⊕ ε) where ε ∼ Υ(σ);
counts[c0 ]++;
end for
cA , cB ← top two index in counts;
nA , nB ← counts[cA ], counts[cB ];
pA ← LowerConfBound(nA , N, 1 − α);
pB ← UpperConfBound(nB , N, 1 − α); return pA − pB
Therefore, we use ∆ p̂ = pA − pB to measure the local
robustness of samples, which is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
C. PA-Curve and PA-Area
Since the robustness varies among different samples, the
global robustness of the model should be based on the distribution of local robustness. It makes no sense to consider the
local robustness of samples that are incorrectly predicted by
the model, so the models robustness should also take accuracy
into account.
1) PA-Curve: It is designed to show the distribution of the
local robustness on the sample space under a certain network
noise perturbation. For the encrypted traffic analysis model,
PA-curve can reflect the relationship between identification
Probability differences and Accuracy within the sample space.
Specifically, a point (x, y) on the PA-curve represents the
proportion of samples that can be correctly predicted by the

10592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. Within the region defined by the neighborhood of x under perturbation Υ(σ), the classes with the highest and second-highest confidence probabilities
are cA and cB , respectively. (This figure is just a schematic, and x is not in Euclidean space.) The confidence probabilities can be respectively estimated as
p̂A (pA ) and p̂B (pB ) using Monte Carlo method. For a test set, the PA-curve is the distribution of ∆ p̂ within different accuracy. PA-area is the area under the
PA-curve.

model when the identification probability difference is at least
x. The equation of PA-curve can be mathematically expressed
as follows:
y=

N

o

1 X n (i)
(i)
≥x ,
I cA = c(i) ∧ p(i)
A − pB
N

(3)

N
n


o
1X
(i)
(i)
(i)
lim I c(i)
A = c ∧ pA − p B ≥ x|ε ∼ Υ(σ) dx
0 N i=1 σ→0
Z 1 X
N
1
(i)
I{c(i)
1 ≥ x }dx
=
A = c ∧ „ƒ‚…
0 N

=

i=1

i=1

where I(·) is the indicator function, c(i) is the label of the i-th
sample x(i) in the test set {x(1) , x(2) , · · · , x(N) }. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, for the PA-curve, the more right-side, the more robust;
the more up-side, the more accurate. Therefore, PA-curve can
measure both accuracy and robustness.
Note: As illustrated in Eq. 3, for the PA-curve, a higher
position indicates that more samples identified by the model
(i)
correctly (c(i)
A = c ) under the same constraints on iden(i)
tification probability differences (∆ p̂(i) = p(i)
A − p B ≥ x),
indicating higher accuracy. Additionally, a rightward shift
indicates that the model exhibits a larger identification probability difference
(∆ p̂(i) ) of samples with a certain accuracy
PN
(i)
1
(Acc = N i=1 I{cA = c(i) }), indicating greater robustness.
2) PA-Area: The area under the PA-curve, called PA-area,
can serve as a comprehensive metric for measuring both
robustness and accuracy. As shown in Fig. 2, the upper and
more right PA-curve lead to the higher PA-area. PA-area can
be calculated as follows:
PN−1
Z 1
(xi+1 − xi )(yi+1 + yi )
PA-area =
ydx = i=1
,
(4)
2(N − 1)
0
where (xi , yi ) is the i-th point of PA-curve corresponding to
the sample x(i) in the test set. (0 ≤ x1 ≤ · · · ≤ xN ≤ 1,
1 ≥ y1 ≥ · · · ≥ yN ≥ 0.) Consequently, PA-area is a reasonable
quantitative description of model’s robustness for network
traffic analysis.
Note: As the perturbation parameter σ approaches zero,
the neighborhood of a sample point corresponds to a single
label, meaning pA → 1 and pB → 0. In this case, the PA-area
reduces to the accuracy. The detailed proof is as follows:
Z 1
PA-area =
lim y (x; ε ∼ Υ(σ)) dx
0 σ→0

Z 1

=

1
N

N
X

True

(i)
I{c(i)
A = c } = Acc

i=1

IV. D ESIGN D ETAILS OF BERT-P S
Packet-length sequences are widely used in encrypted traffic
analysis due to their universality and low cost, but susceptible
to network noise. To demonstrate that pre-training can enhance
the model’s robustness, it is essential to compare pre-trained
models with traditional ML-based and DL-based models.
Nevertheless, no pre-trained model based on packet-length
sequences has been proposed for encrypted traffic analysis.
Therefore, we design a pre-trained packet-length sequence
model named BERT-ps , which is illustrated in Fig. 3.
A. Tokenization
In this module, we convert network flows into token
sequences of packet length sequences. It transforms network flows into a format that can be directly fed into the
model.
First, we record the captured network flows in the form
of a packet-length sequences. A network flow is defined
by a five-tuple (srcIP, srcport, dstIP, dstport, and protocol),
i.e., a collection of bidirectional packets between the client
(srcIP, srcPort) and the server (dstIP, dstPort). To avoid
the influence of functional packets (e.g., SYN packets and
ACK packets) within the network flow, we ignore packets
without transport layer payload. The absolute value of the
packet-length is the packet transport layer load length, while
the sign of the packet length indicates the direction of the
packet.
We apply packet length sequence to represent the transmission pattern of network flows. To mitigate the adverse impact
of functional packets (e.g., SYN packets and ACK packets),

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

10593

Fig. 3. The overview of BERT-ps for encrypted traffic analysis.

packets without transport layer payload are excluded in the
packet length sequence. For the packet length, its absolute
value is the length of the transport layer payload, while its
sign indicates the direction of the packet in the network flow.
We define that the uplink packet length is positive, while
the downlink packet length is negative. For the tokenization
of packet length sequences, we utilize packet lengths with
direction directly as tokens.
We introduce 5 special tokens ([CLS], [SEP], [PAD],
[MASK], and [UNK]). [CLS] and [SEP] are prefixed to indicate the beginning and the end of the sequence, respectively.
For fixed-length input, sequences with insufficient length are
padded with [PAD], which are subsequently masked within
the model to prevent them from affecting the representation of
overall sequence. [MASK] and [UNK] are applied for replacing
masked tokens and unknown tokens.

traffic analysis prioritizes the understanding of network flows
rather than generation, BERT [58] (Encoder-Only architecture)
is more suitable rather than Decoder-Only models (such as
GPT [59]). In addition, the output vector corresponding to
[CLS] is regarded as the representation of the network flow.
3) Classification Head: It is the module within BERT-ps
that maps the learned feature representations to class predictions for specific downstream tasks. The classification head
consists of a fully-connected layer followed by a Softmax
layer. We input the representation into the classification head to
produce the identification result, which is expressed as follows:

B. Model Structure
There are 3 modules in BERT-ps , including packet length
embedding, transformer encoder, and classification head.
1) Packet-Length Embeddin: Each packet-length token is
map into Euclidean space to represent the semantic information as a fixed-length vector. The packet-length embedding is
composed of token embedding and position embedding.
The vocabulary includes packet-lengths ranging from 1 to
1500 with 2 directions and 5 special tokens. For network
flows, tokens with same packet length have different semantic
meanings depending on its position. So we apply the position
encoding to each token. Both token and position embedding
are achieved by embedding layers, and then combined before
being fed into BERT-ps . Consequently, the embedding result
of the packet-length token at position i is expressed as follows:

C. Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning

Eibyte = Epl + Eipos ,

(5)

where its packet length embedding and positional encoding
are represented as epl and eipos , respectively.
2) Transformer Encoder: BERT-ps is developed based on
Bi-directional Transformer Encoder to represent packet length
sequences of encrypted network flows. Given that encrypted

p = Softmax (W x + b) ,
(6)
 
where p = pc c∈Y is the probability vector that indicates the
network flow belongs to different categories in Y. W and b are
the weight and bias of the fully connected layer, respectively.

The BERT-ps is pre-trained on packet length sequences of
TB-scale traffic. After supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on limited
labeled training data, it can achieve downstream analysis tasks.
1) Pre-Training: The goal of pre-training on large-scale
unlabeled packet-length sequences is to capture the underlying
structure and common patterns by self-supervised learning,
thus acquiring a general and meaningful representation of
network flows. We utilize Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
for pre-training. The core idea is to mask certain tokens
([MASK]), and then predict their original values based on
the surrounding unmasked tokens within the context. The
Language Model (LM) head consists of a fully-connected layer
with softmax, which is applied to predict masked tokens.
For the input sequence X with k masked tokens, the loss
function of the pre-training process is defined as follows:
LMLM = −

k
X

log P{MASKi = tokeni |X̃; Θ},

(7)

i=1

where Θ is the model’s parameters, X̃ is the masked input data
and MASKi is the masked token at the i-th position.

10594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

During pre-training, 15% tokens in the input sequence are
masked, which is similar to the pre-training of BERT [58].
For masked 15% tokens, three operations are applied: 80%
are directly replaced with [MASK], 10% are replaced with new
tokens, and the other 10% remain unchanged.
2) Fine-Tuning: Although the pre-trained model can generate the versatile and meaningful representations of packetlength sequences, it cannot solve the problem end-to-end.
Specifically, the output of the pre-trained model serves as the
representation vectors for the packet-length sequence, rather
than the final classification result. In order to enable end-toend analysis, it is required to append a classification head on
the pre-trained model and pass representation results to the
classification head to produce the final decision. During the
training process, the pre-trained parameters will be fine-tuned
to better adapt the model to specific downstream tasks.
During the fine-tuning process, the loss function is set to
cross entropy loss, which is defined as follows:
N

Lcls = −

1 X X (i)
yc log p(i)
c ,
N

(8)

i=1 c∈Y

(i)
where y(i)
c is the ground truth label, and pc is the predicted
probability that the i-th sample belongs to class c.
After pre-training, the model’s parameters generally reach
a stable state. But the parameters in the classification head
are without training. Fine-tuning all model’s parameters on
a small-scale training set could cause unintended changes
to stable pre-trained parameters due to updates of untrained
parameters, potentially leading to over-fitting. Therefore, we
warm-up the gradients of the classification head with all
the pre-trained parameters frozen before full-parameter finetuning, enabling the model to achieve improved performance.

V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
In this section, we describe implementation, pre-training
data, dataset, and baselines in detail.
A. Implementation
Our experiments are performed on a server, which is
equipped with the following configuration: AMD EPYC(TM)
7542 CPU @ 2.90GHz, 8× NVIDA GeForce RTX 6000 Ada,
512GB of RAM. In following experiments, all the neural network structures are implemented by PyTorch (version 2.2.1).
We adopt the hyper-parameter settings of BERT-base [58]
as a reference for BERT-ps , which is illustrated in Table II.
As for the evaluation of model’s robustness (Algorithm 1),
we set the Monte Carlo sample number N as 1000, and set
the confidence coefficient as 0.999, i.e., α = 0.001.
B. Pre-Training Data
We collected a large amount of network traffic (corresponding about 12.1TB pcap files) at a network gateway within a
week. After data processing, a total of 76.11M packet-length
sequences were generated (about 2.96B tokens). Referring to
the pre-training data amount of BERT [58], this amount of
data is enough to support the pre-training of BERT-ps .

TABLE II
T HE H YPER -PARAMETER S ETTING OF BERT- PS

In experiments, all network traffic data were split and parsed
based on Zeek.1 We developed a Zeek plugin to record the
packet-length sequences for each network flow. Considering
that “mouse flows” are too short to provide meaningful information on packet-length sequences, we discarded flows with
fewer than 5 packets with non-zero transport layer payload.
C. Datasets
To evaluate the performance of BERT-ps and existing
baselines, we conduct experiments on five public datasets
with different tasks for encrypted traffic analysis, including
DataCon2020 [61], DataCon2021-p1 [62], DataCon2021-p2
[62], EBSNN-dataset [11], and CSTNET-TLS1.3 [63].
• DataCon2020: [61] It is a malware encrypted traffic
dataset collected by QI-ANXIN Technology Research
Institute. This dataset is derived from the TLS/SSL
encrypted traffic generated by malware and normal software (both are exe types) in the Tianqiong sandbox.
• DataCon2021-p1: [62] It is an encrypted proxy traffic
classification dataset, which is generated by accessing a
list of websites using Selenium automatically. After data
cleaning, the dataset contains encrypted network flows
from 6 different proxy software.
• DataCon2021-p2: [62] It is an encrypted-proxy-based
website traffic identification dataset. The traffic was
generated by accessing different websites through the
same encryption proxy software. After data cleaning,
the dataset contains network flows generated from 22
websites.
• EBSNN-dataset: [11] It includes network traffic generated from using applications and accessing websites.
After data cleaning, the dataset contains 22 categories.
• CSTNET-TLS1.3: [63] This traffic dataset are acquired
from Alexa Top-5000 deployed with TLS 1.3, which is
collected on CSTNET by [14]. After data cleaning, we
select 80 application from the original dataset.
All these datasets were public after 2020, and better aligned
with the current network environment. Raw network traffic
data are parsed by Zeek plugins we developed as well. We
also remove any flows containing fewer than 5 packets with
payload, followed by removing any classes with fewer flows.
1 https://zeek.org

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

D. Baselines
We use five existing packet-length-sequence-based works as
baselines, including AppScanner [3], ETC-PS [8], FlowLens
[5], FS-Net [9], and GraphDApp [10]. The basic algorithms
of these baselines they applied include machine learning
and deep learning. In detail, these existing works are as
follows:
• AppScanner: [3] It is a ML-based method based on
Random Forest to identify smartphone applications from
encrypted traffic. It extracts statistical features from
uplink flow, downlink flow, and complete flow as the
feature set, where each flow provides several statistical features (i.e., minimum, maximum, mean, standard
deviation, etc).
• ETC-PS: [8] It is a ML-based encrypted traffic classification method with path signature. The multi-scale
path signature of packet-length-sequence-based traffic
path is computed as the distinctive feature to train the
traditional machine learning classifier, such as Random
Forest.
• FlowLens: [5] It uses sampled packet-length distribution
of network flows as features to train the identification
model by supervised learning, i.e., Random Forest. We
use the hyperparameter setting with the best accuracy
used in the paper to retrain the model.
• FS-Net: [9] It is a DL-based encrypted traffic analysis
method, which use packet-length sequence information
for supervised learning. It leveraged reconstruction loss
to ensure that the extracted features by Bi-GRU contain
all the information of the flow sequences.
• GraphDApp: [10] It is a DL-based method based on
Graph Neural Network (GNN). It constructed Traffic
Interaction Graph (TIG) to represent network flows based
on the packet-length and packet direction, and then
applied GNN-based supervised learning.
In addition, we also applied four pre-trained models,
including ET-BERT [14], YaTC [15], NetMamba [17], and
Trafficformer [18] as baselines for accuracy analysis. The input
to these pre-trained models is payload byte streams rather than
packet length sequences. Due to possible training biases about
network settings, packet headers are excluded from the input.
VI. E VALUATION
In this section, we conduct a set of experiments to evaluate
the performance of the pre-trained BERT-ps and existing
baselines, including accuracy and robustness.
A. Identification Accuracy Analysis
The accuracy serves as the primary performance metric
for network traffic analysis. We evaluated the accuracy of
BERT-ps on five public datasets and compared it with various
baselines. Metrics about accuracy we applied are detailed in
Appendix B. Experimental results are presented in Table III.
1) Higher Accuracy Than Baselines: Although the task
and complexity of datasets vary, Table III demonstrates
that BERT-ps outperforms packet-length-sequence-based
baselines on all datasets, and surpasses all existing baselines on three datasets. Notably, it achieves approximately

10595

7% and 5% higher accuracy compared to the current
state-of-the-art(SOTA) methods on DataCon2021-p2 and
CSNET-TLS1.3, respectively. Furthermore, on DataCon2020
and EBSNN-dataset, BERT-ps
performance is only
marginally lower, by approximately 1.2% and 2.5%, than the
best pre-trained models. Experimental results substantiate the
adaptability of BERT-ps to diverse encrypted traffic analysis
tasks.
2) Pre-Training Enhance Accuracy: As shown in Table III,
the model with pre-trained parameters and supervised finetuning (SFT) performs consistently better than the model
trained from scratch (TFS) across all encrypted traffic analysis
tasks in terms of accuracy. This suggests that the pre-trained
parameters can effectively enhance the model’s performance.
However, the impact of pre-training on model performance
varies across different tasks. For DataCon2021-p2, which
contains 22 classes, the accuracy and F1 scores are both
improved about 2.8%. In contrast, for the binary classification
task of DataCon2020, the improvement is less than 0.8%.
3) Packet-Length Sequence Is More General: Existing pretrained models are primarily based on raw byte streams.
As shown in Table III, we also compare BERT-ps with
these pre-training-based approaches. While existing pretrained models can achieve slightly higher accuracy than
BERT-ps on DataCon2020 and EBSNN-dataset, their performance is noticeably weaker on the other three tasks.
On the website identification task under encrypted tunnels
(DataCon2021-p2), existing pre-trained models completely
fail, whereas BERT-ps still achieves an accuracy of 90%.
On the encrypted proxy classification task (DataCon2021-p1),
packet-length-sequence-based methods significantly outperform pre-trained models. Compared to DataCon2020 and
EBSNN-dataset, which only contain encrypted traffic with
outdated TLS versions, BERT-ps demonstrates a clear
advantage on the TLS 1.3 website identification task
(CSTNET-TLS1.3), achieving an accuracy of 97.5%. Experimental results indicate that the available byte-pattern in packet
content diminish as the encryption degree increases, leading
to the failure of approaches based on raw byte streams.
Consequently, methods based on packet sequence length are
more general for encrypted traffic analysis.
B. Robustness Analysis
We then conduct a detailed analysis of model’s robustness
using this dataset as a case study. We applied PA-curve and
PA-area as metrics for robustness analysis. Specifically, we
evaluate the impact of three common types of perturbation:
packet loss, packet re-transmission, and packet disorder. These
perturbations affect packet-length sequences but not packet
content due to the checksum and error correction in protocols.
Existing pre-trained models [14], [15], [17], [18] are not
suitable for the robustness analysis in this subsection. As
a result, we only compare BERT-ps with packet-lengthsequence-based methods, including AppScanner [3], ETC-PS
[8], FlowLens [5], FS-Net [9], and GraphDApp [10].
On DataCon2020, both BERT-ps and existing baselines
can achieve relatively high accuracy. Figure 4 illustrates the
PA-curve of the model under varying perturbation parameters.

10596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
T HE I DENTIFICATION R ESULTS OF BERT- PS AND BASELINES ON F IVE P UBLIC DATASET

Fig. 4. The PA-curve of BERT-ps and baselines under different types and intensities of network noise on DataCon2020. Each row in the figure corresponds
to a type of network noise, i.e., packet loss, packet retransmission, and packet disorder.
TABLE IV
T HE PA-A REA R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT I NTENSITIES OF N ETWORK N OISE ON DATAC ON 2020ETA

Furthermore, Fig. 5 also presents variations in the PA-area
metric across 3 types of network perturbation for all datasets.
1) Stronger Robustness Than Baselines: As can be seen
from Figure 4, the PA-curve of BERT-ps is farther to the right
and higher than baselines under various types and levels of

network noise. It indicates that our approach not only achieves
higher accuracy but also exhibits stronger robustness. Most
network flows are still correctly identified after perturbation.
As illustrated in Table IV, the PA-area value of our approach
decreases slower than existing methods as the network noise

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

10597

Fig. 5. The PA-area under different types and intensities of network noise on five public datasets.

increases. This phenomenon can also be observed across all
other datasets. Experimental results suggest that BERT-ps
is more resilient to network noise. Existing methods are
typically trained on labeled datasets, which tend to exhibit
lower levels of noise compared to network traffic in real-world
environments. As a result, models trained solely on clean
labeled data often perform poorly when exposed to network
traffic with noise. BERT-ps demonstrates stronger robustness
because it is pre-trained on large-scale real-world network
traffic with noise and obtains a stable and robust general
knowledge of network traffic.
2) Pre-Training
Can
Enhance
Robustness:
On
DataCon2020, although the fine-tuned model with pretrained parameters and the model trained from scratch can
achieve similar accuracy, they exhibit significant differences in
robustness. As shown in Figure 4, the PA-curve of BERT-ps
with SFT is shifted more to the right and upward compared to
that of the TFS model. It indicates that the pre-trained model
can increase the ∆p of the sample’s identification result
during evaluation. Additionally, as demonstrated in Table IV,
pre-training leads to a PA-area improvement up to 10%
under common network noise. Besides DataCon2020, this
phenomenon is also observed across all other datasets, which
is illustrated in Fig. 5. Experimental results demonstrate
that pre-training can enhance the model’s robustness against
network noises. The traffic data used for pre-training is
collected from real-world network environments with various
forms of network noise. During the pre-training process, the

model can learn generalizable patterns that remain robust
under diverse network noise conditions. This enables the
proposed method to maintain a relatively stable PA-area
under different network noises.
3) Robustness to Different Network Perturbation: We then
analyze the impact of the three types of network noise on
the model performance in more detail. As the packet loss
rate increases (Fig. 5a), the model’s performance gradually
declines. However, the performance degradation of BERT-ps
is notably less pronounced than without pre-training and other
existing methods. Compared with packet re-transmission and
disorder, packet loss has a stronger impact on the model’s
performance. For packet-length sequences, the high packet
loss rate leads to a decrease in tokens, which will reduce
the amount of information contained. Especially for “mouse
flows” with fewer packets, packet loss will interfere with the
identification results more severely. As illustrated in Fig. 5b,
packet re-transmission has virtually no effect on our method,
but it significantly degrades the performance of ETC-PS and
GraphDApp. For this perturbation, some packet-length tokens
will repeat consecutively but without disorder. Therefore,
methods with less sensitivity to token duplication can better
withstand packet re-transmission. Packet disorder also has a
little impact on our approach. As shown in Table IV, the
PA-area value of our approach is reduced by less than 2%
with perturbation rates from 0.1 to 0.6. The features based
on path signatures in ETC-PS are sensitive to the packet
order information. Similarly, the RNN-based packet-length

10598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 6. The PA-aera under different types and intensities of network noise on 5 public datasets. The plot of baselines in the figure corresponds to the
PA-area of the optimal baseline methods.
TABLE V
T HE H YPER -PARAMETER S ETTING OF BERT- PS

representations employed in FS-Net also exhibit strong dependence on packet order. As for BERT-ps, the self-attention
mechanism in the transformer encoder enables it to mitigate
the impact of out-of-order noise, offering improved robustness
to sequence irregularities. However, the performance of other
methods (except for Appscanner and FlowLens) degrades
more noticeably, which is also demonstrated in Fig. 5b.
Additionally, it is worth noting that the features extracted
by Appscanner and FlowLens are statistical features that are
independent of packet order, making them unaffected by this
perturbation. Consequently, as illustrated in Fig. 4, their PAcurves remain flat under packet disorder.
To analyze the impact of the pre-trained model’s parameter
scale on its robustness, we conducted tests on BERT-ps
models with varying scales. We used the PA-area as the
evaluation metric. The evaluated configurations include base,

middle, small, mini, and tiny, with their hyper-parameters
shown in Table V. Fig. 6 illustrates PA-area variations of pretrained BERT-ps with different scales across five datasets
under network noise. We also plotted the highest PA-area of
baselines as a reference for comparison.
4) Larger Parameter Scales Enhance Robustness: As
depicted in Fig. 6, the pre-trained model with larger
scale exhibits stronger robustness compared to that of
smaller-scale models. In general, as the size of model’s
parameters increases, the corresponding PA-area tends to
be higher, especially on DataCon2021-p2, EBSNN-dataset,
and CSTNET-TLS1.3. Notably, the tiny-scale pre-trained
models typically demonstrate PA-area values lower than
existing methods. It indicates that the advantages of pretraining become are evident only when model’s parameters
reach a certain scale. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 6, the
pre-trained BERT-ps typically exhibit superior robustness
compared to baselines when the parameter scale is larger than
BERT-small.
5) Pre-Training Is Better Than Data Augmentation: In
encrypted traffic analysis tasks, data augmentation is a common approach to enhance the model’s robustness [19], [64],
[65], [66], [67]. We compare the robustness improvement
performance of two training strategies, data augmentation
(DA) and pre-training with supervised fine-tuning (SFT). For
data augmentation, we add network noise to the training data
during supervised learning, including Υloss (0.2), Υretrans (0.2),
and Υdisorder (0.3).

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

10599

Fig. 7. The PA-area under different types and intensities of network noise on five public datasets using different training strategy for robustness improvement,
including data augmentation (DA) and pre-training with supervised fine-tuning (SFT).

The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7, in which we
also add the model trained from scratch (TFS) and the optimal
baseline as a reference. As can be seen from the figure, the data
augmentation strategy can improve the ability of the model to
reduce noise to a certain extent under the three perturbations.
However, its robustness is still weaker than that using the
pre-training strategy. It indicates that data augmentation alone
cannot substitute for the general knowledge learned from
real-world network traffic data during pre-training, which illustrates the effectiveness of the pre-training on the improving
model’s robustness. While data augmentation can enhance
model robustness by expanding the training distribution, it also
significantly increases the computational overhead of model
training due to the enlarged training set. In contrast, the pretraining strategy is more efficient and robust for improving
model robustness, as it leverages prior knowledge by loading
pre-trained parameters without increasing the training cost.

C. Time Efficiency
To assess real-world applicability, we evaluate the analysis
latency of BERT-ps and existing methods, which is illustrated
in Table VI. Experimental results indicate that BERT-ps can
process approximately 1,000 network flows in 0.59 seconds. It
shows that the latency of BERT-ps is higher than that of most
existing baselines. This higher latency is primarily attributed
to the model’s large number of parameters. As can be seen

TABLE VI
T HE A NALYSIS L ATENCY OF BASELINES AND BERT- PS W ITH
D IFFERENT PARAMETER S IZE

from Table VI, the model analysis delay increases with the
number of BERT-ps parameters increases.
In addition, the analysis process comprises two components:
feature extraction (FE) and model inference (MI). As illustrated in Table VI, their relative proportion varies significantly
across models. For AppScanner, ETC-PS, and GraphDApp,
feature extraction dominates the total latency, accounting for
over 95% of the overall analysis time. In contrast, BERTps exhibits significantly lower feature extraction time (about
0.07s/K), representing only 12% of its total analysis time.

10600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 8. The precision and efficiency of the model’s decision probability
estimation under different Monte Carlo sampling size (n).

Since the PA-curve is constructed based on the Monte Carlo
method, we tested the precision and efficiency of the model’s
decision probability estimation under different sampling sizes
(n). The target model we analyze is BERT-ps we proposed. We
randomly selected a network flow sample with pA = 0.8384
and pB = 0.1616 for testing.
As shown in Fig. 8, the increasing samples can improve
estimation precision but introduce a linear growth in time
consumption. Notably, the estimation result of the Monte Carlo
method begins to stabilize when the sample size exceeds 200.
It suggests that the computational cost incurred by larger
sample sizes does not scale proportionally with the gains in
estimation accuracy. Therefore, an excessively large Monte
Carlo sampling is not necessary for the construction of PAcurve. In practice, we set the Monte Carlo sample size to 1000,
which not only ensures the estimation precision of the model’s
decision probability but also makes the estimation process an
acceptable time delay (about 0.53s/sample). For large-scale
datasets, down-sampling can be employed to further reduce
computational overhead. Additionally, we also compute confidence intervals during the estimation process, which ensures
the predicted probability differences ∆ p̂ are not overestimated
relative to the true values. As a result, the evaluation results
of the model’s robustness have a high confidence level.
VII. D ISCUSSION
The PA-curve and PA-area are reasonable quantification of
model’s robustness for encrypted traffic analysis. We discuss
their advantages as follows:
• The model’s robustness only makes sense when it
accompanied by an acceptable accuracy. The PA-curve
simultaneously captures both the accuracy and robustness
of models, while the PA-area provides a quantitative
description of the PA-curve. A model can achieve a higher
PA-area value only when it exhibits both high accuracy
and strong robustness.
• The PA-curve and PA-area depict model’s robustness
based on the distribution of sample’s identification probability differences, providing a nuanced understanding of
robustness. They account for difference robustness across
samples, thereby measuring model’s robustness based on
the overall distribution of local robustness.
• The PA-curve and PA-area are model-agnostic and can
be applied to assess the robustness of any identification

model for encrypted traffic analysis, including both MLbased and DL-based models.
Through comprehensive robustness evaluations against traditional ML-based and DL-based approaches, we demonstrate
that models with large-scale pre-trained parameters not only
achieve high accuracy but also exhibit stronger robustness.
Generally, the model’s robustness improves with increasing scale of learnable parameters. Furthermore, pre-training
enhances robustness compared to models trained from scratch.
The pre-trained parameters have stabilized and exhibit strong
robustness. The fine-tuning process usually does not significantly adjust pre-trained parameters, which ensures the
model’s robustness to downstream tasks.
However, there are still some limitations to be addressed.
It is critical to acknowledge computational overhead as a
primary limitation of the robustness metric. In PA-curve and
PA-area, the computation of sample’s identification probability differences is implemented using Monte Carlo methods.
While increasing the number of samples can enhance the
precision of probability estimation, it concurrently incurs
significant computational cost with complexity O(n). Consequently, future work may explore optimization techniques
such as adaptive sampling, variance reduction, or quasi-Monte
Carlo methods to improve computational efficiency while
preserving estimation reliability. Additionally, although pretrained models can bring high accuracy with strong robustness,
they usually have large-scale parameters. The model size,
inference latency, energy consumption, and dependence on
dedicated GPU hardware limit their deployment in the realworld, especially on resource-constrained edge devices. Model
compression techniques are expected to maintain robustness
while improving deployment feasibility, including knowledge
distillation, pruning, and quantization.
While our experiments focused on three common impacts of
network noise (packet loss, retransmission, and disorder), we
acknowledge that real-world network conditions may involve
additional complexities such as mixed and non-uniform perturbations. Extending the robustness evaluation framework to
accommodate these real-world scenarios is a promising direction for future work. Moreover, future research should explore
architectural innovations to enhance the model’s robustness,
which BERT-ps does not consider. While larger pre-trained
models generally exhibit stronger robustness, their pre-training
process becomes increasingly challenging. Pre-training models
with large-scale learnable parameters require not only vast
amounts of training data and computational resources, but
also appropriate optimization techniques to make pre-training
loss converge. Consequently, the efficient pre-training of largescale models for encrypted traffic analysis is also crucial for
future work.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
Considering the lack of reasonable robustness metrics for
encrypted traffic analysis, in this paper, we design the PA-curve
based on identification probability differences to illustrate
the distribution of sample’s decision stability. PA-curve can
reflects model’s accuracy and robustness, simultaneously. By
computing the area under this curve, termed PA-area, we
enable a quantitative assessment of model’s robustness. Addi-

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

tionally, we propose a pre-trained packet-length sequence
model based on the BERT architecture for encrypted traffic
analysis and compare its performance with traditional MLbased and DL-based models trained from scratch. Besides
accuracy, we analyzed the robustness of the pre-trained model
and existing methods under three common network noise
conditions. Experimental results demonstrate that the pretrained model with large-scale parameters not only achieve
higher accuracy, but also exhibit superior resilience to network
noise compared to traditional ML-based and DL-based models
trained from scratch. Therefore, investigating models with
large-scale parameters for encrypted traffic analysis holds
significant practical relevance.

10601

Finally, we estimate the lower and upper bound (p and p) of
a success probability as follows:



α
α
; n − k, k + 1 = Fβ−1 1 − ; k + 1, n − k
p = 1 − Fβ−1
2

α

2 α
p = 1 − Fβ−1 1 − ; k, n − k + 1 = Fβ−1
; n − k + 1, k
2
2
(15)
B. Metrics About Accuracy
The fundamental goal of encrypted traffic analysis is to
identify network flows correctly and avoiding misidentification. Metrics about accuracy include accuracy and macro-F1 .
The accuracy is the proportion of correctly identified samples to total samples, which can be expressed as follows:

A PPENDIX

N

Acc =

A. Clopper-Pearson Interval
The binomial proportion confidence interval is calculated
from the outcome of a series of Bernoulli trials. When only the
experiment number n and the success number k are known, we
apply Clopper-Pearson method [57] to estimate the lower and
upper bound of a success probability p. The
 Clopper-Pearson
interval can be written as inf S ≤ , sup S ≥ with
n
n
αo
αo
, S ≥ ≡ p|P{X ≤ k} ≥
(9)
S ≤ ≡ p|P{X ≤ k} ≤
2
2
where 0 ≤ k ≤ n is the number of successes observed in the
sample and X is the binomial random variable with n trials
and probability of success p. The confidence level is 1 − α.
For binomial distribution X ∼ Bin(n, p), its cumulative
distribution function is defined as follows:
!
k
X
n i
p (1 − p)n−i .
(10)
Fbin (k; n, p) =
i
i=0

For beta distribution X ∼ B(n, p), its cumulative distribution
function is defined as follows:
Z
Γ(a + b) x a−1
t (1 − t)b−1 dt
(11)
Fβ (x; a, b) =
Γ(a)Γ(b) 0
where Γ(·) is the gamma function. The beta distribution is
the conjugate prior probability distribution for the binomial
distribution. Thus, the cumulative distribution function of a
beta distribution can be expressed in terms of the binomial
distribution with
Fbin (k; n, p) = Fβ (x = 1 − p; a = n − k, b = k + 1).

where n is the total number of samples, c(i) and c(i)
A are
respectively the true label and the prediction label of the
i-th sample, and I(·) is the indicator function.
In the binary case, there are four basic concepts: true
positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN) and
false negatives (FN). F1 score is defined as:
P·R
.
(17)
F1 = 2 ·
P+R
TP
TP
where P = T P+FP
is the precision and R = T P+FN
is the
recall rate. To generalize the binary case to multi-class, we
can adopt the macro-F1 assuming we have several one-vs-all
(OvA) classifier of each individual class. Therefore, the macroF1 is the average of the F1 scores of these classifier, which is
defined as follow:
1 X (c)
F1
macro-F1 =
(18)
|Y|
c∈Y

where F1(c) is the F1 -score of the classifier for c and Y is the
label space of network flows.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

−1
We define Fbeta
(·) is the inverse cumulative distribution
function (ICDF) of the beta distribution and

Fβ−1 (x; a, b) = 1 − Fβ−1 (1 − x; b, a).

(14)

(16)

i=1

(12)

We can apply binomial distribution to estimate the lower
bound p and the upper bound p of the success probability
p = nk . Moreover, they can also be presented in an alternate
format that uses quantiles from the beta distribution, which is
expressed as follows:
α
Fbin (k; n, p) = Fβ (1 − p; n − k, k + 1) = ,
2

α
Fbin (n − k; n, p) = Fβ 1 − p; k, n − k + 1 = 1 − . (13)
2

1 X (i)
I(cA = c(i) )
N

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic
with contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
Oct. 2016, pp. 35–46.
V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018.
D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
L. Yang et al., “Packet-sequence and byte-distribution is enough
for real-time identification of application traffic,” in Proc. IEEE
Intl Conf Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big Data Cloud
Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Social Comput. Netw.
(ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), Sep. 2021, pp. 1126–1134.
L. Yang, S. Fu, Y. Wang, K. Liang, F. Mo, and B. Liu, “DEV-ETA:
An interpretable detection framework for encrypted malicious traffic,”
Comput. J., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1213–1227, May 2023.

10602

[8]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[9] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[10] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[11] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
“EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
[12] L. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Liu, J. Huang, and S. Fu, “ExpMD: An explainable
framework for traffic identification based on multi-domain features,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 32nd Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2024,
pp. 1–10.
[13] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Industry-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU
K), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[14] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[15] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[16] Z. Hang, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Flow-MAE: Leveraging
masked AutoEncoder for accurate, efficient and robust malicious traffic classification,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
Defenses, Oct. 2023, pp. 297–314.
[17] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba:
Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct.
2024, pp. 1–12.
[18] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1–15.
[19] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification in diverse network environments with TCP-aware traffic
augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf. (China),
Jul. 2023, pp. 131–132.
[20] D. Shan, F. Ren, P. Cheng, R. Shu, and C. Guo, “Observing and
mitigating micro-burst traffic in data center networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Feb. 2020.
[21] A. Yu, H. Yang, K. K. Nguyen, J. Zhang, and M. Cheriet, “Burst traffic
scheduling for hybrid E/O switching DCN: An error feedback spiking
neural network approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 882–893, Mar. 2021.
[22] N. Geng, T. Lan, V. Aggarwal, Y. Yang, and M. Xu, “A multi-agent
reinforcement learning perspective on distributed traffic engineering,” in
Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–11.
[23] Y. Tian et al., “Traffic engineering in partially deployed segment routing
over IPv6 network with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1573–1586, Aug. 2020.
[24] M. Alfatafta, B. Alkhatib, A. Alquraan, and S. Al-Kiswany, “Toward
a generic fault tolerance technique for partial network partitioning,” in
Proc. 14th USENIX Symp. Operating Syst. Design Implement. (OSDI
20), 2020, pp. 351–368.
[25] Y. Yu et al., “Fault management in software-defined networking: A
survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 349–392, 1st
Quart., 2019.
[26] M. Reitblatt, N. Foster, J. Rexford, C. Schlesinger, and D. Walker,
“Abstractions for network update,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
Rev., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 323–334, Sep. 2012.
[27] N. Christensen, M. Glavind, S. Schmid, and J. Srba, “Latte: Improving
the latency of transiently consistent network update schedules,” ACM
SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 14–26, Mar. 2021.
[28] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of
machine learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021.
[29] M. Seo et al., “Heimdallr: Fingerprinting SD-WAN control-plane architecture via encrypted control traffic,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur.
Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 949–963.

[30] Z. Song et al., “I 2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., pp. 1–14, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10056861
[31] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., pp. 1–18, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10036003
[32] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
[33] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
L. Cavallaro, “INSOMNIA: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
N. Carlini, A. Demontis, and Y. Chen, Eds., New York, NY, USA: ACM,
Nov. 2021, pp. 111–122.
[34] Y. Li, B. Liang, and A. Tizghadam, “Robust online learning against
malicious manipulation with application to network flow classification,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2021,
pp. 1–10.
[35] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MANDA: On
adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[36] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
“MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network intrusion
detection system,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, Mar. 2023.
[37] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May 2025.
[38] S. Feghhi and D. J. Leith, “A web traffic analysis attack using only
timing information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 1747–1759, Aug. 2016.
[39] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[40] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[41] J. Li et al., “Packet-level open-world app fingerprinting on wireless
traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–18.
[42] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[43] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
Security), 2023, pp. 589–606.
[44] K. Wang et al., “BARS: Local robustness certification for deep learning
based traffic analysis systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2023, pp. 1–18.
[45] F. Wei, H. Li, Z. Zhao, and H. Hu, “xNIDS: Explaining deep
learning-based network intrusion detection systems for active intrusion
responses,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security),
2023, pp. 4337–4354.
[46] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[47] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
pp. 1–10.
[48] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[49] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic
classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, Aug. 2017, pp. 50–57.
[50] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
(IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[51] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples
for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2021, pp. 2327–2344.

YANG et al.: ROBUSTNESS MATTERS: PRE-TRAINING CAN ENHANCE THE PERFORMANCE OF ETA

[52] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level
relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, Nov.
2022, Art. no. 109309.
[53] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
Defenses, Oct. 2022, pp. 495–509.
[54] A. Wieland and C. M. Wallenburg, “Dealing with supply chain risks:
Linking risk management practices and strategies to performance,” Int.
J. Phys. Distribution Logistics Manage., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 887–905,
Nov. 2012.
[55] J. Cohen, E. Rosenfeld, and Z. Kolter, “Certified adversarial robustness
via randomized smoothing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
pp. 1310–1320.
[56] L. D. Brown, T. T. Cai, and A. DasGupta, “Interval estimation for a
binomial proportion,” Stat. Sci., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 101–133, May 2001.
[57] C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson, “The use of confidence or fiducial
limits illustrated in the case of the binomial,” Biometrika, vol. 26, no. 4,
pp. 404–413, Dec. 1934.
[58] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[59] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever,
“Improving language understanding by generative pre-training,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/
languageunsupervised/language understanding paper.pdf
[60] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
2017, arXiv:1711.05101.
[61] DataCon-Community. (2020). Datacon2020–Encrypted Malicious Traffic Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://datacon.qianxin.com/opendata/
openpage?resourcesId=6
[62] DataCon-Community. (2021). Datacon2021–Encrypted Proxy Traffic Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://datacon.qianxin.com/opendata/
openpage?resourcesId=10
[63] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu. (2022). CSTNet-TLS
1.3 Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
1BUo5TMRuXNvTqNYy0RLeHk4l4Q3BuzS%k
[64] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022, pp. 647–654.
[65] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website
fingerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023, pp. 1035–1049.
[66] X. Zhao et al., “Towards fine-grained webpage fingerprinting at scale,”
in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024,
pp. 423–436.
[67] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.

Luming Yang received the Ph.D. degree in
cyberspace security from the National University of
Defense Technology in 2025. He is currently an
Assistant Researcher with the Academy of Military
Science. His research interests include encrypted
traffic analysis, intrusion detection, network security,
and machine learning.

Lin Liu received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha, China, in 2020. Currently,
he is an Associate Professor with the College of
Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology. His research interests
include applied cryptography, privacy-preserving
machine learning, and encrypted network traffic
detection.

10603

Jun-Jie Huang (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree (Hons.) in electronic engineering and
the M.Phil. degree in electronic and information
engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China, in 2013 and 2015,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Imperial
College London (ICL), London, U.K., in 2019. From
2019 to 2021, he was a Post-Doctoral Researcher
with the Communications and Signal Processing
(CSP) Group, Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, ICL. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the College of Computer Science and Technology, National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China. His research
interests include the areas of model-based deep learning, computer vision, and
signal processing.

Jiangyong Shi was born in 1990. He received the
Ph.D. degree. He is currently an Associate Professor.
His research interests include networks and system
security.

Shaojing Fu received the Ph.D. degree in applied
mathematics from the National University of
Defense Technology in 2010. He is currently a
Professor with the College of Computer Science and
Technology, National University of Defense Technology. His research interests include cryptography
theory and information security.

Yongjun Wang received the Ph.D. degree in computer architecture from the National University of
Defense Technology in 1998. He is currently a
Professor with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, National University of Defense
Technology. His research interests include network
security and system security.

Jinshu Su (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in mathematics from Nankai University,
Tianjin, in 1985, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science from the National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, in 1988 and 2000,
respectively. He is currently a Professor with the
Academy of Military Science. His research interests
include internet architecture, network security, and
AI for networking.