Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Network and Computer Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

Research Paper

RT-APT: A real-time APT anomaly detection method for large-scale
provenance graph
Zhengqiu Weng a , Weinuo Zhang a , Tiantian Zhu b, Zhenhao Dou a , Haofei Sun b,
Zhanxiang Ye c,d,* , Ye Tian b
a

School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University of Technology, Wenzhou, 325035, China
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, 310023, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou Polytechnic, Wenzhou, 325035, China
d
Wenzhou Cyber Security and Protection Technology Research Center, Wenzhou, 325035, China
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling Editor: M. Atiquzzaman

Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) are prevalent in the field of cyber attacks, where attackers employ advanced
techniques to control targets and exfiltrate data without being detected by the system. Existing APT detection
methods heavily rely on expert rules or specific training scenarios, resulting in the lack of both generality and
reliability. Therefore, this paper proposes a novel real-time APT attack anomaly detection system for large-scale
provenance graphs, named RT-APT. Firstly, a provenance graph is constructed with kernel logs, and the WL
subtree kernel algorithm is utilized to aggregate contextual information of nodes in the provenance graph. In this
way we obtain vector representations. Secondly, the FlexSketch algorithm transforms the streaming provenance
graph into a sequence of feature vectors. Finally, the K-means clustering algorithm is performed on benign
feature vector sequences, where each cluster represents a different system state. Thus, we can identify abnormal
behaviors during system execution. Therefore RT-APT enables to detect unknown attacks and extract long-term
system behaviors. Experiments have been carried out to explore the optimal parameter settings under which RTAPT can perform best. In addition, we compare RT-APT and the state-of-the-art approaches on three datasets,
Laboratory, StreamSpot and Unicorn. Results demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms the state-ofthe-art approaches from the perspective of runtime performance, memory overhead and CPU usage.

Keywords:
APT attack
Provenance graph
Anomaly detection
Clustering analysis

1. Introduction
In the past decades, different from traditional attacks, a novel type of
attacks has become increasingly popular. These attacks are typically
carried out by organized and well-resourced attackers who employ slow
and low-profile techniques to compromise targets, often specific organizations, government agencies, or commercial enterprises, in order to
steal data without being detected by defense systems. Such activities are
referred to as Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs). APT attackers access
the networks of their target entities, using known application vulnerabilities, malware, spear-phishing, zero-day exploits, network downloads, watering hole attacks, etc. According to the “Global Advanced
Persistent Threat Mid-year Report 20231”, government sectors remain
primary targets of APT attacks, accounting for 30% of related worldwide incidents, followed by defense and military sectors with a 16%
share. APT attacks often operate stealthily. Attackers hide in the
compromised systems for extended periods, where they clandestinely
gather information, or conduct malicious operations. Currently, for
unknown APT attacks, there are significant challenges.
A significant amount of research has been conducted by numerous
experts and scholars on defending against APTs. Recent research points
out that Al techniques can be applied in the field of cybersecurity (Yu
et al., 2020).In the field of multi-agent systems, researchers have
explored cooperative fault-tolerant output regulation through adaptive
dynamic event-triggered mechanisms (Piskozub et al., 2021), In addition, the H ∞ controller synthesis technique (Kang et al., 2022) shows its
effectiveness when dealing with network systems with mixed attacks
and disturbances.which provides an important reference for our APT

* Corresponding author. School of Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou Polytechnic, Wenzhou, 325035, China.
E-mail addresses: derisweng@wzut.edu.cn (Z. Weng), limitixynuo@gmail.com (W. Zhang), ttzhu@zjut.edu.cn (T. Zhu), 221122120316@zjut.edu.cn (H. Sun),
wzynetwork@wzpt.edu.cn (Z. Ye), 2112012221@zjut.edu.cn (Y. Tian).
1
https://www.qianxin.com/threat/reportdetail?reportid = 295.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2024.104036
Received 2 May 2024; Received in revised form 10 August 2024; Accepted 24 September 2024
Available online 10 October 2024
1084-8045/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

detection system. However, APT attacks have different characteristics
from traditional attack patterns, and conventional detection systems
cannot effectively identify APT attacks. Previous research has focused on
analyzing system-originated data, but ignored two elements: generality
and reliability, which needs to be considered in our proposed APT
detection system. We detail these two elements in detail.

hard to train the detection models with high generalization, since
the diverse and numerous attack-related samples required in
training cannot be obtained from the low-frequency APT attaks.
In long-term attack scenarios, maintaining incremental system
behavior embeddings incurs significant costs and introduces the
concept drift problem, thus affecting detection reliability.

(1) Generality. APTs feature in their prolonged duration, lengthy
attack chains, high-level stealthiness, diverse techniques, etc.
Traditional single-point intrusion detection based countermeasures cannot effectively address them. For instance, to circumvent the attacks, the attackers can use traffic encryption for the
attack detection based on network traffic analysis (e.g., OWL
(Song et al., 2021), SH-LOT (Pan et al., 2018),MalPhase (Shi
et al., 2020)) and polymorphic variations and obfuscation of
attack samples for the attack detection based on software static
feature analysis (e.g., TRACER (Qu et al., 2017)). The dynamic
sandbox analysis (e.g., VPBox (Xiong et al., 2020), FlowCog
(Hossain et al., 2017)) is not suitable for client-side deployments
due to significant overhead, and attackers often employ
anti-detection techniques to mislead sandbox behaviors. Detection technologies based on hook tracking analysis (e.g., VAHunt
(Milajerdi et al., 2019a), Appshield (Zhu et al., 2023)) modify the
operating system kernel, which has been prohibited in Windows
operating systems because it can adversely affect system stability.
Although rule-based matching methods (e.g., CONAN (Feng
et al., 2003), SLEUTH (Maggi et al., 2008), HOLMES (Mutz et al.,
2007)) can detect many attacks, they heavily rely on predefined
rules or patterns, requiring extensive human involvement, and it
often proves that they does not work in unknown attacks, such as
0-day vulnerabilities. Moreover, the rule formulation in previous
detection systems has been cumbersome as the rules are designed
for specific environments. For instance, APTSHIELD (Manzoor
et al., 2016) formulates rules based on the contextual semantics
within the origin graph, constructs system event compression
strategies that maintain global dependencies and preserve attack
semantics, APTSHIELD also conducts APT attack response and
alerting through label transfer and aggregation of reduced data.
However, it is difficult for the system to detect new attacks and
adapt to changing environments.
(2) Reliability. APT attacks are characterized by their long duration
and strong concealment, and are hard to detect with context information and provenance graphs. Researchers face such issues as
a broad period of attacks, many attack-irrelevant events, and
attack-relevant problems. Existing short sequence detection systems (Han et al., 2020) (Kapoor et al., 2021) (Zengy et al., 2022)
perform poor in the long-term characteristics of APT attacks, as
they fail to model and analyze the long-term behaviors of the
system. Moreover, they are susceptible to evasion techniques and
prone to mimicry attacks. StreamSpot (Chen et al., 2022) and
Unicorn (Milajerdi et al., 2019b) use long sequence events for
anomaly detection and utilize automata to model how the system
state changes. PROV-GEM (Hassan et al., 2020) transforms
graphs into aggregated node embeddings to capture context information and adopts supervised learning for classification.
ShadeWatcher (Hassan et al., 2019) detects malicious interactions between entities by constructing a recommendation
system based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). APT-KGL
(Hossain et al., 2020) proposes a GNN-based intelligent APT
detection method combining heterogeneous graph embeddings
pre-training to reduce real-time processing complexity and
determine the detection scope through subgraph sampling.
However, existing graph-based modeling approaches have a
coarse granularity, requiring analysts to spend significant time
identifying malicious entities or events from subgraphs,which
may potentially contain thousands of nodes. Furthermore, it is

This paper proposes a novel real-time detection system for largescale provenance graph, named RT-APT. Firstly, this method begins
with the analysis of kernel logs from the operating system, which
meticulously record system calls and kernel module activities, providing
us with rich contextual information. We have chosen fine grained logging that captures subtle system behaviors such as file operations and
network connections laying the groundwork for the construction of the
provenance graph, The log data is collected through the SPADE tool and
then transformed by a preprocessing module into data structures for
nodes and edges, which are subsequently used to build the provenance
graph, In the provenance graph, each node represents an entity within
the system, such as a process, file, or network connection, while edges
denote the interactions or relationships between these entities. This
approach allows us to capture and represent the system’s execution
history and the complex causal relationships between entities in detail.
The rich contextual information of nodes in the provenance graph is
then aggregated with the WL subtree graph kernel algorithm, and these
nodes are transformed into vector representations. Secondly, the FlexSketch algorithm is employed to handle the streaming growth of the
provenance graph, generating a feature vector sequence that maintains
similarity and allows for incremental updates. Finally, all benign feature
vector sequences are clustered, and each cluster represents various
states of system execution. Anomalous behaviors in system execution are
detected by using the K-means clustering-based detection method.
In this study,the RT-APT system proposed offers advanced detection
capabilities for APT attacks across various domains in the real world.
The real-time anomaly detection mechanism is of significant importance
for enterprises in protecting sensitive data, for government agencies in
defending against cyber espionage activities, and for industrial control
systems in preventing potential disruptions. Furthermore, with the
proliferation of cloud computing services, the deployment of the RT-APT
system can provide an additional layer of security for cloud platforms,
safeguarding their user’s data and operations from the impact of
advanced persistent threats.
This paper makes the following contributions.
(1) We propose a novel real-time APT attack anomaly detection
system (RT-APT), which is different from existing APT detection
methods due to that RT-APT considers the balance between
generality and reliability. We construct a provenance graph first,
then use the WL subtree kernel algorithm (Hodge and Austin,
2004) and Flexsketch algorithm to obtain the contextual information of nodes and the streaming growth respectively, and
eventually analyze the long-term behaviors of the system.
(2) We cluster generated benign feature vector sequences where each
cluster represents different states of system execution. During
deployment, the K-means clustering-based detection method
matches all trained models and detects anomalies in system
execution. In this way we can detect the unknown attacks.
(3) The method proposed, RT-APT, can detect APT attacks with high
precision and accuracy, and achieves better detection results on
StreamSpot (Chen et al., 2022) dataset and Unicorn dataset.
2. Related work
In this section, to grasp the research status of APT detection, we
analyze the provenance graph based detection first and then focus on the
graph-based similarity comparison.

2

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

2.1. Provenance graph-based APT attack detection

machine-learning-based attack detection algorithm, Unicorn, which
automatically constructed normal system behaviors and use the clustering to detect abnormal behaviors. PROGRAPHER (Vishwanathan
et al., 2010) combines graph embeddings (graph2vec) with sequence
learning (TextRCNN), and AIRTAG (Papadimitriou et al., 2010) integrates BERT with a one-class support veetor machine (OC-SVM) to
achieve fine grained log detection, Alsajri and Steiti (Alshamrani et al.,
2019)present a proposed method for detecting intrusion in network
traffic using a hybrid approach, which combines a genetic algorithm and
an SVM algorithm. However, these methods still face challenges in
capturing the long-term behaviors and subtle patterns indicative of
APTs.
In comparison, anomaly detection based learning techniques have
the following advantages. (1) They can automatically extract potential
patterns and construct detection models from training datasets. (2) The
detection models can adapt to new environments through automatic
retraining or fine-tuning, overcoming the limitations in detecting
stealthy attacks.

In this subsection, we divide the provenance graph based APT attack
detection into heuristic-based detection (rule or pattern matching) and
anomaly-based detection.
Pattern-matching based APT attack detection (PM-APT). With
network security knowledge and threat intelligence, existing studies
manually design predefined rules to detect APT attacks. SLEUTH (Maggi
et al., 2008) was the first to reconstruct APT attacks by using provenance
graphs, marking audit log information, and constructing dependency
graphs. The attack scenarios were reconstructed through label analysis
and by defining rules to match threat attacks. Poirot (Berrada et al.,
2020), based on the previous work, introduced threat intelligence and
added an alignment algorithm for query graphs and provenance graphs.
APT attacks were detected by modeling threat detection as an imprecise
graph pattern matching (GPM) problem and matching specific subgraphs. Addressing the semantic loss, HOLMES (Mutz et al., 2007) integrated high-level scenario graphs (HSG) and the ATT&CK framework.
The former is designed to map the information from the low level to the
high level, and the latter is used to map the APT activity information to
the kill chain model. In this way, eventually benign or attack scenarios
were detected. In addition, PM-APT commonly faces dependency explosion, where many false dependencies result in alert fatigue for analysts. RapSheet (Zimba et al., 2020) and NODOZE (Akoglu et al., 2015)
incorporated alerts triggered by the matching of Tactics, Techniques,
and Procedures (TTP) rules. The former reduced the long-term system
log storage cost. In contrast,the latter effectively reduced the false positive rate and resolved alert fatigue through a path-based threat scoring
scheme. MORSE (Ding et al., 2012) employed label decay techniques to
mitigate the dependency explosion, that is, reducing the impact of potential threats with increasing propagation rounds. PM-APT is the
mainstream approach in the industry due to its high accuracy, strong
interpretability, and ease of deployment. However, there are still some
limitations. (1) In the rule-matching detection, the comprehensive
expertise in network security, operating systems and more is a high
design threshold for the security personnel. (2) With the release of
malware variants, there is no one-for-all formulated rules. The rules just
work for specific scenarios. When the scenarios change or new/unknown attacks emerge, they do not work well.
Anomaly-based attack detection. APT attacks can adapt to defense
techniques. Therefore, APT attackers can evade these defense methods
in such ways as creating new malware and modifying existing malware
to have unique signatures. Hodge and Austin (Liu et al., 2005) investigated different anomaly-based detection methods. They are categorized
into three types: unsupervised clustering, which processes data into
static distributions, accurately identifies the most remote points, and
labels them as potential anomalies; supervised classification, which
pre-labels data classified as normal or abnormal; and semi-supervised
detection, which models pre-classified data with normal or a small
amount of anomalous data. In the unsupervised clustering, when new
data arrives, the model is adjusted to improve outlier detection rates by
defining a normal boundary. Berrada et al. (Gao et al., 2010) extracted
boolean features from provenance graphs and treated APT attack
detection as an anomaly detection task. Unlike supervised classification,
it does not require abnormal training data but learns to recognize
anomalies. StreamSpot (Chen et al., 2022) was an anomaly detection
system that employs clustering to handle heterogeneous streaming
graphs. It extracted local graph features from individual node/edge labels through a breadth-first traversal and converted them into vectors
for classification. In a semi-supervised learning framework, Zimba et al.
(Perozzi et al., 2014) identified hosts exhibiting suspicious, malicious
activities, where features were extracted based on network clustering
algorithms, and a detection model was trained using both labeled and
unlabeled data. Han et al. (Milajerdi et al., 2019b) proposed a

2.2. Graph feature extraction
Graph similarity calculation aims to determine the degree of similarity between two graphs. It is crucial in various real-world applications, such as object tracking, recommendation systems, binary code
analysis, and similarity search. Additionally, it has significant implications in the network security as it helps defense systems issue timely
threat alerts and assists cybersecurity analysts in analyzing attacks
within a system. Meanwhile, similarity evaluation methods for anomaly
detection on network graphs have also become widespread. Akoglu et al.
(Berlingerio et al., 2012) classified graphs or subgraphs based on attributes (static vs dynamic, attribute-less vs attributed) to determine their
similarity for anomaly detection. Ding et al. (Gehani and Tariq, 2012)
identified malicious network sources in flow graphs using vertex-cutting
and employed similarity measures like centrality to detect
inter-community communication behaviors. Liu et al. (Park and Kim,
2021) constructed a software behavior graph to describe program
execution and used support vector machines based on closed and
frequent subgraphs to classify non-crash errors (logical errors that do not
cause program crashes). However, almost all the graph mining algorithms (Berlingerio et al., 2012) (Gehani and Tariq, 2012) (Park and
Kim, 2021) (Shervashidze et al., 2011) (Hunt et al., 2010) and graph
similarity measures (e.g., graph kernels (Weisfeiler and Leman, 1968))
are designed for static graphs. There are some challenges when they are
applied to similarity comparison on streaming graphs. Therefore,
Papadimitriou et al. (Baker and McCallum, 1998) proposed five approaches for similarity comparison on dynamic network graphs
(Chapelle et al., 1999). However, the aforementioned similarity evaluation methods (Berlingerio et al., 2012) (Gehani and Tariq, 2012) (Park
and Kim, 2021) (Shervashidze et al., 2011) (Baker and McCallum, 1998)
(Hunt et al., 2010) (Weisfeiler and Leman, 1968) primarily rely on the
existing graph structure and do not involve learning processes, making it
difficult to effectively utilize the features provided by nodes and edges.
To address this, NetSimile (Xu et al., 2018) leveraged distribution moments to aggregate egonet-based features (such as the number of
neighboring nodes) for clustering social networks. Nonetheless, most
methods for streaming graphs are often application-specific or only
applicable to homogeneous graphs.
In contrast to previous work, this paper utilizes a locality-sensitive
hashing (LSH) approach. It employs a consistent weighted sampling
algorithm to measure similarity based on the underlying distribution of
graph features.Furthermore, we employ the FlexSketch method to efficiently and rapidly generate compact and fixed-size feature representations to address the continuously growing dynamic graphs, thus
maintaining graph similarity in a streaming environment.

3

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Fig. 1. The architecture of APT attack detection system based on provenance graph.

between them can be established.

3. Systematic design
The proposed RT-APT consists of three modules, as shown in Fig. 1.
(1) In the data acquisition and processing module, the SPADE (Indyk and
Motwani, 1998) is a tool used for Linux system to collect the kernel-level
logging data, and then Preproccess transforms the log data into the data
structure. (2) In the graph feature extraction module, we introduce how
to generate histograms using the WL subtree graph kernel algorithm
which aggregates the contextual information of nodes. The histograms
are incrementally updated when new edges arrive. Then a summary
graph generation algorithm based on FlexSketch (Philbin and Zisserman, 2008) produces a fixed-size feature sequence (graph sketch) representing the evolving histogram. (3) In the real-time anomaly detection
module, the K-means clustering anomaly detection algorithm is used to
compare the summary graph of the current system with all trained
normal models to determine if there is any abnormal behavior. Finally,
we illustrate the working process through a real attack case.

3.2. Graph feature extraction
3.2.1. Streaming histogram construction
In this paper, we take the WL subtree graph kernel algorithm as a
graph embedding technique for the provenance graphs. This algorithm
can rapidly and efficiently construct a histogram representing the entire
history of system executions. The histogram is a counting statistical
structure where each element corresponds to a node in the provenance
graph. The value of each piece represents to what degree the complex
contextual information aggregates, including causal relationships between objects, subjects, and activities, involving the corresponding node
and all its neighboring nodes (Lü and Zhou, 2011). Furthermore, each
element in the histogram describes a substructure of the graph and
considers heterogeneous labels attached to nodes and edges and the
temporal order of these edges.
The WL subtree graph kernel algorithm is a one-dimensional variant
of the Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test (Rajaraman and Ullman,
2011). The key idea of this algorithm is to expand node labels based on
the ordered set of labels from neighboring nodes (e.g., those sorted according to the logical timestamps of neighboring nodes) and compress
these expanded labels into new shortened labels. These two steps are
repeated until the iteration reaches a predetermined maximum value n.
We brielly compare the W subtree kernel with other prominent
kernels like the random walk kernel and shortestpath kernel. The
random walk kernel, while useful for stochastic similarity measures,
may overlook the deterministic causal structures inherent in kernel logs.
The shortestpath kernel excels at identifying topological similarities but
may not sufficiently distinguish the nuanced differences inthe execution
context of system activities. We conducted a series of benchmarks to
compare the performance of these algorithms on graphs of different
sizes, The results show that while all algorithms perform well on smallscale graphs, the WL subtree kernel algorithm still maintains high efficiency and accuracy on large-scale graphs.The WL subtree kernel’s
iterative label compression technique adeptly encapsulates the causal
and contextual depth of provenance graphs making it an optimal choice
for our purposes.

3.1. Kernel-level log data collection and processing
The data collection tool needs to meet the following three requirements. (1) In APT scenarios, it is essential to ensure the security and
integrity of information flow capture. APT attacks are insidious, and
attackers often eliminate their traces in the system. Therefore, the collector must capture all system activities. (2) The collector must have
long-term stability to resist persistent APT threats. (3) Data collection
and transmission must be fast enough to achieve real-time detection.
Therefore, in the data collection, we choose SPADE.
SPADE can collect two types of data structures: node-based and edgebased. For node-based data structures, it is necessary to cover attributes
such as the type and properties of each node. The relationships (operations) between nodes are associated via the edge-based data structure.
For edge-based data structures, a single edge represents an event. Edgebased data structures capture various relationships between nodes,
enabling the association of two nodes that may be far apart. This is
crucial for uncovering covert behaviors in APT attacks. During the
construction of the provenance graph, entity nodes (subjects, objects)
can be linked based on the edge-based data, and thus connections
4

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

2011). Subsequently, these nodes are classified according to their
expanded labels, which describe the R-hop neighborhood information of
each node. These expanded node labels are constructed through iterative label propagation. For every node in the provenance graph, we take
as input all node labels, incoming edge labels to each node, and source
node labels for all the edges. For each node, a new label is then
outputted, representing the aggregation of all input labels, and this
process is repeated. The entire process is repeated R times to construct
R-hop neighborhood labels. Accordingly, the provenance graph is represented as a histogram structure. If two graphs have similar distributions on similar label sets, they are considered equal.

Using a designated labeling function, the WL subtree graph kernel
algorithm first assigns specific labels to each node. Then, it calculates
the frequency each label occurs in the graph, which forms a histogram
vector. Next, a hash-based compression method is employed to transform the histogram vector into a fixed-size summary graph, which
measures the similarity between different graphs. Finally, a clustering
algorithm is applied to group the summary graphs, capturing behavioral
changes during the execution of system and forming an evolutionary
model. Fig. 2 illustrates these steps with an example. In step 1, the
numbers 1–5 represent the number of labels assigned to each node. In
each iteration, the labels from neighboring nodes are aggregated onto
the current node, forming a set structure (step 2). However, the large
number of neighboring nodes results in the increase of the length of the
recent label, leading to insufficient storage space. Therefore, the
expanded labels need to be compressed through a relabeling method,
where a new label is generated by the labeling function (step 3). Finally,
for a node, the relabeled label becomes the new label after one iteration
(step 4).
The WL subtree graph kernel algorithm has a time complexity of O
(k*|E|), ensuring fast and efficient graph computation. Here, k represents the total number of iterations, and |E| denotes the total number of
edges. Specifically, in step 2, defining a multiset for all nodes requires an
O(|E|) operation. In step 3, sorting each multiset can be achieved by
using counting sort (an implementation algorithm of bucket sort) since
the range of multiset elements is limited, which is suitable for counting
sort. The time complexity of this step is O(|E|). Subsequently, compressing the expanded labels requires a time complexity of O(|E|).
To further analyze the scalability of the algorithm, we conduct performance tests on graphs of different sizes to evaluate the efficiency of
the algorithm when dealing with large scale datasets, We find that the
computation time of the algorithm grows linearly as the graph size increases.which indicates its good scalability, However, on large-scale
graphs, reasonable parameter selection and optimization become
crucial in order to maintain system efficiency, For example, for graphs
with millions of nodes and edges, we may need to adjust the number of
iterations k to balance accuracy and computational cost.
This paper utilizes the WL subtree graph kernel algorithm to
construct a histogram representation of the provenance graph. In the
provenance graph, each node captures the surrounding graph structural
information, including complex contextual information about causal
relationships between objects, subjects, and activities (Lü and Zhou,

3.2.2. Graph Sketches Generation method based on FlexSketch
Different from traditional histogram-based similarity (Sivic and
Zisserman, 2003) (MacQueen et al., 1967) (Yadav and Rao, 2015), this
paper proposes a graph sketch based method which uses FlexSketch
(Philbin and Zisserman, 2008) to generate fixed-size vector representations of streaming histograms that are continuously updated and
preserve the similarity between histograms. Measuring the similarity
between streaming histograms is not easy because the number of histogram elements is unknown and constantly changes. Additionally, the
underlying distribution of graph features is essential to measure the
similarity of histograms rather than absolute counts. To this end, previous research has attempted to combine enumeration and manual
feature engineering methods to pre-enumerate all possible histogram
elements. However, given the potentially large number of nodes and
edge labels, the resulting histogram data structure becomes sparse due
to the multi-label provenance graph and a large number of neighborhood iterations.
This paper utilizes Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Jacob et al.,
2008), a consistent weighted sampling-based approach to achieve. It
leverages histogram normalization and generalized min-max (Jaccard)
similarity to approximate histograms. Jaccard similarity (Kyrola et al.,
2012) has been successfully applied to solve various real-world tasks
based on machine learning, such as social network analysis (Friedman,
1997), text mining [54], and image processing [55]. The similarity between two graphs can be effectively computed by projecting their
high-dimensional histogram representations into a lower-dimensional
space. Specifically, the LSH method is a distribution over a family Ϝ of
hash functions operating on a collection of objects. For two objects, m
and n:

Fig. 2. Example of one-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test.
5

Z. Weng et al.

Ph∈F [h(m) = h(n)] = sim(m, n)

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

range of K values and identified the ‘elbow’ point where the rate of
decrease sharply changes, suggesting an optimal K that balances the
number of clusters with their cohesion and separation.
Although K-means is a basic clustering technique, Sakirin and Asif
[57] have further explored the adaptability of K-means in dynamic environments and its potential to improve complex threat detection, and
these insights can strengthen the theoretical foundation of our approach.
Additionally, a sub-model is created for each training instance to capture
the variations in the execution state during the runtime. The final model
comprises sub-models from provenance graphs of all training data. By
modeling the sub-models, the final model learns the changing behaviors
at multiple time points. During the deployment detection, the anomaly
detection follows the same streaming paradigm described in Subsection
3.2.1: periodically creating histograms and generating graph sketches.
We compare a given graph sketch with all the sub-models learned in the
training and then fit it into the clusters of each sub-model. Assuming
monitoring starts when system starts up and tracks the system state
transitions in each sub-model, a graph sketch must match with one of the
current states or a state within a sub-model. Otherwise, it is considered
an anomaly. Therefore, this paper can detect two types of abnormal
behaviors: those that do not fit into existing clusters and those that
represent invalid transitions between clusters.
There are diverse APT attack methods, and attackers often exploit
zero-day vulnerabilities. It is difficult for the detection system to
establish models for all attack behaviors. Therefore, this paper adopts a
modeling approach based on normal behaviors. When two system states
are similar, their corresponding feature vectors are similar. During the
attack detection, we can calculate the distance between the feature
vector of the current system state and the cluster center. Any behavior
that exceeds a threshold distance determined by the training data of the
model is considered an anomaly.
Furthermore, we explored alternative clustering algorithms to assess
their comparative advantages over K- means. The DBSCAN algorithm
[58], which does not require a predefined number of clusters and can
handle noise in the data, was considered for its ability to identify outliers
and discover clusters of arbitrary shapes, Hierarchical Clustering[59]
was also examined for its ability to generate a dendrogram that visually
represents the hierarchical structure of clusters.However, its computational complexity can be a limiting factor for large datasets, (Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM)[60]。offer a soft-clustering approach, allowing
data points to belong to multiple clusters with certain probabilities,
which can be beneficial in cases where clear cluster boundaries are not
present, Nonetheless, the fitting process of GMMs can be computationally intensive and requires careful selection of the number of
components.
Each clustering algorithm has its unique merits and is suited to
different scenarios. The choice of the appropriate algorithm hinges on
the characteristics of the data and the specific requirements of the
analysis.

(1)

where h ∈ ϵ,h represents histogram elements, ϵ represents the set of
histogram elements, and sim(m, n) is a similarity function defined on the
sets of objects. This paper adopts the normalized min-max similarity to
measure the similarity between two histogram vectors, as shown in
Equation (2), where a and b represent the units of the histograms.
)
(
∑
∑
(
)
min Hha , Hhb ∑
( a b ),
Simmin− max Ha , Hb = ∑ h∈ϵ
Ha = 1,
Hb = 1
(2)
h∈ϵ h
h∈ϵ h
max
H
,
H
h∈ϵ
h
h
Moreover, FlexSketch, generating graph sketches in this paper, can
also address the concept drift. It processes streaming data dynamically,
and decides when to forget the old data and constructs a new statistical
model by measuring the difference between the current model and the
recently sampled data. It can use minimal memory to estimate the
probability density function (PDF) with a high speed and precision for
both stationary (i.e., no concept drift) and non-stationary (i.e., concept
drift) data streams.
Specifically, let S denote the data structure of the FlexSketch
framework, which is composed of the latest data stream and statistical
models of multiple versions denoted as M. It can be expressed as follows:
S = {Q, M1, ..., MNM, n1, ..., nNM }

(3)

The buffer Q represents the latest data set provided by the input data
stream, and Mi denotes the i th histogram. We assume that the total
number of histograms is greater than 2, that is, NM ≥ 2, and ni represents the number of data points used for updating Mi,A new histogram is
constructed once significant changes are detected in the data stream.
Therefore, the histograms within the data structure are created at
different time points. According to that the convention M1 is the most
recently added, if MNM is the oldest, indicating that Mi+1 has undergone more updates than Mi,then ni+1 > ni. Each histogram consists of a
set of disjoint intervals called buckets, denoted as Ij, and each bucket has
a frequency count mj, where j = 1, …, NB. Therefore, M can be represented as:
M = {I1, ..., INb, m1, ..., mNB }

(4)

Assumed that FlexSketch can keep its stability and tolerate temporary linear outliers without changing the concept of data stream, it can
achieve low computational overhead and high throughput, which is
crucial for processing streaming data.
3.3. APT anomaly detection method based on clustering
Given graph sketches and a similarity measure, clustering is a
commonly-utilized anomaly detection method to identify outliers. This
paper leverages the capability of graph sketches to handle the streaming
to create a model that captures normal variations in system behaviors. It
is of paramount importance that the benign model is established during
the training rather than the deployment process. In the deployment,
building a dynamic model can lead to model poisoning after the prolonged APT attacks, significantly reducing accuracy.
A sequentially ordered feature sequence is created in the training to
represent all benign behaviors generated within a complete system
execution cycle. Then the K-means [56] algorithm clusters the graph
sketches sequence, and the optimal value of K depends on the silhouette
coefficient. The resulting K clusters represent the K elemental states of
the system execution, such as the startup state, initialization state, stable
state, and so on.
To ascertain the optimal number of clusters (K), we employed
Silhouette Analysis, a statistical method that quantifies the similarity of
an object to its own cluster compared to other clusters, This approach
provides a measure of how close each point in one cluster is to the points
in the neighboring clusters, with higher Silhouette coefficients indicating better defined clusters, We plotted the Silhouette coefficients for a

3.4. Case analysis
In this subsection, we illustrate the proposed method, RT-APT, using
a real attack case. Given a provenance graph, rectangles represent processes, ellipses represent files, and diamonds represent networks.
Fig. 3 shows specific attack cases. This attack scenario is a Webshell
attack from Apache The victim host has port 80 open for web services
(time points 1–3). In the web service, user-uploaded files are stored in
var/www/html/uploads/shell.php. However, a file upload vulnerability
exists, allowing users to upload any type of files and access it (time point
4). Consequently, an attacker scans for this vulnerability and uploads a
Trojan file, establishing a connection and successfully obtaining a
Webshell (time points 5–8). However, the acquired Webshell only has
www-data user privileges, which are insufficient for the attacker’s need.
Therefore, the attacker performs an elevation-of-privilege operation.
During further infiltration, the attacker discovers that the administrator
6

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Fig. 3. The provenance graph of real attack cases.

periodically uses a cleanup.sh script to clear the folder where uploaded
files are stored, as specified in the/etc/crontab file. By examining this
script file, it is found that anyone has the permission to read and write.
Thus, the attacker injects malicious code into this script file to gain
reverse shell access (time points 9–16). Subsequently, the attacker begins to listen and wait for the administrator to execute the script file
(time point 17), thereby acquiring administrator privileges. By running
commands, the attacker identifies that the administrator belongs to the
root group and possesses all the necessary permissions for the attacker’s
activities. Using the administrator’s shell, the attacker can modify/etc/
crontab and/etc/sudoers for persistent control (time points 24–38).
Afterwards, the attacker can read valuable files on the host (time points
39–40) and send them to the organization’s system via network transmission (time points 22, 41).
According to (Xiong et al., 2020), the ultimate goal of an APT attack
is to steal sensitive information or cause damage. Therefore, during the
attack, there are some common behavioral characteristics, such as
executing sensitive commands, reading sensitive files, and transmitting
sensitive data. These covert attack behaviors are rare in normal scenarios and can be learned and represented by the WL subtree graph
kernel algorithm. Moreover, the emergence of these new operations
(nodes) leads to changes in the underlying distribution of statistical
features in the provenance graph learned from previous representations.
To address the concept drift in streaming graphs, the FlexSketch graph
sketching method is employed. Although this method reduces the influence of the old data on the current provenance graph, and no matter
how far the event (behavior) occurred in time from the current system’s
execution state (time point 39), as long as it has a causal relationship
with the most recently occurring operation (node) (e.g., the process ”sh”
associated with time point 39), the event and its neighborhood information will have an unreserved impact on the current features of
provenance graph. Therefore, RT-APT can better differentiate between
attack behaviors and normal behaviors, and separate anomalous provenance graphs from normal ones in the vector space.

4. Experiments and results
We conducted experiments to evaluate the accuracy and efficiency of
RT-APT. Our evaluation focused on addressing the following research
questions.
(1) What should the number of hops (k-hop), sketch graph size
(sketch-size), update triggering Interval (Interval), and decay rate
(α) of the sketch graph be if our proposed detection system performs best?
(2) How does our proposed detection system perform on the Lab,
StreamSpot, and Unicorn datasets, respectively?
(3) How is our system superior toStreamSpot and Unicorn?
(4) What is the runtime performance of our proposed detection
system?

4.1. Experimental datasets
The experimental data in this paper consists mainly of the Laboratory
Dataset, StreamSpot Dataset, and Unicorn Dataset. Specifically, the
optimal parameters were determined by analyzing the Laboratory
Dataset. At the same time, the StreamSpot Dataset and Unicorn Dataset
were used to compare RT-APT and existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods.
4.1.1. Laboratory dataset
In this paper, the laboratory dataset, primarily used to determine the
optimal parameters for the experiments, can be grouped into an attack
dataset and a benign dataset. Both of them were collected via the SPADE
tool in a controlled laboratory environment. There are two teams
involved in the experiments: defense team and attack team. The defense
team was responsible for collecting audit data and detecting attacks
from Linux platforms, including three hosts with Ubuntu 16.04
7

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

operating systems. The attack team was responsible for detecting vulnerabilities in the operating systems and carrying out attacks on the
target systems. Additionally, the attack team produced benign background activities such as web browsing and document editing to simulate normal system behaviors.

Table 2
Laboratory benign dataset characteristics.

(1) Attack Dataset. We designed three APT attack scenarios, as shown
in Table 1. APT datasets, T-1, T-2, and T-3 are generated by
simulating real-world scenarios in the laboratory. Each group
records all the activities performed by the system within a 24-h
period.
To simulate APT attacks, the design of the attack path in the data
collection followed a typical network kill chain model. This model
consists of approximately seven stages, namely, reconnaissance (identifying the target and exploring its vulnerabilities), weaponization
(designing backdoors and penetration plans), delivery (delivering the
weapon), exploitation (triggering vulnerabilities on the victim’s system), installation (installing backdoors or malicious software), command and control (C&C) (issuing remote commands to the victim), and
actions on target (taking actions against the target) (Yadav and Rao,
2015).
To collect the data set T-1, we simulated a Webshell attack on the
Apache web server. The details of T-1 have already been mentioned in
Section 3.4, so we will not repeat them here.
To collect the data set T-2, we simulated a remote access Trojan
attack on phishing websites. In this attack, the attacker leveraged the
phishing website to entice the administrator to click a malicious link.
Subsequently, the Trojan file was downloaded onto the victim’s host.
The attacker then monitored and waited for the administrator to execute
the Trojan file, gaining ordinary user privileges. The subsequent privilege escalation was similar to that described in dataset T-1. Once privileges were elevated, the attacker modified sensitive files, establishing
persistent control and exfiltrating valuable files and user information
from the compromised system.
To collect the data set T-3, we simulate a fileless attack on a
vulnerable program. In this attack, the attacker discovered a special
service on port 29273 of the victim’s host. This service had a vulnerability that the attackers exploited through string overflow to gain user
privileges. Subsequently, the attacker crafted a script to trigger a string
overflow, and eventually achieved the fileless attacks. As a result, the
attacker obtained the user privileges associated with running the
vulnerable service. The subsequent attack is the same with that in
dataset T-1.

Dateset

Time
(h)

Source
Systems

Tools

Data
Sources

Attack Descriptions

B-1

24

SPADE

Laboratory

B-2

24

SPADE

Laboratory

B-3

24

SPADE

Laboratory

no data collection
operations
wget downloads,
software upgrades
service startups

B-4

24

SPADE

Laboratory

B-5

24

Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04

SPADE

Laboratory

file operations, script
writing
website browsing,
chatting, or email
sending

necessary to collect benign scenario data as many as possible to avoid
false positive alerts generated due to system behaviors that do not
perform in training.
Table 3 shows the statistical results obtained after we preprocessed
all the obtained benign and attack data. The first column of the table
represents the dataset label, the second column represents the number of
provenance graphs in the dataset, the third column represents the
average number of nodes in the graph, the fourth column represents the
average number of edges, and the last column represents the current
dataset size.
4.1.2. StreamSpot dataset
The StreamSpot dataset, collected by the SystemTap kernel tool
(Jacob et al., 2008), is publicly available only in preprocessed format. As
shown in Table 4, it consists of one drive-by download attack scenario
and five benign host activity scenarios, i.e., watching YouTube,
browsing CNN, downloading files, viewing emails, and playing games.
Each scenario was run 100 times, resulting in 100 graphs. The attack
scenario involves downloading files from a malicious URL, exploiting
Flash vulnerabilities, and gaining root access to the host. Table 4 provides a summary of this dataset. By analyzing these dataset, we notice
that each benign graph in the dataset has about 173K edges on average,
while the attack graph has about 28K edges on average (Han et al.,
2020).
4.1.3. Unicorn Dataset
Unicorn is a machine learning based attack anomaly detection algorithm on provenance graphs, and capable of automatically constructing system behavior models. Firstly, the provenance graph, which
describes system behaviors, is transformed into a sequence of feature
vectors. The feature vectors are then clustered to generate system states.
Subsequently, the changes of system states are described with automaton models. An automaton model is established for each normal
sequence, and during testing, the current state is examined for detection.
Unicorn is designed with two APT attack scenarios and benign scenarios as shown in Table 5, and there is a certain level of similarity
between the benign and attack scenarios. The two attack scenarios and
the benign scenario are analyzed separately, and the results are shown in
Table 5. Unicorn simulated two APT supply chain attacks (SC-1 and SC-

(2) A benign dataset. This paper presents five benign scenarios as
shown in Table 2. Benign datasets B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and B-5 are
generated in a laboratory environment to simulate the real work
of enterprise employees. Each dataset records all activities performed by the system within 24 h.
We regarded as benign scenarios normal system activities, such as
writing files and scripts with the vim command, downloading datasets
and resources (including the third-party libraries), upgrading software
packages and so on. Since RT-APT is based on anomaly detection, it is

Table 3
Characteristics of the Laboratory dataset.

Table 1
Laboratory dataset features attack.
Dateset

Time
(h)

Source
Systems

Tools

Data
Sources

Attack Descriptions

T-1

24

SPADE

Laboratory

T-2

24

SPADE

Laboratory

T-3

24

Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04
Ubuntu
16.04

SPADE

Laboratory

Apache Webshell
attack
Phishing website
Trojan attacks
Fileless attack

8

Dateset

Graphs

Avg. nodes

Avg. edge

Dateset Size(GiB)

T-1
T-2
T-3
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
B-5

20
20
20
100
100
100
100
100

132457
162587
86785
8647
87553
61867
17300
10758

1068953
1141039
958924
41228
451863
369252
104260
62543

15.57
16.69
13.87
3.49
31.01
29.21
7.79
5.47

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Table 4
Characteristics of the StreamSpot dataset.
Scenario

Graphs

Avg. nodes

Avg. edge

Dateset Size(GiB)

YouTube
Gmail
Downloading
VGame
CNN
Attack

100
100
100
100
100
100

8292
6827
8831
8637
8990
8891

113229
37382
310814
112958
294903
28423

0.3
0.1
1
0.4
0.9
0.1

Table 5
Characteristics of the Unicorn dataset.
Dateset

Label

Graphs

Avg. nodes

Avg. edge

Dateset Size(GiB)

SC-1

Benign
Attack
Benign
Attack

125
25
125
25

265424
257156
238338
243658

975226
957968
911153
949887

64
12
59
12

SC-2

Fig. 4. The influence of parameter k-hop.

the highest, implying the best detection performance. However,
when k-hop exceeds 3, the captured contextual information may
become irrelevant and unintentionally mask potential attacks,
leading to a decline in detection effectiveness.
(2) The parameter ”sketch-size” represents the size of the summary
graph obtained by taking the growing histogram as a fixed-size
sketch. A larger sketch-size allows the graph sketches to contain
more information about the streaming updates of the histogram,
thereby reducing errors in normalizing the maximum and minimum similarity and improving the detection precision, recall, and
accuracy. The influence of the sketch-size is shown in Fig. 5. We
can find that our method performs best when the sketch-size is set
to 2000. When the value of sketch-size exceeds 2000, it is influenced by the dimensional factors in the clustering detection
(Friedman, 1997), leading to a decline in detection performance.
(3) ”Interval of Sketch Generation” represents the condition for
triggering updates of the provenance graph in a streaming environment. Typically, the Interval value can indicate the number of
newly added edges or nodes. In this paper, we first make the
Interval represent the number of edges. The influence of the Interval size is shown in Fig. 6. A smaller Interval makes the adjacent provenance graphs appear more similar, resulting in a higher
false negative count and lower recall and accuracy. Conversely,
when the Interval is too large, the granularity of changes between
the provenance graphs would become great, making it difficult to
highlight the attack behaviors and thus causing the adjacent
graphs to appear similar as well. As shown in Fig. 6, the Interval
value should be set to 3000. Similarly, if we make the Interval
represent the number of nodes, the optimal Interval* value
should be set to 500 as shown in Fig. 7.
(4) The decay rate (α) represents the gradual forgetting of old data in
the provenance graph with a decay rate of α. The gradual
forgetting method helps the detection system to focus on the

2) using a Continuous Integration (CI) approach. It utilized CamFlow to
capture the provenance of the entire system, including background
activities.
4.2. Experimental results and analysis
4.2.1. Experimental environment
The experiments in this paper were conducted on a server running
Ubuntu 16.04. The server is equipped with an Intel Xeon E5-2680 v4
CPU with 14 cores clocked at 2.4 GHz, 128 GB of RAM, and four NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 2080Ti GPUs. The real-time detection algorithm proposed
in this paper is implemented using C++ and Python. We analyzed the
system log data of approximately 150 GB. GraphChi (Kyrola et al., 2012)
was employed to make efficient graph computation.
4.2.2. Experimental evaluation index
RT-APT takes a binary classification for benign and attack samples.
Therefore, in this paper, we have four metrics: TP (true positive), representing the number of attack samples correctly classified; FP (false
positive), representing the number of attack samples mistakenly classified; TN (true negative), representing the number of benign samples
correctly classified; and FN (false negative), representing the number of
benign samples mistakenly classified.
Accordingly, to classify the samples, we get the following evaluation
metrics:
precision =
recall =

TP
TP + FP

TP
TP + FN

(5)
(6)

accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(7)

F − score =

2 × precision × recall
precision + recall

(8)

4.2.3. Parameter configuration
In this paper, we use four important parameters from which we can
find how our method performs and when it performs best.
(1) The parameter ”k-hop” in the provenance graph denotes the
neighborhood size of each node. A larger k-hop indicates that the
current model captures a larger size of neighborhood, thereby
incorporating more contextual information. The influence of the
k-hop size on the detection is illustrated in Fig. 4. We can find that
when k-hop is set to 3, all the precision, recall, and accuracy are

Fig. 5. The influence of parameter sketch-size.
9

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Fig. 6. The influence of parameter Interval.
Fig. 9. The PR curve of experimental results.

used as an evaluation metric, where a larger area indicates a better
overall classification across different threshold values.
4.2.5. Precision experiment
This paper compares our proposed RT-APT with existing detectors on
three datasets: the laboratory dataset, the StreamSpot dataset, and the
Unicorn dataset.
On the laboratory dataset, this paper conducts experiments by using
80% of the total 500 benign graphs for training. The remaining 20% of
the benign graphs combined with 60 attack graphs are for testing. In the
experiments, the proposed method is configured with optimal parameters: k-hop = 3, sketch-size = 2000, and Interval = 3000.
The experimental results are shown in Table 6,and our proposed RTAPT method based on the WL subtree kernel algorithm outperforms the
existing detection methods in terms of precision, recall, and F-score.
On the StreamSpot dataset, this paper conducts experiments by using
80% of the total 500 benign graphs for training. The remaining 20% of
the benign graphs combined with 100 attack graphs are for testing.
Similarly, the proposed method is configured with optimal parameters:
k-hop = 3, sketch-size = 2000, and Interval = 3000.
The results on the StreamSpot dataset shown in Table 7 indicate that
the proposed method is more suitable for APT attack detection on the
StreamSpot dataset. This is because it incorporates multi-hop graph
exploration when aggregating neighboring node information and utilizes an automaton modeling strategy to model normal behaviors.
Then we compare our evaluation metrics with the Unicorn (Han
et al., 2020) detector on the Unicorn dataset. The experiments involve
randomly dividing 125 benign graphs into 5 groups for 5-fold
cross-validation. Specifically, each training set consists of 100 benign
graphs. After modeling normal behaviors, the false positive of the
remaining 25 benign graphs is evaluated. Then, the model is evaluated
in false negatives on 25 attack graphs. This process is repeated for each
group, and the average results are recorded. The results on the Unicorn
dataset presented in Table 8 indicate that compared with the Unicorn
method, the proposed method is better at distinguishing normal and
abnormal behavior in long-term attack scenarios.
In summary, RT-APT exhibits superior performance when evaluated
on the laboratory dataset, StreamSpot dataset, and Unicorn dataset, as
depicted in Fig. 10.
The primary reason why we choose the FlexSketch algorithm is that

Fig. 7. The influence of parameter Interval*.

current state of system execution (i.e., the most recent part of the
provenance graph) and any part of the provenance graph causally
related to the current execution, while preserving the log. The
influence of different α is shown in Fig. 8. We can find that when α
is set to 0.03, the graph sketches achieve a good balance between
the historical histogram and the current histogram.
4.2.4. Experimental results
In this paper, according to the silhouette coefficient we set the
optimal number of clusters as K = 6. All 500*0.8 = 400 benign graphs
are used for training. The remaining 500*0.2 = 100 benign graphs and
60 attack graphs are used for testing. In the experiments, the optimal
parameters are set as: k-hop = 3, sketch-size = 2000, Interval = 3000,
and α = 0.03. We use the 5-fold cross-validation in the experiments.
Since RT-APT models normal behaviors, we plot a precision-recall
(PR) curve as shown in Fig. 9 to determine the optimal threshold for
the testing. The area between the PR curve and the coordinate axis is

Table 6
Comparison of different detection methods on the Lab dataset.

Fig. 8. The influence of parameter α.
10

Detector

precision

recall

accuracy

F-score

StreamSpot (baseline)
Unicorn
RT-APT

0.84
0.95
0.98

0.72
0.92
0.96

0.86
0.97
0.94

0.82
0.94
0.97

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

complexities introduced by high dimensionality or temporal dynamics.
To assert the robustness and scalability of the FlexSketch algorithm,
we conducted additional experiments to evaluateits performance under
varied environments and different load conditions. The FlexSketch algorithm was tested withvarying data set sizes and streaming rates to
simulate diverse real-world scenarios.
Our results indicate that FlexSketch maintains a consistent performance profile across a wide range of conditions.Even under high-load
situations, the algorithm demonstrates minimal memory overhead and
acceptable processing latency, outperforming other state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of scalability.

Table 7
Comparison of different detection methods on the StreamSpot dataset.
Detector

precision

recall

accuracy

F-score

StreamSpot (baseline)
Unicorn
RT-APT

0.74
0.98
0.96

0.72
0.93
0.94

0.66
0.96
0.95

0.78
0.94
0.95

Table 8
Comparison of different detection methods on the Unicorn dataset.
Unicorn Dataset

Detector

precision

recall

accuracy

F-score

SC-1[13](baseline)

StreamSpot
Unicorn
RT-APT
StreamSpot
Unicorn
RT-APT

0.80
0.85
0.88
0.72
0.75
0.84

0.88
0.96
0.92
0.72
0.80
0.88

0.85
0.90
0.90
0.70
0.77
0.86

0.85
0.90
0.90
0.74
0.78
0.85

SC-2[13] (baseline)

4.3. Overhead
In this subsection, we analyze the runtime overhead, including
runtime performance, and memory consumption and CPU utilization.
4.3.1. Runtime performance
In APT scenarios, runtime performance is crucial as intrusion
detection systems (IDS) which often need to monitor systems in real
time. In this subsection, to grasp the runtime performance of RT-APT, we
take the same parameter settings as in Subection 4.2.3. We conduct
experiments on a laboratory dataset. The results demonstrate the tradeoff between accuracy and runtime performance. Table 9 records the
average number of edges processed within a given time (data processing
rate) under different parameter settings. This quantifies the speed at
which our method processes data. In Table 9, ”inline” represents the
speed close to that of the SPADE collection system (data generation
rate). Smaller differences between the detection processing speed and
the inline rate indicate better runtime performance. The difference in
Table 9 is obtained by calculating the average processing edge speed
under different parameters minus the difference of processing edge

it can capture features in long sequences more effectively. In real-world
network attack scenarios, APT attack cycles are long, and the corresponding feature sequences are lengthy. The proposed method can
extract patterns from long sequences more efficiently, and adapt to the
characteristics of APT attacks in real scenarios. Although the Unicorn
algorithm also utilizes feature sequences, it tends to overlook the subtle
differences of the anomalies and normal behaviors in matching state
machine templates This study employs the FlexSketch algorithm, which
constructs a new statistical model by measuring the differences between
the current model and the most recent sampled data. While capturing
sequence features, the algorithm integrates historical and current features of the feature sequences. The resulting sequence feature calculation incorporates the entire sequence’s characteristics, preserving and
accumulating minor differences. This increases the distance between
normal and abnormal behaviors in the feature space.
The FlexSketch algorithm adeptly manages high-dimensional data by
utilizing Local Sensitive Hashing (LSH) techniques,.which efficiently
approximate the similarity of feature vectors in high-dimensional spaces
and maintain the integrity of temporal relationships, This is achieved by
dynamically processing data streams, deciding the optimal time to
phaseout outdated information, and constructing new statistical models
that consider both historical and recent data points.The algorithm’s
consistent weighted sampling approach ensures stability and adaptability to concept drift, while the decay rate parameter (a) facilitates a
balanced focus on the current system execution state and its causal dependencies as recorded in the provenance graph, This harmonized
approach allows FlexSketch to effectively capture and analyze the
evolving patterns within the data, without being overwhelmed by the

Table 9
The impact of different parameter Settings on running performance.
Parameter

Value

Average processing speed (bars/sec)

Difference%

inline (baseline)
k-hop

N/A
2
3
4
1000
2000
3000
2000
3000
4000

267.12
265.25
263.38
262.84
266.90
266.82
252.30
267.06
266.31
266.31

0
− 0.7
¡1.4
− 1.6
− 0.8
¡1.1
− 5.6
− 0.2
¡0.3
− 0.3

sketch-size
Interval

Fig. 10. Metric comparison of the proposed method in three datasets.
11

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

speed under the inline condition, and then dividing with the processing
edge speed under the inline condition.
In general, RT-APT is relatively insensitive to variations in these
parameters at runtime. Under the optimal parameter settings (highlighted in bold in the table), the differences with the baselines are
around 1%. This means that the proposed method can perform real-time
detection effectively.

Table 10
Average memory overhead and average CPU usage.

Average memory
cost (MB)
Average CPU
usage (%)

4.3.2. Memory overhead and CPU usage
In this subsection, we test the memory consumption and CPU utilization. The results are shown in Table 10. It can be observed that the
proposed system has a memory consumption of around 600 MB on
various datasets. Compared with the Unicorn method (with a memory
consumption of 687 MB under optimal detection performance), our
proposed system reduces the memory consumption by approximately
15%. In comparison to the StreamSpot method, the average memory
consumption is reduced by about 23%. The average CPU utilization
remains stable at around 17.6%, indicating a clear advantage over
StreamSpot and Unicorn methods.

Detector

Lab
Dataset

StreamSpot
Dataset

Unicorn
Dataset

RT-APT
StreamSpot
Unicorn
RT-APT
StreamSpot
Unicorn

597
734
686
18.6
23
19.2

588
726
664
17.4
18
19.6

609
765
586
16.9
25.4
14.3

graph. This allows for extensive and efficient graph analysis computations while enabling rapid updates of feature vectors in streaming environments. Experimental evaluations conducted on the StreamSpot
dataset, Unicorn dataset, and in-house dataset demonstrate that the
proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhengqiu Weng: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Conceptualization. Weinuo Zhang: Software, Formal analysis,
Data curation. Tiantian Zhu: Methodology, Investigation, Funding
acquisition, Conceptualization. Zhenhao Dou: Validation, Software,
Resources, Data curation. Haofei Sun: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software. Zhanxiang Ye: Writing – original draft, Supervision,
Project administration, Funding acquisition. Ye Tian: Writing – review
& editing, Visualization, Validation, Software.

5. Discussion
The RT-APT system demonstrates a robust generalization capability,
vital for its effectiveness across various APT detection scenarios. It exhibits consistent performance across multiple datasets, such as Laboratory, StreamSpot,and Unicorn, showcasing its adaptability in different
operational environments. This cross-dataset generalization enables RTAPT to maintain high detection accuracy in realworld applications.
Moreover, in terms of identifying novel and unknown attacks, the RTAPT system is robust because it analyzes behaviors instead of relying
on specific attack signatures.
Despite these strengths, RT-APT has certain limitations.It assumes a
secure initial modeling phase to capture normal system behaviors,
which is crucial for distinguishing benign from malicious activities.
However, this assumption may occasionally lead to false positives when
encountering new or unknown attack patterns. The effectiveness of the
system also depends on the integrity of the log data, and the complexity
of APTs brings the risk of data leakage, which may affect the detection
effect.
While the FlexSketch algorithm excels in handling high-dimensional
data and time series, it does have some limitations.For instance, when
dealing with data that exhibit very complex patterns, the algorithm may
require more computational resources to maintain high accuracy.
Furthermore,the performance of the algorithm may be affected by the
choice of hash functions and parameter settings, necessitating careful
adjustment during actual deployment.
Parameter tuning presents another challenge, as RT-APT requires
precise configuration of parameters like k-hop,sketch-size, and update
intervals to optimize performance.This can be complex across different
systems and conditions.Additionally, the reliance on external tools like
SPADE for data collection introduces potential reliability issues.
While RT-APT marks a step forward in APT detection, ongoing
research and development are necessary to overcome these limitations
and refine the system’s capabilities.

Data availability
The data used in this study are sourced from three distinct datasets.
The Unicorn dataset can be accessed from https://drive.google.co
m/drive/folders/1QlbUFWAGq3Hpl8wVdzOdIoZLFxkII4EK.
The
StreamSpot dataset can be accessed and downloaded from https://sbust
reamspot.github.io/. Interested parties may request our Laboratory
dataset by contacting the authors via email at derisweng@wzut.edu.cn.
All of these datasets are publicly available and can be obtained without
restrictions.
Funding
This research was funded by Wenzhou Cyber Security Detection and
Protection Technology Research Center (No. WZKF2023001 and No.
WZKF2023002), supported by Wenzhou Major Scientific and Technological Innovation Research Project (No.ZG2023031 and No.
ZG2024007), funded by Wenzhou Basic scientific Research Project (No.
G2024033), supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.62273263), supported by Fundamental Research Funds for the
Provincial Universities of Zhejiang (No. RF-A2023009).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
The author is an Editorial Board Member/Editor-in-Chief/Associate
Editor/Guest Editor for Journal of Network and Computer Applications
and was not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish
this article.

6. Conclusion
This paper proposes a real-time method for detecting APT attacks
based on provenance graphs constructed from log data. The proposed
method uses graph embedding techniques to consider rich contextual
information and long-term causal relationships within the provenance

12

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Data availability

L’u, L., Zhou, T., 2011. Link prediction in complex networks: a survey. Phys. Stat. Mech.
Appl. 390 (6), 1150–1170.
MacQueen, J., et al., 1967. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate
observations. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
Statistics and Probability, vol. 1, pp. 281–297. Oakland, CA, USA.
Maggi, F., Matteucci, M., Zanero, S., 2008. Detecting intrusions through system call
sequence and argument analysis. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 7 (4),
381–395.
Manzoor, E., Milajerdi, S.M., Akoglu, L., 2016. Fast memory-efficient anomaly detection
in streaming heterogeneous graphs. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1035–1044.
Milajerdi, S.M., Gjomemo, R., Eshete, B., Sekar, R., Venkatakrishnan, V., 2019a. Holmes:
real-time apt detection through correlation of suspicious information flows. In: 2019
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, pp. 1137–1152.
Milajerdi, S.M., Eshete, B., Gjomemo, R., Venkatakrishnan, V., 2019b. Poirot: aligning
attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber threat hunting. In: Proceedings of
the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
pp. 1795–1812.
Mutz, D., Robertson, W., Vigna, G., Kemmerer, R., 2007. Exploiting execution context for
the detection of anomalous system calls. In: Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection:
10th International Symposium, RAID 2007, Gold Goast, Australia, September 5-7,
2007. Proceedings 10. Springer, pp. 1–20.
Pan, X., Cao, Y., Du, X., He, B., Fang, G., Shao, R., Chen, Y., 2018. Flowcog: contextaware
semantics extraction and analysis of information flow leaks in android apps. In: 27th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18), pp. 1669–1685.
Papadimitriou, P., Dasdan, A., GarciaMolina, H., 2010. Web graph similarity for anomaly
detection. Journal of Internet Services and Applications 1, 19–30.
Park, N., Kim, S., 2021. Flexsketch: estimation of probability density for stationary and
nonstationary data streams. Sensors 21 (4), 1080.
Perozzi, B., Akoglu, L., Iglesias Sánchez, P., Müller, E., 2014. Focused clustering and
outlier detection in large attributed graphs. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1346–1355.
Philbin, J., Zisserman, A., 2008. Near duplicate image detection: min-hash and tf-idf
weighting. In: Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference, vol. 3, p. 4.
Piskozub, M., De Gaspari, F., Barr-Smith, F., Mancini, L., Martinovic, I., 2021. Malphase:
fine-grained malware detection using network flow data. In: Proceedings of the 2021
ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 774–786.
Qu, Z., Guo, G., Shao, Z., Rastogi, V., Chen, Y., Chen, H., Hong, W., 2017. Appshield:
enabling multi-entity access control cross platforms for mobile app management. In:
Security and Privacy in Communication Networks: 12th International Conference,
SecureComm 2016, Guangzhou, China, October 10-12, 2016, Proceedings 12.
Springer, pp. 3–23.
Rajaraman, A., Ullman, J.D., 2011. Mining of Massive Datasets. Cambridge University
Press.
Shervashidze, N., Schweitzer, P., Van Leeuwen, E.J., Mehlhorn, K., Borgwardt, K.M.,
2011. Weisfeiler-lehman graph kernels. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12 (9).
Shi, L., Ming, J., Fu, J., Peng, G., Xu, D., Gao, K., Pan, X., 2020. Vahunt: warding off new
repackaged android malware in appvirtualization’s clothing. In: Proceedings of the
2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
pp. 535–549.
Sivic and Zisserman, 2003. Video Google: A Text Retrieval Approach to Object Matching
in Videos. IEEE.
Song, W., Ming, J., Jiang, L., Xiang, Y., Pan, X., Fu, J., Peng, G., 2021. Towards
transparent and stealthy android os sandboxing via customizable container-based
virtualization. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pp. 2858–2874.
Vishwanathan, S.V.N., Schraudolph, N.N., Kondor, R., Borgwardt, K.M., 2010. Graph
kernels. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11, 1201–1242.
Weisfeiler, B.Y., Leman, A.A., 1968. A reduction of a graph to a canonical form and an
algebra arising during this reduction. Nauchno-Technicheskaya Informatsiya 2 (9),
12–16.
Xiong, C., Zhu, T., Dong, W., Ruan, L., Yang, R., Cheng, Y., Chen, Y., Cheng, S., Chen, X.,
2020. Conan: a practical real-time apt detection system with high accuracy and
efficiency. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 19 (1), 551–565.
Xu, K., Li, C., Tian, Y., Sonobe, T., Kawarabayashi, K.-i., Jegelka, S., 2018.
Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In:
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 5453–5462.
Yadav, T., Rao, A.M., 2015. Technical aspects of cyber kill chain. In: Security in
Computing and Communications: Third International Symposium, SSCC 2015,
Kochi, India, August 10-13, 2015. Proceedings 3. Springer, pp. 438–452.
Yu, L., Luo, B., Ma, J., Zhou, Z., Liu, Q., 2020. You are what you broadcast: identification
of mobile and iot devices from (public) wifi. In: 29th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 20), pp. 55–72.
Zengy, J., Wang, X., Liu, J., Chen, Y., Liang, Z., Chua, T.-S., Chua, Z.L., 2022.
Shadewatcher: recommendation-guided cyber threat analysis using system audit
records. In: 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, pp. 489–506.
Zhu, T., Yu, J., Xiong, C., Cheng, W., Yuan, Q., Ying, J., Chen, T., Zhang, J., Lv, M.,
Chen, Y., et al., 2023. Aptshield: a stable, efficient and real-time apt detection system
for linux hosts. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.
Zimba, A., Chen, H., Wang, Z., Chishimba, M., 2020. Modeling and detection of the
multi-stages of advanced persistent threats attacks based on semi-supervised
learning and complex networks characteristics. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 106,
501–517.

Data will be made available on request.
References
Akoglu, L., Tong, H., Koutra, D., 2015. Graph based anomaly detection and description: a
survey. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 29, 626–688.
Alshamrani, A., Myneni, S., Chowdhary, A., Huang, D., 2019. A survey on advanced
persistent threats: techniques, solutions, challenges, and research opportunities.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 21 (2), 1851–1877.
Baker, L.D., McCallum, A.K., 1998. Distributional clustering of words for text
classification. In: The 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 96–103.
Berlingerio, M., Koutra, D., Eliassi-Rad, T., Faloutsos, C., 2012. A Scalable Approach to
Size-independent Network Similarity. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv: 12092684.
Berrada, G., Cheney, J., Benabderrahmane, S., Maxwell, W., Mookherjee, H.,
Theriault, A., Wright, R., 2020. A baseline for unsupervised advanced persistent
threat detection in system-level provenance. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 108,
401–413.
Chapelle, O., Haffner, P., Vapnik, N.V., 1999. Support vector machines for
histogrambased image classification. IEEE Trans. Neural Network. 10 (5),
1055–1064.
Chen, T., Dong, C., Lv, M., Song, Q., Liu, H., Zhu, T., Xu, K., Chen, L., Ji, S., Fan, Y., 2022.
Apt-kgl: an intelligent apt detection system based on threat knowledge and
heterogeneous provenance graph learning. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2022.3229472 (Access, Dec. 26, 2022).
Ding, Q., Katenka, N., Barford, P., Kolaczyk, E., Crovella, M., 2012. Intrusion as (anti)
social communication: characterization and detection. In: Proceedings of the 18th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pp. 886–894.
Feng, H.H., Kolesnikov, O.M., Fogla, P., Lee, W., Gong, W., 2003. Anomaly detection
using call stack information. In: 2003 Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2003.
IEEE, pp. 62–75.
Friedman, J.H., 1997. On bias, variance, 0/1—loss, and the curse-of-dimensionality.
Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 1, 55–77.
Gao, J., Liang, F., Fan, W., Wang, C., Sun, Y., Han, J., 2010. On community outliers and
their efficient detection in information networks. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pp. 813–822.
Gehani, A., Tariq, D., 2012. Spade: support for provenance auditing in distributed
environments. In: ACM/IFIP/USENIX International Conference on Distributed
Systems Platforms and Open Distributed Processing. Springer, pp. 101–120.
Han, X., Pasquier, T., Bates, A., Mickens, J., Seltzer, M., 2020. Unicorn: runtime
provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats. In: 27TH ANNUAL
NETWORK AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM SECURITY SYMPOSIUM (NDSS 2020).
Hassan, W.U., Guo, S., Li, D., Chen, Z., Jee, K., Li, Z., Bates, A., 2019. Nodoze:
Combatting threat alert fatigue with automated provenance triage. In: Network and
Distributed Systems Security Symposium.
Hassan, W.U., Bates, A., Marino, D., 2020. Tactical provenance analysis for endpoint
detection and response systems. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP). IEEE, pp. 1172–1189.
Hodge, V., Austin, J., 2004. A survey of outlier detection methodologies. Artif. Intell.
Rev. 22, 85–126.
Hossain, M.N., Milajerdi, S.M., Wang, J., Eshete, B., Gjomemo, R., Sekar, R., Stoller, S.,
Venkatakrishnan, V., 2017. {SLEUTH}: Realtime attack scenario reconstruction from
{COTS} audit data. In: 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17),
pp. 487–504.
Hossain, M.N., Sheikhi, S., Sekar, R., 2020. Combating dependence explosion in forensic
analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, pp. 1139–1155.
Hunt, P., Konar, M., Junqueira, F.P., Reed, B., 2010. Zookeeper: wait-free coordination
for internet-scale systems. In: 2010 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 10).
Indyk, P., Motwani, R., 1998. Approximate nearest neighbors: towards removing the
curse of dimensionality. In: Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, pp. 604–613.
Jacob, B., Larson, P., Leitao, B., Da Silva, S., 2008. Systemtap: instrumenting the linux
kernel for analyzing performance and functional problems. IBM Redbook 116.
Kang, W., Son, B., Heo, K., 2022. Tracer: signature-based static analysis for detecting
recurring vulnerabilities. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, pp. 1695–1708.
Kapoor, M., Melton, J., Ridenhour, M., Krishnan, S., Moyer, T., 2021. Prov-gem:
automated provenance analysis framework using graph embeddings. In: 2021 20th
IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA).
IEEE, pp. 1720–1727.
Kyrola, A., Blelloch, G., Guestrin, C., 2012. {GraphChi}:{Large-Scale} graph computation
on just a {PC}. In: 10th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 12), pp. 31–46.
Liu, C., Yan, X., Yu, H., Han, J., Yu, P.S., 2005. Mining behavior graphs for “backtrace” of
noncrashing bugs. In: Proceedings of the 2005 SIAM International Conference on
Data Mining. SIAM, pp. 286–297.

13

Z. Weng et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104036

Zhengqiu Weng received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the
Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China, in 2023,and the M.S. degree in
software engineering from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2005. She
is also a professor with the Wenzhou University of Technology, Zhejiang, China. Her
current research interests include networks security and big data technologies.

Zhenhao Dou is currently pursuing the bacheleor degree in big data technologies from the
Wenzhou University of Technology, Zhejiang, China. His research interests include system
security, software security, and firmware analysis.
Zhanxiang Ye received the M.S. degree from Wuhang University of in Wuhang, china, in
2006, He is currently a Associate professor in Wenzhou Polytechnic. His research interests
include Network Technology and Information Security.

Weinuo Zhang is currently pursuing the bacheleor degree in big data technologies from the
Wenzhou University of Technology, Zhejiang, China. His research interests include system
security, software security, and firmware analysis.

Haofei Sun is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science and technology from
the Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China. His research interests include
system security, software security, and firmware analysis.

Tiantian Zhu received the PhD degree in computer science from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2019. He is currently an associate professor with the college of
computer science and technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China. His research
interests include mobile security, system security and artificial intelligence.

Ye Tian is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science and technology from the
Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China. His research interests include system
security, software security, and firmware analysis.

14