Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Network and Computer Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

SAT-Net: A staggered attention network using graph neural networks for
encrypted traffic classification
Zhiyuan Li , Hongyi Zhao , Jingyu Zhao , Yuqi Jiang , Fanliang Bu *
School of Information Network Security, People’s Public Security University of China, Beijing, 100045, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling editor: M. Atiquzzaman

With the increasing complexity of network protocol traffic in the modern network environment, the task of traffic
classification is facing significant challenges. Existing methods lack research on the characteristics of traffic byte
data and suffer from insufficient model generalization, leading to decreased classification accuracy. In response,
we propose a method for encrypted traffic classification based on a Staggered Attention Network using Graph
Neural Networks (SAT-Net), which takes into consideration both computer network topology and user interac­
tion processes. Firstly, we design a Packet Byte Graph (PBG) to efficiently capture the byte features of flow and
their relationships, thereby transforming the encrypted traffic classification problem into a graph classification
problem. Secondly, we meticulously construct a GNN-based PBG learner, where the feature remapping layer and
staggered attention layer are respectively used for feature propagation and fusion, enhancing the robustness of
the model. Experiments on multiple different types of encrypted traffic datasets demonstrate that SAT-Net
outperforms various advanced methods in identifying VPN traffic, Tor traffic, and malicious traffic, showing
strong generalization capability.

Keywords:
Deep learning
Encrypted traffic classification
Graph neural networks
Attention mechanism

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of computer communication and
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, the demand for data security and
privacy protection has reached a new level. According to the Google
Transparency Report (Google) (the portion of HTTPS encryption on the
web), as of February 11, 2024, 96% of all Google products and services
have implemented encryption. Therefore, in the unstoppable trend of
network traffic encryption, effectively classifying encrypted traffic into
specific categories is a key issue for achieving high-quality network se­
curity management and optimizing network resources (e.g., QoS con­
trol, traffic billing, and intrusion detection) (Tao et al., 2023). The
process of network traffic classification typically involves capturing
traffic data from monitored network nodes and then labeling them ac­
cording to user requirements (protocols, service types). However, as
traffic encryption technologies continue to evolve (such as IPsec, TLS,
SSL, and SRTP), achieving fine-grained encrypted traffic classification
faces many unprecedented challenges.
Due to concerns about user privacy and security, numerous tech­
nologies have emerged for secure communication and remote access,
such as Virtual Private Networks (VPN), Network Address Translation

(NAT), and The Onion Routing (Tor). This directly results in a significant
decrease in the accuracy of traditional methods based on port and deep
packet/flow inspection (Yaxuan et al., 2009) (Tomasz et al., 2015)
(Michael et al., 2014). The reasons for this are as follows: (1) Many
applications no longer have queryable port numbers (because of the use
of dynamic port numbers) (Michelle et al., 2011) and employ port
obfuscation techniques to bypass firewall detection. (2) The proportion
of encrypted fields in packet continues to increase, making the use of
payload unreliable. As the proportion of encrypted traffic gradually in­
creases, machine learning and deep learning-based methods for network
traffic analysis have become mainstream. Researchers have found that
encrypted traffic of different types (e.g., protocol type, service type, and
application type) exhibits different statistical characteristics. Thus, they
attempt to combine machine learning algorithms (e.g., C4.5 decision
tree, SVM, RF) with manually designed statistical features (e.g.,
time-related features) for encrypted traffic classification (Gerard et al.,
2016) (Arash Habibi et al., 2017). However, this approach has certain
drawbacks. On the one hand, it is difficult to ensure that the selected
traffic statistical features are stable and reliable. For example, the sta­
tistical characteristics of Elephant flows and Mice flows are significantly
different in their respective communication patterns (Theophilus et al.,

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: bufanliang@sina.com (F. Bu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2024.104069
Received 21 March 2024; Received in revised form 21 October 2024; Accepted 13 November 2024
Available online 15 November 2024
1084-8045/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

2010). On the other hand, this method heavily relies on expert experi­
ence and consumes a considerable amount of manual effort during the
feature engineering stage.
To address the aforementioned challenges, researchers have turned
their attention to deep learning methods. By simply inputting raw
network traffic data into a well-designed neural network model, the
model can automatically extract features for traffic classification (Wei
et al., 2017a; Haipeng et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2019; Xinjie et al., 2022;
Peng et al., 2023; Giuseppe et al., 2021; Xin et al., 2020). Due to its
linear features such as translation invariance and compositionality, CNN
is naturally suitable for deep computation and inference of Euclidean
data, such as natural language processing and image processing tasks
(Ma et al., 2022). Therefore, we believe that the potential reason for the
effectiveness of deep learning methods in encrypted traffic classification
lies in the representation of traffic flow data (Chang et al., 2019) (Xin
et al., 2020) (Chang et al., 2018), which inevitably brings network traffic
into Euclidean space. However, this approach has two drawbacks: first,
it cannot fully explore the nonlinear implicit features of network traffic,
and second, training deep neural network models consumes a significant
amount of time.
Recently, researchers have become increasingly interested in nonEuclidean data, which is widely present in many fields (Zonghan
et al., 2021) (such as social networks, chemical molecular structures,
and neuroscience), and have attempted to model and analyze network
traffic according to non-Euclidean structures (Chang et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2020; Ting-Li et al., 2021, 2023; Minghao et al., 2022; Bo et al.,
2021; Meng et al., 2021). Therefore, starting from the topology of
computer networks, we observe that the features of network traffic data
naturally reside in the non-Euclidean domain. Representing network
encrypted traffic data as graph data can express its potential hidden
patterns. As shown in Fig. 1, the arrangement of elements in the two data
domains exhibits significant differences. Specifically, treating byte­
s/packets/session flows in encrypted traffic as nodes in the graph and
constructing edges using relationships between corresponding entities,
embedding the traffic graph into a model based on graph neural net­
works, and then completing downstream tasks according to user re­
quirements. Existing GNN-based methods primarily use packets as graph
nodes to extract flow-level feature information for encrypted traffic
classification. In summary, we believe that focusing on the intrinsic
characteristics of traffic flows and achieving fine-grained feature
extraction can, to some extent, alleviate the issue of feature instability
caused by fluctuations in the network environment. Therefore, selecting
a suitable, stable, and reliable representation method for encrypted
traffic is a crucial step towards efficient encrypted traffic classification
and enhancing the generalization capability of the model.
Inspired by the observations of geometric deep learning, in this
paper, we propose SAT-Net (Staggered Attention Network), a novel
GNN-based method for encrypted traffic classification. Specifically,
SAT-Net comprises four modules: Graph Embedding Layer, Feature
Remapping Layer, Staggered Attention Layer, and classification layer,

with detailed graph construction and model design presented in Sec­
tion4. Firstly, SAT-Net addresses the challenge of converting traffic
flows into graph. Specifically, we transform the original byte sequence
of data packets into an undirected graph structure, namely the Packet
Byte Graph (PBG), where bytes serve as vertices in the graph, and the
associations between bytes are represented by edges. This graph struc­
ture allows for capturing the complex relationships between bytes,
laying the foundation for subsequent feature learning. Next, we perform
embedding learning on the PBG through the GraphSAGE algorithm,
obtaining vector representations in the feature space. Subsequently,
these vectors are subjected to feature remapping by a carefully designed
MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron), thereby extracting richer and more
expressive feature representations. In particular, we introduce a multihead attention mechanism in the Staggered Attention Layer, which
fuses parallel PBG feature vectors to capture global context and key
features, thereby highlighting important information in the packet byte
graph of encrypted traffic. Ultimately, these fused features are input into
the classification layer, generating the final classification labels. With
this architecture, SAT-Net effectively captures key patterns and features
in encrypted traffic, significantly improving the accuracy and robustness
of classification. Especially through the combination of PBG and the
Staggered Attention Layer, SAT-Net demonstrates strong performance
advantages in encrypted traffic classification tasks.
In summary, the main contributions of our paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose a GNN-based encrypted traffic classification method,
named SAT-Net, which transforms the network traffic classification
problem into a graph classification problem. It handles graph feature
vectors in a multi-task learning manner, enabling high-precision
packet-level encrypted traffic classification.
• To achieve fine-grained feature extraction, we design a dynamic
sliding window size selection strategy to obtain optimal represen­
tations of packet byte graph of traffic flow, thereby improving the
model’s generalization.
• To obtain vector representations of entire packets, we propose a
feature fusion method based on staggered attention, allowing it to
capture important features from different graphs and enhance the
model’s performance.
• We evaluate the performance of our proposed model through a series
of experiments on four public datasets and a self-collected dataset.
Experimental results demonstrate that, compared to baselines, SATNet can accurately identify encrypted traffic generated by different
apps with high precision.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present
an overview of the related research on encrypted traffic classification
according to various methodologies. Section 3 serves as a preliminary
section, setting the stage for the subsequent discussion. Section 4 pro­
vides a detailed description of our proposed SAT-Net. The focus of

Fig. 1. Two types of data fields.
2

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Section 5 is on the experimental setup and the evaluation of the SAT-Net,
and we discuss the practical application in Section 6. Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper with a summary of the findings and discussions.

2021) combined pre-training and fine-tuning methods, utilizing
multi-modal traffic representation information as input and achieving
automatic feature extraction through multi-task learning. Most deep
learning-based methods utilize the raw bytes of flows and carefully
designed flow or packet features. For instance, Wang et al. proposed
App-Net (Xin et al., 2020), an end-to-end hybrid neural network that
combines LSTM and CNN to respectively learn the sequence of packet
lengths and the raw packets of TLS flows. Some studies have achieved
promising results solely using the distribution of packet lengths (Chang
et al., 2019) (Chang et al., 2018) (Chen et al., 2020). Their rationale is
that the sequence of packet lengths contains temporal characteristics of
flows. In general, the stability of traffic features extracted by these
methods is susceptible to fluctuations due to differences in network
environments, system architectures of applications, and types of ser­
vices. Additionally, these methods lack focus on the bytes of traffic
themselves, hence these features are unstable.

2. Related work
Handling the encrypted traffic classification problem can be roughly
divided into two stages. The first stage is traffic representation, followed
by the design of suitable deep learning model classifiers. It can be said
that the traffic representation method directly affects the selection of
neural network classifiers. We review relevant work based on these two
aspects and finally discuss the differences between our work and existing
methods. Table 1 provides a summary of the two types of related work.
2.1. Deep learning-based method
With the continuous enhancement of GPU computing power, many
fields requiring large-scale training data, such as speech recognition,
machine translation, and computer vision, have achieved substantial
breakthroughs (Michael et al., 2017). In the field of encrypted traffic
classification, Wang et al. (Wei et al., 2017a) first proposed using deep
learning models to address the problem of encrypted traffic classifica­
tion. They utilized the first 784 bytes of packets to learn the nonlinear
relationship between input and output through a 1D-CNN (Convolu­
tional Neural Networks). By extracting 10 packets from each flow, each
containing 1500 bytes, they obtained the optimal representation of
traffic. Yao et al. (Haipeng et al., 2022) achieved VPN traffic type
recognition using an LSTM model based on attention mechanisms. Liu
et al. (Chang et al., 2019) introduced the Flow Sequence Network
(FS-Net), which employs an encoder to map flows to a feature space and
then uses a reconstruction mechanism to recover the input sequence. In
addition, the method of using a large amount of unlabeled traffic data
for pre-training has also achieved good performance as expected. Lin
et al. proposed an encrypted traffic classification model ET-BERT (Xinjie
et al., 2022) based on the pre-training method, which first performs
pre-training on a large-scale unlabeled dataset, and then fine-tunes with
a small amount of task-specific dataset. Similarly, using the pre-training
method, Lin et al. (Peng et al., 2023) trained a deep learning model
based on the self-attention mechanism with the original traffic bytes and
packet length sequences, deeply exploring the multimodal relationships
between ‘bytes-packets-bidirectional flow’. Aceto et al. (Giuseppe et al.,

2.2. GNN-based method
In recent years, methods based on graph neural networks, which
analyze data from the perspective of non-Euclidean space, have gained
widespread attention. Huoh et al. (Ting-Li et al., 2021) first proposed
using graph neural networks for traffic classification by considering the
relationship between raw bytes of packets from the perspective of
non-Euclidean distance space. In subsequent work (Ting-Li et al., 2023),
they enhanced graph neural networks by supplementing graph-level
attributes. To obtain more accurate traffic graph representations,
Jiang et al. (Minghao et al., 2022) proposed using a Flow Relationship
Graph to characterize encrypted traffic by defining two types of
flow-level relationships. Pang et al. (Bo et al., 2021) characterized
network traffic based on packet semantics and causal relationships of
network behavior, proposing a Chain Graph as the basis for graph neural
network classification. Shen et al. (Meng et al., 2021) found significant
differences in the behavior of packets within a single burst and across
different bursts, which can serve as the basis for learning features of
encrypted traffic by classifiers. Zhang et al. introduced TFE-GNN
(Haozhen et al., 2023), a time-fused encoder based on graph neural
networks, which learns byte-level traffic graphs of packet headers and
payloads through dual embedding and then obtains vector representa­
tions of entire packets. Pham et al. (Thai-Dien et al., 2021) learned po­
tential patterns of mobile application traffic using communication

Table 1
Summary of related work on encrypted traffic classification.
Category

Refs.

Year

Model/Algorithm

Traffic features

Goal

Deep Learningbased

Wei et al. (2017a)
Chang et al. (2019)
Xin et al. (2020)
Chen et al. (2020)

2017
2019
2020
2020

Original traffic byte data in each packet
Packet length sequence characteristics
Original network traffic flow
Packet length sequence characteristics

Giuseppe et al.
(2021)
Haipeng et al.
(2022)
Xinjie et al. (2022)
Peng et al. (2023)
Bo et al. (2021)
Meng et al. (2021)

2021

1D-CNN
FS-Net
App-Net
Capsule Neural
Network
DISTILLER

2022

LSTM & HAN

Original network traffic flow

2022
2023
2021
2021

ET-BERT
PEAN
CGNN
GraphDApp

Traffic raw bytes are used for pre-training
Traffic raw bytes are used for pre-training
Chained graph of the chained compositional sequence
Constructed Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG)

Thai-Dien et al.
(2021)
Minghao et al.
(2022)
Ting-Li et al. (2023)
Haozhen et al.
(2023)
Tiru et al. (2023)
Ours

2021

MAppGraph

2022

FG-Net

A communication graph defined by tuples of IP address and port
of the services
Constructed Flow Relationship Graph (FRG)

VPN encrypted traffic
Application Fingerprint
Application Fingerprint
VPN and non-VPN encrypted
traffic
VPN and non-VPN encrypted
traffic
VPN and non-VPN encrypted
traffic
Traffic type and Application
Traffic type and Application
Traffic type and Application
DApp Traffic type and
Application
Mobile-App Classification

2023
2023

GNNs
TFE-GNN

Account packet raw bytes, metadata and packet relations
PMI is used to construct byte-level traffic graph

VPN encrypted traffic
Traffic type and Application

2023

BehavSniffer
SAT-Net

Constructed Traffic Burst Graph (TBG)
A Packet Byte Graph (PBG) according to the payload and header
of the packet

Social Network User Behavior
Traffic type and Application

GNN-based

Traffic Object Segmentations

3

Traffic type and Application

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

behavior represented as graphs with node features and edge weights,
proposing the DGCNN model. It is worth mentioning that in the past two
years, research on traffic behavior has also become active in this
research community, as identifying traffic behavior is a key research
hotspot in the field of encrypted traffic analysis and serves as an
important means for network security management and monitoring
(Xiaodong et al., 2023). BehavSniffer (Tiru et al., 2023) enhances the
relationship between unidirectional flows by using an additional
designed burst-bt edge on the basis of GraphDApp (Meng et al., 2021). In
(Tiru et al., 2023), the authors focus on the combination of high-order
and low-order relationships of flows, and achieve feature fusion using
DNN and kernel principal component analysis, ultimately realizing the
recognition of user behavior in social media. These methods all
construct graphs based on flow or packet features, without dis­
tinguishing between communication control behavior and data trans­
mission behavior. Therefore, they exhibit weak robustness against noise
in traffic.
In summary, here are the differences between our method and
existing works:

3. Preliminary
3.1. Graph based representation of network encrypted traffic
Existing neural networks are well-suited for processing Euclidean
data with translational invariance and for uncovering hidden patterns
(Bentian et al., 2021). However, a vast amount of data cannot be dis­
cussed within the Euclidean space, such as the structure of chemical
molecules, user behavior in social networks, and so on. Therefore, re­
searchers have turned their attention to graph-structured data, which
are complex and can encapsulate rich information (Ting-Li et al., 2021)
(Ting-Li et al., 2023). Below, we will describe the general form of rep­
resenting traffic data using graph-structured data.
{ }n
Given a collection of bidirectional flows S = f i
, where each
i=1
{ }n
i
flow corresponds to a label L = l
. A packet is the basic unit of a
i=1

single bidirectional flow. Therefore, each flow f i in S can be represented
{ }m
as f i = pj
, where each packet pj consists of several bytes: pj =
j=1

{bk }ok=1 . Encrypted traffic classification aims to categorize an unknown
flow or packet into the correct protocol, service type, or application.
Therefore, based on the structure of the graph:

a) We observe that a session can be divided into two processes: hand­
shake and teardown phases, and data transmission phase. As shown
in Fig. 2, we use a workflow of a TCP session to illustrate the above
process. We construct packet byte graphs for the header byte portion
(including IP header, TCP header) and payload portion (including
data fields) separately, enabling feature extraction at the network
packet level. It is worth noting that the applicability of the encrypted
traffic classification method proposed in this paper is not limited to
the TCP protocol. The reason is that we consider the network to­
pology and the communication process between the client and the
server, and regardless of the protocol used, it will include data
transmission behavior and communication control behavior (for
example, the QUIC (UDP-based) and the UDP (connectionless) also
have these two modes).
b) We employ a dynamic sliding window mechanism to construct
packet byte graphs, capturing long-term dependencies between bytes
and obtaining richer, more accurate representations of traffic graphs.
c) In terms of classifier design, we utilize a multi-head attention
mechanism during the feature fusion stage to integrate information
about both session control behavior and data transmission behavior.
We also validate the generalization of the proposed model on various
types of network traffic datasets.

G = {V, E, X}
where V represents the set of nodes, E represents the set of edges, X ∈
R|V|×D is the feature matrix of the graph, where D is the dimensionality of
{ }T
node features. N(nv ) = ntv t=1 represents the set of neighbors of node v,
and the graph’s label is denoted as y. The adjacency matrix of the graph

is represented as A ∈ {0, 1}|V|×|V| . Where, for any element aij in A, if aij =
1, it indicates that there is an edge between node i and node j. Thus, A is
a symmetric matrix, and all elements on the diagonal are 1.
Clearly, for the task of flow-level encrypted traffic classification, we
can treat individual packets or packets within the same burst as nodes,
with the relationships between these packets serving as edges (Minghao
et al., 2022) (Meng et al., 2021), thereby modeling at the flow granu­
larity. For packet-level classification tasks, we can utilize the bytes of
each packet as nodes and the relationships between bytes as edges to
capture byte-level features (Haozhen et al., 2023).
3.2. Graph SAmple and aggregate (GraphSAGE)
GraphSAGE (William et al., 2017) does not learn embeddings for
individual nodes but learns an aggregation function. This function is
used to generate new embedding representations from the local neigh­
borhood of nodes, addressing the inefficiency in training large-scale
graph neural networks. Therefore, it is well-suited for handling
encrypted traffic. GraphSAGE has three aggregation functions:
(1) Mean Aggregation (MEAN): Similar to the convolution propaga­
tion rule in the GCN framework, it directly calculates the mean of
neighboring nodes. The calculation is as follows (Equation (1)):
(
({
} {
})
pkv = σ W • mean pk−v 1 ∪ pk−n 1
(1)

where, ∀n ∈ N, pkv represents the feature vector of node v at step k, and N
represents the set of neighbors.
(2) Long Short-Term Memory Aggregation (LSTM): LSTM aggrega­
tion is suitable for scenarios where neighboring nodes are
randomly arranged. We demonstrated in experiments that LSTM
aggregation yields the best performance for encrypted traffic
classification, attributed to its ability to capture temporal infor­
mation in traffic.
Fig. 2. A TCP session.
4

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

(3) Pooling Aggregation (POOL): The isomorphic max pooling
operation of the pooling aggregation achieves aggregation of
information across neighbors. The calculation is as follows
(Equation (2)):
({ (
)
})
Aggregatepool
= max σ Wpool pkn + b , ∀n ∈ N
(2)
k

Edge: The edges in the PBG are used to represent relationships be­
tween vertices. Since the connections between vertices reflect the
structural characteristics of the graph data, we adopt the Pointwise
Mutual Information (PMI) (Liang et al., 2018) commonly used in NLP
tasks to measure the relationships between bytes. To avoid the occur­
rence of negative infinity in PMI, we calculate the Positive Pointwise
Mutual Information (PPMI), which is computed as follows in Equation
(3):
(
)
P(b1 , b2 )
PPMI(b1 , b2 ) = MAX log2
,0
(3)
P(b1 )P(b2 )

As shown in Fig. 3, the general steps of node sampling and aggre­
gation in the GraphSAGE algorithm are as follows: (1) Sample the kthorder neighboring nodes of the center node. (2) Utilize the aggrega­
tion function to obtain local neighborhood features. (3) Predict the
center node based on the feature information. Due to the ability of the
aggregation function to learn new subgraph embedding representations,
GraphSAGE is also suitable for learning node representations in graphs
with dynamic changes.

where, P(b) denotes the probability of a byte occurring in all windows.
For example, if there are a total of 6 windows and byte b appears in 4 of
them, then P(b) = 23. Additionally, P(b1 , b2 ) represents the probability of
bytes b1 and b2 occurring together in a window, that is, out of a total of 6
windows, bytes b1 and b2 appear together in 2 of them, thus P(b1 , b2 ) =
1
3. We only construct an edge between two nodes when PPMI(b1 ,b2 ) > 0.
It’s worth noting that PPMI(b1 , b2 ) = PPMI(b2 , b1 ), making PBG an un­
directed graph.
Dynamic Window Setting: Since we handle the header and payload
parts of the data packet separately, we dynamically define the window
size using a strategy similar to exponential smoothing.
Below, we illustrate the method of setting up a dynamic window
using an example. Let’s assume a byte sequence {12, f3, 03, 97, 12, 0f,
f2, 30}, when the sliding window size is set to w = 3 (taking only pos­
itive integers), we can calculate that P(12) = 23, P(97) = 12, P(03) = 12,

4. Methodology
4.1. The design of packet byte graph and construction
Network packets are the most common data units in communication
networks and represent the smallest data element in packet-switched
networks (PSDN), consisting of control information (such as port
numbers, checksums, service types, and protocols) and payload data
(Leslie, 2020). Due to the different information carried by the packet
header and payload, the former conveys control semantic information
about the communication process and the content of the packet, while
the latter contains the specific data content of the communication pro­
cess. Based on this observation, to obtain the global semantics of the
packet, we process both the header and payload parts of the packet
separately and use the packet byte sequence to construct the Packet Byte
Graph (PBG), enabling packet-level encrypted traffic classification. In
this graph, nodes represent bytes in the packet, and edges denote the
spatial relationships between bytes. The following is a detailed
description of our PBG construction process.

P(03, 97) = 13, PPMI(97, 03) = log2 43. We also observe that there may be
significant differences between the features of the header and payload,
hence a flexible approach is required to set the window size, in order to
accommodate different packets. Due to the fixed length of the packet
header byte sequence, but not for the payload part, we set different
sliding window sizes for these two parts when constructing PBG. Spe­
cifically, we set the size of the packet header byte sequence as wh , and
the window size for the payload part is calculated as follows according to
equation (4):
)
(
Lenpayload
wp = α*MAX
, wh + (1 − α)2wh
(4)
Lenheader

4.1.1. Packet byte graph construction
Before constructing the Packet Byte Graph (PBG), we need to pre­
process the dataset (the original.pcap files). Firstly, we use the opensource tool, named Splitcap, to extract bidirectional flows based on
the packet’s five-tuple information. Secondly, we remove packets
without payload content. Lastly, we discard the Ethernet header of the
packets and anonymize the source and destination IP addresses as well
as the port numbers since this information is irrelevant for traffic
classification.
Vertex: The vertices of the PBG are the bytes in the packets. Bytes
with different values are considered as different vertices, thus limiting
the size of the entire graph to within 256 nodes. Each node has two
attributes: byte size and count.

The dynamic window size can adaptively capture the dependency
relationship between bytes in sequences of different lengths. By
adjusting α and the window size, we can better adapt to the relationships
between bytes in sequences of different lengths. For instance, when the
payload length of a packet is much greater than the header length, the
window size will be increased accordingly to capture richer byte de­
pendencies. Through a series of experiments, we found that the best
performance is achieved when wh = 5 and α = 0.4. Algorithm 1

)T
(
Fig. 3. The GraphSAGE algorithm. Here, the sampled node features are represented as y1 , y2 , …, ym , which can be used for prediction tasks.
5

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

describes the construction process of PBG.

PBG-payload using a multi-head attention mechanism to capture
important features of the entire packet. Finally, the fused representation
is input into a classification layer to obtain the final label.

Algorithm 1 Construction of Packet Byte Graph
Input: The byte sequence of the packet: p = {b1 , b2 , …, bn }
Output: The Header Byte Graph Gh = {V, E} and the Payload Byte Graph Gp = {V,E}
1: Initialize Gh = {V, E} and Gp = {V, E} as empty sets
2: Separate the sequence p into header and payload
3: for bi ∈ p do
4: if i ≤ length(header) then
5:
Add vertices in VGh according to ascending order of byte value
6:
if ∀vr , vs ∈ VGh then
7:
if PPMI(vr , vs ) > 0 then
8:
Add an edge between vr , vs in EGh
9: else
10:
Add vertices in VGp according to ascending order of byte value
11:
if ∀vk , vl ∈ VGp then
12:
if PPMI(vk , vl ) > 0 then
13:
Add an edge between vk , vl in EGp
14: return Gh and Gp

4.2.1. Graph embedding layer
Having constructed the PBG, we have obtained a graph-structured
representation of the encrypted traffic, where nodes represent bytes in
packets and edges denote the relationships between bytes. The core
objective of the graph embedding layer is to encode the Packet Byte
Graph (PBG) into high-dimensional feature vectors to capture the
complex relationships and patterns between packet bytes. In SAT-Net,
we utilize the GraphSAGE algorithm as the basis for graph convolu­
tion operations, owing to its unique sampling and aggregation strategy
that efficiently handles large-scale graph data, particularly suitable for
complex graph structures in encrypted traffic analysis. The GraphSAGE
algorithm is an inductive learning method, offering several significant
advantages over traditional full-graph convolution methods. Firstly,
GraphSAGE effectively limits the neighborhood size required for each
computation through its fixed-interval node sampling strategy, thereby
accelerating feature propagation and significantly improving computa­
tional efficiency. This is especially critical in scenarios such as encrypted
traffic analysis, where the data volume is large and highly diverse.
Secondly, GraphSAGE’s aggregation operation effectively captures
hidden features between nodes by representing the features of a node
and its neighbors in a joint embedding space. Particularly in our
encrypted traffic analysis task, GraphSAGE iteratively aggregates the
feature representations of nodes and their neighbors, integrating local
features of the traffic byte graph (PBG) into global features. This itera­
tive aggregation process starts with the sampled nodes and their
neighbors, calculating the feature vectors of these nodes and aggre­
gating them into a specific neighborhood. Then, the current represen­
tation of the node is concatenated with the aggregated neighborhood
vector and input into a nonlinear activation function (such as PReLU),
generating the final embedding vector of the node. This embedding
vector better captures both local and global features within the packet,
thereby providing strong support for subsequent feature remapping and
classification.
The input of the graph embedding layer is defined as G = {V, E} ,
where the number of nodes in the graph is n, V represents the set of
nodes, and E is the set of edges. Node features are denoted as {xv ,
∀v ∈ V}. To further learn the deep relationships between graph nodes,
we stack two GraphSAGE convolutional layers in the graph embedding
̃ 1 to the
layer. The output of the first layer is passed as the hidden state H

4.1.2. A PBG sample of SAT-Net
In this subsection, we visualize the construction process of a PBG
through an example. As depicted in Fig. 4, the process begins by
calculating the frequency of each byte (same value) within all sliding
windows of the byte sequence (steps 1-n). Subsequently, bytes are
mapped to vertices in the graph, and relationships between vertices are
determined by computing Positive Pointwise Mutual Information
(PPMI). This results in the formation of the PBG. For convenience, we
arrange the byte values in sequence; however, such a logical order may
not exist in the actual graph. Then, we differentiate the graph into PBGheader and PBG-payload based on the header and payload in the byte
sequence.
4.2. SAT-Net
Prior to this section, we have addressed the conversion of network
traffic data into graph data, transforming packet raw byte sequences into
undirected Packet Byte Graphs (PBGs), where each byte in a packet
constitutes a vertex in the graph, and the connections between vertices
represent the associations between bytes. Additionally, we have utilized
a window-based optimization method to obtain a more accurate repre­
sentation of the packet byte graph. Following this, we present the spe­
cific design concept of SAT-Net, Fig. 5 provides an overall framework of
SAT-Net.
Specifically, SAT-Net comprises four modules: a graph embedding
layer, feature remapping layer, Staggered Attention layer, and classifi­
cation layer, which are interconnected to form an end-to-end network.
Initially, we employ GraphSAGE to embed PBG-header and PBGpayload in parallel, obtaining the vector representation of PBG in the
feature space. Then, each embedding is remapped through an MLP to
obtain more semantic information about the PBG. Subsequently, stag­
gered attention layer fuses the vector representations of PBG-header and

t

̃ 2 from the second layer for
next layer. Finally, the output layer uses the H
t
batch normalization and regularization to compute the final feature
vector v. The computation process is as follows in Equations (5) and (6):
)
(
̃ (k) = SAGEConv H(k)
,1 < t<n
H
t
t

(5)

(
( (1) (2) ))
̃ ,H
̃
v = σ Wo ⋅ CONCAT H
t
t

(6)

where σ is the activation function, Wo represents the weight matrix for a
linear transformation, which can be used to change the output dimen­
sion. We use average pooling to obtain the feature vector of PBG. It is
worth noting that our SAT-Net adopts a parallel embedding approach,
where the parameters of the model are independent for PBG-header and
PBG-payload during the embedding learning process.
4.2.2. Feature remapping layer
Inspired by the graph isomorphism problem (Jin-yi et al., 1992), we
designed an MLP in this layer to learn the representation vector of the
PBG for feature enhancement. It comprises two linear layers, a batch
normalization layer, and a parameterized PReLU activation function,
with each linear layer acting as a recursive neighbor aggregation strat­
egy, performing deep processing and feature enhancement on node

Fig. 4. Visualization of the construction process of the PBG.
6

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Fig. 5. Overall network architecture of the proposed SAT-Net.

features. Here is our design approach for the MLP:
Within the MLP, the input data first undergoes a linear trans­
formation through the first linear layer, mapping node features to a
hidden feature space. This step expands the original feature information
to a higher-dimensional representation through linear transformation,
thereby preserving and enhancing the initial information of the node
and its neighborhood. After the linear transformation, the batch
normalization layer normalizes the features by adjusting their mean and
variance, ensuring that the hidden layer features have zero mean and
unit variance. This operation not only accelerates the training process of
the network but also significantly improves the stability and conver­
gence speed of the model, avoiding issues such as vanishing or exploding
gradients, thus maintaining the consistency and robustness of the
feature representation. Subsequently, the batch normalization layer
normalizes the output of the linear layer. Normalization aids in accel­
erating the training process and improving the stability and convergence
speed of the model. Unlike traditional ReLU, PReLU enhances the net­
work’s ability to handle nonlinear problems by adaptively adjusting the
output of negative input values. This is particularly effective when the
distribution of input data is uneven, as PReLU can better capture po­
tential feature relationships. After passing through the second linear
layer and the activation function, the output layer of the MLP maps these
nonlinearly transformed features to the final output space. This recur­
sive neighbor aggregation strategy ensures that the model can effec­
tively integrate multi-level information from nodes and their
neighborhoods, strengthening the model’s ability to recognize key fea­
tures. Formally, the computational formula for the above process is
given by (7)-(12):

where, hv is the input node feature vector, W1 ∈ Rm×n and b1 ∈ Rm are
the weight matrix and bias vector of the linear layer, respectively, and h1
is the output of the linear layer.
(2) For each feature dimension i of h1 , compute the mean μi and
variance σ 2i .

μi =

(8)

B
(
)2
1∑
h1,k,i − μi
B k=1

(9)

σ 2i =

where B represents the batch size. Then, after normalization, we obtain
h2 :
h1 − μ
h2 = √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⋅γ + β
σ2 + ϵ

(10)

where γ ∈ Rm and β ∈ Rm are learned scaling and shifting parameters,
respectively. The purpose of ϵ is to avoid division by zero.
(3) PReLU activation function
h3 = max(0, h2 ) + a*min(0, h2 )

(11)

(4) output:
y = W2 ⋅h3 + b2

(1) Linear Transformation:
h1 = W1 hv + b1

B
1∑
h1,k,i
B k=1

(12)

Transform h3 through the weight matrix W2 and bias b2 for the sec­
ond linear transformation to obtain the final output y.
Through the above steps, the Feature Remapping Layer enhances the

(7)
7

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

feature representation while maintaining the integrity of the original
information. It is able to capture global and local features in the PBG
more effectively, ultimately resulting in the remapped feature vector y.
Since we perform parallel embeddings, we distinguish between the
feature vectors of PBG-header and PBG-payload, for subsequent de­
scriptions, denoted as yh and yp respectively.

(16)

(
)
z = CONCAT ̃
yh , ̃
yp

(17)

In conclusion, the Staggered Attention Layer effectively enhances the
model’s feature representation capability through the contextawareness of the multi-head attention mechanism, multi-perspective
feature representation, refined feature fusion, and information capture
across semantic spaces. This ensures that key features can be accurately
captured and integrated in complex encrypted traffic classification tasks.

4.2.3. Staggered attention layer
Now that we have obtained the rich vector representation of the PBG,
we use the Staggered Attention Layer to capture traffic feature infor­
mation in multiple semantic spaces through the multi-head attention
mechanism. The aim is to address the issue of information loss in
traditional feature concatenation methods and to enhance the model’s
ability to express complex features. The benefits of this approach are as
follows:

4.2.4. Classification layer
The classification layer consists of two fully connected layers. The
first fully connected layer accepts the output z from the staggered
attention layer as input and employs the PReLU activation function,
which adaptively adjusts the shape of the activation function to enhance
the model’s non-linear expressive capabilities. The second fully con­
nected layer is a linear layer that takes the output of the first fully
connected layer as input, and its output feature dimension corresponds
to the number of categories in the classification task. This layer serves to
map the output features of the previous layer to the final classification
results.
The output o of the entire classification layer is the output of the
second fully connected layer, representing the model’s predictions for
the input data classification. In this way, the model can make classifi­
cation decisions based on the input data features.
Loss function. Considering that traffic data in real-world traffic
environments is often imbalanced, the use of standard cross-entropy
loss, commonly employed in classification problems, may lead to
biased estimates. Some research has utilized Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) (Wajdi and Wonjun, 2020) to generate traffic samples
to address the issue of sample data imbalance. However, these generated
samples often do not align with real samples and can increase the
training cost. Therefore, we employ Focal Loss as the loss function.
Formally, it is represented by Equation (18):
)
FLsoftmax (gt ) = − αt (1 − gt )γ log (gt )
(18)

(1) Context-aware Feature Fusion: The core advantage of the atten­
tion mechanism lies in its ability to provide contextual informa­
tion for each feature vector, allowing the fusion of features to
consider the global dependencies within the Packet Byte Graph
(PBG). Through a weighted approach, the attention mechanism
automatically assigns higher weights to important features while
diminishing the impact of irrelevant or redundant features.
(2) Multi-perspective Feature Representation with Multi-head
Attention: The multi-head attention mechanism processes mul­
tiple attention heads in parallel, enabling the model to learn
feature representations in multiple subspaces. Each attention
head focuses on different types of feature relationships within a
distinct representation subspace, capturing the diversity and
complexity of traffic features. For example, one attention head
may concentrate on specific patterns in header information,
while another may focus on detailed features in the payload. This
multi-perspective feature representation allows the model to
more comprehensively capture rich information in encrypted
traffic, enhancing classification accuracy and robustness.
(3) Avoiding Information Loss and Refined Feature Fusion: Directly
concatenating header and payload feature vectors can lead to
information loss due to dimensional discrepancies or uneven
weight distribution. Our Staggered Attention Layer refines the
weighted fusion of these features through the multi-head atten­
tion mechanism, ensuring a more rational weight allocation be­
tween different features in the model. This weighted fusion not
only effectively retains the original information of each feature
vector but also further strengthens the inter-feature correlations.

where gt represents the SoftMax prediction for class αt is the weight for
class t, and γ is the tuning factor.
In this paper, we sum up the losses for all classes, then average them
to obtain the final loss value. The calculation process is as follows:
)
C
(
)γ
( )
∑
Loss = −
(19)
αt 1 − gi,t log gi,t

Assuming the number of attention heads is h, the output of the Headi
can be represented as equation (13):
(
)
Q ⋅KT
(13)
AttnHeadi (Q, K, V) = softmax √̅̅̅̅̅ ⋅V
dk

t− 1

where, C represents the number of classes, gi,t denotes the probability
predicted by the softmax function for sample i to belong to class t.
5. Experiment and evaluation

where dk is the dimensionality of the Key vectors. The output of the
multi-head attention mechanism is represented as equation (14):
MultiHeadAttn(Q,K,V) = Concat(AttnHead1 , …, AttnHeadh )⋅WO

)
(
̃
yp = MultiHean Attn yp , yh , yh

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of SAT-Net on the task
of encrypted traffic classification through a series of experiments.
Initially, we introduce the datasets and comparison baselines used, fol­
lowed by an overall performance assessment via comparative experi­
ments with state-of-the-art methods (Section 5.2 Comparison
Experiments). Subsequently, we analyze the necessity of each compo­
nent within SAT-Net (Section 5.3 Ablation Study). We then conduct a
sensitivity analysis by varying different hyperparameters of the model
(Section 5.4 Sensitivity Analysis), and finally, we study the balance
between the model’s training and testing costs and its performance
(Section 5.5 Tradeoff Study for Cost and Performance).

(14)

where WO is the weight matrix of the output layer.
Then, we compute two attention outputs separately: one using the
PBG-header feature vectors yh as Query and the PBG-payload feature
vectors yp as Key and Value; the other using the PBG-payload feature
vectors yp as Query and the PBG-header feature vectors yh as Key and
Value. Then, we concatenate these two outputs as the final output z, and
the computation process is as follows in equations (15)–(17):
)
(
̃
yh = MultiHead Attn yh , yp , yp
(15)

8

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Z. Li et al.

specific information. It is worth noting that although we strive to
eliminate useless traffic flows, some irrelevant traffic may still remain;
however, this noise does not significantly affect the training and eval­
uation of our model. Notably, since we are conducting packet-level
classification tasks, we select the first 10 packets of each traffic flow
as the input for the model. This amount of information has been proven
to be sufficient in numerous studies on encrypted traffic classification
(Wei et al., 2017a) (Peng et al., 2023). Table 2 provides statistical in­
formation for these datasets after preprocessing.

5.1. Experiment setup
5.1.1. Datasets
The following paragraphs introduce the four public datasets and one
self-collected dataset used to evaluate the performance of SAT-Net.
(1) ISCX VPN-nonVPN (Gerard et al., 2016): This dataset, provided
by the Information Security Center of Excellence (ISCX), is spe­
cifically designed for research on the classification of VPN (Vir­
tual Private Network) and non-VPN traffic. It encompasses a
variety of traffic types and applications, (such as Chat: Skype,
ICQ; VoIP: Facebook, Hangout), among others. The ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset is generated by simulating the activities of
users Alice and Bob in different network environments. Although
it covers a variety of traffic types and applications, these simu­
lated environments may differ from real-world network condi­
tions, potentially leading to data that is not comprehensive or
representative in certain aspects.
(2) ISCX Tor-nonTor (Arash Habibi et al., 2017): Similar to ISCX
VPN-nonVPN, this dataset, also provided by ISCX, is dedicated to
the classification of Tor (The Onion Router) and non-Tor traffic.
Due to the unique traffic characteristics of the Tor network,
which are often employed for privacy and anonymous commu­
nication, this dataset is particularly relevant for studies that aim
to differentiate between legal and illicit activities. However, in
this dataset, encrypted traffic predominantly uses the Tor proto­
col, which somewhat limits the dataset’s applicability and
effectiveness in handling other encryption protocols such as VPN
and IPSec.
(3) USTC-TFC2016 (Wei et al., 2017b): Developed by USTC (Uni­
versity of Science and Technology of China), this dataset includes
both malicious and benign traffic for research on traffic classifi­
cation. It comprises network traffic from a multitude of applica­
tions, ranging from web browsing and social media to email and
various online services. Although the USTC-TFC2016 dataset
contains network traffic data from a variety of applications, its
scale and diversity may still not be sufficient to cover all types of
traffic found in actual network environments, which could
potentially limit the model’s generalization ability in practical
applications.
(4) CIC IoT (2023) (Euclides Carlos Pinto et al., 2023): This dataset,
provided by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), fo­
cuses on research related to Internet of Things (IoT) devices and
associated security threats. It includes network traffic collected
from various IoT devices and services, encompassing both normal
operations and potential attack traffic, such as DDoS attacks and
malware distribution. However, the variety, quantity, and con­
figurations of devices in actual IoT environments may be more
complex, which could potentially impact the model’s general­
ization capability in practical applications.
(5) HTTPS-D: We collected 14 web traffic deployments with TLS 1.3
from different types and services of applications using opensource tools Wireshark and tcpdump on a dedicated server. The
dataset encompasses services such as news websites, social
media, video platforms, and more. Due to the deployment of
collection devices at the campus network gateway, with the
server location relatively centralized, it may not reflect the user
experience and network conditions in different geographical
locations.

5.1.2. Baselines
We selected six advanced models as comparison baselines, which can
be categorized into two groups: deep learning-based methods (FS-Net
(Chang et al., 2019), DeepPacket (Mohammad et al., 2019), FlowPic (Tal
and Yuval, 2021)), and GNN-based methods (GraphDApp (Meng et al.,
2021), FG-Net (Minghao et al., 2022), EC-GCN (Zulong et al., 2023)). It
is worth noting that these methods can also be divided into three
different traffic representation approaches: based on raw byte sequences
(DeepPacket, FS-Net), converting encrypted traffic into images
(FlowPic), and transforming encrypted traffic into graph classification
problems (GraphDApp, FG-Net, EC-GCN), all of which are exemplary
representatives among these methods. Below is a brief introduction to
these models:
(1) FS-Net: This method learns features from raw flows and employs
a multi-layer encoder-decoder structure for feature enhancement
through reconstruction.
(2) DeepPacket: Utilizing autoencoders and convolutional neural
networks for processing network traffic, this approach can
simultaneously differentiate between application types and ser­
vice types.
(3) FlowPic: This method leverages temporal and size features of
flows, converting traffic data into images without utilizing
payload data to form a traffic images.
(4) GraphDApp: Building a Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and
combining it with a GNN-based classifier specifically designed for the
identification of Decentralized Applications.
(5) FG-Net: This model uses information-enhanced graph structures
to design a GNN-based traffic fingerprint learning model.
(6) EC-GCN: A temporal-spatial (multi-subgraph) classification ar­
chitecture that utilizes graphical layers and graph learning layers
to extract features from encrypted traffic.
5.1.3. Metrics
To evaluate the performance of SAT-Net, we utilize four metrics
commonly employed in classification problems: Accuracy, Precision,
Recall, and the F1 Score. Accuracy serves as an overall measure of the
model’s performance. Precision and Recall are utilized to assess the
model’s efficiency for each traffic category. The F1 Score, calculated as
the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, provides an integrated
measure of the model’s performance across all categories. The calcula­
tion methods for these metrics are presented in Equations (20)–(23):

Table 2
Statistics of experimental datasets. *In the USTC-TFC2016, both malware and
benign have 10 categories each; due to the vast size of the entire CIC IoT (2023)
dataset, we selected a portion of representative encrypted traffic from attacks for
the experiment, including DDoS-ICMP_Flood, DoS-SYN_Flood, Recon, MiraiArpspoofing, MITM, VulnerabilityScan, and SqlInjection.

Dataset Preprocessing. Before using the aforementioned datasets, we
need to perform a series of preprocessing operations to meet the re­
quirements for training in SAT-Net. First, we use Splitcap to segment the
raw PCAP files for each category of traffic and delete empty flows and
short flows. Next, we utilize the Scapy library in Python to anonymize
the packets within the flows, preventing the model from being biased by
9

Dataset

Number of Types

Total number of biflows

Dataset size

ISCX VPN-nonVPN
ISCX Tor-nonTor
USTC-TFC2016
CIC IoT (2023)
HTTPS-D

14
7
10/10
7
14

79315
50613
172048
132971
11594

16.3 GB
14.2 GB
3.2 GB
20.3 GB
4.3 GB

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Z. Li et al.

ACC =

TP + TN
TP + FP + FN + TN

PR =

TP
TP + FP

(21)

RC =

TP
TP + FN

(22)

F1 = 2*

traffic identification. Therefore, the packet-level classification
performed by SAT-Net and DeepPacket helps mitigate the issue of
dataset imbalance. Moreover, FG-Net achieves the second-best
performance on non-VPN traffic, indicating the superiority of
GNN-based methods.
(2) ISCX Tor-nonTor. Due to the use of onion routing technology, Tor
traffic is encrypted layer by layer, making it more difficult to
identify. As shown in Table 4, SAT-Net still maintains a high
accuracy rate. For Tor traffic identification, it outperforms the
second-best FG-Net by 4.81% in accuracy and by 2.03% in F1score, indicating that the use of graph-structured data can accu­
rately represent Tor encrypted traffic. Notably, the FS-Net, with
its complex reconstruction mechanism, performs almost identi­
cally to FG-Net in Tor traffic identification.
(3) USTC-TFC2016. This dataset contains both malicious software
traffic and benign traffic. From Table 5, it can be seen that the
accuracy of all models is less than 90%, with SAT-Net’s accuracy
being only 89.03%, indicating that the behavior patterns of ma­
licious software traffic are similar, making identification difficult.
Notably, GraphDApp performs poorly on this dataset, suggesting
that the interaction patterns of decentralized Applications are
quite different from those of malware.
(4) CIC IoT (2023). As shown in Table 6, similar to Tor traffic, the
performance of all models on this dataset is not satisfactory. Our
SAT-Net achieved the best result, with an accuracy of only
83.41%, followed by FlowPic at 81.38%. We observed that
network traffic attacks in IoT have fixed patterns, so the approach
of modeling traffic as images in FlowPic to construct traffic fin­
gerprints can also yield good results.
(5) HTTPS-D. This dataset is characterized by a large number of
samples and a diverse range of traffic types. As shown in Table 6,
our model achieved the top performance with an accuracy of
99.59% and an F1 score of 99.79%. Methods based on GNN all
achieved accuracies above 90%, with the exception of Graph­
DApp. Due to its integration of both communication control
behavior and data transmission behavior from bidirectional
flows, SAT-Net exhibits strong resistance to interference. Conse­
quently, when the dataset is sufficiently large, SAT-Net can
effectively mine the implicit patterns within encrypted traffic
using PBG without being swayed by irrelevant traffic. This sug­
gests that SAT-Net is capable of adapting to concept drift.

(20)

precision*recall
precision + recall

(23)

ACC refers to the proportion of correctly classified samples out of the
total number of samples. TP and FN represent true positives and true
negatives, respectively, while FP and FN denote false positives and false
negatives, respectively. A higher PR value indicates that the model has a
higher capability to discriminate traffic of that category, while a larger
RC value suggests that the model has a lower false positive rate for traffic
of that category. The F1 score is defined as the arithmetic mean of PR
and RC, and we utilize the F1 score to evaluate the model’s overall
balanced classification performance.
5.1.4. Implementations
Our experimental environment consists of an Ubuntu 18.04 oper­
ating system, an Intel® Xeon® Platinum 8255C CPU @2.50 GHz with
43 GB of memory, and an RTX 3090 (24 GB) GPU. The model con­
struction was completed using the Python 3.8 within the PyTorch1.10
environment. The processed dataset was randomly divided into training,
validation, and testing sets in a ratio of 8:1:1. Additionally, 10-fold
cross-validation was employed during training to reduce randomness
and mitigate the limitations associated with fixed dataset splits, thereby
enhancing the model’s generalization capabilities. During the training
process, the AdamW optimizer was utilized to optimize all parameters,
with the learning rate set to 1e-4, batch size fixed at 32, and dropout rate
at 0.1. SAT-Net introduces early stopping mechanisms and a learning
rate scheduler to dynamically adjust the learning rate during training,
preventing overfitting and enhancing the model’s convergence speed
and stability. Additionally, all experimental settings have undergone
strict consistency checks to ensure that the same configuration is
maintained across all cross-validation folds, eliminating potential
experimental biases and inconsistencies, thereby increasing the reli­
ability and reproducibility of the results.
5.2. Overall performance evaluation via comparison experiment

5.3. Ablation study

To validate the performance of our proposed SAT-Net, we compared
it with six baseline models on five datasets, with all baseline models
reproduced according to the original content’s network structure and
parameter settings. Our SAT-Net achieved the best performance on all
datasets, and the following are the model’s performances in each
dataset:

In this section, we validate the influence of each component within
SAT-Net by conducting ablation studies on the HTTPS-D dataset. The
results of these experiments are presented in Fig. 6. SAT-L2 denotes the
model without the feature remapping layer (L2), while SAT-L3 signifies
the model without the multi-head attention layer (L3). Additionally, we
substituted SAGEConv with either a Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) to produce SAT-GCN or a Graph Attention Network (GAT) to
produce SAT-GAT, thereby assessing the efficacy of SAGEConv within
SAT-Net. From these ablation studies, we can draw the following

(1) ISCX VPN-nonVPN. Table 3 shows that SAT-Net outperforms the
second-best model (DeepPacket) by 8.72% in accuracy and by
10.31% in F1-score on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset for VPN
Table 3
Experimental results on ISCX VPN-nonVPN.
Method
FS-Net
DeepPacket
FlowPic
GraphDApp
FG-Net
EC-GCN
SAT-Net

ISCX-VPN

ISCX-nonVPN

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

0.8621
0.8713
0.8538
0.4212
0.8592
0.7338
0.9605

0.9773
0.855
0.9363
0.4531
0.8313
0.7214
0.9616

0.8607
0.8748
0.7917
0.4852
0.8519
0.7401
0.9725

0.9149
0.8647
0.8566
0.4641
0.8466
0.7291
0.9678

0.7079
0.7701
0.6944
0.4087
0.8077
0.6572
0.9500

0.9196
0.7742
0.7073
0.4119
0.8519
0.7509
0.9523

0.7465
0.9603
0.7310
0.5971
0.9545
0.7121
0.9408

0.7586
0.8571
0.7131
0.5897
0.8753
0.7211
0.9494

10

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Table 4
Experimental results on ISCX Tor-nonTor.
Method

ISCX-Tor

FS-Net
DeepPacket
FlowPic
GraphDApp
FG-Net
EC-GCN
SAT-Net

ISCX-nonTor

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

0.8911
0.7071
0.7199
0.6686
0.8914
0.4971
0.9532

0.9029
0.7417
0.7311
0.5349
0.9253
0.4915
0.9599

0.9042
0.6209
0.7801
0.4799
0.9615
0,4376
0.9652

0.9031
0.7313
0.7484
0.5097
0.9434
0.4811
0.9637

0.9153
0.8741
0.5243
0,8605
0.7895
0.4103
0.9272

0.9153
0.8653
0.5593
0.7743
0.6714
0.4253
0.9182

0.9141
0.7792
0.6074
0.7193
0.6615
0,3752
0.9746

0.9104
0.8167
0.5653
0.7627
0.6613
0.3951
0.9621

Table 5
Experimental results on USTC-TFC2016.
Method

USTC-TFC2016-malware

FS-Net
DeepPacket
FlowPic
GraphDApp
FG-Net
EC-GCN
SAT-Net

USTC-TFC2016-benign

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

0.6889
0.8713
0.5538
0.1231
0.7129
0.8863
0.8903

0.6679
0.8851
0.5951
0.1341
0.8077
0.8824
0.9403

0.6815
0.8248
0.5917
0.1456
0.8109
0.8404
0.9152

0.6722
0.8747
0.5567
0.1403
0.8027
0.8591
0.9201

0.6576
0.7451
0.5942
0.1731
0.6667
0.8347
0.9323

0.6594
0.7178
0.54973
0.1354
0.6532
0.8591
0.9597

0.6465
0.7354
0.5313
0.1597
0.6664
0.8112
0.9147

0.6486
0.7187
0.5136
0.1373
0.6567
0.8225
0.9234

Table 6
Experimental results on CIC IoT (2023) and HTTPS-D.
Method

CIC IoT (2023)

FS-Net
DeepPacket
FlowPic
GraphDApp
FG-Net
EC-GCN
SAT-Net

HTTPS-D

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

ACC

PR

RC

F1-score

0.4289
0.5692
0.8138
0.1331
0.7129
0.7363
0.8341

0.8179
0.5052
0.7843
0.1901
0.7003
0.7224
0.8213

0.8215
0.5513
0.8228
0.1582
0.7409
0.7504
0.8016

0.8122
0.5502
0.7916
0.1599
0.7123
0.7231
0.8141

0.8576
0.7551
0.8847
0.7901
0.9592
0.9394
0.9959

0.8594
0.7478
0.9346
0.7882
0.9637
0.9725
0.9909

0.8365
0.7354
0.9036
0.7438
0.9435
0.9641
0.9921

0.8483
0.7387
0.9131
0.7773
0.9551
0.9652
0.9979

information from PBG-header and PBG-payload, underscoring
the pivotal role of L3 over L2.
(2) Analysis of Table 7 reveals that when the model employs GCN or
GAT for convolutional operations, there is a significant drop in
performance, as indicated by ACC and F1-score. Specifically, ACC
decreases by 25% and 17.32%, respectively, and the F1-score
decreases by 24.92% and 14.11%, respectively. This decline is
attributed to the fact that GCN does not utilize an adjacency
matrix that includes neighbor nodes, whereas the construction
process of PBG emphasizes the role of node neighbors. Interest­
ingly, there is also a performance degradation when SAGEConv is
replaced with GAT. GAT relies on the weights of neighbor nodes
to update the information of the central node, and we have also
employed attention mechanisms at L3. This suggests that SATGAT experiences overfitting.

Table 7
Experimental results of ablation study on HTTPS-D.
Method
SAT-L2
SAT-L3
SAT-GCN
SAT-GAT
SAT-Net

HTTPS-D
ACC

PR

ACC

F1-score

0.7331
0.5328
0.7459
0.8227
0.9959

0.7421
0.5704
0.7502
0.8617
0.9909

0.7318
0.5317
0.7417
0.8383
0.9921

0.7378
0.5591
0.7487
0.8568
0.9979

conclusions:
(1) We initiated by examining the performance fluctuations induced
by the alteration of L2 and L3. Table 7 illustrates that the removal
of either L2 or L3 results in substantial decrements in model
performance, as measured by ACC and F1-score. Specifically,
ACC decreases by 26.28% and 46.31%, respectively, and the F1score decreases by 26.01% and 43.88% respectively. This evi­
dence suggests that both L2 and L3 contribute significantly to the
model’s performance. L2, implemented as a multi-layer percep­
tron (MLP), functions to project the PBG into different vector
spaces, analogous to feature propagation. When the PBG’s rep­
resentation capacity suffices, the model can, in the absence of L2,
utilize the multi-head attention mechanism within L3 to fuse
features and elicit rich semantic representations. In particular,
the model’s optimal performance is contingent upon the fusion of

5.4. Sensitivity analysis
In this section, we selected several hyperparameters to study their
impact on model performance. The choice of these hyperparameters for
analysis is based on their significant influence on the core mechanisms
and performance of the model, while other hyperparameters are rela­
tively less important or contribute less to the model’s performance. The
experiments were conducted on the HTTPS-D dataset and the USTCTFC2016(benign) dataset with the largest number of sample flows. We
chose ACC as the evaluation metric, where ACC-1 represents the
experimental results on HTTPS-D, and ACC-2 represents the results
under USTC-TFC2016-benign.
11

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Fig. 6. Results of ablation experiments on the HTTPS-D dataset.

5.5. Tradeoff study for cost and performance

(1) Sliding Window Size Index (α): This hyperparameter primarily
affects the structure of the PBG. As α approaches 0, the PBG tends
to be constructed from sliding windows of a fixed size; as α ap­
proaches 1, the sliding window size is more influenced by the
length of the packet payload. The results shown in Fig. 7(a)
indicate that, since the HTTPS-D dataset consists of web traffic,
the packet length distribution across different website services
possesses learnable characteristics (Ziqing et al., 2019). This
suggests that the window size should be more closely related to
the correlation of the packet length distribution. Similarly, such a
pattern is also observed in USTC-TFC2016-benign, indicating that
the PBGs constructed by us are more inclined to describe the
recognizable patterns of traffic bytes from the distribution regu­
larities of packet lengths.
(2) Learning rate: A learning rate that is too large can make it diffi­
cult for the model to converge, while too small a learning rate can
increase the convergence time of the model. Fig. 7(b) represents
the relationship between the learning rate and the model’s ac­
curacy. For the HTTPS-D dataset, the epoch size is set to 21; for
the USTC-TFC2016-benign dataset, the epoch size is set to 14.
The results show that a learning rate of 1e-4 achieves the highest
accuracy, and a learning rate lower than this cannot achieve the
expected effect within the same time.
(3) SAGEConv Layer Numbers: SAT-Net performs graph convolution
operations by stacking multiple SAGEConv layers. Fig. 7(c) il­
lustrates the impact of different numbers of SAGEConv layers on
the model’s accuracy. It is evident that when only one layer is
used, the model lacks learning capacity and exhibits a lower ac­
curacy. When the number of layers exceeds two, the model’s
accuracy begins to decline, which is indicative of overfitting.
(4) Head Numbers of the Multi-Head Attention: The number of heads
in the multi-head attention mechanism determines how many
semantic spaces the model employs to learn the features of
encrypted traffic. As shown in Fig. 7(d), when the number of
heads is too few, the model’s accuracy decreases by more than
12%. The highest accuracy is achieved when the number of heads
is 8. When the head count is increased to 16 or 32, the accuracy
drops, indicating that 8 heads are sufficient to fully leverage the
expressive power of PBG.

In practical applications, striking a balance between training costs
and model performance is of paramount importance. Overzealous pur­
suit of higher accuracy often leads to resource wastage. Therefore, in this
section, we analyze the trade-off between model performance and
training costs. The experiments were conducted on the HTTPS-D dataset
and USTC-TFC2016(benign), and the following is a detailed analysis.
(1) Epoch. It is well-known that during an epoch, the model un­
dergoes both forward computation and backpropagation.
Consequently, an increase in epochs leads to an increase in
training time. To investigate the balance between epochs and
accuracy, we conducted a set of experiments, the results of which
are shown in Fig. 8. Evidently, for the HTTPS-D dataset, as the
number of epochs increases, so does accuracy. Within 5 epochs,
the accuracy reaches 0.8912, with a significant growth rate,
peaking at the 21st epoch. However, after 8 epochs, the benefits
of increased epochs slow down, and accuracy begins to decline
after the 22nd epoch. Similarly, for the USTC-TFC2016(benign)
dataset, SAT-Net achieves its best performance at the 14th
epoch, with significant gains in the first 7 epochs. Therefore, in
practical applications, to achieve the optimal balance between
cost and performance, the number of epochs should be selected
between 11 and 15.
(2) Dataset Size. The size of the dataset influences the quantity and
quality of the features of Packet Byte Graphs (PBGs) that the
model learns. Consequently, we varied the dataset size, and Fig. 9
presents the trend in the accuracy of the SAT-Net model under
different sizes of the HTTPS-D dataset. For the HTTPS-D dataset,
we randomly selected 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% of the traffic
samples from the original dataset. Even when using a dataset that
is only 20% of the original size, the model’s accuracy remains
above 90%, which suggests that the PBGs we constructed are a
stable and reliable representation of encrypted traffic. As the
dataset size increases, the improvement in model performance is
not pronounced, indicating that SAT-Net has a certain degree of
resistance to interference. The experimental results on USTCTFC2016(benign) also demonstrate this point. Since capturing
traffic data is relatively straightforward, yet subject to significant
concept drift, we prefer to use a dataset that is relatively larger.

12

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Fig. 9. Impact of dataset size on SAT-Net performance.

information-rich PBGs requires complex computations (such as setting
dynamic sliding window sizes and calculating PPMI values). For
instance, when dealing with video traffic (where the average number of
bytes per packet is often large), constructing PBGs can be timeconsuming. However, our strategy in such cases is to reduce the num­
ber of packets used per flow. Additionally, while it is relatively easy to
obtain a large amount of network encrypted traffic data, most of it
cannot be directly used by deep learning models after preprocessing. In
future work, we could further explore using the raw bytes of unlabeled
traffic flows as input for pretraining GNNs models, as this approach may
contribute to a reduction in the consumption of continuous computa­
tional resources.
Moreover, the computational time required for the construction of
PBGs can significantly impact the system’s ability to perform in realtime. Specifically, the calculation of PPMI values and the adjustment
of dynamic sliding window sizes demand considerable computational
resources, particularly when dealing with large-scale traffic data, espe­
cially in a cloud computing environment. For instance, when con­
structing the PBG using the HTTPS-D dataset (4.3 GB), we observed an
average processing time of 0.18 seconds per sample flow, with a cor­
responding total memory consumption of 6144 MB. To enhance realtime performance, it is advisable to consider these factors during the
system design phase and to investigate potential optimization strategies,
such as the implementation of more efficient algorithms or the utiliza­
tion of hardware acceleration techniques.
The second issue concerns the application of SAT-Net in real-world
networks. Since our SAT-Net experiments were conducted on closed
datasets, when deployed in the core part of a network (such as routers),
the phenomenon of concept drift in network traffic can pose challenges
for SAT-Net in open-set recognition (recognizing unseen traffic pat­
terns). It is worth noting that at the edge of the network, such as servers
in data centers, traffic types are relatively stable. Therefore, in such
scenarios, SAT-Net can achieve the expected results in identifying
abnormal traffic types.

Fig. 7. Experimental results of sensitivity analyses on the HTTPS-D dataset.

7. Conclusion
Considering the network’s topological structure and the advantages
of geometric deep learning, we propose an encrypted traffic classifica­
tion method based on Staggered Attention Networks (SAT-Net). SAT-Net
can utilize bidirectional flow control information and data transmission
information for encrypted traffic identification. SAT-Net represents the
original encrypted traffic through Packet Byte Graph (PBG), where the
vertices of the graph store byte features, and the edges represent the
relationships between bytes. We employ the GraphSAGE algorithm to
obtain the vector representation of the PBG, and then extract the rich
information of PBG through a feature remapping layer. Subsequently,
we utilize the Staggered Attention layer for feature fusion, in which the
multi-head attention mechanism can capture traffic flow feature infor­
mation from different semantic spaces. Finally, we conduct

Fig. 8. Effect of training epoch on the performance of SAT-Net.

6. Limitations
The experiments conducted in Section 5 have demonstrated the ad­
vantageous properties of SAT-Net. Next, we discuss its limitations. The
first issue is that our SAT-Net takes PBGs as input, but constructing
13

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

comprehensive experiments on four public datasets and one selfcollected dataset (HPPTS-D) to evaluate the generalization and effec­
tiveness of SAT-Net. Comparative experiments with state-of-the-art
methods demonstrate that SAT-Net outperforms SOTAs on all datasets.
Ablation study results indicate that both the feature remapping layer
and the Staggered Attention layer contribute to performance improve­
ment. Furthermore, we find that SAT-Net is suitable for real-world
network environments in terms of the balance between cost and
benefit. In future research, we aim to address concept drift by obtaining
a universal representation of encrypted traffic through the study of the
encrypted traffic itself.

Haozhen, Z., Le, Y., Xi, X., Qing, L., Francesco, M., Xiapu, L., Qixu, L., 2023. TFE-GNN: a
temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks for fine-grained encrypted
traffic classification. The Web Conference 16713, 2066–2075. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3543507.3583227 abs/2307.
Jin-yi, C., Martin, F., Neil, I., 1992. An optimal lower bound on the number of variables
for graph identification. 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science 12 (4), 389–410. https://doi.org/10.1109/sfcs.1989.63543.
Leslie, F.S., 2020. Packet analysis for network forensics: a comprehensive survey.
Forensic Sci. Int.: Digit. Invest. 32, 200892. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fsidi.2019.200892.
Liang, Y., Chengsheng, M., Yuan, L., 2018. Graph convolutional networks for text
classification, AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-First Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 7370–7377. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1809.05679 abs/1809.05679.
Ma, S., Liu, J., Zuo, X., 2022. Survey on graph neural network. J. Comput. Res. Dev. 59
(1), 47–80. https://doi.org/10.7544/issn1000-1239.20201055.
Meng, S., Jinpeng, Z., Liehuang, Z., Ke, X., Xiaojiang, D., 2021. Accurate decentralized
application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural networks.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16, 2367–2380. https://doi.org/10.1109/
tifs.2021.3050608.
Michael, F., Chris, R., Eduardo, R., Jean-Alexander, M., Klaus, H., 2014. A survey of
payload-based traffic classification approaches. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 16 (2),
1135–1156. https://doi.org/10.1109/surv.2013.100613.00161.
Michael, M.B., Joan, B., Yann, L., Arthur, S., Pierre, V., 2017. Geometric deep learning:
going beyond Euclidean data. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 34 (4), 18–42. https://doi.
org/10.1109/msp.2017.2693418.
Michelle, C., Lars, E., Joe, T., Magnus, W., Stuart, C., 2011. Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA) Procedures for the Management of the Service Name and
Transport Protocol Port Number Registry, vol. 6335. Request for Comments,
pp. 1–33. https://doi.org/10.17487/rfc6335.
Minghao, J., Zhen, L., Peipei, F., Wei, C., Mingxin, C., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., 2022.
Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level relationship with graph neural
networks. Comput. Network. 217, 109309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2022.109309.
Mohammad, L., Mahdi Jafari, S., Ramin Shirali Hossein, Z., Mohammdsadegh, S., 2019.
Deep packet: a novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning. Comput. Res. Repos. 24 (3), 1999–2012. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500019-04030-2.
Peng, L., Kejiang, Y., Yishen, H., Yanying, L., Cheng-Zhong, X., 2023. A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.
31 (3), 1369–1384. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnet.2022.3215507.
Tal, S., Yuval, S., 2021. FlowPic: a generic representation for encrypted traffic
classification and applications identification. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18 (2),
1218–1232. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2021.3071441.
Tao, Y., Xingshu, C., Yi, Z., Weijing, G., Zhenhui, H., 2023. Review on the application of
deep learning in network attack detection. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 212, 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2022.103580.
Thai-Dien, P., Thien-Lac, H., Tram, T., Tien-Dung, C., Hong Linh, T., 2021. MAppGraph mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic using deep graph convolution
neural networks. Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
pp. 1025–1038. https://doi.org/10.1145/3485832.3485925.
Theophilus, B., Aditya, A., David, A.M., 2010. Network traffic characteristics of data
centers in the wild. IMC 267–280. https://doi.org/10.1145/1879141.1879175.
Ting-Li, H., Yan, L., Tong, Z., 2021. Encrypted network traffic classification using a
geometric learning model. IFIP/IEEE Symp. Integr. Netw. Manag. 376–383.
Ting-Li, H., Yan, L., Peilong, L., Tong, Z., 2023. Flow-based encrypted network traffic
classification with graph neural networks. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 20 (2),
1224–1237. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2022.3227500.
Tiru, W., Xi, X., Qing, L., Qixu, L., Guangwu, H., Xiapu, L., Yong, J., 2023. BehavSniffer:
sniff user behaviors from the encrypted traffic by traffic burst graphs. 2023 20th
Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking,
SECON, pp. 456–464. https://doi.org/10.1109/secon58729.2023.10287511.
Tomasz, B., Valentín, C., Pere, B., 2015. Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for
traffic classification. Comput. Network. 76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2014.11.001. C: 75.0-89.0.
Wajdi, B., Wonjun, L., 2020. Detecting malign encrypted network traffic using Perlin
noise and convolutional neural network, computing and communication: 02000206. https://doi.org/10.1109/ccwc47524.2020.9031116.
Wei, W., Ming, Z., Jinlin, W., Xuewen, Z., Zhongzhen, Y., 2017a. End-to-end encrypted
traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks. Intelligence
and Security Informatics, pp. 43–48. https://doi.org/10.1109/isi.2017.8004872.
Wei, W., Ming, Z., Xuewen, Z., Xiaozhou, Y., Yiqiang, S., 2017b. Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning.
International Conference on Information Networking, pp. 712–717. https://doi.org/
10.1109/icoin.2017.7899588.
William, L.H., Rex, Y., Jure, L., 2017. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30, 1024–1034. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1706.02216.
Xiaodong, Z., Jian, G., Maoli, W., Peng, G., Guowei, Z., 2023. IP traffic behavior
characterization via semantic mining. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 213, 103603. https://
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4250125, 103603.
Xin, W., Shuhui, C., Jinshu, S., 2020. App-net: a hybrid neural network for encrypted
mobile traffic classification. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. 424–429. https://doi.
org/10.1109/infocomwkshps50562.2020.9162891.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhiyuan Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Methodology. Hongyi Zhao: Investigation, Data curation. Jingyu
Zhao: Visualization, Conceptualization. Yuqi Jiang: Visualization,
Software. Fanliang Bu: Validation, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was partially supported by the Double First-Class Inno­
vation Research Project of People’s Public Security University of China:
No.2023SYL08.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Arash Habibi, L., Gerard, D., Mohammad Saiful Islam, M., Ali, A.G., 2017.
Characterization of tor traffic using time based features. International Conference on
Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 253–262. https://doi.org/10.5220/
0006105602530262.
Bentian, L., Dechang, P., Yunxia, L., Lin, C., 2021. DNC: a deep neural network-based
clustering-oriented network embedding algorithm. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 173,
102854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102854.
Bo, P., Yongquan, F., Siyuan, R., Ye, W., Qing, L., Yan, J., 2021. CGNN: traffic
classification with graph neural network. CoRR, 09726. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2110.09726 abs/2110.
Chang, L., Zigang, C., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., Siu-Ming, Y., Longtao, H., 2018. MaMPF:
Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on Multi-Attribute Markov Probability
Fingerprints. IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Quality of Service, pp. 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1109/iwqos.2018.8624124.
Chang, L., He, L., Gang, X., Zigang, C., Zhen, L., 2019. FS-net: a flow sequence network
for encrypted traffic classification. IEEE International Conference Computer and
Communications, pp. 1171–1179. https://doi.org/10.1109/infocom.2019.8737507.
Chen, Z., Cheng, G., Jiang, B., Tang, S., Guo, S., Zhou, Y., 2020. Length matters: fast
Internet encrypted traffic service classification based on multi-PDU lengths. 2020
16th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN),
pp. 531–538. https://doi.org/10.1109/msn50589.2020.00089.
Euclides Carlos Pinto, N., Sajjad, D., Raphael, F., Alireza, Z., Rongxing, L., Ali A, G.,
2023. CICIoT2023: a real-time dataset and benchmark for large-scale attacks in IoT
environment. Sensors 23 (13), 5941. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23135941, 5941.
Gerard, D., Arash Habibi, L., Mohammad Saiful Islam, M., Ali, A.G., 2016.
Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features.
International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 407–414.
https://doi.org/10.5220/0005740704070414.
Giuseppe, A., Domenico, C., Antonio, M., Antonio, P., 2021. DISTILLER: encrypted traffic
classification via multimodal multitask deep learning. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
183–184, 102985. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2021.102985.
Google. HTTPS on the Web-Google Transparency Report. https://transparencyreport.
google.com/https/overview(accessed 11 February 2024).
Haipeng, Y., Chong, L., Peiying, Z., Sheng, W., Chunxiao, J., Shui, Y., 2022. Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term memory.
IEEE Trans. Big Data 8 (1), 241–252. https://doi.org/10.1109/
tbdata.2019.2940675.

14

Z. Li et al.

Journal of Network and Computer Applications 233 (2025) 104069

Xinjie, L., Gang, X., Gaopeng, G., Zhen, L., Junzheng, S., Jing, Y., 2022. ET-BERT: a
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted
traffic classification. The Web Conference, pp. 633–642. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3485447.3512217.
Yaxuan, Q., Lianghong, X., Baohua, Y., Yibo, X., Jun, L., 2009. Packet classification
algorithms: from theory to practice. IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
p. 648. https://doi.org/10.1109/infcom.2009.5061972.
Ziqing, Z., Cuicui, K., Gang, X., Zhen, L., 2019. Deep forest with LRRS feature for finegrained website fingerprinting with encrypted SSL/TLS. International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 851–860. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3357384.3357993.
Zonghan, W., Shirui, P., Fengwen, C., Guodong, L., Chengqi, Z., Philip S, Y., 2021.
A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Transact. Neural Networks
Learn. Syst. 32 (1), 4–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2020.2978386.
Zulong, D., Gaogang, X., Xin, W., Rui, R., Xuying, M., Guangxing, Z., Kun, X., Mingyu, Q.,
2023. EC-GCN: a encrypted traffic classification framework based on multi-scale
graph convolution networks. Comput. Network. 224, 109614. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.comnet.2023.109614, 109614.

–Hongyi Zhao obtained his Bachelor’s degree in Cybersecurity and Law Enforcement from
the People’s Public Security University of China in 2022 and is currently pursuing a
Master’s degree in Security Prevention Engineering. He has been studying at the People’s
Public Security University of China since 2018. His research interests include network
traffic analysis and natural language processing.

–Zhiyuan Li received the B.S. degree in Cyber Security in Law Enforcement from Jiangxi
Police College in 2021. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree (in the direction of big
data technology) and has been studying at the People’s Public Security University of China
(PPSUC) since 2022, where his research interests include network traffic analysis and deep
learning.

–Fanliang Bu is a Doctor of Engineering from the School of Electronics and Information
Engineering at Xi’an Jiaotong University, and a Postdoctoral Fellow in Acoustics at the
Institute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is currently a professor at the
School of Information and Network Security, People’s Public Security University of China,
with research interests in intelligent social governance and security protection
engineering.

– Jingyu Zhao received the B.S. degree in Automation from Northeastern University
(China) in 2021, and is currently pursuing the M.S. degree (in the direction of security
prevention engineering), and has been studying at the People’s Public Security University
of China (PPSUC) since 2022, where his research interests include cybersecurity preven­
tion and control, and information transmission.
– Yuqi Jiang received a Bachelor’s degree in Cybersecurity and Law Enforcement from the
People’s Public Security University of China in 2021. Since 2022, she has been pursuing a
Master’s degree in the field of Cyberspace Security Law Enforcement Technology at the
same university. Her research interests include natural language processing, imbalanced
data processing, text classification, and related areas.

15