11744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

S AURON E YES: Disentangling Voluminous Logs to
Unveil Camouflaged Attack Intentions
Wei Qiao , Weiheng Wu, Song Liu, Yebo Feng , Zehui Wang, Junrong Liu , Teng Li , Bo Jiang ,
Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu

Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) pose escalating risks to large enterprises and institutions. While current
research has predominantly focused on data source analysis
for identifying known attack patterns or anomalous behaviors,
three critical challenges remain inadequately addressed: 1) APTs
demonstrate sophisticated concealment capabilities, embedding
malicious operations within legitimate business activities; 2) The
sparse nature of APT attacks leads to low-frequency malicious
activities that prove exceptionally challenging to detect within
massive log datasets; 3) APTs employ multi-stage attack chains,
whereas existing solutions exhibit limitations in reconstructing
complete attack pathways to enable effective forensic analysis. In this paper, we address the detrimental effects of the
sparsity of malevolent interactions and attack intent camouflaging on anomaly detection by introducing S AURON E YES, the
pioneering APT detection system tailored to resolve these challenges. S AURON E YES constructs audit logs into both knowledge
and interaction views, disentangling these to learn representations through graph learning enhanced with an attention-based
neighbor allocation mechanism. Additionally, we incorporate
self-supervised contrastive learning to discern the subtle similarities and distinctions among disentangled samples, facilitating
a deeper understanding of the inherent structures within system
Received 2 April 2025; revised 2 August 2025, 31 August 2025,
and 23 September 2025; accepted 24 September 2025. Date of publication
6 October 2025; date of current version 6 November 2025. This work
was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2023YFC2206402; in part by the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences under
Grant XDA0460100; in part by the Open Foundation of Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education of China under Grant
KLCS20240206; in part by the Program of Key Laboratory of Network
Assessment Technology; in part by Chinese Academy of Sciences; in part by
the Program of Beijing Key Laboratory of Network Security and Protection
Technology; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62272370; in part by the Natural Science Basic Research Program
of Shaanxi under Grant 2025JC-JCQN-073; in part by the Young Elite
Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST under Grant 2022QNRC001; in
part by the Qinchuangyuan Scientist + Engineer Team Program of Shaanxi
under Grant 2024QCY-KXJ-149; and in part by the Songshan Laboratory
under Grant 241110210200. The associate editor coordinating the review of
this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Ming Li. (Wei Qiao
and Weiheng Wu contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors:
Junrong Liu; Teng Li.)
Wei Qiao, Weiheng Wu, Song Liu, Zehui Wang, Junrong Liu, Bo Jiang,
Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu are with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China, and also with the
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 101408, China (e-mail: qiaowei@iie.ac.cn; wuweiheng@iie.ac.cn;
liusong@iie.ac.cn; wangzehui@iie.ac.cn; liujunrong@iie.ac.cn; jiangbo@
iie.ac.cn; luzhigang@iie.ac.cn; liubaoxu@iie.ac.cn).
Yebo Feng is with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
(e-mail: yebo.feng@ntu.edu.sg).
Teng Li is with the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an
710126, China, and also with the Songshan Laboratory, Zhengzhou 450018,
China (e-mail: litengxidian@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3618381

interactions. S AURON E YES thus boasts heightened sensitivity
and granular detection capabilities. Finally, S AURON E YES reconstructs the attack chain at the node level and presents an
attack-chain that is more accessible for security analysis. Our
evaluations in real-world scenarios and simulated attack environments demonstrate that S AURON E YES achieves outstanding
accuracy, with an average detection rate of 99%.
Index Terms—Advanced persistent threats (APT) detection,
graph neural network (GNN), provenance graph, intrusion detection system (IDS).

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

N ADVANCED Persistent Threat (APT) is a long-term,
targeted cyberattack conducted by skilled attackers who
stealthily infiltrate a system, often through phishing or by
exploiting vulnerabilities [1]. Once they gain access, they
deploy advanced malware and backdoors to remain undetected while moving through the network to gain control
[2]. APTs typically aim to steal sensitive data or disrupt
operations, posing a severe threat to large organizations and
government systems. Consequently, achieving full-cycle attack
attribution has become an urgent need. However, unlike
traditional attacks, APTs feature a multi-stage attack chain
(e.g., reconnaissance, lateral movement, data exfiltration),
making it difficult for conventional single-point event detection
methods to establish a complete contextual relationship of
the attack. Additionally, APTs incorporate disguised benign
behaviors within their attack chain, exhibiting a high degree
of stealth that renders detection through traditional featurematching methods ineffective. Moreover, APTs have long
dormancy periods and utilize low-frequency communication,
causing traditional threshold-based anomaly detection models
to fail. These characteristics of APTs present challenges that
render conventional intrusion detection systems ineffective, as
they struggle to address low-frequency and complex attack
strategies, resulting in higher rates of false positives and
false negatives. Therefore, there is a need to propose a highaccuracy APT detection solution that maintains a low false
positive rate while consuming minimal resources without
compromising system performance. In response, the research
community has employed data provenance techniques for
executing APT detection [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13]. These techniques transform system audit logs
into provenance graphs, utilizing rich contextual information
for fine-grained causal analysis to detect intrusions and deduce
security vulnerabilities. Existing research partially relies on

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

Rule-based methods [14], [15], [16], which employ typical
or specific attack patterns to construct rules and match audit
records with known attack rules. However, this approach
heavily depends on prior knowledge and is costly to develop
in environments with frequent new variations, making it challenging to detect common zero-day issues in APT scenarios.
Alternatively, some studies utilize Statistics-based methods
[17], [18], [19] to detect threats by mapping the rarity of elements from various sources in provenance graphs, quantifying
the tendency for attacks. The limitation of this approach is
its focus only on direct connections (low-order information)
within the graphs, which leads to overlooking a vast amount
of deeper intents hidden in complex system entity interactions.
Most recent research has shifted towards Learning-based
methods [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. These methods
leverage various deep learning techniques to model APT
behaviors or patterns, classify anomalous samples, and detect
deviations, enabling the detection of unknown attacks.
Traditional non-learning methods (e.g., rule-based matching, statistical analysis) exhibit inherent limitations in modeling complex entity relationships and dynamic behavioral
patterns due to reliance on predefined knowledge bases’
completeness. While large language models enhance contextual reasoning via chain-of-thought mechanisms, their
design paradigms fundamentally misalign with APT attribution
requirements. Large models’ data/compute demands clash
with scarce APT samples and dynamic threats, while their
opacity hinders pinpointing initial breaches and lateral movements, causing dual failures in path inference and forensic
clarity. In contrast, graph neural network (GNN)-based provenance frameworks model network entities as heterogeneous
provenance graph structures that explicitly preserve attack
propagation topology and temporal-causal dependencies. This
approach achieves optimal balance across detection accuracy,
resource efficiency, and explainability.
While provenance graph-based graph learning methods have
achieved promising results, they still face inherent challenges
in handling APT attacks: 1) Camouflage: Attackers construct
semantically coherent pseudo-normal contexts by blending
malicious operations with massive benign behaviors (e.g.,
masquerading as legitimate process invocations or routine
file access), causing traditional anomaly detection models
to suffer from feature confusion; 2) Low-frequency: APT
events exhibit extremely low signal-to-noise ratios, with malicious fragments (often < 0.01%) concealed in long-term
TB-scale operation logs—the extreme sparsity allows normal
high-frequency nodes to dominate graph neural networks’
neighborhood aggregation, while existing loss functions struggle to capture long-tailed malicious patterns under class
imbalance ratios exceeding 104 : 1; 3) Multi-stage: APT
attacks follow multi-phase tactics spanning hundreds of entities and dozens of stages, yet current methods relying on
fixed-hop subgraph sampling (e.g., 3-hop truncation) fail to
model cross-stage long-range dependencies, ultimately hindering complete attack graph reconstruction.
To address these challenges, we propose S AURON E YES, an
advanced APT detection framework integrating graph disentanglement algorithms and contrastive learning. It systemati-

11745

cally addresses APT characteristics through three innovations:
1) A graph disentanglement algorithm that isolates interactive
noise in multi-dimensional entity attributes while revealing
latent behavioral intentions; 2) A multi-view contrastive learning mechanism applied to the disentangled graph, which
enhances discriminative feature learning through dynamic
positive/negative sampling, effectively reducing false positives
while amplifying subtle attack patterns; 3) During attack
detection, malicious interaction scores are used to distinguish
between benign and malicious entities, and critical intents
(attributes and relationships) among infected entities are preserved to intuitively reconstruct attack scenarios, thereby
providing hierarchical forensic evidence for security analysts.
SauronEyes comprises four collaborative modules for
efficient anomalous edge detection and attack chain reconstruction: (1) Graph Construction constructs an Interaction
Knowledge Graph (KG) capturing entity attributes (IP, paths,
parent-child relationships) and a Graph (IG) reflecting entity
interactions (processes, files, sockets), initializing aspect
embeddings through gate units coupled with specific aspects.
(2) View Disentanglement employs an attention-based neighbor allocation mechanism into path-aware GNNs for KG
disentanglement, while integrating an focused lightweight
GCN (LightGCN) to disentangle IG. (3) Contrastive Learning enhances representation learning through intra-view and
inter-view contrastive mechanisms, mitigating data sparsity.
(4) Threat Detection & Attack Reconstruction predicts edge
maliciousness via multi-aspect fusion, constructs compact
summary graphs by considering overlapping attack behaviors
across events.
We have implemented S AURON E YES and evaluated its
effectiveness and efficiency on the DARPA Transparent Computing (TC) E3 dataset [20], StreamSpot dataset [21] and the
Unicorn Wget dataset [6]. The DARPA dataset includes realworld attacks, while the StreamSpot and Unicorn dataset can
simulate attacks in a controlled environment. Experimental
results show that S AURON E YES can efficiently capture real
attack intents and distinguish between benign and malicious
system entity interactions with high precision and recall rates.
Moreover, S AURON E YES matches or exceeds the performance
of state-of-the-art detection methods. Finally, S AURON E YES
accurately reconstructs attack chains.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose S AURON E YES, an APT detection method
suitable for environments with high sparsity of malicious
interactions, capable of detecting deep attack intents in
massive log data. It also constructs an attack chain that
is easier to analyze.
• We capture deep attack intentions by disentangling the
camouflaged graphs and model system entity interaction
tendencies through disentangled representation learning,
thus preventing the detection model from being misled
by surface intent-induced representations.
• We introduce a novel self-supervised contrastive learning
framework that learns disentangled representations of
system entities from knowledge views and interaction
views and enhances inter-view and intra-view compar-

11746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
O BSTACLES T HAT L IMIT THE P ERFORMANCE OF P ROVENANCE -BASED
APT D ETECTION M ODELS . I NDICATE T HAT T HEY C AN S OLVE OR
H AVE T HIS A BILITY, W HILE ◦ I NDICATE THE O PPOSITE

Fig. 1. Abstract diagram sourced from DARPA E3-CADETS, depicting a
backdoor attack activity.

isons, providing an effective solution for the high sparsity
of malicious entities in real-world log data.
• We conduct extensive experimental evaluations on widely
used datasets, demonstrating the high effectivenes.
II. BACKGROUND & M OTIVATION
In this section, we use APT attacks from DARPA [20] to
illustrate the challenges in existing threat detection solutions.
A. Motivating Example
As shown in Fig. 1, this is a real Nginx backdoor attack from
the DARPA Transparent Computing Engagement 3 [20]. The
attacker 81.49.200.166 launched two cyber attacks against
the CADETS system by exploiting an Nginx backdoor. During
the initial attack, the perpetrator successfully connected to
the vulnerable Nginx server running on CADETS. Through
shell commands, they downloaded a malicious payload to the
/tmp/vUgefal directory and successfully escalated privileges
for the vUgefal process to root level. After exfiltrating
sensitive information, the attacker attempted to infect the sshd
process with the malicious payload, which ultimately caused
a system crash before completion. Subsequently, the attacker
initiated a second assault by creating the malicious process
XIM and establishing a persistent test process designed to
maintain long-term connectivity while conducting port scanning operations across the local network (128.5.12.*:*).
B. Attack Intent Camouflaging
Intent refers to the normal interactive behaviors of system
entities themselves, as well as the objectives of malicious
behaviors orchestrated by APT attackers [22], [23]. Attack
Intent Camouflaging describes a critical detection challenge
where an attacker deliberately mixes malicious operations with
a large volume of legitimate, benign system activities. By
embedding malicious behavior within normal workflows, the
attacker’s hostile intent becomes mixed with routine operational intents, effectively camouflaging the attack. This tactic
makes it exceptionally difficult to discern the true purpose
behind a series of actions. For instance, a single process might
execute both legitimate and malicious tasks simultaneously,
which obscures its overall intent from traditional detection
systems. The Nginx backdoor attack in the DARPA dataset
serves as a concrete example of Attack Intent Camouflaging.

C. Challenge to Existing Solutions
Previous studies on threat detection have demonstrated
remarkable performance in the field of APT detection.
Nevertheless, persistent challenges hinder the effectiveness
of provenance-based detection models when deployed in
increasingly complex real-world environments. These critical
limitations, which will be elaborated in subsequent sections,
are systematically summarized in TABLE I.
1) Rule-Based Methods: Rule-based detection frameworks
[14], [15], [16] incorporate expert knowledge to construct
attack-matching patterns through known attack reports and
meticulously designed attack chain scoring mechanisms based
on ATT&CK. While this expert-driven approach effectively
reduces false positive rates, the excessive reliance on manual
expertise results in slow pattern updates when confronting
sophisticated APT attack vectors and evolving cyberspace
landscapes, ultimately leading to significant detection latency
in rule-based methodologies.
2) Statistics-Based Methods: Statistical-based approaches
[17], [18], [19] detect anomalies by calculating occurrence
probabilities of system behaviors and assigning anomaly
scores based on their rarity (operating under the assumption
that rare entities are more likely to be malicious). However,
these shallow statistical measurements fail to capture the
genuine intent behind system behaviors. As demonstrated in
our motivating example (Fig. 1), the test process conducting multiple port scans across different IP addresses would
be misclassified as benign due to its high frequency, while
overlooking its critical association with the malicious Nginx
entity. Moreover, initial low-frequency benign activities like
file writes by python often trigger false positives. These
limitations originate from conventional statistical approaches’
failure to holistically capture entity attributes and interaction
semantics in provenance graphs.
3) Learning-Based Methods: Deep learning-based APT
detection leverages large-scale system behavioral data
for model training, yet faces fundamental constraints.
KAIROS [13] adopts graph neural network encoder-decoder

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

11747

Fig. 2. The framework of S AURON E YES consists of: i) generating initial embeddings from knowledge graphs and interaction graphs; ii) dual-view disentangling
by LightGCN and Path-aware GNN respectively; iii) contrastive learning within and between views and iv) threat detection and attack chain reconstruction.

architectures for attack chain reconstruction. UNICORN [6]
constructs contextual provenance graphs for stealthy attack
detection but suffers from coarse-grained alerting. SHADEWATCHER [12] reformulates APT detection as entity preference prediction via bipartite graph modeling, lacking full-chain
attack reconstruction. MAGIC [24] employs masked graph
representation learning to abstract benign system patterns,
while THREATRACE [10] implements GraphSAGE-based
entity aggregation for host-centric threat detection. Current
approaches remain fundamentally constrained by severe data
imbalance between benign logs and sparse APT patterns, with
inadequate mitigation strategies exacerbating false positives.
III. T HREAT M ODEL AND D ESIGN G OAL
A. Threat Model
We assume attackers infiltrate hosts via networks to steal
data or manipulate devices, leaving reconstructable audit
traces. Aligned with prior models [6], [16], [25], [27], our TCB
includes OS kernels and audit frameworks, excluding hardware
trojans/evasion attacks beyond kernel auditing [5], [28]. Audit
data integrity is ensured via tamper-resistant logging [29], [30].
B. Design Goal
S AURON E YES models audit logs to extract behavioral patterns by disentangling entity attributes and relationship types,
enabling precise identification of genuine behavioral intents
across diverse entity activities. The system aims to achieve
three key objectives for effective APT detection: (1) generating
edge-grained granular alerts from massive log volumes to
ensure fine-grained threat visibility; (2) maintaining low false
positives through intent disentanglement to isolate malicious

behaviors; and (3) providing complete alert graphs with contextualized relationships to streamline security analysts’ alert
verification and attack investigation processes.
IV. OVERVIEW
S AURON E YES is an innovative provenance-based APT
detection scheme that utilizes graph disentangling algorithms
and graph contrastive learning. It enables fine-grained identification of system anomalies in audit logs, providing a concise
and complete attack chain. Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture
of S AURON E YES, which consists of four major components:
1
O
Graph Construction and Initialization For the host
logs of different systems, S AURON E YES models system
behavior by focusing on the interactions between system entities and the multiple information flows and attribute features of
these entities. S AURON E YES extracts interaction relationships
(e.g., Process → File) and entity attributes (e.g., Socket →
IP segment) from the logs, which are then converted into two
types of graph structures: knowledge graphs (KG) and interaction graphs (IG). The system entity features are initialized
as vector embeddings through element-wise gating units.
2
O
Disentangling Module once the initial embeddings
are obtained, the disentangling module begins the process of
disentangling the knowledge graph (KG) and the interaction
graph (IG). For the KG, the module uses a path-aware GNN
to encode the multi-faceted attribute information of individual
system entities. An attention-based neighbor allocation mechanism is employed for each aspect. For the IG, the disentangling
module focuses on separating each system entity’s interactions
with multiple entities (or aspects) and applies a lightweight
graph convo-lutional network (LightGCN) for aggregation.
Similarly, an attention-based mechanism is used to filter
subsets of neighbors, aggregating more valuable neighbor
attributes

11748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

3
O
Contrastive Learning Module After obtaining the
disentangled entity feature embeddings, the contrastive learning module applies within-view contrastive learning to the
embeddings of KG and IG. This module introduces random
noise into the embeddings to add perturbations for contrastive
enhancement. For any system entity within a view, a pair of
augmented embeddings under the same aspect is treated as
a positive pair, while representations from different aspects
form negative pairs. Once the positive and negative pairs
are determined, contrastive loss is calculated separately for
both views. Subsequently, the module performs contrastive
learning between the two views to align the system entity
representations within them.
4
O
Threat Detection and Reconstruction Leveraging
multi-view embeddings, S AURON E YES calculates intent prediction scores for interactions by combining inner products
across distinct intent dimensions of system entities. When an
anomaly score exceeds a predefined threshold, the interaction
is flagged as malicious and incorporated into the alert chain.
To generate compact attack summary graphs for analysts,
S AURON E YES employs overlapping community detection to
automatically aggregate discrete alerts into coherent attack
events, ensuring both interpretability and structural integrity
of reconstructed attack scenarios.

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF K EY N OTATIONS AND T ERMS

V. D ESIGN
In this section, we introduce S AURON E YES, whose purpose is to disentangle the knowledge graph and interaction
graph and extract deep-seated intentions, then use contrastive
learning to study the intrinsic structural information of entities,
ultimately detecting malicious interactions hidden among system entity interactions. TABLE II provides detailed definitions
of key concepts and parameters.
A. Graph Construction and Initialization
1) Graph Construction: SauronEyes extracts system entities including subjects (processes), objects (processes, files,
network flows, etc.), and attributes (IP addresses, commandline arguments) from audit logs (TABLE III). After we obtain
these four types of entities relationships, we will map the
necessary behavioral relationships into attribute relationships
between nodes in the KG graph to assist in building attribute
edges. The knowledge graph is defined as a set of triples:
KG = {(e, r, v) | e ∈ E, r ∈ R, v ∈ V}, where E denotes system
entities(including subject and object), R represents the relationship between entities and attribute values. Subsequently, we
enrich the graph by embedding entity attributes and interaction
relationships. We abstract the interactions between system
entity pairs with causal relationships into a unified interaction
graph. Each interaction reflects a causal exchange between two
system entities within a specific timestamp. The interaction
graph is formally defined as: IG = {(s, o) | s ∈ Subject, o ∈
Object}, where each pair (s, o) indicates that subject s has
interacted with object o.
2) Embeddings Initialization: Prior to graph disentangling,
we initialize multi-aspect embeddings for entities. Formally,
we assume there are K distinct aspects. Unlike methods that

TABLE III
S YSTEM B EHAVIORS E XTRACTED F ROM AUDIT L OGS

partition ID embeddings into K chunks [31], we employ
element-wise self-gating units to regulate information flow
from ID embeddings to each aspect:
k
ee,k = fgate
(ee ) = ee

σ(Wk ee + bk ),

(1)

where ee is the ID embedding of entities e, ee,k is the initial
embedding of entities e for the k-th aspect, Wk ∈ Rd×d and
bk ∈ Rd are learnable parameters,
denotes element-wise
multiplication, and σ is the sigmoid function. Similarly, we
initialize aspect-specific embeddings e s,k , eo,k , er,k and ev,k
for subject s, object o, relations r and attribute values v,
respectively.
The self-gating mechanism adaptively learns non-linear
gates to modulate ID embeddings across different aspects
at element-wise granularity through dimension re-weighting.

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

This approach offers greater flexibility compared to naively
partitioning embeddings into fixed chunks.
B. Disentangling Module
After constructing the audit logs into KG and IG, and
initializing the embeddings through gating units, we explore
the disentangling of the two views(KG and IG) in the disentangling module. This process differentiates the various aspects
between system entity interactions and system entity attributes,
aiming to obtain embeddings with clearer expressive power.
1) Disentangling Knowledge Graph: The purpose of this
component is to learn disentangled knowledge-aware representations that distinguish various aspects of system entity
attributes. For example, in the Knowledge Graph (KG), for
the entity node Nginx, its connected node 200.36.109.214
reflects IP information, /var/log/nginx-*.log indicates
storage path information, and /etc/group represents the
Received objects of Nginx. Inspired by [32], we use a pathaware GNN to encode this information. The path-aware GNN
aggregates L-hop neighborhood information through deep
aggregation while preserving path information (i.e., long-range
connectivity).
However, in KG disentanglement tasks, we cannot aggregate
all neighbors because only a subset of neighbors is highly
relevant to their corresponding aspects. For instance, the IP
information 200.36.109.214 directly caused the compromise
of Nginx and is strongly correlated with the “attack source”
aspect, while /var/log/nginx-*.log and /etc/group are
weakly relevant. To better capture the affinity between target
entities and their neighbors, we choose similarity-based attention with the assumption that the more similar entity node e
is to its neighbor v in the k-th aspect, and the relation is r, the
better the representation of node e in that aspect. The attention
score is represented as
αk(e,r,v) = P

exp(e>e,k (er,k ev,k ))
.
>
ev,k0 ))
k0 ∈K exp(ee,k0 (er,k0

(2)

Then, the aggregation at the l-th layer of the k-th aspect can
be represented as:
X
1
ˇ
ˇ
(3)
αk(e,r,v) er,k e(l)
e(l+1)
=
v,k ,
e,k
ˇ kg ˇ
kg
ˇNe ˇ (r,v)∈Ne
l specifically refers to the l-th convolutional layer of the GNN,
which is conceptually equivalent to the l-hop neighborhood
from the central node. Finally, we aggregate the representations from all layers to obtain the knowledge attribute
representation at the k-th aspect:
(0)
(L)
xkg
e,k = ee,k + · · · + ee,k .

(4)

where e(0)
e,k represent the initial embeddings of system entities
e at the k-th aspect.
2) Disentangling Interaction Graph: The purpose of this
component is to learn multi-aspect representations of system
entity interactions. The Interaction Graph (IG) emphasizes collaborative signals between entities. For instance,
in the interaction sequence Nginx → tmp/test (and →
/etc/passwd and → tmp/vUgefal), four entities participate

11749

in three interactions, where capturing both direct and transitive collaboration patterns is critical. We obtain collaborative
information by modeling these connections.
We adopt LightGCN, which employs simple message passing and aggregation mechanisms without feature transformation or nonlinear activation, thereby improving computational
efficiency in graph structures constructed from real-world audit
logs. However, similar to KG disentanglement, we observe that
for key nodes equivalent to “traffic hubs” (e.g., Nginx), they
may engage in interactions across multiple distinct aspects.
Aggregating all neighbors under a single aspect during disentanglement is clearly suboptimal.
For example, as previously mentioned, the relationships
and entities in the attack provenance aspect are the primary
causes of the Nginx server’s operations and associations with
/tmp/vUgefal, while interactions from other aspects are not.
Therefore, we utilize an attention-based neighbor allocation
mechanism to refine the IG by inferring the importance of
each interaction under different aspects. For the interaction
(s, o) under the k-th aspect, its attention score is calculated as
αk(s,o) = P

exp(e>s,k xkg
o,k )
kg
>
k0 ∈K exp(e s,k0 xo,k0 )

.

(5)

In the l-th layer at the k-th aspect, the aggregation result can
be represented as:
1 X k (l)
ˇ
e(l+1)
=ˇ
α(s,o) eo,k ,
s,k
ˇ ig ˇ
ˇN s ˇ o∈Nsig
1 X k (l)
ˇ
α(s,o) e s,k ,
(6)
e(l+1)
=ˇ
o,k
ˇ ig ˇ
ˇNo ˇ s∈Noig
where N sig and Noig represent sets of system entities s’s and
o’s neighbors in the interaction graph. Then representations at
different layers are summed up as the collaborative representations of the k-th aspect, as follows:
(0)
(L)
xig
s,k = e s,k + · · · + e s,k ,

(0)
(L)
xig
o,k = eo,k + · · · + eo,k ,

(7)

(0)
where where e(0)
s,k and eo,k represent the initial embeddings of
system entities s and o at the k-th aspect.

C. Contrastive Learning Module
Contrastive learning has enhanced representation learning
by minimizing the distance between similar sample pairs
and maximizing the distance between dissimilar sample pairs,
addressing the issue of data sparsity caused by the scarcity
of key samples. S AURON E YES does not require labels at all
in the contrastive learning stage, but automatically generates
pseudo labels based on the structure of the data itself.
1) Embedding Augmentation: It has been demonstrated in
[33] that, for graph contrastive learning, the key factor is
the contrastive loss (CL), rather than the augmentation of
the graph itself. Therefore, this component designs a random noise-based embedding augmentation method, adding
perturbations to the node embeddings for contrastive learning.
Specifically, noise is randomly added to the disentangled
embeddings at the k-th aspect. We add noise to each embedding in the opposite direction, i.e., the two augmented

11750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

embeddings are slightly stretched in opposite directions and
slightly shifted, which is expected to improve the linear separability in the projection space. A set of augmented embeddings
for the k-th aspect can be represented as
(
1
e = e + (k1 erand k2 × η) sign(e)
f (e) = 2
(8)
e = e − (k2 erand k2 × η) sign(e)
where k · k2 represents L2 normalization, 1 erand and 2 erand are
random embeddings that are uniformly distributed on [0, 1).
By normalizing 1 erand and 2 erand , we can convert them into
unit length in the projection space. We set a hyperparameter
η to control the intensity of the embedding augmentation,
to prevent excessive noise from making the model unable to
differentiate between similar samples.
2) Intra-View Contrastive Learning: Our goal is to explore
the weak dependencies between the disentangled representations. We aim to achieve comprehensive disentangling to
obtain more information. We utilize contrastive learning
between the disentangled Kg and IG to perform independent
representation learning. The steps are as follows: First, we
define positive and negative sample pairs. For any embedding
in the view, we select a pair of augmented embeddings from
the same aspect to form a positive pair and calculate their
self-similarity, then choose augmented embeddings from two
different aspects to form a negative pair. We use the optimized
contrastive loss InfoNCE, which learns more unified entity
representations and implicitly alleviates popularity bias. The
contrastive loss for the disentangled Knowledge graph can be
expressed as:
kg

Lkg
intra =

XX
v∈E,V k∈K

− log P

kg

e s(zv,k ,zv,k )/τ
kg

k0 ∈K

kg

e s(zv,k ,zv,k0 )/τ

,

(9)

where s(·) represents the calculation of cosine similarity, and
τ represents the temperature parameter. In a similar manner,
we can derive the contrastive loss for the interaction graph as
follows:
ig ig
XX
e s(zn,k ,zn,k )/τ
ig
Lintra =
− log P
.
(10)
ig
s(zig
n,k ,zn,k0 )/τ
n∈s,o k∈K
k0 ∈K e
The total intra-view contrastive loss is the sum of the two
contrastive losses mentioned above:
ig
Lintra = Lkg
intra + Lintra .

(11)

Through this learning, we achieve independent contrastive
learning within each of the two views.
3) Inter-View Contrastive Learning: We also aim to investigate the relationship between the KG and IG views.
Specifically, our goal is to align the embeddings of IG and KG
and perform contrastive learning between their representations.
For an entity in one view (e.g., Process, File, or Socket), we
extract the embeddings of the same entity learned in the other
view as a positive sample pair, and select the embeddings of
different entities from the other view as negative sample pairs.
The inter-view contrastive loss can be expressed as
kg

Linter =

XX
i∈E k∈K

− log P

ig

e s(zi,k ,zi,k )/τ
i0 ∈E (e

s(zkg
,zig )/τ
i0 ,k i,k

kg

ig

+ e s(zi,k ,zi0 ,k )/τ )

(12)

D. Threat Detection and Attack Reconstruction Module
1) Threat Detection: After obtaining the contrastive loss
for disentangled representations on both the knowledge graph
and interaction graph views, we proceed to threat prediction,
specifically categorizing system entity interactions into benign
and malicious interactions. Given any interaction (u,r,v) with
k-th dimension, we combine the embeddings (zu,k and zv,k )
from both views and apply the inner product to represent the
prediction score ŷk (u, v) for the interaction between system
entities u and v being malicious. The specific formula is as
follows:
z s,k = zig
s,k ,

ig
zo,k = zkg
o,k ⊕ zo,k

ŷ (s, o) = (z s,k ) zo,k .
k

T

(13)
(14)

Considering that each interaction may be related to different
aspects differently, we adopt a careful fusion of prediction
scores from different aspects with βk(u,v) as the attention weight
to obtain the final result ŷ(u, v), as follows:
exp((h s ⊕ ho )T (z s,k ⊕ zo,k ))
βk(s,o) = P
exp((h s ⊕ ho )T (z s,k0 ⊕ zo,k0 ))
0
Xk ∈K
ŷ(s, o) =
βk(s,o) ŷk (s, o).

(15)
(16)

k∈K

Given the focus of the simple contrastive loss on the
intrinsic distribution structure of the sample space, we apply a
multi-task learning strategy to jointly train the pairwise BPR
loss and the contrastive loss, in order to more comprehensively
achieve system entity prediction. As shown below:
X
1
ln S igmoid(ŷ(s,o) − ŷ(s0 ,o0 ) ),
(17)
LBPR = −
|R|
0 0
(s,o,s ,o )∈E

ŷ(s,o) and ŷ(s0 ,o0 ) are both prediction scores, where (s0 , o0 ) corresponds to a different pair of nodes from (s, o), R represents
the set of interactions sampled in each mini-batch.
By combining intra-view and inter-view contrastive losses
with BPR loss, we minimize the following objective function
to learn the model parameters:
L f inal = LBPR + λ1 Lintra + λ2 Linter + λ3 kΘk22 .

(18)

Here, θ represents the set of model parameters, λ1 and λ2
are hyperparameters controlling the weights of the intraview and inter-view contrastive losses, respectively, λ3 is the
hyperparameter controlling the L2 regularization term.
2) Attack Reconstruction: In the process of intent disentangling and threat detection, S AURON E YES extracts
comprehensive attack intents and behaviors. However, the
resulting anomaly graph remains a complex and large node
graph. To further reduce the burden on security analysts,
S AURON E YES implements attack chain construction. Unlike
existing approaches that use the Louvain algorithm [7], [13],
[34], we considered the phenomenon of overlapping communities in attack division. As shown in Fig. 4, when nodes
belong to multiple clusters simultaneously, communities in
the network overlap, and some behaviors may contribute to
different attack communities. The Louvain algorithm, based
on modularity partitioning, cannot detect this issue. We
devised an overlapping community detection method based

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

11751

VI. E VALUATION

Fig. 3. An example shows the composition of knowledge graph and
interaction graph. It can be seen that knowledge graph has multi-faceted
attribute knowledge.

We assessed S AURON E YES from the following Seven
perspectives:
RQ1: How effective is S AURON E YES in detecting APTs
compared to current state-of-the-art appraoches?
RQ2: Are the key components in our S AURON E YES framework really improving the overall performance?
RQ3: How do hyperparameters affect S AURON E YES’
efficacy?
RQ4: What is the performance overhead of S AURON E YES
when handling large-scale data in real-world scenarios?
RQ5: Can S AURON E YES accurately reconstruct attack
behavior from the original provenance graph?
RQ6: How resilient is S AURON E YES to adversarial attacks?
RQ7: How is the generalization ability of S AURON E YES
when confronting concept drift?
A. Experimental Settings

Fig. 4. The Overlapping Phenomenon of Attack Clusters.

on Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [35], which
explicitly models the membership strength of each node to
each community. We assign a non-negative latent factor to
each node-community pair, indicating the degree of the node’s
affiliation with the community. The probability of an edge
existing between a pair of nodes in the network is then
modeled as a function of their shared community affiliations.
Based on the node affiliation model, community structures
are identified by maximizing the affiliation strength between
nodes.
To accomplish this, S AURON E YES extracts a subgraph G p
containing malicious activities (edges) from the interaction
graph, where G p serves as the input graph for attack reconstruction. The community detection in B IG CLAM [35] is
performed by leveraging the affiliation strength Auv between
nodes u and v.
K
X
Auv = Fu · Fv =
Fuk × Fvk
(19)
k=1

Here, Fu and Fv are the community attribute vectors of nodes
u and v, respectively. By maximizing the affiliation strength
between node pairs while considering the actual connections in
the network, overlapping community partitioning is achieved.
The optimization function is:
X
 X
log 1 − exp(−Auv ) −
Auv .
(20)
(u,v)∈E

(u,v)<E

To the best of our knowledge, S AURON E YES is the first
to address the issue of overlapping attack communities. For
instance, Hercule [7] and Kairos [13] also utilize community
detection but do not consider that attack nodes may simultaneously belong to multiple anomalous behavior communities.

1) Datasets: S AURON E YES was evaluated using three
authoritative open-source datasets: The StreamSpot dataset
[1] employs six experimental scenarios (five benign, one
drive-by download attack) to assess rapid attack detection.
The Unicorn Wget dataset [2] contains 150 CamFlow logs
(125 benign/25 covert supply-chain attacks) simulating killchain obfuscation tactics, challenging systems to discern
malicious patterns mimicking legitimate workflows. The
DARPA-E3 dataset [3] from real adversarial engagements
combines APT activities with benign operations in an enterprise network, reflecting Advanced Persistent Threats’ stealth
characteristics. Their complementary designs – controlled
experiments (StreamSpot/Unicorn) and operational realism
(DARPA-E3) – ensure comprehensive evaluation of detection
accuracy, anti-evasion robustness, and practical applicability.
2) Metrics: (1) To evaluate SauronEyes’ anomaly detection capability, we use two evaluation metrics based on IDS
ThreaTrace [10] and Unicorn [6]. We perform graph-level and
node-level anomaly detection on both system entity logs and
batch logs. We use Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1-score
for evaluation. (2) To evaluate attack community overlap, we
use Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) to measure the
similarity of community partitions and ensure the algorithm
accurately reflects the true structure. The Jaccard similarity
coefficient assesses node set overlap, while the F1 score
measures precision and recall. This provides a comprehensive evaluation of S AURON E YES’ performance in identifying
communities and avoiding errors.
The Jaccard similarity coefficient is defined as:
J(U, V) =

|U ∩ V|
|U ∪ V|

(21)

where U represents the groundtruth community and V represents the detected partitioned community. NMI is defined
as
2 · MI(U, V)
N MI(U, V) =
(22)
H(U) + H(V)
where MI(U, V) is the mutual information and H(U), H(V)
are the entropies.

11752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION R ESULTS B ETWEEN S AURON E YES AND
OTHER S TATE - OF - THE - ART S OLUTIONS

Fig. 5. ROC curves on all datasets.
TABLE IV
OVERVIEW OF THE ROW E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

3) Implementation: We implemented the S AURON E YES
prototype using Python 3.11. We used PyTorch [36] to implement the model. For the hyperparameters in S AURON E YES,
we set all embedding dimensions to 64, the learning rate
to 0.001, and the L2 regularization parameter to 0.0001.
We chose a batch size of 1024 for log detection in our
experiments. We used the Adam [37] optimizer to optimize the model. While these hyperparameters might have
other potential choices, in Section VI-D, we discuss the
impact of hyperparameter settings on the final performance of
S AURON E YES. All experiments were performed on a server
running Ubuntu 22.04.5 LTS with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver
4208 CPU (14 cores, 14 threads, base frequency 2.10 GHz)
and 256 GB of RAM.
B. Detection Performance (RQ1)
1) Detection Results: Experimental results demonstrate that
S AURON E YES achieves robust performance across diverse
operational scenarios, with comprehensive evaluations conducted on both batch processing logs and entity-level system
logs (TABLE V). Furthermore, the ROC curves presented in
Fig. 5 validate the model’s superior classification accuracy
under varying operational conditions, confirming its adaptability and detection effectiveness in heterogeneous logging
environments.
2) SauronEyes Vs. State-of-the-Art: In batch log analysis, S AURON E YES achieved near-perfect detection on the
Streamspot dataset with simple attack patterns, while conventional graph-level baselines suffered notable degradation on
the complex, highly camouflaged attacks in Unicorn Wget.
Though node-level methods like Threatrace maintained decent
accuracy, S AURON E YES reduced false positives significantly
via edge-level intent-disentanglement detection. This approach

separates malicious behaviors from benign activities at edge
granularity, enhancing stealthy attack identification. For entitylevel log in DARPA E3, Log2vec detects anomalies in logs
within graphs using node embeddings and clustering methods, aggregating information from node neighbors. However,
Log2vec’s nodes are logs rather than system entities, making it naturally inferior to provenance graph-based detection.
DeepLog, being a log-level detector, cannot capture the contextual information in system entity interactions, making it
difficult to detect anomalies within these interactions. As
node-level detector, ThreaTrace and FLASH are comparable
to SauronEyes in all aspects, but is significantly inferior
to precision and F1-score in THEIA. Compared to the latest LLM-integrated prompt engineering solutions, although
OMNISEC [38] incorporates expert knowledge to achieve
lower false positives, its recall rate is significantly lower than
S AURON E YES. Its missed detections of attacks could make the
system more vulnerable to being compromised by attackers.
C. Ablation Study (RQ2)
In this section, we discuss the effectiveness of individual components in S AURON E YES and investigate whether
removing or modifying these components impacts the final
performance. The performance results are shown in Fig. 7.
In Fig. 6, we select logs around the attack periods from
E3-CADETS and used t-SNE to plot 2D visualized node
representations after different disentanglement scenarios in the
ablation experiments of the disentanglement module.

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

11753

Fig. 6. 2D visualization of node representations on E3-CADETS using t-SNE. Red nodes indicate anomalous entities, while blue nodes indicate benign
entities.

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION R ESULTS B ETWEEN S AURON E YES
( ORIGINAL ) AND S AURON E YES ( ABLATION )

Fig. 7. Effects of Different Modules on the Detection Performance of
S AURON E YES.

1) Removing Disentanglement: To validate the necessity of
disentanglement mechanisms, we conducted ablation studies
by replacing key modules in the knowledge and interaction
views(see Fig. 7). For knowledge disentanglement, removing
the module and substituting it with a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) caused precision to drop to 75%. This phenomenon suggests that GCN alone fails to deeply capture
the intricate relationships among system calls, impeding the
model’s ability to uncover malicious behavioral logic and
resulting in frequent false positives. For interaction disentanglement, replacing the module with a Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) led to a more pronounced degradation (67% precision),
underscoring the critical role of disentangling dynamic interaction patterns. When all decoupling modules were replaced
with the traditional scheme, the final model performance
significantly declined, with Precision at only 55%. This occurs
because GCN+MLP encoding fails to disentangle entities’
multifaceted intentions, allowing misleading signals to distort
their authentic behavioral patterns.
2) Removing Contrastive Learning Module: We removed
the contrastive loss component within and between views.
From Fig. 7, it can be seen that removing this module also
reduced detection performance. This is because the two views

not only lost the self-supervised ability to capture the structural
relationships of system entities within themselves but also
could not transfer information between the views.
3) Removing Multi-View: To study the significance of the
respective disentangling operations and dual-view contrastive
learning in dual views, we replaced the original S AURON E YES
design with a combination of ‘PG construction + PG disentanglement + contrastive learning + threat detection‘. The
decoupling operation is modified to aggregate PG using
LightGCN with a multi-attention mechanism, and contrastive
learning is to upsample positive and negative sample pairs
from different aspects of the same node on PG. As shown in
TABLE VI, the ablated version of SauronEyes has a significant
performance degradation on various datasets, which reveals the
importance of multi-view decoupling and contrastive learning
in revealing the deep intentions of APT.

D. Hyperparameter Impact on Performance (RQ3)
In this section, we independently modify specific hyperparameters to reflect their impact on the detection of APTs by
S AURON E YES and provide interpretable explanations for these
impacts. We selected StreamSpot at the batch log level (Fig. 8)

11754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 8. Impact of different hyperparameters on detection performance on StreamSpot(Batch-level log).

Fig. 9. Impact of Hyperparameter Variations on Detection Performance in DARPA E3-CADETS(Entity-level log).

and DARPA E3-CADETS at the system entity level (Fig. 9)
as the experimental subjects for hyperparameter analysis.
1) Impact of Disentangling Dimension K: The disentangling dimension K concretely represents the degree of
disentangling of different aspects of a single system entity
in the two views. We analyzed the range [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. We
observe that increasing the disentangling dimensions can
enhance attack detection accuracy, as it allows S AURON E YES
to capture system entity interaction tendencies from a broader
perspective and more diverse aggregation levels. However,
excessively high K values result in too much dimension separation, compromising the independence of each dimension’s
attributes of the system entities. We found that when K = 2,
the model performs best across all datasets.
2) Impact of Contrastive Loss Weights: The contrastive loss
weight parameters λ1 and λ2 control the impact of intra-view
and inter-view contrastive learning on the final loss for the
knowledge view and the interaction view, respectively. We
varied λ1 and λ2 within the range [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1]. When
λ1 = 0.01 and λ2 = 0.01, S AURON E YES performs optimally
on each dataset. The reason is: excessively high contrastive
learning losses may cause the model to focus too much on the
relative distances between samples, neglecting the main task
loss. Conversely, setting the contrastive learning loss weights
too low, meaning the contrastive learning loss occupies too
small a proportion in the overall loss function.
3) Impact of Embedding Size: The embedding operation
maps node features to edge embeddings, specifically representing edges in a graph as low-dimensional vectors that
retain the original graph structure and attribute information.
From the results: As the embedding size increases, the
model accuracy improves significantly and gradually stabilizes
(20 epochs for StreamSpot and 40 for CADETS), reaching
near-perfect accuracy (close to 1.0). In both datasets, the model
with an embedding size of 64 performs best and has the highest
final accuracy.

TABLE VII
C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD P ROFILING

E. Performance Overhead (RQ4)
S AURON E YES is designed to achieve detection with low
and reasonable overhead. We tested the time and peak
memory overhead of S AURON E YES at different stages,
including (1)Graph Construction, (2)Training, and (3)Testing. We provide specific runtime performance overheads of
S AURON E YES on CADETS-E3. It is worth noting that, GPUs
are generally lacking in real production environments, we
cannot require large-scale hosts in the industry to use GPUs
for threat detection, with CPU being the dominant resource
when GPUs are unavailable, our experiments mainly focus on
CPU-based testing. During the graph construction phase, we
measured the total time taken by S AURON E YES to construct
a usable graph from the preprocessed dataset, as well as the
memory changes before and after the process. In the training
phase, we assessed the training overhead by measuring the
time required for S AURON E YES to generate the complete
model, and the peak memory usage during this process was
recorded. In the final testing phase, we recorded the duration
of APT predictions made by the trained model on input system
entities, as well as the peak memory consumption.
TABLE VII presents the complete performance overhead
of S AURON E YES. As shown, S AURON E YES has very low
time overhead, and its memory overhead remains within the
range that can be tolerated by real-world threat detection
hosts. S AURON E YES shows significant advantages in practical

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

11755

Fig. 10. Case Study: An Example of a Multi-Stage Complex Attack with Overlapping Attack Activities.

threat detection. For example, the dataset used for testing in
CADETS-E3 takes almost two days to collect and amounts
to approximately 4GB of log data, whereas S AURON E YES
completes the prediction in just 27 seconds. The training
overhead primarily stems from multiple rounds of iteration
over millions of nodes and edges: each round involves multilayer neighbor aggregation in the GNN and the computation
of a complex objective function comprising the BPR loss and
two types of contrastive losses (intra-view and cross-view).

Fig. 11. Attack Reconstruction Performance of SauronEyes.

F. Attack Reconstruction (RQ5)
The ultimate goal of S AURON E YES is to provide security
analysts with a comprehensive and concise attack chain. In the
1 a single attack
context of the attack chain, we believe that O
chain should encompass the entirety of an attack activity,
2
O
the attack behavior should effectively indicate the attack
stages, thereby creating a directed flow of attack information,
3 this approach aims to expedite analyst feedback and
and O
the handling of false positives (FP).
We simulated multiple attacks by an adversar, completing a
sophisticated APT campaign. This showcases S AURON E YES’
capability to segment and reconstruct different attack events,
ensuring the attack chain remains concise and complete.
Fig. 10(b) presents an overview of the attack scenario tracing,
where the attacker initiated the campaign with a phishing
email, leading to two distinct attack campaigns.
• In the first campaign depicted in Fig. 10(a), the attacker
begins by crafting a simple message in a phishing
email, enticing the recipient to download a file from
the email. In the second step, once the recipient clicks
on the Word document in the email, the attacker
exploits CVE-2017-11882, triggering a stack overflow
in the EQNEDT32 module, which then initiates a reverse
TCP connection to the C&C server at IP address
10.207.125.63. In the third step, the attacker starts
performing port scans for internal reconnaissance and
establishes a stealthy connection between the target host
and the attacker.
• In the second campaign depicted in Fig. 10(c), the
attacker embeds a phishing link within the Word document attached to the initial phishing email. In the first
step, the phishing email entices the recipient to download
the file from the email. In the second step, the report.doc
included a link to a website hosted at www.gov.cn,

address 156.251.67.239. The website hosted a form
asking for name, e-mail address, and password. In the
third step, the user unfortunately clicked on the link,
entered the requested information, and submitted it.
The results were sent back to www.fake.com, address
10.207.125.7. The attacker now has access to victim’s
e-mail account, including contact information for other
company employees.
As illustrated in Fig. 10(b), overlapping attack communities
emerge when distinct attack activities share common entry
points, challenging the reconstruction framework in Section
V-C.3. Conventional community detection methods (e.g., Louvain algorithm adopted by Kairos and Hercules) fail to
resolve such overlaps, causing incomplete attack chain extraction in aggregated community assignments. S AURON E YES
overcomes this limitation through overlapping community
detection, effectively distinguishing interdependent attack
chains from shared entry points. This enables precise reconstruction of two distinct attack chains (Figs. 10(a)(c)) that
traditional approaches would erroneously merge.
As shown in Fig. 11b, S AURON E YES demonstrates outstanding performance across various metrics, enabling a more
comprehensive reconstruction of attack chains. Additionally,
as illustrated in Fig. 11a, S AURON E YES significantly reduces
the number of items that investigators need to review through
its attack reconstruction capabilities. This facilitates a more
efficient and targeted attack analysis, allowing for precise
identification of attack stages, and simplifies the analysis of
false positives and feedback mechanisms.
Using DARPA detection examples, we demonstrate how
attack reconstruction significantly reduces security analysts’
alert processing time. We illustrate this with both a false
positive and a genuine attack alert. Fig. 12(a) shows a

11756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE OF C ONCEPT D RIFT

Fig. 12. Alert Generation Graph.

Fig. 13. Resilience Against Adversarial Attacks.

malicious mail process conducting a port scan across
6000 ports. The massive number of raw alert nodes makes
it difficult for analysts to identify the core system event. The
reconstructed attack graph in Figure 11 effectively reveals the
event logic. Similarly, Fig. 12(b) depicts Wget communicating
with multiple IPs for downloads. This behavior structurally
resembles malicious scanning, triggering a false positive alert.
Here again, hundreds of disconnected alert nodes obscure the
event context, while the structured visualization in Fig. 12
enables analysts to quickly identify and filter it. Attack chains
dramatically reduce the number of items analysts must review,
as they are far fewer than individual anomaly nodes.
G. Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks (RQ6)
S AURON E YES is a provenance-based detection system.
Goyal [39] et al. noted that intrusion detection systems (IDS)
with graph-level granularity, such as Unicorn [6], StreamSpot
[21] and ProvDetector [27] are highly sensitive to “adversarial
attacks”. These adversarial attacks initiate evasion attacks
by manipulating the distribution graph encoding, aiming to
create misleading similarities between the node neighborhood
distribution of the attack graph and that of the benign source
graph. To assess the robustness of S AURON E YES against
adversarial attacks, we modifyed the node neighborhood in
the attack graph to mimic that in the benign source graph.
Fig. 13 shows the anomaly scores (min/avg/max, y-axis)
of attack nodes as benign edges (x-axis) are added. While
some node scores decrease slightly with benign structures, they
remain above the detection threshold. Although a few nodes
evade detection, the stable average score ensures persistent
event alerts. S AURON E YES maintains robustness by leveraging a decoupling module to discern structural nuances and
contrastive learning to amplify node similarity patterns.
It is worth mentioning that, after inserting more camouflage
events, the effectiveness of the adversarial attack surprisingly

decreases. This phenomenon has also been noted in FLASH
[26]. This occurs because the continuous addition of benign
nodes causes a shift in the node distribution learned by our
model. This change leads to an increase in the anomaly score,
which in turn helps to separate the camouflaged events from
the truly malicious ones.
H. Concept Drift (RQ7)
S AURON E YES is designed as a periodic training and nearreal-time detection system, rather than a pure real-time online
learning system. However, adapting to environmental changes
is an important challenge commonly faced by IDS, such
as concept drift. To verify the concept drift robustness of
SauronEyes, we randomly generate edges in different time
periods of its training set, and add edge drift to the nodes
in the target time window according to the timestamp. For
example, we select time windows in CADETS with an interval
of one hour as the benchmark to generate edge relationships.
To ensure that the randomly sampled interaction relationships
meet the characteristics of sparse attacks, the randomly sampled edge relationships are only selected from common edge
connections such as “read”, “open”, “close”, and “write”. We
use CADETS as the experimental target, calculate the KL
divergence between the sampled new graph and the original
graph, and determine whether the new graph has produced
concept drift according to the criteria of [32]. Experiments are
conducted on the new and old training sets and fixed test sets.
The results are shown in TABLE VIII. The detection accuracy
and precision decrease slightly, proving that SauronEyes has
obvious concept drift robustness. The current design in our
paper does not include an online learning mechanism. In
practice, the most feasible way to adapt to environmental
changes and new threats is to periodically retrain the model
with new log data.
VII. R ELATED W ORK
A. Provenance Detection
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks exhibit prolonged
incubation periods, necessitating enterprises to maintain operational logs for over six months - a requirement that
imposes significant storage overhead and highlights the

QIAO et al.: SAURONEYES: DISENTANGLING VOLUMINOUS LOGS TO UNVEIL CAMOUFLAGED ATTACK INTENTIONS

critical challenge of provenance graph reduction and compression. References [15] and [24] have proposed viable
solutions addressing both graph simplification and semantic
preservation. Furthermore, contemporary provenance detection
methodologies can be broadly categorized into three principal
approaches: statistical analysis [17], [18], [19], specificationbased detection [9], [11], [40], and learning-driven prediction
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [41], as comprehensively
discussed in Section II.
B. Disentangled Representation Learning
Disentangled representation learning aims to separate the
underlying factors of data by embedding objects from multiple
perspectives [42], [43]. It has been applied to various fields
such as text [44], image [45] and knowledge graph embedding
[46]. Efforts have also been made in disentangled representation learning for predictive classification. DGCF [47] performs
disentangled representation learning on embedded segmentation graph neural networks based on intent disentanglement.
C. Contrastive Learning
As an efficient self-supervised learning method, contrastive
learning (CL) has achieved significant advancements in computer vision [48] and natural language processing [49]. The
idea of contrastive learning is to pull positive samples together
and push negative samples apart in the embedding space.
Researchers have found that applying contrastive learning to
graph representation learning yields excellent performance.
Velickovic et al. [50] proposed Deep Graph Infomax (DGI) by
maximizing the consistency between node representations and
graph representations in a local-global contrastive paradigm.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
The escalating sophistication of APT attacks and the
dynamic evolution of network environments have rendered
existing detection schemes inadequate for uncovering genuine attack patterns beneath adversaries’ complex activities.
To address this challenge, we present S AURON E YES- an
innovative APT detection system that employs graph disentanglement algorithms and contrastive learning to effectively
decouple intricate interaction patterns within massive audit
logs(Camouflage), while resolving the inherent issue of
sparse malicious interactions(Low-frequency). Our solution
further implements hierarchical attack-chain reconstruction to
reveal comprehensive threat scenarios(Multi-stage). Extensive
evaluations across multiple datasets and detection scenarios
demonstrate that S AURON E YES achieves exceptional operational performance, attaining an average detection accuracy of
99%. These results significantly advance the state-of-the-art in
APT detection capabilities.
R EFERENCES
[1]

E. J. Khaleefa and D. A. Abdulah, “Concept and difficulties of advanced
persistent threats (apt): Survey,” Int. J. Nonlinear Anal. Appl., vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 4037–4052, 2022.

[2]

11757

A. Sharma, B. B. Gupta, A. K. Singh, and V. K. Saraswat,
“Advanced persistent threats (APT): Evolution, anatomy, attribution and
countermeasures,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 14, no. 7,
pp. 9355–9381, Jul. 2023.
[3] A. Gehani and D. Tariq, “SPADE: Support for provenance auditing
in distributed environments,” in Proc. ACM/IFIP/USENIX Int. Conf.
Distrib. Syst. Platforms Open Distrib. Process., 2012, pp. 101–120.
[4] Y. Ji et al., “RAIN: Refinable attack investigation with on-demand
inter-process information flow tracking,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Dallas, TX, USA, Oct. 2017, pp. 377–390.
[5] A. Bates, D. Tian, R. B. K. Butler, and T. Moyer, “Trustworthy wholesystem provenance for the Linux kernel,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Secur.
Symp. (SEC), Austin, TX, USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 319–334.
[6] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn:
Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020.
[7] K. Pei et al., “HERCULE: Attack story reconstruction via community
discovery on correlated log graph,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Comput.
Security Appl. (ACSAC), 2016, pp. 583–595.
[8] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P.-A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias:
Predicting security events through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), 2018, pp. 592–605.
[9] A. Alsaheel et al., “Atlas: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
2021, pp. 3005–3022.
[10] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based
threats in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022.
[11] Z. Li, X. Cheng, L. Sun, J. Zhang, and B. Chen, “A hierarchical approach
for advanced persistent threat detection with attention-based graph neural
networks,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–14, May 2021.
[12] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber
threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2022, pp. 489–506.
[13] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy
(SP), May 2024, pp. 3533–3551.
[14] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
[15] N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
from COTS audit data,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
Secur.), 2017, pp. 487–504.
[16] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
May 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
[17] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2019.
[18] Y. Liu et al., “Towards a timely causality analysis for enterprise
security,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
[19] W. U. Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache Nice
things: Lightning-fast threat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical
storage,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. Security Appl. Conf. (ACSAC), 2020,
pp. 165–178.
[20] (2020). Darpa Transparent Computing Program Engagement 3 Data
Release. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/TransparentComputing
[21] (2016). The Streamspot Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
sbustreamspot/sbustreamspot-data
[22] H. Yue, T. Li, D. Wu, R. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Detecting
APT attacks using an attack intent-driven and sequencebased learning approach,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024,
Art. no. 103748.
[23] H. Li et al., “MIRDETECTOR: Applying malicious intent representation
for enhanced APT anomaly detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 157, Oct.
2025, Art. no. 104588.
[24] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “MAGIC:
Detecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation
learning,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023,
pp. 5197–5214.
[25] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan,
“POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
Nov. 2019, pp. 1795–1812.

11758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[26] M. Ur Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Ul Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive
approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2024,
pp. 3552–3570.
[27] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via
data provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2020.
[28] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc.
Symp. Cloud Comput., Sep. 2017, pp. 405–418.
[29] R. Paccagnella et al., “Custos: Practical tamper-evident auditing of
operating systems using trusted execution,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., 2020.
[30] R. Paccagnella, K. Liao, D. Tian, and A. Bates, “Logging to the danger
zone: Race condition attacks and defenses on system audit frameworks,”
in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2020,
pp. 1551–1574.
[31] X. Wang, H. Jin, A. Zhang, X. He, T. Xu, and T.-S. Chua, “Disentangled
graph collaborative filtering,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res.
Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2020, pp. 1001–1010.
[32] G. I. Webb, R. Hyde, H. Cao, H. L. Nguyen, and F. Petitjean,
“Characterizing concept drift,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 964–994, Jul. 2016.
[33] J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, L. Cui, and Q. V. H. Nguyen, “Are
graph augmentations necessary?: Simple graph contrastive learning for
recommendation,” in Proc. 45th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop.
Inf. Retr., Jul. 2022, pp. 1294–1303.
[34] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mech., Theory
Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008.
[35] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Overlapping community detection at scale: A
nonnegative matrix factorization approach,” in Proc. 6th ACM Int. Conf.
Web Search Data Mining, Feb. 2013, pp. 587–596.
[36] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019.
[37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[38] W. Cheng et al., “Omnisec: LLM-driven provenance-based intrusion
detection via retrieval-augmented behavior prompting,” Available SSRN
J., 2025.

[39] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t
what you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion
detection systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023.
[40] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec:
A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber
threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1777–1794.
[41] G. Wang, N. Ivanov, B. Chen, Q. Wang, T. Nguyen, and Q. Yan, “Graph
learning for interactive threat detection in heterogeneous smart home rule
data,” in Proc. ACM Manage. Data, 2023, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–27.
[42] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
[43] F. Locatello et al., “Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML), 2019, pp. 4114–4124.
[44] V. John, L. Mou, H. Bahuleyan, and O. Vechtomova, “Disentangled
representation learning for non-parallel text style transfer,” in Proc. 57th
Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2019, pp. 424–434.
[45] X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and
P. Abbeel, “InfoGAN: Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2016.
[46] J. Wu et al., “DisenKGAT: Knowledge graph embedding with disentangled graph attention network,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 2140–2149.
[47] X. Wang et al., “Learning intents behind interactions with knowledge graph for recommendation,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021,
pp. 878–887.
[48] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information
estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2018.
[49] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26,
2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[50] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Lió, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR (Poster), 2018,
p. 4.