4252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Self-Supervised and Interpretable Anomaly
Detection Using Network Transformers
Daniel L. Marino , Member, IEEE, Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe , Member, IEEE,
Craig Rieger , Senior Member, IEEE, and Milos Manic , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Machine learning and deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been proposed as a tool to identify anomalies
in computer network communications. However, due the
obfuscated nature of off-the-shelf machine learning models, their output often does not provide enough information
to isolate the source of the anomaly to take corrective measures. In this article, we introduce the network transformer
(NeT), a DNN model for anomaly detection that incorporates the graph structure of the communication network in
order to improve interpretability. The presented approach
has the following advantages: first, enhanced interpretability by incorporating the graph structure of computer networks; second, provides a hierarchical set of features that
enables analysis at different levels of granularity; second,
self-supervised training that does not require labeled data.
The NeT model was evaluated on a set of anomalous scenarios executed in a real industrial control system. The presented approach successfully identified the anomalies, the
devices affected, and the specific connections causing the
anomalies, providing a data-driven hierarchical approach to
analyze the behavior of a cyber network.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, cybersecurity, interpretable machine learning, self-supervised learning, transformers.

I. INTRODUCTION
RITICAL infrastructures, such as critical manufacturing,
transportation systems, healthcare and public health systems, defense systems, and financial systems, play a vital role
in the United States. Failures, delays, or incapacitation of these
infrastructures can have debilitating effects on various areas,
including national health, public safety and security, stable
energy supply, and economic stability [1], [2]. Consequently,

C

Received 30 August 2024; revised 13 November 2024; accepted 9
January 2025. Date of publication 27 February 2025; date of current
version 21 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the Department of Energy through the U.S. DOE Idaho Operations Office under
Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517, in part by the Resilient Control and Instrumentation Systems (ReCIS) Program of Idaho National Laboratory,
and in part by the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative, an investment in
the advancement of cyber R&D, innovation and workforce development.
Paper no. TII-24-4368. (Corresponding author: Daniel L. Marino.)
Daniel L. Marino, Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe, and Milos Manic are
with the Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284 USA
(e-mail: marinodl@vcu.edu; brahmanacsw@vcu.edu; misko@ieee.org).
Craig Rieger, retired, was with the Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho
Falls, ID 83415 USA. He resides in Pocatello, ID 83201 USA (e-mail:
crieger@ieee.org).
For more information about CCI, visit cyberinitiative.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3534443

building effective and resilient critical infrastructures is a primary concern for many entities, including government, industry,
academia, and the research community [3], [4].
The integration of information and communication technologies (ICTs) into industrial control systems (ICSs) has been
driven by the desire for increased efficiency and connectivity [5].
ICTs are essential for ensuring the effective operation of critical
infrastructure systems. However, their adoption also introduces
vulnerabilities that can be exploited by cyber-criminals, jeopardizing security, and resilience [6]. In critical infrastructure
environments, sensitive information and data flow continuously
through various subsystems, necessitating robust protection
against unauthorized and malicious access. Ensuring the security
of these networks is crucial to prevent potential threats and
maintain the integrity of critical operations.
Network traffic monitoring is fundamental for ensuring the
security and reliability of critical infrastructures. This technology is crucial for protecting systems that depend on ICTs. A key
aspect of resilient network traffic monitoring involves the timely
identification of abnormal behaviors, which enables engineers
to take preventative measures and avert potential catastrophic
failures [7]. Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has
emerged as a prominent approach for anomaly detection in
critical infrastructure environments [7], [8]. By leveraging ML
algorithms, organizations can enhance their ability to detect and
respond to irregularities in network traffic, thereby strengthening
the overall security and operational stability of their critical
systems.
This article presents a novel network anomaly detection
approach—the network transformer (NeT)—an ML model that
uses graph representations to improve the interpretability of
anomaly detection in network traffic monitoring. The presented
model allows the identification of anomalies in the network at
the global level. It also generates a series of hierarchical features
(device-level and connection-level) that allow the identification
of devices affected by the anomalies and the connections responsible for the anomalies. The interpretable component uses
these device-level and device-level features to help with localizing impacted devices and connections during a system attack,
providing a better understanding of the detected anomaly at a
global level. The approach leverages self-supervised learning to
train the model using unlabeled data. A multiprocessing pipeline
is presented as a prototype for scalability to large datasets.
Contributions of this article are as follows.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS

1) Graph packet dissection method for extracting hierarchical features (global level, device level, and connection
level).
2) Self-supervised NeT model for detecting network anomalies at the global level.
3) Interpretable components that use device level and connection level features for providing a better understanding
of the detected anomalies.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
presents the background and related work. Section III describes
the proposed NeT approach. Section IV presents the experimental evaluation. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Anomaly detection involves identifying patterns in data that
deviate from the expected behavior of a system [9]. It can
be approached in various ways, including out-of-distribution
detection, outlier detection, and novelty detection [10], [11].
While many existing ML approaches effectively detect abnormal behaviors in cyber-physical systems [12], [13], they often
suffer from a lack of interpretability. These approaches typically
only indicate the presence of an anomaly without providing
additional information about its source or cause. This limitation
is particularly problematic in monitoring applications, where
understanding the root of the problem is crucial for effective response and corrective measures. Many off-the-shelf ML models
used for anomaly detection are designed as obfuscated, making
their internal workings opaque to users [14].
To address the obfuscated nature of ML models, researchers
have explored the field of explainable AI (XAI) [15]. XAI aims
to make the decision-making processes of ML models more
transparent and understandable [16]. Techniques such as local
interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) and SHapley
Additive exPlanations (SHAP) [17], [18] are commonly used to
provide local explanations for individual predictions made by
complex models like transformers. In addition, incorporating
domain knowledge into the inductive bias of ML algorithms can
also enhance interpretability by guiding the model’s learning
process in a way that aligns with known principles in the specific
application domain [19].
Despite these advancements, many approaches still struggle
with the challenge of effectively incorporating and utilizing
data structure, which can obscure exploratory analysis and limit
interpretability. To address this issue, designing methods that
not only detect anomalies but also support exploratory analysis
is crucial. Preserving the graph structure of the problem can significantly improve interpretability and diagnosis by providing a
clearer representation of the relationships between entities [15].
Graph-based approaches offer several advantages over traditional methods, as they enable computation over discrete entities
and their relationships, which is essential for understanding
complex systems and diagnosing issues effectively. Graph neural
networks have emerged as a promising tool in this context,
offering a flexible way to embed relational inductive bias into
ML models. Recent research highlights their application in
learning the structure of relationships in time-series sensor data
and identifying anomalous edges in dynamic graphs [20], [21].

4253

In this study, our approach uses transformer neural networks
(TNNs) as the backbone for our model. The choice of TNNs
is motivated by their advanced capabilities in sequence modeling tasks. TNNs are currently regarded as state-of-the-art ML
models for sequence, language, and image processing [22], [23],
[24], [25]. They offer significant advantages over traditional neural networks, particularly in terms of efficiency and scalability,
due to their ability to process input data in parallel [26]. TNNs
excel in capturing complex temporal and spatial dependencies,
which enhances their capability to extract features representing
normal system behavior, a critical aspect for effective anomaly
detection.
This article considers three unsupervised ML model baselines for anomaly detection: one-class support vector machines
(OCSVMs), local outlier factors (LOFs), and autoencoders
(AEs). These models are chosen due to their widespread use
in unsupervised anomaly detection [27]. Our intention is to
demonstrate how the presented NeT approach can be effectively integrated with existing anomaly detection techniques,
improving performance and interpretability beyond that of the
original algorithms. The use of other supervised anomaly detection algorithms, such as variants of SVM, XGBoost, decision
trees, and convolutional neural networks [8], [28], which require
labeled data, is beyond the scope of this work. The necessity
for extensive labeling demands domain expertise, and it is
often a time-consuming and expensive task. This is especially
relevant in industrial applications of anomaly detection, where
anomalous data is scarce and difficult to collect [29], [30], [31].
The scarcity of abnormal labeled data underscores the value of
self-supervised and unsupervised methods, which are the focus
of our article.
In addition, this study employs t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) to visualize deviations between abnormal and normal system behaviors. t-SNE [32] is a dimensionality reduction technique that maps high-dimensional data to
a lower dimensional space while preserving local similarities.
By converting high-dimensional distances into probabilities,
t-SNE excels in capturing nonlinear relationships, surpassing
traditional methods such as principal component analysis and
multidimensional scaling [33], [34]. Its effectiveness in visualizing neural network embeddings and clustering results has
been well-documented, making it a valuable tool in ML applications [35].
III. INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION: NET
In order to create an interpretable model for anomaly detection, we design an approach that leverages the graph structure
of computer networks. As shown in Fig. 1, the idea is to have
an abstract model of the problem that is shared by the human
and the ML model. The abstract model in this case is the graph
representation of the computer network being monitored. By
embedding this abstract model into the ML approach, we are
able to leverage our understanding of the system as a graph in
order to extract useful information about the anomalies detected
in the system.
Fig. 2 shows the overview of the presented NeT approach.
The approach consists of the following:

4254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE I
PACKET FEATURES WHEN USING TCP DISSECTION

Fig. 1.

Graph models as abstract representations for interpretable ML.

1) a packet dissector that groups packages by their respective
source and destination addresses;
2) an embedded representation obtained using a TNN;
3) an aggregator that extracts a series of hierarchical network
features that represent the communication graph.
The features extracted by the NeT model are fed to anomaly
detection algorithms to identify anomalies at different levels of
granularity. The approach uses the IP address of the devices in the
network to represent the nodes in a graph. Packets communicated
between devices represent the edges of the graph. The hierarchical network features are ultimately used for anomaly detection.
These hierarchical features include global features representing
the entire graph, node features representing each node, and edge
features representing individual connections. The approach uses
TNNs [26], which are currently the state-of-the-art ML model
for sequence modeling tasks. The following sections expand the
description of each of the aforementioned components.
A. Graph Packet Dissection
The approach starts by dissecting packet windows in order
to identify the source and destination addresses. Packets are
grouped by their respective source-destination pairs. A graph is
constructed where each node represents an IP address. Edges
consist of the list of packets communicated between nodes.
Each packet is dissected in order to create an initial feature
representation that is suitable for an ML model. We consider two
sets of features: transmission control protocol (TCP) features
and raw byte features. TCP features are presented in Table I.
Raw byte features are presented in Table II.
B. Embedded Packet Representations, Transformer, and
Self-Supervised Training
The TNN model is presented in Fig. 3. We use the transformer as it is the current state-of-the-art model for sequence
modeling. The transformer uses attention layers that allow capturing long-range dependencies directly. Attention layers also
improve the efficiency of the training algorithm as sequences
can be processed in parallel; this is in contrast to LSTM and

TABLE II
PACKET FEATURES WHEN USING RAW BYTES

GRU models whose inherently sequential nature precludes parallelization [26]. We use a modified version of the transformer
model presented in [26], which was originally used to train
language models. Like a sentence is composed of a sequence
of words, the edges in our network are composed of a sequence
of packets. Thus, we use the transformer to encode the list of
packets pk in each edge to a latent representation z(i,j) .
The transformer model used in this work is trained using a selfsupervised learning approach [36]. The transformer is trained to
predict the next n packets (unobserved) given the sequence of
past k packets (observed). As shown in Fig. 3, the transformer
consists of an encoder–decoder network. The encoder network
encodes the input packets into a set of embedded representations
that are used by the decoder to predict a series of future packets.
This approach allows us to leverage unlabeled data as the input–
output packet sequence can be extracted by dividing unlabeled
packet windows into two. Once the transformer is trained, we
use the encoder network to extract packet features zn from the
edges of the graph Section III-A.
As shown in Fig. 3, the model is composed of the following
four types of layers.
1) Linear: Applies an affine transformation f (x) = W x + b
of the input using a weight matrix W and a bias vector b.
2) Feedforward: Applies an nonlinear transformation using
stacked layers f (x) = σ(W x + b) where σ is an activation function. We use the ReLU activation function.
3) Add and norm: This layer adds a residual connection
followed by layer normalization.
4) Multihead attention: This layer consists of several scaled
dot-product attention models that evaluate the input in

MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS

Fig. 2.

4255

Overview of the NeT. (a) Graph packet dissection. (b) Embedded representation. (c) Hierarchical network features.

Fig. 4.

Hierarchical graph features of the NeT model.

is learned when training the transformer model. The position
encoding in Fig. 3 uses the sine and cosine functions presented
in [26].
The loss function in Fig. 3 is used to evaluate the performance
of the transformer network to predict the future window of
packets. As shown in Tables I and II, the packets are represented
by a series of binary, categorical, and numerical values. We use
this distinction to evaluate the loss depending on the type of
predicted value. Numerical values use a quadratic loss, while
binary and categorical values use a cross-entropy loss.
C. Hierarchical Graph Features
Fig. 3.

Transformer model and self-supervised training.

parallel. The scaled dot-product attention is a function
that performs an evaluation of a query matrix (Q) over a
series of key (K) value (V ) matrices


QK T
V
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √
dz
where dz is the dimension of the encoded feature representations, which is specified when instantiating the
transformer model.
Fig. 3 shows W 0, which is a vector used at the beginning
of the target sequence to shift the position of the packets on
the right. Shifting the input to the right allows the decoder to
predict the next packet given the series of previously predicted
symbols, making the transformer model autoregressive [26]. In
our implementation, the vector W 0 is a trainable parameter that

Fig. 4 shows the set of hierarchical graph features of the NeT
model. These include global, node, and edge features. These
features characterize the computer network at different levels of
granularity. NeT hierarchical features are computed on packet
windows, which are lists of packets obtained during a specified
time window (30 s in this article). To compute NeT features, first
each packet feature zn is encoded using the encoder from the
transformer model (see Fig. 3). Edge features e(i,k) are computed
by summing the list of encoded packets zn transferred between
nodes i and k. Node features vk are obtained by summing the
edge features e(i,k) attached to the node k. Global features u are
obtained by summing all edge features in the graph.
The graph features represent the computer network in a given
time window. They represent the network in different layers of
abstraction, using a format that is easy to interpret and exploit
in order to extract information. We train anomaly detection
algorithms for each level of abstraction (global, nodes, edges)

4256

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Data preprocessing pipeline.

in order to detect anomalies and extract information in different
levels of granularity. The algorithms are trained using only data
collected during the normal operation of the system. In this
article, we consider three anomaly detection algorithms: LOF,
OCSVM, and AEs.
Global features provide the highest level of abstraction by
representing the entire network for a given window of packets.
Global features provide a way to identify anomalies effectively
without dealing directly with individual nodes or connections.
This serves as the first indication of anomalous behavior that
considers the network as a whole.
Node features are used to characterize the behavior of individual devices. They provide the next level of abstraction after
global features. After an anomaly is detected with the global
features, node features are used to identify the devices involved
in the anomalous event. Edge features provide the next level
of abstraction after node features. Edge features allow us to
identify exactly which connections are exhibiting anomalous
behavior. Even when we are using a complex DNN transformer
model, the hierarchical graph features provide a structure that is
easy to understand. This structure can be exploited in order to
extract information such as devices and connections involved in
an anomaly.
D. Scalability
Network packet data is often characterized by a very high
volume of samples. Attacks such as network scans and DOS
often flood the computer network with a high volume of packets.
As a result, ML algorithms need to be designed in order to
handle large quantities of data. Performing the graph packet
dissection and training of the NeT required the development of
a multiprocessing pipeline in order to scale to these types of
datasets.
Fig. 5 shows the developed multiprocessing pipeline used
to train the NeT. The pipeline preprocesses a series of packet
capture files (PCAP) into a series of features formatted as
tensors (multidimensional arrays), ready to be consumed by
Tensorflow. The first stage consists of extracting windows of
consecutive raw packets using a rolling window. In our case,
we used a window of 30 s, but this can be tuned depending
on the application. The second processing stage consists of
TCP/user datagram protocol (UDP) dissection, which groups
packets by the source-destination IP address. The third processing stage extracts features according to Tables I and II. These
features are grouped using the source-destination address and
then packaged in a tensor representation. These tensor feature

Fig. 6.

ICS testbed used to collect data.

representations are then managed by Tensorflow-Datasets, a
library that creates a cache of the preprocessed values in order
to be consumed efficiently when training the NeT. The training
uses stochastic gradient descent, more specifically the adaptive
moment estimation (ADAM) algorithm, which scales to very
large datasets. Once the NeT is trained, the features can be used
for downstream ML operations without retraining the model.
The preprocessing pipeline in this work was implemented using
Python multiprocessing library, but the same approach can be
horizontally scaled with libraries such as Hadoop or Spark.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section presents the experimental analysis of the NeT. We
used packet data captured from a real ICS system to evaluate the
performance of the presented NeT approach. The performance
was evaluated on an anomaly detection task, which included
the detection of a set of attack scenarios. We also evaluated
the ability of NeT to provide an indication of devices and
connections related to a detected anomaly.
A. Data Collection and Processing
The presented approach was evaluated using a dataset of
packet captures collected in an ICS. The data were provided
by Idaho National Laboratory. The ICS network is presented in
Fig. 6. The network is composed of two attack computers, two
protection relays, one power quality meter, one real-time automation controller (RTAC), one satellite synchronized network
clock, and one SCADA PC. All devices are connected using
two network switches. The RTAC is using the DNP3 protocol to
communicate with the relays, the meter, and the SCADA PC. A
sniffer is connected to a SPAN port in the switch. The SPAN port
forwards all the packet data passing through the switch to the

MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS

sniffer, which stores the data in PCAP files for later analysis. In
total, the collected data consisted of 6.036.046 packets. The data
are processed first by performing packet dissection. A rolling
window is used to analyze sections of the data, extracting a
series of manually engineered features to be used as inputs to ML
anomaly detection systems. The normal behavior of the system
is learned by ML algorithms such that any behaviors that are
different from previously seen data are flagged as anomalies.
For experimental evaluation, the following five types of scenarios were considered.
1) Normal scenario: Consisted of normal operation of the
system without any cyber disturbance/attack executed.
2) Flood attack: Consisted of a flood of packets using hpin3
command with random source IP address. The attack is
launched from the PC1 attack device. The attack targets
Relays 1 and 2.
3) Scan attack: Consisted of a network scan using nmap.
The attack was launched from the PC1 attack device. The
attack targets Relays 1 and 2. Two attacks were launched.
The first attack was an nmap OS fingerprint scan. The
second attack was a TCP SYN port scan.
4) Failed authentication: Consisted of an unauthorized user
who attempted to access remote devices and failed to get
access after three attempts. The scenario was launched
from PC2 and targeted Relays 1 and 2 through ssh and
telnet. After three unsuccessful login attempts, the relays
pulsed a series of alarms that were communicated through
DNP3.
5) Setting change: An unauthorized user that successfully
accessed Relays 1 and 2 from PC2 and made changes in
the settings of each device. The setting change scenario
included changes to the following configurations: current
transformer ratio, phase instantaneous overcurrent level,
and relay trip equations. When the user logs into the
device, the relay pulses an alarm, which is communicated
through DNP3 to the RTAC device. After the setting
change is executed, the relay pulses another alarm, which
is also communicated through DNP3.
For experimental evaluation, the normal scenario data were
divided into 80% for training and 20% for testing. Only data
from the normal scenario were used to train the models. Thus,
training did not require labeling. The remaining 20% of the
normal scenario data was used for evaluation, more specifically
to measure the false positive ratio. All other four scenarios
were considered abnormal. None of the abnormal scenario data
was used for training the models. The abnormal scenario data
was only used for evaluation, more specifically to measure the
anomaly detection ratio. The following sections present the
results and analysis of our experiments.
B. Global Level
As described in Section III-C, global features characterize
the behavior of the entire network. As mentioned before, LOF,
OCSVM, and AEs models were used for comparing the global
level performance. These anomaly detection algorithms run on
top of the NeT global features. The baseline used the same three

Fig. 7.

4257

Global features visualized using the T-SNE algorithm.

anomaly detection algorithms, but it considered a series of handengineering statistical features found in the literature [12], [37].
These features were computed across packet windows of 30 s.
NeT refers to the NeT using the TCP features from Table I. NeTB
refers to the NeT using the raw bytes features from Table II. NeT
and NeTB report anomalies detected using packet windows of
30 s as well. The AE model used the reconstruction error to
identify anomalies [37]. In this article, we executed attacks at
the global level by executing attacks using PC1 and PC2. Thus,
the anomaly detection performance was also calculated at the
global level.
The presented global level performance was evaluated using
the false positive rate (FPR) and anomaly detection rate (ADR).
Results were measured using 5-fold cross-validation, where
normal scenario data is split 80% for training and 20% for
testing. Data from attack scenarios were only used for performance evaluation. The FPR measures the rate of anomalies for
normal scenarios. The ADR measures the rate of anomalies
during attack scenarios. FPR is the percentage of incorrectly
identified abnormal communication windows given a normal
communication duration. ADR is the percentage of correctly
identified abnormal communication windows over all the abnormal communication windows. We report ADR measured across
all scenarios and for each attack scenario separately. Values
of FPR closer to zero and high values of ADR indicate better
anomaly detection performance. It is worth clarifying that the
ADR may not necessarily be one, as the anomalous scenarios
contain a mix of normal and abnormal data [37].
1) Behavior Characterization Analysis: We used NeT global
features to characterize the behavior of the entire network, as
described in Section III-C. Fig. 7 shows a visualization of the
NeT global features. The visualization was obtained with the
T-SNE algorithm. The figure shows each anomaly scenario
(red) along with data from normal operations (blue). The figure
provides a visual reference of the difference between each
scenario compared to the normal behavior of the system. We

4258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE III
FPR AND ADR FOR NET MODEL

observed that features from flood and scan scenarios are significantly different from normal behavior. Failed authentication
and setting change showed more subtle differences from normal
data. This behavior follows our expectations as flood and scan
attacks had a larger impact on the network as both introduced a
large volume of packets. This visual representation of the global
features served as an initial understanding of the data, providing
a tool to understand the similarity between different scenarios.
2) Anomaly Detection Analysis: When looking at the results
presented in Table III, among baselines, AE provided the lowest
FPR while achieving comparable ADR performance. NeTB
and NeT provided slightly better FPR with higher ADR when
compared with the baseline. We observed a higher ADR for
flood and scan scenarios using NeTB and NeT models. However, the baseline provided a slightly better performance on
failed authentication and setting change scenarios. NeT-AE and
Baseline-AE provided comparable results for failed authentication, with NeTB-AE providing the lowest performance. For
setting change, NeTB-AE and baseline AE provided comparable
results, with NeT-AE having the lowest performance in this
scenario. The baseline and the NT models had specific features
indicating activity on ssh and telnet, which helps to explain
why they performed better in the failed authentication scenario.
On the other hand, setting change was characterized by larger
payloads than failed authentication, which helps to explain the
better performance of NeTB as it included the raw 512 B of the
payload.
Table III shows that the presented NeT and NeTB models
provide comparable or better performance in anomaly detection
than the baseline. Furthermore, the baseline does not have mechanisms to explore which devices and connections are involved in
the anomalies. The following experiments show the capability
of NeT to provide an indication of devices affected and anomalous connections using the node and edge features. Given the
superior performance of AE compared to LOF and OCSVM,
the subsequent sections utilize AE for all experiments.
C. Node Level
Node features were used to characterize the behavior of each
device in the network, as described in Section III-C. These
features were used to identify the devices affected in each attack
scenario. As described in Section IV-A, flood and scan attacks
were launched by PC1 while failed authentication and setting

Fig. 8. Anomalies in each device detected with NeT node features.
(a) Flood. (b) Scan. (c) Failed Auth. (d) Setting Change.

change were launched by PC2. Fig. 8 shows the anomalies
per-device detected using NeT Node features. The figure shows
the number of anomalies per device for each attack scenario.
1) Analysis of Flood Attack: Flood attack shows a high
anomaly rate for PC1 [see Fig. 8(a)], which confirms the correct
origin of flood attacks.
2) Analysis of Scan Attack: Scan attack also shows a high
anomaly rate for PC1 [see Fig. 8(b)], confirming the correct
origin.
3) Analysis of Failed Authentication Attack: During failed
authentication attacks, PC2 shows a high anomaly rate confirming the origin of the attack [see Fig. 8(c)].
4) Analysis of Settings Change Attack: Setting changes
show a high anomaly rate in PC2, confirming the accurate
identification of the attack origin [see Fig. 8(d)].
5) Identification of Targeted Devices: A key observation
from Fig. 8 is the high anomaly ratio for Relays 1 and 2, which
were the devices targeted by the attacker. This highlights the
effectiveness of the presented approach in detecting the specific
devices under attack.
6) Overall Analysis: The experiments in this section showed
that our approach was able to recognize which PC launched

MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS

Fig. 9. Anomalous connections detected with NeT edge features.
(a) Flood. (b) Scan. (c) Failed Auth. (d) Setting Change.

the attack in each attack scenario. In addition, Fig. 8 shows a
high number of anomalies for the RTAC device during failed
authentication and setting change. Although the RTAC device
was not targeted by the cyber attacks, the relays communicate
with the RTAC whenever there is a failed authentication or a
setting change. This communication used the DNP3 protocol as
described in Section IV-A. A key insight from this observation
is that the presented approach not only identified the attacker
and target devices but also captured the broader impacts or side
effects of the attack, highlighting its ability to detect indirect
consequences in addition to direct interactions.
D. Edge Level
We used NeT Edge features to characterize each connection
between devices in the network, as described in Section III-C.
By running anomaly detection on the edge features, we were
able to identify the connections responsible for an anomaly.
Fig. 9 shows the results of anomalous connections obtained by
analyzing the edge features. The figure shows that the presented
approach was able to identify the connections responsible for
the anomalies.
1) Analysis on Flood and Scan Attacks: For the flood [see
Fig. 9(a)] and scan scenarios [see Fig. 9(b)], we observed that
NeT successfully reported the anomalous connections between
the attacker (PC1) and the relays.
2) Analysis on Failed Authentication and Setting Change
Attacks: For failed authentication [see Fig. 9(c)] and setting

change [see Fig. 9(d)], the presented approach was able to
identify the anomalous connections, which in this case involved
PC2 and both relays.
E. Overall Analysis and Discussion
Figs. 7–9 demonstrate how the proposed approach enables
the extraction of information from multiple abstraction layers.

4259

This is thanks to the graph structure we have embedded in
our methodology. Concretely, our experiments demonstrated the
proposed approach has the following main advantages.
1) Enhance interpretability by incorporating the graph
structure of computer networks: The equivalence between
the ML model graph representation and the actual device
network communication allows experts to effectively use
the model to obtain detailed information, such as the
origin of an attack, the devices affected, and the signatures
of different attack types. This information is important
for users to identify the root causes of anomalies and
implement corrective actions. In addition, it provides a
shared understanding of the problem between humans and
the ML model, which can serve as a bridge to enhance
human trust in the ML model outputs.
2) Provide a hierarchical set of features that enables analysis at different levels of granularity: The approach integrates multiple layers of abstraction, including global,
node, and edge feature representations. This facilitates
straightforward backtracking and analysis of model predictions across different levels of detail.
3) Self-supervised training that does not require labeled
data: Industrial settings produce large volumes of unlabeled data during normal operation. In most cases, it
is unpractical, costly, time-consuming, and sometimes
impossible to obtain and label abnormal data. Using the
presented self-supervised approach, the NeT model can
be trained using only data from normal operation, without
the need to acquire and label abnormal data.
For the experiments, we chose global-level FPR and ADR
metrics to provide a clear and fair comparison across the different anomaly detection algorithms presented. The attacks were
executed at a global level only. Therefore, the scope of the
experimental setup was to identify attacks at a global level. We
did not provide these metrics at a node and connection level
because this would require modifying the baseline algorithms we
use for comparison, which was outside the scope of the presented
work. The purpose of presenting node-level and connectionlevel anomalous record count in Figs. 8 and 9 was to support our
contribution—Enhanced interpretability by incorporating the
graph structure of computer networks—demonstrating how NeT
edge and node features were used to extract information about
devices and connections involved in each anomalous scenario.
V. CONCLUSION
This article presented the NeT, an ML model that uses graphbased representations to incorporate the structure of a monitored
computer network. The presented model uses self-supervised
learning in order to train the model without the need for labeled
data. NeT provides an approach to extract a series of hierarchical
graph features for down-stream ML analysis. In this article,
we demonstrated the use of the extracted hierarchical features
for anomaly detection. NeT successfully identified anomalies
in an ICS network while being able to report devices affected
and connections compromised, demonstrating its ability for
enhanced interpretability by facilitating the extraction of more
detailed information about the anomalies.

4260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

The presented approach provided an end-to-end differentiable
model for analyzing network packet data, starting from potentially raw byte values up to a global representation of the
network graph. Although we used a complex DNN transformer,
the hierarchical design of the approach allows to backtrack
and analyze the predictions of the model in different levels of
granularity. In the experimental evaluation, we demonstrated
this analysis starting from a global representation followed by
an analysis of individual nodes and connections. The presented
analysis demonstrates how the graph structure can be exploited
to not only identify anomalies but extract useful information of
what devices the anomaly is affecting and which connections are
responsible for the anomaly. Because the transformer encoder
processes potential raw binary data, the approach can be used as
a unified end-to-end methodology for network traffic monitoring
that goes from a global view up to individual bytes. Future work
will explore the use of existing explainable algorithms such
as LIME or SHAP to provide explanations at the packet and
possibly byte level.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Li, C. Xie, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, and H. Yu, “Anomaly detection algorithm of industrial Internet of Things data platform based on deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1037–1048,
Sep. 2024.
[2] P. Mishra, A. Vidyarthi, and P. Siano, “Guest editorial: Security and privacy
for cloud-assisted Internet of Things (IoT) and smart grid,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 4966–4968, Jul. 2022.
[3] A. Tabassum, S. Chinthavali, L. Chen, and A. Prakash, “Data mining
critical infrastructure systems: Models and tools,” IEEE Intell. Informat. Bull., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 31–38, Dec. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1503981
[4] J. Zhu, Y. Yuan, F.-Y. Wang, and G. Wang, “Federated control:
A trustable control framework for large-scale cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7986–7994,
May 2024.
[5] D. L. Marino, C. S. Wickramasinghe, V. K. Singh, J. Gentle, C. Rieger, and
M. Manic, “The virtualized cyber-physical testbed for machine learning
anomaly detection: A wind powered grid case study,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 159475–159494, 2021.
[6] B. Vaagensmith et al., “Review of design elements within power
infrastructure cyber-physical test beds as threat analysis environments,”
Energies, vol. 14, no. 5, 2021, Art. no. 1409. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/5/1409
[7] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced
anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021.
[8] C. S. Wickramasinghe, D. L. Marino, K. Amarasinghe, and M. Manic,
“Generalization of deep learning for cyber-physical system security: A
survey,” in Proc. IEEE 44th Annu. Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc., 2018,
pp. 745–751.
[9] Y. K. Saheed, O. H. Abdulganiyu, and T. A. Tchakoucht, “A novel hybrid
ensemble learning for anomaly detection in industrial sensor networks
and SCADA systems for smart city infrastructures,” J. King Saud Univ.Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 35, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 101532.
[10] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on
outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3444690
[11] X. Du, Z. Fang, I. Diakonikolas, and Y. Li, “How does unlabeled data
provably help out-of-distribution detection?,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=jlEjB8MVGa
[12] D. L. Marino et al., “Cyber and physical anomaly detection in smart-grids,”
in Proc. Resilience Week (RWS), 2019, vol. 1, pp. 187–193.
[13] Z. Zhao, C. Xu, and B. Li, “A LSTM-based anomaly detection model for
log analysis,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 93, no. 7, pp. 745–751, 2021.

[14] O. Arreche, T. R. Guntur, J. W. Roberts, and M. Abdallah, “E-XAI:
Evaluating black-box explainable AI frameworks for network intrusion
detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 23954–23988, 2024.
[15] D. Gunning and D. Aha, “DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) program,” AI Mag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 44–58, 2019.
[16] R. Dwivedi et al., “Explainable AI (XAI): Core ideas, techniques, and
solutions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–33, 2023.
[17] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[18] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30,
pp. 4765–4774. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7062-aunified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf
[19] D. L. Marino and M. Manic, “Physics enhanced data-driven models with
variational Gaussian processes,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Electron. Soc., vol. 2,
pp. 252–265, 2021.
[20] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
[21] L. Cai et al., “Structural temporal graph neural networks for anomaly
detection in dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2021, pp. 3747–3756.
[22] J. Song, K. Kim, J. Oh, and S. Cho, “Memto: Memory-guided transformer
for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 36, pp. 57947–57963, 2024.
[23] J. Lu et al., “Unified-IO 2: Scaling autoregressive multimodal models with
vision language audio and action,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 26439–26455.
[24] M. Dehghani et al., “Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion parameters,”
in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2023, pp. 7480–7512. [Online].
Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/dehghani23a.html
[25] C. Ryali et al., “Hiera: A hierarchical vision transformer without the bellsand-whistles,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 29441–29454.
[26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30, pp. 6000–6010. [Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
[27] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4,
pp. 1038–1059, 2021.
[28] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 665–674.
[29] Y. An, K. Zhang, Y. Chai, Z. Zhu, and Q. Liu, “Gaussian mixture
variational-based transformer domain adaptation fault diagnosis method
and its application in bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 615–625, Jan. 2024.
[30] X. Yang, T. Ye, X. Yuan, W. Zhu, X. Mei, and F. Zhou, “A novel data
augmentation method based on denoising diffusion probabilistic model
for fault diagnosis under imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7820–7831, May 2024.
[31] Y. Wu, Z. Feng, J. Liang, Q. Liu, and D. Sun, “Fault diagnosis algorithm
of beam pumping unit based on transfer learning and DenseNet model,”
Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 21, 2022, Art. no. 11091. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/21/11091
[32] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[33] V. Marx, “Seeing data as t-SNE and UMAP do,” Nature Methods, vol. 21,
pp. 930–933, 2024.
[34] X. Liu, X. Qu, X. Xie, S. Li, Y. Bao, and L. Zhao, “Predicting alloying element yield in converter steelmaking using t-SNE-WOA-LSTM,”
Processes, vol. 12, no. 5, 2024, Art. no. 974. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/12/5/974
[35] A. Bibal, V. Delchevalerie, and B. Frénay, “DT-SNE: T-SNE discrete
visualizations as decision tree structures,” Neurocomputing, vol. 529,
pp. 101–112, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0925231223001054
[36] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[37] D. L. Marino, C. S. Wickramasinghe, B. Tsouvalas, C. Rieger, and
M. Manic, “Data-driven correlation of cyber and physical anomalies for holistic system health monitoring,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 163138–163150, 2021.

MARINO et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED AND INTERPRETABLE ANOMALY DETECTION USING NETWORK TRANSFORMERS

Daniel L. Marino (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in automation engineering from
La Salle University, Bogotá, Colombia, in 2015
and the Ph.D. degree in engineering from Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
USA, in 2021.
He is currently an Applied Scientist with Amazon.com, Seattle, WA, USA. He has more than
eight years of research and development experience, collaborating with U.S. DOE National
Labs, universities, and industry. He has authored more than 27 articles in peer reviewed journals and conferences.
His research interests include stochastic modeling, deep learning, and
explainable AI with applications in cyber-physical systems, cybersecurity, energy, and robotics.

Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe (Member,
IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in computer
science from the University of Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, in 2016 and the Doctoral
degree in engineering from Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA, in 2022.
She is currently a Principle Data Scientist with
Capital One, McLean, VA, USA. Her research
interests include machine learning, anomaly detection, human behavior segmentation, neural
networks, and explainable AI.

Craig Rieger (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in chemical engineering from Montana State University, Bozeman,
MT, USA, in 1983 and 1985, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in engineering and applied
science from Idaho State University, Pocatello,
ID, USA, in 2008.
He is currently the Managing Director and
Consultant with TRECS Consulting. He was the
Chief Control Systems Research Engineer and
a Directorate Fellow with the Idaho National
Laboratory (INL), Idaho Falls, ID, USA, pioneering interdisciplinary research in next-generation resilient control systems. He has also organized and chaired 14 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) technically cosponsored symposia and one National Science
Foundation workshop in this new research area. He has authored more
than 75 peer-reviewed publications. His doctoral coursework and dissertation focused on measurements and control, with specific application to
intelligent, supervisory ventilation controls for critical infrastructure. He
has also been a supervisor and technical lead for control-systems engineering groups having design, configuration management and security
responsibilities for several INL nuclear facilities and various controlsystem architectures.
Dr. Rieger is a senior member of IEEE with 20 years of software and
hardware-design experience for process control-system upgrades and
new installations.

4261

Milos Manic (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Dipl.Ing. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the University of Niš, Niš, Serbia, in 1991 and 1997,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science fron the University of Idaho, in 2003.
He is currently a Professor with the Computer Science Department, the Director of VCU
Cybersecurity Center, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA, USA, and the Director of Commonwealth Center for Advanced
Computing. He has completed more than 50 research grants in AI/ML
in cyber and energy and intelligent controls. He authored more than 200
refereed articles, holds several U.S. patents.
Dr. Manic was the recipient of the 2018 R&D 100 Award for Autonomic Intelligent Cyber Sensor (AICS). He is an inductee of the
U.S. National Academy of Inventors (S/M 2023/2019) and a Fellow of
Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (specialty in AI & Cybersecurity). He
is an IEEE IES President (2024–2025). He was also a recipient of
IEEE IES 2019 Anthony J. Hornfeck Service Award, 2012 J. David Irwin
Early Career Award, 2017 IEM Best Paper Award, an Associate Editor
for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, Open Journal of
Industrial Electronics Society, and Senior Life AdCom member. He was
Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS,
was a founding chair of IEEE Industrial Electronics Society Technical
Committee on Resilience and Security in Industry, and was a general
chair of IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology 2023,
IEEE International Conference on Human System Interaction 2019, and
IEEE IECON 2018.