IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

2675

Self-Supervised Random Forest on Transformed
Distribution for Anomaly Detection
Jiabin Liu , Huadong Wang , Hanyuan Hang, Shumin Ma , Xin Shen , and Yong Shi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Anomaly detection, the task of differentiating
abnormal data points from normal ones, presents a significant
challenge in the realm of machine learning. Numerous strategies
have been proposed to tackle this task, with classification-based
methods, specifically those utilizing a self-supervised approach via
random affine transformations (RATs), demonstrating remarkable performance on both image and non-image data. However,
these methods encounter a notable bottleneck, the overlap of
constructed labeled datasets across categories, which hampers the
subsequent classifiers’ ability to detect anomalies. Consequently,
the creation of an effective data distribution becomes the pivotal
factor for success. In this article, we introduce a model called
“self-supervised forest (sForest),” which leverages the random
Fourier transform (RFT) and random orthogonal rotations to
craft a controlled data distribution. Our model utilizes the
RFT to map input data into a new feature space. With this
transformed data, we create a self-labeled training dataset using
random orthogonal rotations. We theoretically prove that the
data distribution formulated by our methodology is more stable
compared to one derived from RATs. We then use the self-labeled
dataset in a random forest (RF) classifier to distinguish between
normal and anomalous data points. Comprehensive experiments
conducted on both real and artificial datasets illustrate that
sForest outperforms other anomaly detection methods, including
distance-based, kernel-based, forest-based, and network-based
benchmarks.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, data distribution, random
forest (RF) classifier, random Fourier transform (RFT), random
orthogonal rotations, self-supervised learning.
Manuscript received 7 October 2022; revised 1 February 2023, 24 August
2023, and 22 October 2023; accepted 22 December 2023. Date of publication 23 January 2024; date of current version 6 February 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62306036, Grant 62306159, Grant 72231010, and
Grant 71932008. The work of Shumin Ma was supported in part by the
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research and
Application for Data Science (IRADS) under Grant 2022B1212010006 and
Grant R0400001-22, in part by the Guangdong Higher Education Upgrading
Plan under Project UIC-R0400024-21, and in part by the Beijing Normal
University-Hong Kong Baptist University United International College (UIC)
under Grant UICR0700019-22. (Corresponding author: Huadong Wang.)
Jiabin Liu is with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also with the Laboratory
of Electromagnetic Space Cognition and Intelligent Control, Beijing 100191,
China.
Huadong Wang is with ModelBest Inc., Beijing 100084, China (e-mail:
huadw2012@163.com).
Hanyuan Hang is with the Department of Applied Mathematics, University
of Twente, 7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands.
Shumin Ma is with the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory IRADS and
the Department of Mathematical Science, BNU-HKBU United International
College, Zhuhai 519087, China.
Xin Shen is with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
Yong Shi is with the School of Economics and Management, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3348833

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

EEP learning, with its demonstrated efficacy in a plethora
of domains, heavily depends on the availability of largescale, high-quality, and accurately labeled data to effectively
train deep neural networks. However, due to privacy and
security issues, it is usually difficult to obtain trustworthy
ground-truth labels in practice [1], [2]. For instance, in the
field of cybersecurity, identification of novel, unknown attacks
is frequently hampered due to the absence of patterns or
signatures of these attacks, which are essential for a supervised classifier. Similar problems arise in industrial detection,
wherein we often find ourselves unable to anticipate all possible fault situations. This shortage of labeled data considerably
impedes the process of supervised learning.
Anomaly detection, also referred to as outlier detection,
fault detection, or novelty detection, emerges as a solution to
the challenges previously discussed. The key concept involves
training exclusively with “normal” samples and identifying
“abnormal” samples within the test dataset. This is accomplished by labeling all test samples as either normal or
anomalous. Researchers have successfully designed effective
anomaly detection techniques applicable across a myriad of
fields. For instance, within the realm of computer vision, the
techniques have been applied to identify abnormal trajectories
and moving objects [3], [4], [5], [6]. Within the finance sector,
anomaly detection plays a crucial role in fraud detection [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Moreover, in healthcare and medicine,
the technique proves useful for monitoring and addressing
abnormalities within medical records [13]. For a more comprehensive understanding of this topic, readers are encouraged
to refer to the surveys in [14] and [15].
Self-supervised learning has recently emerged as a promising approach, demonstrating an impressive capability to
generate better feature representations. Techniques widely
employed in self-supervised learning for image data encompass geometric transformations [16], [17], [18], patching [19],
[20], and color permutations [21], [22]. This learning paradigm
has recently been adopted to address anomaly detection problems [17], [23] for image data. Here, image rotations are
leveraged to generate distinct categories, and a neural network
is trained based on these “supervised” data. Since these pretext
tasks are largely inapplicable to the analysis of structured
data, Bergman and Hoshen [24] broadened the application of
classification-based pretext tasks to outlier detection with general data by defining multiple random affine transformations
(RATs) as different categories. It is noteworthy, however, that

2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Effect of data distribution in a 2-D space. (a) Original data. (b) Rotated
data based on the original data in (a), where the transformed abnormal data
is specially marked by adding a black edge. (c) Transformed data based on
a random Fourier transform (RFT) ψ : R2 → R2 . (d) Rotated data based
3
represent the four categories
on the transformed data in (c). The {Ri }i=0
of self-labeled data, and each category corresponds to a random rotation
transformation.

the distribution of data procured from affine transformation
is of great importance, as it directly influences the performance
of the final classifier. As an illustration, we display the effect
of kernel feature transformation in a 2-D space in Fig. 1.
In Fig. 1(b), the four categories of self-supervised data are
intensely mixed, making it challenging for the subsequent
classifier to distinguish features and thereby leading to failure
in anomaly detection. Therefore, we propose that an optimal approach to implementing self-supervised-based anomaly
detection on general data involves “creating” a superior data
distribution for the ensuing classifier.
In this article, we introduce a novel distribution for
self-supervised-based anomaly detection, which incorporates
RFT [25] and random orthogonal rotations. This new methodology supplants the RAT, previously used in research [24],
thereby enabling more effective control over the distribution
of the generated data. Our proposed method initially maps the
input data into a feature space at the onset of the learning
process, applying RFT [25] to the original data. Subsequently,
these newly generated, less correlated, or redundant features
are used to train a random forest (RF) classifier via supervised learning with self-labeled data. This self-labeled data is
produced through random orthogonal rotations. In this article,
we primarily employ our data distribution methodology with
RF to underscore the advantages of our data distribution.
However, it is essential to note that our data distribution can
be applied to any classifiers, including neural networks, not
just the RF classifier. In Fig. 1(d), there is a pronounced
separation between the four categories of normal data following transformation. Conversely, the transformed abnormal data
points intermingle. During the testing phase, the same series
of rotations will be implemented on the testing data, which
includes both normal and anomalous samples. The trained RF

classifier will then be used on the self-labeled testing data.
Ultimately, samples with low testing accuracy are categorized
as anomalies.
In summary, the main contributions of this article are
mentioned as follows.
1) We develop a self-supervised anomaly detection method
for structured data, dubbed “self-supervised forest (sForest).” This method introduces a novel self-labeled data
distribution, derived from the application of RFT and
orthogonal rotation, for self-supervised anomaly detection methodologies.
2) We provide a theoretical rationale for our method’s
superiority. The data distribution obtained through the
combination of RFT and orthogonal rotation is more
stable (“kernel approximation with lower expected variance”) than that acquired through RAT.
3) The superiority and robustness of our proposed
method have been examined on various artificial
and benchmark datasets. The performance of “sForest” is contrasted with several state-of-the-art anomaly
detection algorithms, encompassing forest-based methods isolation forest (iForest) and partial identification forest (PIDforest), distance-based methods
[i.e., k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and local outlier factor
(LOF)], kernel-based method one-class support vector machine (OCSVM), and the self-supervised-based
method geometric-transformation anomaly detection
(GOAD).
II. R ELATED W ORKS
The study of anomaly detection, alternatively termed as
outlier detection, fault detection, or novelty detection, has
gained substantial traction within the field of machine learning.
Broadly, it encompasses three distinct methodologies: supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised learning, the choice
of which hinges on the accessibility of labeled data. In this
research paper, our primary focus rests on semi-supervised
anomaly detection, a scenario wherein only a minimal number
of samples are labeled, leaving the majority without groundtruth labels. Notably, based on the strategies applied to this
learning paradigm, it can be segmented into distance-based
methods [26], [27], [28], density estimation and probabilistic
models [29], [30], as well as classification-based methods [17],
[23], [24], [31].
In recent years, the field of anomaly detection has witnessed
an evolutionary leap, wherein the self-supervised mechanism
within this learning paradigm has been leveraged to reframe
anomaly detection as a classification problem. This novel
approach has delivered substantial enhancements in performance across both image and non-image datasets. In fact,
it transforms the structured data into different categories by
defining a set of geometric transformations and makes the
anomaly detection problem a conventional classification task.
For the image data, Golan and El-Yaniv [17] initially
introduced the concept of a “supervised task” by rotating each
image by 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ , where each angle is defined
as an individual category. This approach was later expanded

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

upon by Hendryck and Gimpel [23], who combined additional
self-supervision mechanisms to enhance performance. They
deemed the low-confidence samples from the softmax activation statistics to be anomalies, following a specific selection
rule. However, these geometric transformations are primarily
designed for unstructured data like images and are therefore
not directly transferable to tabular data.
Addressing the challenge of non-image data, Bergman
and Hoshen [24] broadened the scope of the geometric
transformation method to include RATs. They put forth
an anomaly detection technique that synergistically amalgamated a one-class model with the transformation classification
method. This methodology boasts a dual advantage: it can
process a wide array of data types and has an auto-tuning
capability for transformation parameters, thanks to the utilization of RATs. Furthermore, the variance between disparate
data types can be effectively minimized through the selection of random transformations, simultaneously reducing the
detrimental impact of adversarial samples.
However, the method proposed by [24] has overlooked the
influence of data distribution on the overall performance of the
self-supervised model. In terms of the geometric morphology
of the original data distribution, the application of affine
transformation functions preserves a similar morphology in
the transformed data. Moreover, if the geometric morphology
of the original data distribution is unsuitable, the self-labeled
data after transformation will be challenging for classifiers to
discern (as shown in Fig. 1, where the original data is normally
distributed around the origin), or substantial intervals between
different classes of data are generated. This allows classifiers
to easily differentiate between data classes, which complicates
the learning of complex patterns of normal data distribution
for any classifier, leading to the failure of anomaly detection.
In addition, this method does not consider the influence of
data redundancy or feature correlation on the self-supervised
model.
III. A LGORITHM D ESIGN
We train the sForest model only on the normal data
D := {x1 , . . . , x N }, where each observation xi is drawn
i.i.d. from one probability distribution P. The construction
of sForest starts with mapping the input data into a feature
space Z := {ψ(x1 ), . . . , ψ(x N )}, with a nonlinear kernel
transformation ψ(·) (such as the Monte Carlo approximation
of the Fourier transform [25]). Then, we augment the data by
M
applying random rotations {Rm }m=0
to the features. In particular, R0 signifies the identity transformation, implying that
no changes are made to the features when the rotation R0 is
applied. For every rotated feature, Rm (ψ(xi )), is assigned the
corresponding label Rm , resulting in a self-labeled dataset:
{(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} . Using these self-labeled
data pairs, we proceed to train an RF classifier in a supervised
way. During the testing phase, similar operations are carried
out on the test data using the function ψ(·) and the set of
M
rotation matrices {Rm }m=0
. The previously trained RF classifier
is utilized to assess the samples. Anomalies are discerned
based on low testing accuracy.

2677

A. Rotations and RFT in Self-Supervised Learning
1) Rotations in Self-Supervised Learning: For the image
data, classical self-supervised learning algorithms usually perform fixed-angle rotations with the angle θ taking values from
the set {0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , and 270◦ }. However, such methods are
tailored for image data, and cannot be directly applied to
high-dimensional structured data. To address the challenge of
rotation on structured data, we propose a self-labeling method
through the random rotation [32]. The details are described as
follows.
Given a feature space Z ⊆ Rd , a matrix R ∈ Rd×d is called
a proper rotation matrix when it is orthogonal and has unit
determinant, namely
R ⊤ = R −1

and |R| = 1.

The set of all proper rotation matrices form the special
orthogonal group, which we denote as SO(d). It is a subgroup of the orthogonal group O(d) that contains additional
improper rotations involving reflections (orthogonal matrices
with determinant −1). To be more specific, matrices in SO(d)
share the same determinant 1, whereas matrices in O(d) may
have determinant 1 or −1.
We perform the random rotation by uniformly sampling over
all feasible rotations in SO(d). It is worth mentioning that
uniformly sampling in SO(d) is not equivalent to rotating a
random angle in the spherical coordinates. As it can be proved,
randomly rotating one angle does not guarantee a uniform
distribution over all rotations when the feature dimension d is
larger than 2. Actually, some rotations are more likely to be
generated than others. Inspired by [32], we adopt the “true”
uniformly random rotations instead of naïve ones. Because
sampling naïve random rotations that are not uniformly distributed can lead to some rotations being over-represented and
others being under-represented in the resulting distribution,
causing bias in the solution. Besides, for categorical variables,
rotation is unnecessary and ill-defined. Hence, the random
rotations will not be applied to categorical variables.
2) Random Fourier Transform: A well-observed phenomenon is that, when the dimension of the input data
d is small, the features generated by the random rotation
transformation often overlap across categories. This makes the
subsequent RF classifier fail to detect anomaly. To solve this
problem, we adopt the random approximation method proposed in [25] to first transform the low-dimensional data into a
high-dimensional feature space. Specifically, on the input data,
we apply a random transformation ψ : Rd → R D , where D ≥
d. According to [25], when D is large enough, the evaluation
of the kernel K(x, y) between x ∈ Rd and y ∈ Rd can be
approximated by the inner product ψ(x)⊤ ψ(y). It is shown that
the transformed feature space saves the geometric distribution
of the data in the original low-dimensional feature space.
In this article, we define ψ(x) := [ψ1 (x), . . . , ψ D (x)]⊤ and
each ψi (·) is a real-valued transformation function (see [25])
r

2
cos wi⊤ x + φi , i = 1, 2, . . . , D.
(1)
ψi (x) =
D
Here, φi is uniformly sampled from the interval [0, 2π ],
and wi is randomly sampled from the distribution

2678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

√
2γ N (w; 0, 1). N (w; 0, 1) denotes a standard
p(w) =
Gaussian distribution, and γ is the parameter of the
approximated RBF kernel. One can easily find that p(w)
is the Fourier transform of the Gaussian kernel function.
When the dimension of the input data is high enough, this
transformation is unnecessary. The parameter γ defines how
far the influence of a single training example reaches, with
low values meaning “far” (i.e., more disperse the transformed
data distribution) and high values meaning “close” (i.e., more
compact the transformed data distribution).
3) Theoretical Analysis: This part devotes to a theoretical analysis over why the proposed method can outperform
GOAD [24]. More specifically, it proves that the distribution of
the self-labeled data obtained by combining RFT together with
random orthogonal rotation is more stable than that obtained
by a RAT. This stability is measured by the variance of the
kernel function within the transformed feature space.
Let O S(D) be the orthogonal group on the transformed
feature space of Z := {ψ(x1 ), . . . , ψ(x N )} ⊆ R D . For any
rotation transformation A ∈ O S(D), we denote the feature
after rotation as r A (x) = Aψ(x), where x ∈ Rd is the input
data. We denote the inner product of x and y in the transformed
space R D with the orthogonal transforms A and B as
.
KAB (x, y) = r A (x)⊤r B (y).

(2)

Denote the approximate kernel with ψ taking the RAT as
KRAT (x, y) and the approximate kernel with ψ taking the RFT
as KRFT (x, y).
AB
Theorem 1: For any A, B ∈ O S(D), KRFT
(x, y) is an
unbiased estimator of the Gaussian kernel, i.e.,

Since φi ∼ Uniform[0, φ], wi is drawn from the Fourier
transform p(w), then
2

D
X




u i j Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j

j=1

=

D
X



u i j Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x − w⊤j y + φi − φ j

j=1



Ewi ,φi ,w j ,φ j cos wi⊤ x + w⊤j y + φi + φ j


= u ii Ewi cos wi⊤ (x − y) .
+

(8)

Then, let v = (x − y)/σ , we have
D


1 X
u ii E cos(wi⊤ v) .
D i=1

AB
E(KRFT
(x, y)) =

(9)

Let w be a d-dimensional vector distributed N (0, Id ).
By Bochner’s theorem,
E[cos(w⊤ v)] = e−v /2
2

and (1/D)

PD

i=1 u ii = tr(A

AB
E(KRFT
(x, y)) = D1

⊤

(10)

B)/D, hence

PD

i=1 u ii e

−v 2 /2

⊤

= tr(AD B) e−v /2 (11)
2

where v = ∥v∥. RFT yields an unbiased estimate.
We now compute the variance of RFT approximation.
Observe that
cos2 (w⊤ v) =

1 + cos(2w⊤ v)
1 + cos(w⊤ (2v))
=
. (12)
2
2

Hence by Bochner’s theorem
2

1 + e−2v
E[cos (w v)] =
.
2
2

⊤

 tr(A B) −∥x−y∥2 /(2σ 2 )
AB
e
.
E KRFT
(x, y) =
D

(3)

(4)

Proof: From (2), we have
AB
KRFT
(x, y)) = r A (x)⊤r B (y)

= ψ(x)⊤ A⊤ Bψ(y) = r I (x)⊤rU (y)

(5)

where U = A⊤ B is also a member of the orthogonal group
O S(D). Let ui = [u i1 , . . . , u i D ] be the ith row of U . Then
r I (x)⊤rU (y) =



2 X
u i j cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j . (6)
D i, j

The expectation of the approximate kernel is
E[r I (x) rU (y)]



2 X
=
u i j E cos wi⊤ x + φi cos w⊤j y + φ j .
D i, j

(13)

Therefore,

AB
Let v = ∥x − y∥/σ . The variance of KRFT
(x, y) is


 tr(A⊤ B) 
2 2
AB
Var KRFT
(x, y) =
1 − e−v .
2− D

⊤

Var(cos(w⊤ v)) = E[cos2 (w⊤ v)] − (E[cos(w⊤ v)])2
2
2
1 + e−2v
(1 − e−v )2
2
=
− e−v =
. (14)
2
2
If we take D such independent random variables
w1 , w2 , . . . , w D , since variance of the sum is sum of
variances
!
2
D
tr(A⊤ B)(1 − e−v )2
1 X
⊤
u i j cos(wi v) =
. (15)
Var
D i=1
2− D
N
Theorem 2: Consider the sample data D = {xi }i=1
, where
d
D×d
D×d
xi ∈ R . Suppose that W
⊂R
be the affine space of
d-to-D-dimensional transformations from the standard normal
distribution. For any A, B ∈ W D×d and any x, y ∈ D, let
.
A,B
KRAT
(x, y) = r A (x)⊤r B (y) = (Ax)⊤ By, then the variance of


A,B
Var KRAT
(x, y) = D∥x∥2 ∥y∥2 .
(16)

Proof: Let C = A⊤ B. Then

⊤

(7)

ci j =

D
X
t=1

ati bt j .

(17)

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

2679

Since ati and bt j are independent of each other, the expectation
of the product ati bt j is equal to 0, so we have


d
X
E[x⊤ A⊤ By] = E
xi ci j y j  = 0.
(18)
i, j=1

For the expectation of squared quantity, we break it into a
summation of terms

2 
d
 X

E[(x⊤ A⊤ By)2 ] = E
xi ci j y j  
i, j=1

=

d
X

xi y j xk yl E[ci j ckl ].

(19)

i, j,k,l=1

It suffices to evaluate E[ci j ckl ] in the following cases.
Case 1: When i = k, j = l, we have

!2 
D
X
E[ci2j ] = E
ati bt j 
t=1

=

D
X

D

 X
E ati2 bt2j +
E[ati asi bt j bs j ]
t̸ =s

t=1

= D.
Case 2: When i = k, j ̸ = l, we have
D
D
X
 2
 X
E ati bt j btl +
E[ati asi bt j bsl ] = 0. (20)
E[ci j cil ] =
t̸ =s

t=1

Case 3: When i ̸= k, j = l, similarly, E[ci j ckl ] = 0.
Case 4: When i ̸= k, j ̸ = l, similarly, E[ci j ckl ] = 0.
In summary, we have
d


X
A,B
Var KRAT
xi 2 y j 2 = D∥x∥2 ∥y∥2 .
(x, y) = D

(21)

i, j=1

From (16) in the Theorem 2, the approximate kernel with
RAT KRAT (x, y) is linearly positively related to the norm of
the input samples x, y and the dimension D of the transformed
space. Comparing (16) and (4), we can observe that when
the transformed dimension D increases, the variance of the
A,B
approximate kernel of the RAT Var(KRAT
(x, y)) increases,
but the variance of the approximate kernel of the RFT
A,B
Var(KRFT
(x, y)) becomes smaller, which indicates that the data
distribution using the RFT is more stable than the RAT.
Our anomaly detection algorithm is built on self-labeled
classification data obtained through a set of random transformation mappings and then a classifier is trained to predict the
class distribution and construct the sample anomaly scores.
Therefore, controlling and generating appropriate data distribution will be beneficial to our self-labeled classification-based
anomaly detection. Kernel method is often used to implement nonlinear learning; kernel approximation is a powerful
technique to make kernel methods scalable by mapping input
features into a new space where inner products approximate the kernel well. Random Fourier features is a typical
data-independent technique to approximate the kernel function
using an explicit feature mapping RFT [33]. We adopt RFT

combined with a set of random orthogonal rotations as random
transformation mappings to transform the original data into
a new feature space. Theorem 1 shows that the sample
inner product in the transformed space can approximate the
Gaussian kernel function, and the inner product’s expectation
AB
variance Var(KRFT
(x, y)) is fixed under a given transformation
matrix and dimension, which meets the general properties
of the Gaussian kernel function. In comparison, Theorem 2
shows that using a set of RAT does not meet the requirements
of the kernel function (the expectation of the transformed
sample inner product is 0, and the variance of the transformed
sample inner product is related to the sample size). In addition,
adjusting the parameter γ of RFT is equivalent to adjusting the
distribution of the approximate Gaussian kernel, which affects
the fitting and generalization ability of the classifier.
A stable data distribution offers two primary advantages for
anomaly detection.
1) Consistency and predictability: Stable data distributions
ensure a lower expected variance in kernel approximations after applying random transformations. This
translates to more predictable and less random data
distributions, making it easier to discern patterns and
detect anomalies. Furthermore, the smooth nature of the
kernel approximation, such as the approximated RBF
kernel, resists minor variations, enhancing the model’s
robustness.
2) Robust feature representation: Stability in transformations, as offered by RFT, means that features remain
consistent, allowing models to focus on inherent data
structures rather than noise. This robust representation
aids in emphasizing crucial patterns pivotal for anomaly
detection, as deviations from these patterns are typical
indicators of anomalies.
In essence, a more stable data distribution facilitates better
model training, reduces the risk of overfitting, and strengthens
the detection of genuine anomalies by prioritizing consistent,
noise-resistant features.
4) How to Guarantee the Appropriate Transformation of the
Data Distribution: Our method transforms the data distribution by sequentially applying an RFT and then ROTs. The
key to this transformation lies in the parameter γ used in the
approximated RBF kernel exp(−γ ∥x − y∥2 ) during the RFT
stage. The appropriate data distribution can be achieved by
tuning the parameter γ (in our experiments, we tune γ among
the values of {0.1, 0.01, 0.001}). Specifically, γ influences the
transformation of the data distribution in the following two
ways.
1) Width of the kernel: By adjusting γ , we can control the
width of the approximated RBF kernel, thereby finding
the optimal balance between the model complexity and
its generalization ability.
2) Distribution of wi : For an RFT, each wi √
in (1) is sampled
from a Gaussian distribution p(w) = 2γ N (w; 0, 1).
Thus, the spread of this Gaussian distribution is influenced by γ . Larger γ leads to wider distributions of wi ,
while smaller γ results in more concentrated distributions of wi .

2680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

B. sForest Classifier
In this section, we provide a detailed description on the
proposed self-supervised classifier. On the normal training
dataset D := {x1 , . . . , x N } ⊆ Rd , we first conduct feature
transformation with the RFT ψ(·). Then, we generate M
M
rotation matrices {Rm }m=1
by uniformly sampling among
SO(d) and construct the self-labeled normal dataset as
D A := {(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} .

(22)

Here, R0 denotes the identical transformation and
{R0 (ψ(xi ))}i∈{1,...,N } stand for the data only after the
RFT ψ(·). It is worth noting that when the data dimension
d is very small (e.g., d < 5), it is necessary to do the RFT
to transform the data into a higher-dimensional feature space
where the dimension of transformed data D ≫ d (e.g.,
D = 100). However, when the data dimension d is large
or the data contains lots of redundant features, we need
to reduce the data dimension before applying the RFT.
Reducing the dimensionality of the high-dimensional data can
eliminate redundant information contained in the data, thus
improving the final performance of the classifier. Moreover,
it can efficiently reduce the computational complexity for
the subsequent RF training. Here, various dimensionality
reduction methods apply, including principle components
analysis (PCA), singular-value decomposition (SVD), etc.
Now we are ready to construct our sForest based on the
RF classifier proposed by [34]. First, we generate B buckets
of self-labeled normal samples randomly through a bootstrap
method, with the bth sample bucket denoted as Db ⊂ D A .
Then, we construct a decision tree on each bucket. It divides
the predictor space into non-overlapping regions {A j } Jj=1 , with
J denoting the total number of terminal nodes of the decision
tree. Borrowing notations from [35], in a node j, representing
a region A j with N j observations, for (R(ψ(xi )), Yi ) ∈ Db ,
let
X
1
1(Yi = Rm )
p̂ j,m,b :=
N j (R(ψ(x )),Y )∈A
i

i

j

be the proportion of class Rm observations in node A j , where
the random parameter R stands for random rotation and 1(·)
is the indicator function. Then, we take the vector
J
X
M
R̂ b (x; R, Db ) :=
p̂ j,m,b · 1(x ∈ A j )
m=0

j=1

as the output of the bth self-supervised tree.
P M We mention that
R̂ b (x; R, Db ) is a standard vector since m=0
p̂ j,m,b = 1.
Then by ensembling the outputs of all trees, the
self-supervised forest classifier can be denoted as
B

R̂ sForest (x; R, D) :=

1 X
R̂ b (x; R, Db ).
B b=1

(23)

Intuitively, we can take the mth element of vector
R̂ sForest (x; R, D) as the probability of R(x) being classified
to Rm . The detailed construction procedure of sForest is
presented in Algorithm 1.
Here, we provide an intuitive explanation on why our model
can boost the performance of anomaly detection with two toy

Algorithm 1 Construction of sForest
1: Input: Training (normal) data D := {x1 , . . . , x N };
M
The random rotation matrices {Rm }m=0
(Rm ∈ S O(D),
R0 denotes the identical transformation).
2: Apply the RFT ψ(·) to D and obtain the data
{(ψ(x0 ), . . . , ψ(x N ))};
3: for m = 0 → M do
4:
Generate random rotation matrix Rm ;
5:
Apply Rm to {(ψ(x0 ), . . . , ψ(x N ))} and achieve labeled
N
data {(Rm (ψ(xi )), Rm )}i=1
;
6: end for
7: Obtain self-labeled normal dataset D A as in Eq. (22).
8: Build random forest classifier based on D A .
9: Output: R̂ sForest (x; R, D) defined as in Eq. (23).

Fig. 2.
t-SNE visualization of RFT-based rotated data. (a1) Toy data.
(a2) Self-labeled data. (b1) Toy data. (b2) Self-labeled data.

datasets “blob” and “moons.” Both of the two datasets contain
200 data points, 80% of which are normal data and 20%
abnormal points generated by uniform sampling in the region
of [−7, 7] × [−7, 7]. The normal data points of “blob” are
generated by isotropic Gaussian. The normal data of “moons”
contains two interleaving half-circles. The two toy datasets are
visualized in Fig. 2(a1) and (b1).
On the two datasets, we first increase the data dimension
from 2 to 10 with RFT, and then generate different random
orthogonal matrices to transform the 10-D features into different categories. We visualize the generated self-labeled data
in Fig. 2(a2) and (b2). Different colors in Fig. 2 represent
different categories. Note that the abnormal data is specially
marked by adding a black edge. Surprisingly, most of the
abnormal data is clustered to the center of Fig. 2(a2) and (b2),
while the normal data is more concentrated to different clusters
according to their corresponding labels. Then the classifier
trained by the normal data and their corresponding rotations
makes it easier to classify the normal data, and harder for the
abnormal ones. Note that the normal clusters also contain a
small number of abnormal data, which mainly results from a

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

small blob of the generated abnormal samples overlaps with
the normal data.
C. Self-Supervised Forest (sForest) for Anomaly Detection
After training the classifier, the main issue is how to
separate the anomalous and normal instances in the testing
data. Golan and El-Yaniv [17] and Hendrycks and Gimpel [23]
claimed that anomalous points tend to obtain lower probability
belonging to their predicted labels by a classifier, with the
intuition being that class-exclusive features must be captured
by training the classifier to distinguish between self-labeled
data. Now we apply the well-trained sForest classifier defined
in (23) to detect the anomalies.
Let Dt = {xt1 , . . . , xtN } denote the testing dataset that
contains both normal samples and anomalies. With RFT,
we can obtain the transformed dataset {ψ(xt1 ), . . . , ψ(xtN )}.
M
After the transformation, we apply the rotations {Rm }m=0
to
the transformed dataset and generate the self-labeled testing
dataset



D A,t := Rm ψ(xit ) , Rm i∈{1,...,N },m∈{0,...,M} .
(24)
Then, we apply the well-trained sForest classifier to D A,t , and
achieve the output vectors



R̂ sForest ψ xit ; Rm , Dt m∈{0,...,M} , i = 1, . . . , N .
Specifically, for each xit , we feed the M +1 rotational versions
to the classifier, and can simply write the output vectors as an
(M + 1) × (M + 1) matrix Â

 M
Â(xit ) := R̂ sForest ψ xit ; Rm , Dt m=0 .
(25)
Notice that the diagonal elements are the probabilities for
every self-labeled R(ψ(xit )) being correctly classified. Therefore, by aiming to categorize the points with low accuracy as
anomalies, we design the normality score for xit as the sum of
these probabilities, i.e.,


Score xit := tr Â ψ xit .
(26)
where tr(A) means the trace of the matrix A. Normality scores
describe how normal a testing sample is, and we recognize
those with the lowest normality scores as anomalies. The
detailed process of our model for anomaly detection is shown
in Algorithm 2.
IV. N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
In order to evaluate the generalization and effectiveness of
the proposed sForest, we conduct extensive experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets. We compare the proposed
method with the state-of-the-art methods. Besides, we also
carry out extensive numerical simulations to analyze the
behavior of the model parameters and data transformation.
A. Baselines
The following anomaly detection methods are taken as
baselines for comparison.
1) iForest [26] recognizes anomalies as those more likely
to be “isolated” in the early stage of tree construction.

2681

Algorithm 2 sForest for Anomaly Detection
1: Input: The sForest R̂ sForest (x; R, D) trained as in Eq.
(23); Testing data Dt = {xt1 , . . . , xtN }; Number of random
M
rotations M; the random rotation matrices {Rm }m=0
(Rm ∈
S O(D), R0 denotes the identical transformation).
2: Apply the same RFT ψ(·) employed in training data to
Dt .
3: for m = 0 → M do
4:
Apply Rm to Dt and achieve labeled data
N
{(Rm (ψ(xit )), Rm )}i=1
;
5: end for
6: Obtain self-labeled testing dataset D A,t in Eq. (24);
7: Apply the well-trained R̂ sForest (x; R, D) classifier to D A,t
and achieve the output matrix Â(xit ) in Eq. (25).
8: Output: Measure the normality and anomaly in the test
data based on the score defined as in (26).

2) PIDForest [28] favors partitions of greatly varying sparsity, and detects anomalies based on the PID scores.
3) GOAD [24] is a classification-based anomaly detector
with deep neural networks.
4) LOF [36] is a distance-based anomaly detector focus on
the locality of samples.
5) k-NN [37], [38] is a prevailing distance-based anomaly
detection method, while it has computational cost when
data size and dimension is high.
6) OCSVM [39] trains a classifier to perform the separation
of normal points and outliers.
7) COPOD [40], parameter-free method which first constructs an empirical copula, and then uses it to predict
tail probabilities of each given data point to determine
its level of “extremeness.”
B. Experiments on Synthetic Data
In this part, we first demonstrate the advantage of applying
a self-supervised learning mechanism to anomaly detection
through two synthetic datasets. We conduct the experiment by
generating two datasets that each of which contains 400 points,
where the proportion of abnormal samples is set to 20%.
For the first dataset “moon,” the normal points are generated
by sklearn with noise setting 0.5, and the second dataset
is obtained by employing “make_blobs.” For both datasets,
the abnormal data are uniformly sampled in the region of
[−7, 7] × [−7, 7].
More specifically, we compare the performance of the proposed method with seven state-of-the-art methods introduced
in Section IV-A. For fair comparisons, the number of trees is
set as 100 for all the tree-based algorithms, and three fully
connected layers are employed for GOAD with the hidden
layer setting 100. The default node setting is adapting for
k-NN and LOF. For sForest, we first change the dimension
to 100 by RFT, and then conduct 16 orthogonal rotations to
generate self-supervised labels.
Fig. 3 provides the visual results for different methods on
the two datasets, where the normal and abnormal data are,
respectively, represented by white and black dots. The red

2682

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Comparison of different methods on two synthetic datasets, where the red line denotes the decision boundary for normal and abnormal data.

dotted line is the decision boundary with the yellow and
blue regions denoting normal and abnormal data, respectively.
Besides, we also provide the degree for abnormal data in the
blue region, where the darker region means higher degree of
certainty. The number on the downside is the corresponding
error for each algorithm for different datasets. Based on the
result presented in Fig. 3 that our method could predict
the region for normal data more correctly, which is more
closed to the ground-truth distribution. In the meanwhile, the
lower number of errors can also prove the advantage of our
method. Note that our method is consistently and significantly
superior to GOAD [24], which is also constructed by the selfsupervised mechanism. These synthetic data experiments can
also efficiently demonstrate the advantage of our method for
anomaly detection compared with other methods.
C. Experiments on Real-World Data
We perform numerical experiments to illustrate the effectiveness of our sForest method compared with other typical
anomaly detection algorithms on real-world outlier detection
benchmark datasets.
1) Datasets:
1) Low-dimensional datasets: We perform numerical experiments on 30 real datasets to illustrate the effectiveness
of our proposed sForest on real-world outlier detection benchmark datasets. There are 28 multidimensional real datasets from Outlier Detection DataSets
(ODDS), with various sample sizes and dimensionalities. For example, small-size datasets such as glass,
ionosphere, wbc, and wine, and large-scale datasets
such as forestcover, http, and smtp are included
in the experiments. High-dimensional datasets such
as arrhythmia and speech are also included.
Details of datasets are shown in Table I. For these
28 datasets, our configuration follows that of Bergman
and Hoshen [24]. We use 50% of the normal data to
train the outlier detector, and evaluate the outlier detector

on the remaining 50% of the normal data and all the
anomalies.
2) High-dimensional datasets: Since the feature dimensions of the above datasets are too low and there
are the maximum of 400-D in datasets, we introduce
another three datasets with higher dimensions including:
1) OSQ-768d; 2) OSQ-1024d: these two datasets are
generated from a textual dataset OSQ in task-oriented
dialogue systems. OSQ provides a set of manually
labeled out-of-scope queries (OSQs) that are not supported by the current system. These OSQs are regarded
as anomaly instances in our experiments. We take each
utterance as input and obtain its feature vector using
the two pre-trained English language models BERT-base
and BERT-large [41], respectively; and 3) IPA dataset: it
contains a set of Chinese utterances that were collected
and annotated in the development process of a commercialized intelligent personal assistant (IPA) named
Bixby. This dataset covers 81 intents, but 15 intents
are not supported by the current IPA system. In this
study, these non-supported intents are selected as the
out-of-domain intents, and the corresponding utterances
are considered as anomaly data. We generate their feature vectors by Chinese BERT-base.1 The datasets are
divided into the train, validation, and test sets, while the
anomaly data were only used for validation and test.
We keep the same data splits with [42] and [43]. The
partitions of the data used in our experiment are shown
in Table II.
2) Parameter Settings: In the following, we present the
details of implementation. For the proposed sForest, we fix the
number_of_rotations M = 64 and randomly sample
each element of d × d transformation matrices according
to the standard normal distribution. For the RF classifier, we fix the number_of_trees B = 100 and the
1 https://github.com/google-research/bert

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

2683

TABLE I
D ESCRIPTIONS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION B ENCHMARK DATASETS

TABLE II
D ESCRIPTIONS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION B ENCHMARK DATASETS .
OSQ-768d AND OSQ-1024d H AVE 768- AND 1024-D F EATURES ,
R ESPECTIVELY, W HICH A RE B OTH G ENERATED F ROM OSQ BY
BERT-BASE AND BERT-L ARGE . IPA I S C ONVERTED I NTO
768-D DATA T HROUGH B ERT-BASE

min_samples_split p = 2. For PIDForest, we use
the implementation of the authors provided in github.2 For
iForest, LOF and OCSVM, we utilize the implementation of
scikit-learn. For k-NN, we use the PyOD implementation.3
For hyperparameter settings, we fix the hyperparameters of
sub-sampling size to 256 and the number of trees to 100 for
iForest. For PIDForest, we fix the hyperparameters of depth to
10 and the number of trees to 50, which is used in [28]. We fix
the number of neighbors to 20 for LOF, and use RBF kernel
with default hyperparameter gamma for OCSVM, referred to
hyperparameter settings in scikit-learn. For k-NN, we fix k to
be 5.
The performance evaluation has been done based on the area
under the ROC curve (AUC). We run these algorithms 10 times
and record the means and standard deviations of the AUC
values. Since some methods such as LOF, k-NN, OCSVM,
and COPOD are deterministic, it is not necessary to repeat
experiments for three datasets (OSQ-768d, OSQ-1024d, and
IPA) in which data partitions are provided.
3) Main Results: The experimental results for the
low-dimensional datasets are illustrated in Table III. In the
aspect of best performance, our method wins 14 out of
31 datasets, and the other three forest-based methods, iForest,
PIDforest, win 7 and 5 out of 31 datasets, respectively.
The network-based GOAD wins only 1, and the other three
deterministic methods, k-NN, LOF, OCSVM, and COPOD,
2 https://github.com/vatsalsharan/pidforest
3 https://github.com/yzhao062/pyod

win 6, 6, 2, and 3 out of 31 datasets, respectively. Besides,
in the perspective of the top two performance, sForest, iForest,
PIDforest, GOAD, k-NN, LOF, OCSVM, and COPOD win 20,
6, 4, 2, 9, 13, 6, and 5 out of 31 datasets. Moreover, in the
aspect of the average performance of benchmark datasets, our
method has the lowest rank sum.
When it comes to the three high-dimensional datasets as
shown in Table IV, sForest consistently outperforms other
baselines by a large margin. Specifically, there are 1.3, 4.1, and
8.5 AUC improvements compared to the second best results
for OSQ-768d, OSQ-1024d, and IPA, respectively. Note
that the performance gap for high-dimensional datasets is more
obvious compared to that in low-dimensional datasets. The
main reason is that high-dimensional data has more redundant
features, and it can boost the performance of the downstream
tasks by reducing the dimensionality of the data.
The above results can efficiently demonstrate the advantage
of sForest in dealing with tabular data. In the meanwhile,
it can also indicate that the self-supervision-based methods
can not only achieve the best performance for image data,
but also for tabular data. Furthermore, it is also consistent
with our analysis that the data distribution obtained by the
combination of RFT and orthogonal rotation is more stable and
robust. Thus, a better performance is achieved by the proposed
sForest.
D. Analysis on Relationship Between Classification
and Anomaly Detection
To demonstrate the efficacy of classification-based anomaly
detection, we perform simulations on four real datasets
of varying sizes and dimensions. We assess the baseline
classifiers by calculating the classification accuracy of the
self-labeled normal samples in the testing set, each adhering
to a specific classification rule. The anomaly detection performance is measured by the area under the ROC curve, denoted
as AUC. A higher AUC value signifies greater anomaly
detection accuracy.
For parameter settings, we fix the number_of_
rotations M = 32 and the number_of_trees
B = 100 for the all datasets. Then, we vary the
min_samples_split p to adjust the performance of

2684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE III
AUC P ERFORMANCE (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON B ENCHMARK DATASETS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD , AND THE S ECOND B EST
IN U NDERLINE . F OR S F OREST, I F OREST, PID FOREST, AND GOAD, THE S TANDARD D EVIATION I S R EPORTED IN THE S UBSCRIPT. T HE L AST
ROW S HOWS THE S UMMATION OF R ANKS FOR E ACH M ETHOD , W HICH I S THE L OWER THE B ETTER . I F OREST [26], PID FOREST [28],
GOAD [24], k-NN [37], LOF [36], OCSVM [39], AND COPOD [40]

TABLE IV
AUC P ERFORMANCE (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON T HREE T EXTUAL DATASETS . G IVEN THE S TABILITY OF AUC P ERFORMANCE
D UE TO THE L ARGE S IZE OF T HESE DATASETS , S TANDARD D EVIATION I S O MITTED

the RF classifier, and observe its impact on the accuracy of
anomaly detection. We apply PCA to remove the feature
correlation in datasets by transforming the dimensionality of
Mnist and Ionosphere to 32. For IPA and OSQ-678d,
their dimensionality is reduced to 128. We run the
experiment five times under different random seeds to
obtain the average value of AUC and the classification
accuracy.
The results for the four datasets are shown in Fig. 4. As the
min_samples_split p increases, first the self-label classification accuracy and the AUC criterion for anomaly detection
show a negative correlation trend. Meanwhile, as the classification accuracy of the RF classifier decreases, the AUC criterion
for anomaly detection turns better. This indicates that choosing
an appropriate weak classifier or constructing a more difficult self-supervised classification task is useful for anomaly
detection. However, the performance of both classifiers will
eventually turn worse consistently. This consistency in the
performance of the classification and anomaly detection-based
methods can be reasonable properties so that a good classifier

is needed to capture the features of the self-labeled normal
class. From Fig. 4 for Mnist, the classification accuracy
drops rapidly, while the anomaly detection AUC declines
at a slower pace (e.g., when p increases from 2 to 100,
the classification accuracy drops by 10%, but the AUC only
decreases by 0.5%). The reason may be that for the self-labeled
classification data of Mnist, the data distributions of different
categories overlap each other, so a classifier with stronger
classification ability is required to discriminate. In addition,
sForest achieves a high AUC when p is large (indicating the
classifier’s weaker classification ability). This could be because
the abnormal samples are derived from one of the handwritten digits, making them distinctly different from the normal
samples.
E. Analysis on the Effect of RFT
In this experiment, we compare the performance between
the self-labeled data obtained by the RFT + orthogonal
rotation transform and the self-labeled data obtained by the

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 4.

2685

Relationship between accuracy of classification and anomaly detection.

random affine transform (RAT).4 For a fair comparison, we set
the same setting for both RFT and RAT. We normalize each
row of the affine transformation matrix wm .5 Note that we
denote RFT + orthogonal rotation transform as RFT for simplicity of notation. Specifically, we first generate the training
data according to the corresponding setting, where the number
of orthogonal rotation transforms is set as 16. Meanwhile,
the initial input feature is d, and then is transformed to
D. For RFT, we randomly sampled transformation matrices
wm using the normal distribution for each element. Each
matrix has dimensionality D × d. We examine changes in the
performance and the trend of the approximation error (MSE)
of RBF kernel under different transformation dimensions. The
odds from Ionosphere and Mnist are regarded as test data.
In the experiment, the parameter γ of RBF is set to 0.01, and
the final experimental results are shown in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5, the AUC value of sForest is very stable
with the increase of transformation dimension when choosing
the self-labeled data generated by RFT. This indicates that
RFT method can achieve comparable performance without
an extra increasing transformation dimension. In addition,
the kernel approximation error of this method presents a
steady downward trend with the increase of transformation
dimension, which indicates that RFT + orthogonal transformation can maintain a good kernel approximation, as well
as reflecting the stability of transformation data distribution.
However, when it comes to sForest based on RAT, although
the kernel approximation error of samples also reduces with
the increase of affine transformation dimension, its MSE is
far more than the results of RFT. Moreover, the performance
fluctuates a lot with different dimensions and has a larger
prediction variance. These experiments can indicate the high

4 This self-labeled data is done by transforming data X ∈ Rn×d using M
different affine transformations into T (x, m) = wm X ⊤ , where wm ∈ R D×d is
a random matrix.
5 If normalization is not performed, the MSE of its kernel approximation
shows a rapid increase with the increase of D/d. After normalizing wm , the
kernel approximation MSE of RAT shows a decreasing trend with the increase
of D/d. Besides, we also find that normalizing or not normalizing wm has
no significant effect on its anomaly detection results.

Fig. 5.

Comparison of RFT and RAT with the same setting.

effectiveness of generating proper data distribution by our
method.
F. Effect of Different Classifiers and Transformations
We conduct the comparison by replacing the RF classifier
and our random transformations RFT with other classifiers
and RAT, respectively. More specifically, we mainly select
Gaussian Naive Bayesian (GNB), logical regression (LR), support vector machine (SVM), k-NN, and multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) as the base classifiers. The final results are shown in
Table V, where different combinations are constructed to compare the performance with six datasets including satellite,
arrhythmia, ionosphere, mnist, OSQ-768d, and
IPA.
The table clearly indicates that both the choice of classifier
and the corresponding data distribution significantly influence
the final performance. Notably, when combined with various

2686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE V
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED A LGORITHM U NDER D IFFERENT C LASSIFIERS AND T RANSFORMATIONS (RAT AND RFT). T HE AUC
P ERFORMANCE I S E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES , AND THE S UBSCRIPT R EFER TO THE S TANDARD D EVIATION OF THE R EPEATED E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 6. AUC score versus the number_of_rotations M for datasets
with different dimensions.

classifiers, RFT consistently outperforms RAT. Specifically,
when employing GNB, k-NN, LR, and MLP as classifiers,
RFT demonstrates superiority across all datasets in comparison
to RAT. Furthermore, RF appears to be more competitive
relative to the other five classifiers. It is worth noting that in
this section, we only replace the RF and RFT with MLP and
RAT, which is inconsistent with GOAD.

As is shown in Fig. 6, we can observe the following
conclusions: 1) the performances of anomaly detection would
be decreased when the dimensionality of datasets d is too
low, such as dim = 2 for Mnist and Ionosphere, dim =
4 for the other two datasets; 2) for the difficult anomaly
detection tasks IPA and OSQ-768d, as the dimension of
datasets d becomes higher, the optimal M becomes larger.
For example, when the dimension d ′ of the PCA-transformed
OSQ-768d dataset is 8, the best M lies in the range [20, 30].
In addition, when the dimension d ′ raises up to 16 or more,
it can consistently boost the performances when M increases,
and become steady when M is sufficiently large; 3) for easy
anomaly detection datasets Ionophere and Mnist, the best
Ms lie in the range (0, 10], which are relatively small. This
indicates that choosing a small M is enough to capture their
data information and achieve better AUC; and 4) from dim =
64 in Mnist, the AUC value eventually shows a decreasing
trend as the number_of_rotations M becomes larger.
The reason may be that the PCA-transformed features with
higher dimensions contain much redundant information. As the
number of rotations M increases, the negative impact of this
redundant information will be amplified which will further
reduce or suppress the accuracy of anomaly detection algorithms. Therefore, before using sForest, it is necessary to
perform feature selection or feature learning on the datasets to
reduce the redundant information or the correlation of features.

G. Analysis on Relationship Between the Dimension
of Data and the Number of Rotations

H. Adversarial Samples Experiment

For the purpose of investigating the relationship between
the best number_of_rotations M and the dimension of
dataset, we conduct experiments among datasets with different
dimensions. Here, we employ the PCA for dimensionality
reduction, and generate datasets with different dimensions
among {2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. The four datasets used in
Section IV-D are selected for this experiment. We conduct
anomaly detection with our sForest algorithm with different
M, and evaluate its performances via AUC. The plots of
the AUC score versus the number_of_rotations M for
datasets with different dimensions are provided in Fig. 6.

1) Setting: Let us assume an adversarial model in which
the attacker knows the model architecture and normal training
data with attempting to modify normal samples to become
anomalies. We examine three settings: 1) the attacker knows
random orthogonal transformation (ROT) and the classifier,
but not know the RFT; 2) the attacker knows the classifier,
but not RFT and ROT; and 3) the attacker does not know
RFT, ROT, and the classifier. Since adversarial samples are
mainly targeted at neural network models, we first choose an
MLP as the classifier to obtain adversarial samples and test
the model’s adversarial robustness.

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

1) To evaluate the benefits of the components of our proposed anomaly detection framework, we construct four
self-supervised anomaly detection models using MLP as
the classifier: sMLP1 (RFT + ROT + MLP), sMLP2
(RFT + ROT + MLP), sMLP3 (RFT + ROT + MLP),
and sMLP4 (RFT + ROT + MLP). More specifically,
sMLP2 has the same ROT and MLP as sMLP1 and
sMLP3 has the same MLP as sMLP1. For sMLP4, it has
different RFT, ROT, and MLP from sMLP1. We use the
same color to indicate the same components used, where
the same MLP refers to the same network structure and
initialization.
2) We also construct three self-supervised anomaly detection models with RF as the classifier: sForest1 (RFT +
ROT + RF), sForest2 (RFT + ROT + RF), and
sForest3 (RFT + ROT + RF). In detail, sForest1 has
the same RFT and ROT as sMLP1, but with different
classifiers; sForest2 has the same ROT as sMLP1 but
with different RFTs and classifiers; sForest3 has different RFTs, ROTs, and classifiers from sMLP1.
3) In addition, we also compare the performance
with incorporating RAT-based methods including
RAT + MLP, RAT + MLP, and RAT + RF.
Specifically, RAT + MLP has the same MLP as
sMLP1, while RAT + MLP has different MLPs from
sMLP1. For RAT + RF, it employs RF as the classifier.
In the experiment, sMLP1 is employed to generate adversarial samples. The number of random orthogonal rotations
M is set to 32, and the transformation dimension of the
RFT is set to 200. The parameter γ of the RFT for each
dataset takes its optimal parameters used in Section IV-C. The
MLP is a three-layer perception with hidden size 256 and
ReLU activation function. Adversarial examples are created
using projected gradient descent algorithm (PGD) [44] based
on sMLP1 (making normal samples appear like anomalies).
Divide the original test set into two parts: test normal data and
test abnormal data, and then combine the adversarial samples
obtained from sMLP1 on test normal data with test abnormal
data as the final adversarial sample test set to evaluate various
models. Here, we run 40 iterations of PGD as our adversary,
with a step size of α = 0.01 and against perturbations of
size ϵ = 0.1. The increase of false classification rate on the
adversarial examples is measured using the above models.
Besides, we also design a similar new experiment with
the above experiment and test whether our proposed method,
using RFT + ROT, has superiority in adversarial robustness
compared to RAT. We used another model with RAT transformation, named RAT + MLP, to generate adversarial samples,
which were then applied to other model variations including
RAT + RF, RFT + ROT + RF, etc. The RATs are obtained
through the standard normal distribution generation function
numpy.random.randn(). Note that it is similar to the above
experimental setting in this experiment, where the same color
indicates the same component.
2) Results: The experimental results on six datasets are
shown in Tables VI and VII. From the results, we can draw
the following conclusions.

2687

1) The AUC values of the models in the first row of
both tables significantly decrease under the attack of
their generated adversarial samples, indicating that these
adversarial samples can effectively attack the model.
2) When the generated adversarial samples are applied
to models with significant differences, the adversarial samples basically become ineffective. For example,
in Table VI, the adversarial samples generated by RFT +
ROT + MLP applied to the model using RAT, and in
Table VII, the adversarial samples generated by RAT +
MLP applied to the model using RFT + ROT, show that
the model performance is largely unaffected, with both
increases and decreases on different datasets. This result
also aligns with our intuition.
3) In Table VI, the AUC value of RFT + ROT + Forest still
shows a significant decrease under adversarial samples.
This model shares the same RFT + ROT transformation
with RFT + ROT + MLP, but even with a different
classifier, RF, the performance decline of other models with different RFTs is very small, mostly ranging
between 0% and 2%. This indicates that RFT + ROT
can enhance the model’s robustness against adversarial
samples.
4) In Table VII, the adversarial samples of RAT + MLP
applied to other models using RAT still show a significant decrease in performance. The reduction generally
exceeds 2%, even if the model uses a different classifier,
RF. Compared to Table VI, it is evident that using
RFT + ROT provides more advantages in terms of
adversarial robustness than using RFT.
I. Contamination Experiment
1) Setting: Our proposed model assumes that the training
data are all normal samples. Here, we conduct a contamination
experiment to observe the robustness of the model when
some anomalies are given normal labels and mixed into the
training data. Different from the previous experiment setup,
here the anomalies are divided into train and test parts. The
train anomalies are all used for data contamination, and the
test anomalies are all used for evaluation. We mix the original
training set’s 1%, 2%, . . . , 10% degree of anomalies into
the training data and observe the model’s anomaly detection
AUC value. Since some datasets have relatively few training anomalies, such as OSQ-768d, which is less than 2%
(250/15 000), we resample from the training anomalies to
obtain the corresponding ratio of contamination samples.
2) Results: Fig. 7 shows the experimental results of the proposed framework under two classifiers RF and MLP, denoted
as RFT + Forest (sForest) and RFT + MLP (sMLP). Each
experiment is executed five times using different random seeds.
From Fig. 7(a) and (b), we can observe that: 1) the AUCs
of sForest and sMLP show stable changes on almost all
datasets except for mnist, which indicates that the proposed
framework is generally robust to the degree of contamination
and 2) the AUC value of sForest fluctuates steadily and
insignificant, but the AUC value of sMLP fluctuates greatly.
This indicates that sForest is more stable in anomaly detection
than the MLP-based sMLP overall.

2688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE VI
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS (E XPRESSED IN P ERCENTAGES ) ON A DVERSARIAL ROBUST OF O UR M ETHOD . adv AND no_adv R EPRESENT THE E VALUATION
R ESULTS OF THE M ODEL U NDER THE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLE T EST S ET AND THE O RIGINAL T EST S ET (W ITHOUT A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES ),
R ESPECTIVELY. T HE VALUE W ITH ↓ D ENOTES A D ECREASE IN AUC U NDER A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES , W HILE ↑ I NDICATES AN I NCREASE .
T HE M ODEL IN THE F IRST ROW W ITH A L IGHT B LUE BACKGROUND I S U SED TO G ENERATE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES AND I S
A PPLIED TO T EST THE R EMAINING M ODELS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

TABLE VII
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS ON A DVERSARIAL ROBUST OF O UR M ETHOD . adv AND no_adv R EPRESENT THE E VALUATION R ESULTS OF THE M ODEL U NDER
THE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLE T EST S ET AND THE O RIGINAL T EST S ET (W ITHOUT A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES ), R ESPECTIVELY. T HE VALUE W ITH
↓ D ENOTES A D ECREASE IN AUC U NDER A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES , W HILE ↑ I NDICATES AN I NCREASE . T HE M ODEL IN THE F IRST ROW
W ITH A L IGHT B LUE BACKGROUND I S U SED TO G ENERATE A DVERSARIAL S AMPLES AND I S A PPLIED TO T EST THE R EMAINING
M ODELS . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

Fig. 7. Plots of the relationship between the degree of contamination and
the anomaly detection accuracy (measured by AUC) on six datasets. The
proposed sForest is generally robust to the degree of contamination. Each line
plot corresponds to the average AUC values, and the shaded region around
each line represents the range (from minimum to maximum) of AUC values
observed. (a) sForest. (b) sMLP.

V. C ONCLUSION

constructed to the self-supervised training date by orthogonal
rotation transform. Furthermore, a theoretical description is
given to show that the proposed method produces more stable
data distribution (kernel approximation with lower expected
variance) rather than RAT. We conduct different experiments
on some artificial and real data to evaluate the performance
of the proposed method is more stable and efficient than the
distance-based, kernel-based, forest-based, and network-based
methods, where the RF classifier is employed to connect the
data distribution.
In the future, we aim to extend our method to other
domain such as the anomaly detection for time series. Besides,
this work is designed for semi-supervised anomaly detection,
where the given training data only contain normal samples.
In the future work, we plan to design an algorithm for
unsupervised anomaly detection, in which both normal and
abnormal data are contained in the training data.
R EFERENCES

In this article, we solve the classification-based anomaly
detection by proposing a more suitable data distribution, which
is created for general data with RFT combined with orthogonal
rotation transform. Specifically, the training data is first transformed to a new feature space by RFT, and then the feature is

[1] J. Liu, B. Wang, Z. Qi, Y. Tian, and Y. Shi, “Learning from label
proportions with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
[2] J. Liu et al., “LLP-GAN: A GAN-based algorithm for learning from
label proportions,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34,
no. 11, pp. 8377–8388, 2023.

LIU et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED RF ON TRANSFORMED DISTRIBUTION

[3] J. Mao, T. Wang, C. Jin, and A. Zhou, “Feature grouping-based outlier
detection upon streaming trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2696–2709, Dec. 2017.
[4] P. Banerjee, P. Yawalkar, and S. Ranu, “MANTRA: A scalable approach
to mining temporally anomalous sub-trajectories,” in Proc. 22nd ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016,
pp. 1415–1424.
[5] J. Mao, P. Sun, C. Jin, and A. Zhou, “Outlier detection over distributed
trajectory streams,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018,
pp. 64–72.
[6] Y. Yuan, J. Fang, and Q. Wang, “Online anomaly detection in crowd
scenes via structure analysis,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 548–561, Mar. 2015.
[7] U. Fiore, A. De Santis, F. Perla, P. Zanetti, and F. Palmieri,
“Using generative adversarial networks for improving classification effectiveness in credit card fraud detection,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 479, pp. 448–455, Apr. 2019.
[8] V. S. Tseng, J.-C. Ying, C.-W. Huang, Y. Kao, and K.-T. Chen,
“FrauDetector: A graph-mining-based framework for fraudulent phone
call detection,” in Proc. 21st ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, Aug. 2015, pp. 2157–2166.
[9] Y.-H. Yoo, U.-H. Kim, and J.-H. Kim, “Recurrent reconstructive network
for sequential anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 1704–1715, Mar. 2021.
[10] C. Yin, S. Zhang, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Anomaly detection
based on convolutional recurrent autoencoder for IoT time series,”
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 112–122,
Jan. 2022.
[11] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time
series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191,
Mar. 2021.
[12] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with LSTM
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 8,
pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020.
[13] T. Schlegl, P. Seebock, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidterfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
Med. Imag., 2017, pp. 146–157.
[14] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
[15] H. Wang, M. J. Bah, and M. Hammad, “Progress in outlier detection techniques: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 107964–108000,
2019.
[16] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent. (ICLR). Vancouver, BC, Canada: OpenReview.net,
Apr./May 2018, pp. 1–12.
[17] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geometric transformations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
pp. 9758–9769.
[18] J. Liu, Z. Qi, B. Wang, Y. Tian, and Y. Shi, “SELF-LLP: Self-supervised
learning from label proportions with self-ensemble,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 129, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 108767.
[19] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual representation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Santiago, Chile, Dec. 2015, pp. 1422–1430, doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2015.167.
[20] M. Noroozi and P. Favaro, “Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzles,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2016,
vol. 9910. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
Oct. 2016, pp. 69–84, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46466-4_5.
[21] R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. Efros, “Colorful image colorization,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 9907. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2016, pp. 649–666, doi: 10.1007/978-3-31946487-9_40.
[22] G. Larsson, M. Maire, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Learning representations
for automatic colorization,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2016, vol. 9908.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Oct. 2016,
pp. 577–593, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_35.

2689

[23] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR). Toulon, France:
OpenReview.net, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available: https://
openreview.net/forum?id=Hkg4TI9xl
[24] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection
for general data,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR).
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: OpenReview.net, Apr. 2020, pp. 1–12. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1lK_lBtvS
[25] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, “Random features for large-scale kernel
machines,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 3, no. 4. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer,
2007, p. 5.
[26] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[27] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 968–998, Nov. 2018.
[28] P. Gopalan, V. Sharan, and U. Wieder, “PIDForest: Anomaly detection
via partial identification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
pp. 15783–15793.
[29] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.
[30] X. Yang, L. J. Latecki, and D. Pokrajac, “Outlier detection with globally
optimal exemplar-based GMM,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining,
Apr. 2009, pp. 145–154.
[31] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[32] R. Blaser and P. Fryzlewicz, “Random rotation ensembles,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 126–151, 2016.
[33] F. Liu, X. Huang, Y. Chen, and J. A. K. Suykens, “Random features
for kernel approximation: A survey on algorithms, theory, and beyond,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 7128–7148,
Oct. 2022.
[34] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
2001.
[35] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2009.
[36] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000.
[37] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for
mining outliers from large data sets,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf.
Manage. Data, May 2000, pp. 427–438.
[38] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discovery.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2002, pp. 15–27.
[39] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul. 2001.
[40] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copulabased outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123.
[41] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[42] S. Larson et al., “An evaluation dataset for intent classification and
out-of-scope prediction,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
Lang. Process. 9th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLPIJCNLP), 2019, pp. 1311–1316.
[43] Y. Zheng, G. Chen, and M. Huang, “Out-of-domain detection for natural
language understanding in dialog systems,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio,
Speech, Language Process., vol. 28, pp. 1198–1209, 2020.
[44] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
“Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–23. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJzIBfZAb