IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

7013

Solving Data Contamination in DDoS Detection: A
Method Based on Hierarchical Federated Learning
Jiaping Gui , Member, IEEE, Ruiwen Ji , Haishi Huang, Jianan Hong , Member, IEEE,
and Cunqing Hua , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks can
cause significant damage to network applications. A crucial
step in combating these attacks lies in promptly and accurately
detecting DDoS attack traffic. However, existing solutions struggle
with data imbalance and contamination, leading to suboptimal
DDoS detection. Furthermore, current methods typically require
access to raw data for training, posing a significant privacy risk.
To tackle these challenges, we propose HFL-AD, a hierarchical
federated learning framework specifically designed for detecting
DDoS attack traffic by resolving the data contamination issue.
In our approach, a federation of lower-layer clients train local
anomaly detection models using diverse raw data. A selected few
clients, possessing a small supplementary dataset, serve as upperlayer clients, responsible for excluding model updates uploaded
by lower-layer clients that have been trained on contaminated
datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that HFL-AD outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) solutions in DDoS detection,
particularly when some training datasets are contaminated.
Index Terms—DDoS attack, anomaly detection, federated
learning, data contamination.

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

ISTRIBUTED Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks have
been a significant threat to our network. In such attacks,
the attacker controls a large number of devices located
in different areas, particularly the Internet of Things (IoT)
devices with limited security resources [1]. These devices,
under attacker control, flood the victim with traffic simultaneously. This depletes the victim’s bandwidth, CPU, or memory
resources. The massive traffic generated by DDoS attacks can
severely impact or even disrupt the service availability of the
victim host. For instance, a DDoS attack on Github in 2018
[2] reached a peak traffic of 1.35Tbps, temporarily rendering
Github’s services unavailable.
Due to the rapid advancement of deep learning techniques,
various machine learning (ML)-based anomaly detection methods (e.g., DoS/DDoS detection [45]) have been employed to
scrutinize network traffic at different levels of granularity, such
Received 23 December 2024; revised 14 May 2025 and 9 June 2025;
accepted 2 July 2025. Date of current version 14 July 2025. This work was
supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2022YFB2702302 and in part by the Natural Science
Foundation of Shanghai under Grant 23ZR1429600. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Guowen Xu. (Corresponding authors: Jiaping Gui; Cunqing Hua.)
The authors are with the School of Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: jgui@sjtu.edu.cn;
jiruiwen@sjtu.edu.cn;
mxrjkwy@sjtu.edu.cn;
hongjn@sjtu.edu.cn;
cqhua@sjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3587185

as packets [3] or flows [4]. In ML-based anomaly detection,
supervised learning often encounters challenges in obtaining
attack traffic. Moreover, inspecting and labeling every training
sample requires extensive laborforce. Hence, unsupervised
learning is also applied to intrusion detection [4], [5]. A typical
process of unsupervised learning involves collecting traffic
data from a device’s routine operations within the network. We
then extract packet or flow-level features to train an anomaly
detection model, assuming that all traffic is normal. Since the
model learns the distribution of normal traffic during training,
any traffic that deviates from this distribution will be classified
as anomalous.
However, the above process encounters three practical challenges. Firstly, traffic data from a single device lacks diversity,
so the model cannot learn other normal traffic patterns during
training. Consequently, the model misidentifies unseen normal
traffic as suspicious, thereby increasing the false positive rate.
Secondly, the traffic data collected during regular operations
of the device may contain a small proportion of attack traffic.
Thus, the model learns a mixed distribution of normal and
attack traffic, erroneously representing it as normal. This poses
a data contamination problem and could have a significant
impact on the model performance [6], such as a decrease in
the recall rate. Unlike malicious intent that is purposeful, data
contamination is often unintentional (see detailed comparison
in Section III). Thirdly, collected traffic data may contain
sensitive information. To protect privacy, existing ML methods cannot simply aggregate data from multiple devices for
centralized training.
In this paper, we propose HFL-AD,1 a novel approach to
tackle the aforementioned three challenges. Specifically, to
handle the challenges of data diversity and privacy protection,
we utilize federated learning (FL) to train the anomaly detection model. In FL, participants collaboratively train a global
model, thereby overcoming the issue of limited data diversity.
The model can learn the joint distribution of normal traffic
that is collected by all participants without disclosing sensitive
data [44]. To address the challenge of data contamination,
we leverage a small supplementary dataset containing labeled
anomaly samples collected by a few participants. These
attack traffic samples are labeled by security experts. Our
insight is that participants with a supplementary dataset can
exclude contaminated model updates (trained on contaminated
1 We provide a comprehensive comparison between this work and our prior
conference version [39] in Appendix 1.

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

data) during aggregation. The supplementary dataset is also
employed to train the model, further mitigating the issue of
data contamination.
In HFL-AD, we introduce a hierarchical federated learning
framework, where aggregation is conducted in both upperlayer clients and the central server. Upper-layer clients possess
a supplementary dataset and guide the aggregation process
related to lower-layer clients. Leveraging this supplementary
dataset, we obtain a post-training model that is resilient to data
contamination. Compared to manually inspecting each training sample individually, compiling a supplementary dataset
with a limited number (e.g., 30) of anomaly samples is
significantly more cost-effective. Traditional hierarchical FL
solutions mainly address issues like heterogeneous computing resources and FL acceleration [7], [8]. In contrast, our
work extends this approach to provide valuable insights into
anomaly detection tasks. Some previous works [6], [12] have
also proposed the incorporation of a small supplementary
dataset. However, these efforts have primarily focused on the
centralized training scenario, which differs from the distributed
FL scenario presented in this paper.
Nonetheless, we encountered three technical challenges
while implementing our insights. The first challenge lies
in distinguishing between normal models and contaminated
models. To address this, we utilize the supplementary dataset
from upper-layer clients to simulate normal and contaminated
models, which provides a baseline for subsequent comparisons. The second challenge is determining the threshold
between contaminated and normal models. To tackle this
challenge, we adopt a learning strategy in upper-layer clients,
simulating two different scenarios: unsupervised learning with
the same settings as lower-layer clients, and semi-supervised
learning guided by the labeled supplementary dataset. Then,
we calculate the similarity score between models trained in
these different scenarios, and use the average similarity score
among all upper-layer clients to determine the threshold. The
third challenge is resolving threshold dynamics during model
training, especially when the similarity range of a normal
model may undergo changes. To handle this challenge, we
introduce a dynamic threshold mechanism. Unlike FLTrust
[11], which employs a static threshold for aggregation, our
approach calculates the threshold dynamically in each global
training round, which adapts to the vast diversity of normal
traffic behaviors under varying network conditions. To accomplish this, we utilize models trained on various batches of
data, encompassing both normal data and contaminated (supplementary) data, for comparison. This ensures contaminated
models can be promptly identified and filtered out.
We evaluated HFL-AD through extensive experiments. The
results demonstrate that a supplementary dataset containing
labeled anomaly samples is more beneficial than a clean
dataset in identifying contaminated model updates. Across a
range of contamination ratios from 0% to 8%, our approach
achieved higher AUC and F1-score compared to baseline
approaches. Specifically, in our experiments conducted on
three different network traffic datasets, HFL-AD attained
an average F1-score of 0.994 when 1/3 of the participants
possessed a dataset with a contamination ratio of 4%, whereas

the average F1-scores of all baseline approaches fell below
0.975.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We proposed HFL-AD, a novel approach to training
an anomaly detection model on network traffic using
federated learning. This approach addresses the issues of
limited data diversity, data contamination, and the leakage
of sensitive data.
• We gained insights that, to identify contaminated model
updates in federated anomaly detection, a supplementary
dataset outperforms a clean dataset.
• We demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach
through numerous experiments. The results indicate that
our approach maintains high accuracy, F1-score, and
AUC value across a contamination ratio ranging from 0%
to 8%.
Open Science. We have also released the source code and
experimental configurations at https://github.com/realllriven/
HFL-AD to facilitate further research.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Hierarchical Federated Learning
With aggregation conducted in more than one layer, hierarchical FL has garnered increasing attention in recent years.
Wang et al. [7] propose FedCH to address client heterogeneity
in FL. Lim et al. [8] introduce a hierarchical game framework
for dynamic resource allocation in self-organizing FL networks. Xu et al. [32] design CAHFL to improve hierarchical
FL accuracy under unbalanced data distribution. Zhang et al.
[33] focus on solving the problem of device scheduling and
assignment in hierarchical FL. Deng et al. [43] proposed
a hierarchical FL framework that optimizes edge-level data
distribution, significantly reducing communication costs while
maintaining model accuracy. Unlike these works, we propose
leveraging hierarchical FL to address data contaminated problems in anomaly detection.
B. Federated Learning-Based DDoS Detection
To preserve client privacy, researchers have leveraged FL
to detect DDoS attacks. Mateus et al. [27] propose a DDoS
detection system based on FL within SDN networks. They
trained various classification models to categorize DDoS
attack traffic and discovered that LSTM performed optimally.
Doriguzzi-Corin et al. [28] devise an FL-based adaptive
DDoS detection mechanism. It addresses convergence issues
in dynamic cybersecurity scenarios. Fotse et al. [46] proposed an efficient FL method to combat DDoS attacks in
large-scale SDN-based networks, especially in multi-controller
architectures. Xu et al. [26] utilize an FL framework tailored
for DDoS attack detection in blockchain networks, enabling
clients to train the model without excessive resource consumption. Pourahmadi et al. [4] introduce an auto-encoder into FL
to improve model performance through an outlier exposure
technique. While all these efforts employ FL for DDoS attack
detection, they overlook the issue of data contamination that
HFL-AD aims to address.

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

C. Data Contamination in Anomaly Detection
Data contamination refers to the scenario where traffic data
is normally collected but may contain anomalous samples.
Data contamination can lead to a significant decline in model
performance [6]. To address data contamination, Qiu et al.
[15] first estimate the contamination ratio and then jointly
infer the binary label of each training sample during model
parameter updates. Wu et al. [6] introduce an extra dataset
containing a few anomaly samples. Zhang et al. [31] utilize
the extra dataset as a validation set to label contaminated
samples. Kim et al. [29] design an iterative learning framework
with dynamically decreasing weights for training samples.
Su et al. [30] introduce an extra dataset to train a bidirectional GAN. This GAN includes a discriminator capable
of distinguishing between normal, anomalous, and generated
samples. All these works tackle the data contamination issue
in a centralized manner; however, they lack the capability to
protect data privacy. In contrast, HFL-AD leverages FL to
preserve the privacy of both collected data and supplementary
data.
The most similar work to ours is that of Sanon et al.
[47]. The authors showed that median aggregation can mitigate the influence of malicious data sources in FL by
reducing the impact of abnormal updates. However, their
approach does not identify or eliminate malicious clients,
allowing polluted data to persist in the global model. As a
result, the model exhibits significant robustness and reliability
deficiencies when dealing with large-scale or stealthy DDoS
pollution.
Overall, in the context of DDoS detection, limited data
diversity, data contamination, and sensitive data leakage are
three key challenges that existing approaches struggle to
address effectively. This motivates us to propose HFL-AD, a
novel hierarchical federated learning-based solution. By leveraging a small supplementary dataset, HFL-AD effectively
detects DDoS traffic while filtering out contaminated model
updates. In Section III, we further elaborate more on the
background and motivation.
III. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
In this section, we formally describe anomaly detection
for network traffic, focusing on data contamination, to justify
federated learning.

7015

where n represents the number of samples in DN . The gradient
descent algorithm is employed to iteratively update the model
parameters θ as follows:
n

θ(k + 1) = θ(k) − η ·

1X
∇θ L(xi ; θ(k)),
n

(2)

i=1

where k represents the training round and η represents the
learning rate. g(k + 1) = θ(k + 1) − θ(k) is referred to as the
model gradient for this iteration.
Model M’s performance depends on DN ’s quality. Ideally,
DN contains only normal samples, so M learns to assign them
low anomaly scores. However, if DN inadvertently contains a
few anomaly samples, the performance of M will be compromised. Manual inspection of DN is impractical, undermining
unsupervised anomaly detection’s purpose.
To address the aforementioned data contamination problems, some prior works [6], [12] proposed leveraging a small
supplementary dataset, denoted as DA , which comprises a
limited number of anomaly samples. In the context of intrusion detection, security experts can assist in preparing this
supplementary dataset by labeling a small number of attack
flows.
By maximizing the anomaly scores of samples in DA , the
issue of data contamination can be alleviated. Formally, let
La (x; θ) be a monotonically decreasing function of the anomaly
1
.
score L(x; θ), such as La (x; θ) = −L(x; θ) or La (x; θ) = L(x;θ)
The new loss function is given by:
n+na

1 X
((1 − yi ) · L(xi ; θ) + yi · La (xi ; θ)),
n + na

(3)

i=1

where na represents the number of anomaly samples in DA .
The binary value yi is used to indicate the origin of xi : yi = 0
denotes that xi comes from the (potentially contaminated)
dataset DN , and yi = 1 denotes that xi comes from the
dataset DA .
The aforementioned method can effectively mitigate the
issue of data contamination on a single device. However, in
real-world scenarios, training data often originates from multiple devices. Maintaining a small dataset with anomaly samples
on each device, if not impossible, poses significant practical
challenges. Moreover, traditional centralized training uses this
method but cannot protect data privacy. This motivates us
to propose a novel approach that can handle data diversity,
privacy protection, and data contamination.

A. Traditional Anomaly Detection on Network Traffic
The procedure of a traditional anomaly detection task on
network traffic is as follows. Given a dataset DN comprised of
normal samples, the goal of unsupervised anomaly detection is
to train a model M to learn the patterns within DN . This model
M assigns an anomaly score L(x; θ) to each input sample x,
where θ represents the learnable parameters of M.
The training of M requires minimizing the anomaly scores
of the samples in DN . The loss function is given by:
n

1X
L(xi ; θ),
n
i=1

(1)

B. Federated Learning (FL) for Anomaly Detection
FL can be utilized to train a global model for anomaly detection without sharing clients’ private data. Suppose there are in
toal c clients. To train a global detection model among these
clients without disclosing their sensitive data, the following
three steps are iteratively executed:
1) The central server disseminates the global model parameters θk−1 (where θ0 represents the randomly initialized
model parameters) to all clients.
2) Each client updates its local model parameters using θk−1
and its respective loss function Lossi derived from its

7016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN P REVIOUS W ORKS AND O UR WORK

local training dataset, obtaining θk,i , i = 1, 2, . . . , c, which
are then uploaded to the central server.
3) On the server side, all local model parameters θk,i , i =
1, 2, . . . , c are aggregated according to a predefined
aggregation strategy. The result of this aggregation constitutes the new global model parameters θk , which are
then disseminated in the subsequent iteration.
By repeating the above steps iteratively, the global model
gradually converges. Upon completion of the model training, the final aggregated global model is leveraged for
anomaly detection on the test dataset (i.e., new network traffic
data).
In the aforementioned FL scenario, it is possible that the
network traffic collected (pertaining to DN ) on each client
may be contaminated and contain malicious traffic, ultimately
resulting a substantial decline in model performance [6].
Existing FL solutions primarily concentrate on tasks such
as classification (e.g., Byzantine-robust FL) [10], [16] and
word prediction [11], but cannot handle anomaly detection. In
Section VII, we demonstrate that, despite their effectiveness in
defending against malicious clients, traditional robust aggregation algorithms (such as Krum [9], Trimmed mean [10],
FLTrust [11], and RFA [34]) fail to address data contamination
in anomaly detection tasks. This is attributed to the fact that
excluding model updates trained on contaminated datasets
differs from excluding model updates deliberately crafted
by malicious clients. Firstly, malicious clients intentionally
craft model updates to disrupt the training process, whereas
data contamination arises when attacks compromise a small
fraction of collected data. Secondly, malicious clients typically strive to craft harmful model updates in every round,
aiming to maximize their impact. However, in our work,
each client trains their local model using a batch of data
randomly sampled from the training dataset in every round.
The number of contaminated samples within this batch is
random.
We present a detailed comparison of our work with the
existing literature in Tabel I. Therefore, a new FL aggregation
strategy that minimizes the influence of contaminated model
updates is desired for the anomaly detection of DDoS traffic.
To achieve this, we proposed a hierachical FL approach, which
we describe in Section VI.

Fig. 1. Hierarchical structure in HFL-AD. Every round of federated learning
consists of five steps: (1) Lower-layer clients obtain the current global model
parameters. (2) All clients train their models using local data. (3) Each
lower-layer client sends its training results to its corresponding upper-layer
client within the same group. (4) Each upper-layer client exchanges model
information with other upper-layer clients and aggregates all the training
results from its group accordingly. (5) Each upper-layer client transmits the
aggregated results to the central server. Finally, the central server aggregates
these results and distributes the updated global model back to the upper-layer
clients.

IV. T HREAT M ODEL AND A SSUMPTIONS
We consider an FL system comprising a central aggregation
server and a collection of distributed clients that belong to two
distinct layers, as depicted in Fig. 1. We assume there are no
malicious clients that intend to disrupt the training process on
purpose by crafting model updates. Among all clients, the local
traffic data may be contaminated, i.e., it may contain a small
proportion of attack traffic. Only clients in the upper layer
(as shown in the figure) can obtain annotated attack traffic
from security analysts. For communications between clients or
between clients and the central server, only model information
is transmitted, thus protecting privacy.
V. A PPROACH OVERVIEW
We realize our strategy as a framework, HFL-AD, of which
the workflow is shown in Fig. 1. It comprises three layers:
lower-layer clients, upper-layer clients, and a central server.
Each upper-layer client coordinates a few (e.g., 6) lowerlayer clients. Regarding the training data, each lower-layer

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

client has only local normal traffic dataset (DN ) that may
be potentially contaminated, whereas each upper-layer client
has a small supplementary dataset (DA ) containing labeled
anomaly samples, in addition to normal traffic data (DN ). The
key insight is that benign traffic far outweighs attack traffic in
the real world. By adopting a hierarchical structure, HFL-AD
is viable for extension to a large network. Below, we outline
the working procedure of HFL-AD.
At the beginning of each global round, the central server
disseminates the global model to the upper-layer clients, each
of which then distributes the global model to its lower-layer
1 in Fig. 1). Lowerclients within the same group (step O
layer clients train the model unsupervised on local data, while
upper-layer clients employ both local data and the labeled
2
supplementary dataset for semi-supervised training (step O).
Once local training is completed, each lower-layer client
sends the trained model to its corresponding upper-layer client
3
within the same group (step O).
Each upper-layer client then
trains additional models, calculates cosine similarities among
them, and exchanges these values with peers to derive a
contamination-filtering threshold. The details of this step (step
4 will be elaborated in Section VI-B. Finally, each upperO)
layer client calculates the average of all retained models and
uploads the average model to the central server for global
5
aggregation (step O),
completing one global training round.
VI. D ESIGN
In this section, we delve into the design details of
HFL-AD, including its hierarchical structure and the aggregation algorithm.
A. Hierarchical Structure
FL training data in real-world scenarios may contain
attack traffic, though most data is benign. As outlined in
Section II-C, data contamination can significantly impact
model performance. Checking all data samples individually
to eliminate attack traffic is infeasible due to the immense
laborforce required. A more viable solution is to filter out
contaminated model updates trained on the collected data,
ensuring only uncontaminated model updates are aggregated
on the server side. However, distinguishing between clean and
contaminated model updates is challenging, as the number of
labeled attack samples is limited. A client with uncontaminated
DN cannot reliably identify clean model updates without
additional information (see Section VII-B).
To address the aforementioned challenge, we propose leveraging a hierarchical structure that divides all clients into two
layers: the lower layer and the upper layer. In the lower
layer, clients that lack the supplementary dataset DA train their
models in each round solely using DN . In contrast, clients in
the upper layer possess DA , and employ both DN and DA for
model training.
As depicted in Fig. 1, suppose there are a total of p clients
in the upper layer, namely A1 , A2 , . . ., A p . Each Ai manages
a few lower-layer clients Bi,1 , Bi,2 , . . . , Bi,qi for i = 1, 2, . . . , p.
We refer to Ai and Bi,1 , Bi,2 , . . ., Bi,qi as belonging to the same
group, for i = 1, 2, . . . , p. In the k-th round of the federated
learning process, the following steps are performed:

7017

1) Each lower-layer client Bi, j receives the current model
parameters θ(k − 1) from its upper-layer client Ai .
2) Each lower-layer client Bi, j trains a local model with
parameters θi, j (k) using its dataset DN . Meanwhile, each
upper-layer client Ai trains a local model with parameters θi,0 (k) using both its datasets DN and DA . The loss
function for lower-layer clients is given in Eq. 1, whereas
the loss function for upper-layer clients is provided in
Eq. 3.
3) Each lower-layer client Bi, j sends the local model parameters θi, j (k) to its upper-layer client Ai .
4) Each upper-layer client Ai aggregates {θi,0 (k), θi,1 (k), . . .,
θi,qi (k)} and obtains θi (k). This step will be referred to
as lower-layer aggregation in the rest of the paper.
5) A central server aggregates {θ1 (k), θ2 (k), . . ., θ p (k)} sent
by the upper-layer clients, obtains the result θ(k). This
step will be referred to as upper-layer aggregation in
the rest of the paper.
In the procedure outlined above, the lower-layer aggregation
plays a crucial role. It excludes model updates trained on
contaminated datasets, utilizing a mechanism that we will
outline in Section VI-B.
B. Aggregation Algorithm
The goal of the proposed aggregation algorithm is to
determine a threshold that distinguishes contaminated model
updates from uncontaminated ones. This operation is conducted on upper-layer clients, where both local model updates
and model updates from lower-layer clients are collected.
In the high level, we aim to identify a boundary between
contaminated and uncontaminated model updates by utilizing
the supplementary dataset.
Intuitively, we have two choices for this additional small
labeled dataset: clean traffic and attack (or contaminated)
traffic, both enabling contamination detection. FLTrust [11]
leverages a small, clean dataset to determine the trust score
of a client model, thereby assisting in filtering out malicious
clients. However, The utilization of clean traffic presents a
challenge in addressing the data contamination issue. Normal
traffic behavior exhibits greater diversity compared to malicious traffic, given that the majority of traffic collected in
real-world scenarios pertains to normal network behaviors.
Models trained on a different type of normal traffic data might
be misidentified as contaminated and consequently excluded
from the upper-layer aggregation. The absence of these models
ultimately impacts the global model’s performance in anomaly
detection (see Section VII-B). Conversely, the behavioral
patterns of attack traffic deviate more significantly from those
of clean (i.e., uncontaminated) traffic than from contaminated
traffic. This enables models trained on clean normal traffic
to be included in the upper-layer aggregation, enhancing the
performance of the global model in DDoS detection.
Therefore, we leverage labeled attack traffic as supplementary data. To make such a comparison, we leverage cosine
similarity [11], a widely adopted approach to measure vector
differences. In this process, we encounter a challenge: as the
training progresses, the similarity range of a normal model
will change. Existing solutions, such as FLTrust, which focus

7018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

on detecting malicious clients, fail to account for this circumstance. These solutions determine whether to incorporate a
new model into aggregation based on a static threshold. For
example, FLTrust only aggregates models with a similarity
score above zero.
To address the aforementioned challenge, we dynamically
adjust the threshold each global training round by comparing
models trained on mixed normal and contaminated (supplementary) data batches. The threshold is dynamically calculated
in each round, ensuring that contaminated models can be
identified and filtered out in a timely manner. Compared to
static thresholds, this dynamic threshold mechanism adapts to
the vast diversity of normal traffic behaviors, demonstrating
that HFL-AD can be applied to varying network conditions.
In the high level, the proposed aggregation algorithm aims
to filter out contaminated model updates (e.g., from clients
with poisoned data) in federated learning (FL) by dynamically
adjusting a similarity threshold. Just as a thermostat adjusts
room temperature based on real-time feedback, our threshold adapts to model behavior in each round. Unlike static
thresholds (e.g., FLTrust), our method adapts to changes in
model behavior during training, ensuring robustness against
data contamination (e.g., DDoS attack traffic).
The process involves two main steps, executed by upperlayer clients:
1) Dynamic Threshold Calculation: In this step, HFL-AD
determines a threshold to separate contaminated vs. normal
updates. To do it, HFL-AD computes a threshold T (k) in
each global round k to identify suspicious updates as follows:
i) Simulating Contaminated Updates. Each upper-layer
client Ai first trains a “contaminated” model θit1 (k) using a mix
of normal data DN and attack data DA . This mimics potential
malicious behavior, creating a baseline for comparison. We
leverage attack traffic as reference because normal traffic
is diverse and attack traffic provides a sharper signal for
contamination. Attack traffic prevents false exclusion of benign
clients with atypical normal data. ii) Computing Cosine
Similarity. Each upper-layer client then compares the contaminated model’s gradient gt1
i (k) with the local (normal) model’s
gradient gi,0 (k) using the cosine similarity. This similarity acts
as a “Trust Meter” to measures how much a client’s update
aligns with the expected direction (like a compass pointing to
“normal”). Low similarity suggests deviation from expected
behavior. iii) Collaborative Thresholding. Clients share similarity scores st1
i (k) and compute the mean µ(k) and standard
deviation σ(k). The threshold is set to T (k) = µ(k) + m · σ(k),
where m is a hyperparameter. We introduce this dynamic
threshold because normal behavior varies across rounds, to
which static thresholds (e.g., FLTrust’s fixed T = 0) fail to
adapt.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the process of dynamic threshold
calculation. Specifically, each client Ai in the upper layer only
trains one model, θit1 (k), which utilizes the loss function in
Eq. 1 to mimic a contaminated model update (Line 2). After
that, the cosine similarity st1
i (k) is calculated and exchanged
(Lines 3-4), where
S (a, b) =

aT · b
.
|a| · |b|

(4)

Algorithm 1 The Upper-Layer Client Ai Dynamically Determines the Threshold in Round k

With a list of the estimated cosine similarities of contaminated
gradients, the mean µ(k) and the standard deviation σ(k) are
calculated (Lines 5-13). Then, µ(k) + mσ(k) is used as T (k),
where m is a hyper-parameter.
2) Model Aggregation: HFL-AD filters and aggregates
updates based on the threshold. In this step, only trustworthy
updates (with similarity > T (k)) are aggregated. This process
consists of two substeps: i) Collecting Updates. The upperlayer client Ai first gathers models from lower-layer clients
Bi, j along with its own local model θi,0 (k). ii) Filtering
and Aggregating. For each model, HFL-AD computes its
similarity to θi,0 (k). HFL-AD then retains only those updates
where si, j (k) > T (k) and aggregates them using FedAvg. The
key difference from FLTrust is that our method includes θi,0 (k)
in aggregation (as it is trained to maximize attack detection).
We outline the entire procedure that an upper-layer client
Ai follows during the global training round k in Algorithm 2.
Initially, Ai receives the global model parameters θ(k − 1)
from the central server (Line 1) and disseminates them to
its lower-layer clients (Lines 2-4). Subsequently, Ai trains a
model locally (Line 5) and receives the newly trained models
from its lower-layer clients upon their completion of training
(Lines 6-8). Then, Ai computes the threshold T (k) through
Algorithm 1 (Line 9). Following this step, Ai calculates the
similarity score between its locally trained model θi,0 (k) and
all collected models (Lines 10-13), and aggregates all models
whose cosine similarity exceeds T (k) using FedAvg (Lines
14-20). Notice that unlike the existing work FLTrust, where
the model trained on the supplementary dataset does not
participate in the model aggregation, HFL-AD utilizes θi,0 (k)
as a basis for calculating the similarity score and includes it in
the model aggregation. This is because the training of θi,0 (k)

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

Algorithm 2 The Entire Procedure Followed by the UpperLayer Cilent Ai in Round k

7019

1 − Φ(m), where Φ(m) is the CDF of the standard normal
distribution. For m = 2, this probability exceeds 95%.
2) Convergence Guarantees: The convergence of traditional hierarchical federated learning (HFL) has been
extensively analyzed and theoretically guaranteed [7], [40],
[41], [42]. Traditional HFL corresponds to HFL-AD without
any contaminated models being filtered out. In HFL-AD,
the lower-layer aggregation mechanism ensures that excluded
updates are high-probability outliers, thereby preserving
the unbiasedness of aggregated gradients. Furthermore, the
upper-layer aggregation in HFL-AD maintains this unbiased
property through its use of FedAvg. Therefore, HFL-AD is
guaranteed to converge to a stationary point of the global loss
function.
VII. E VALUATION
We implemented a prototype of HFL-AD and evaluated
it using three representative datasets of network traffic in
the DDoS detection task. These datasets are: CICDDoS2019
[17], CICIoT2023 [18], and CICIoMT2024 [19]. In this
section, we first describe our experimental setup, including
hyper-parameters and settings, training models in the lowerlayer aggregation, and the hardware configurations utilized for
evaluation.
To evaluate HFL-AD, we aim to answer the following
research questions:

aims to maximize the abnormal score of labeled attack traffic
in DA , which is beneficial for resisting data contamination.
Finally, Ai sends the resulting parameters θi (k) to the central
server, which subsequently conducts the model aggregation
(i.e., FedAvg).

RQ 1: Are supplementary datasets and dynamic thresholds
necessary to distinguish between clean and contaminated
model updates?
RQ 2: How effective is HFL-AD in detecting DDoS attacks
when the training data is contaminated?
RQ 3: Is HFL-AD scalable to accommodate a larger number of clients within the FL framework, anomaly detection
of non-traffic data, and alternative upper-layer aggregation
algorithms?
A. Experimental Setup

C. Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we investigate the impact of HFL-AD’s
hierarchical aggregation on its model robustness and
convergence.
1) Robustness: The hierarchical aggregation in HFL-AD
improves robustness by localized contamination filtering and
dynamic threshold adaptivity. Specifically, upper-layer clients
exclude contaminated updates before global aggregation,
reducing the propagation of biased gradients, whereas the
threshold T (k) ensures tighter bounds on gradient deviations
compared to static thresholds (e.g., FLTrust). Proof sketch.
A model update θi, j (k) from lower-layer client Bi, j is retained
if its cosine similarity with the upper-layer client’s gradient
g j (k)T gi,0 (k)
gi,0 (k) satisfies: S i, j (k) = kg i, (k)
kkg (k)k > T (k). Let gclean be
i, j

i,0

the gradient of an uncontaminated model and gcont be that of a
contaminated model. Due to the divergence in loss landscapes,
S (gcont , gi,0 ) tends to be smaller than S (gclean , gi,0 ). By setting
T (k) = µ(k) + m · σ(k), we ensure: P(S (gcont , gi,0 ) ≤ T (k)) ≥

In both upper-layer and lower-layer clients, we adopt Neural
Transformation Learning (NTL) [14] as the local anomaly
detection model. NTL comprises K learnable transformations,
denoted as T ri (·), along with a shared encoder, fφ (·). The
anomaly score for an input x is calculated as follows:
L(x; θ) = −

K
X

log di (x),

(5)

i=1

where
di (x) =

h(T ri (x), x)
P
,
h(T ri (x), x) + l,i h(T ri (x), T rl (x))
h(a, b) = exp(S ( fφ (a), fφ (b))/τ),

(6)
(7)

and τ is the temperature parameter, θ denotes all the learnable
parameters, encompassing the K transformations and one
encoder. In our experiments, we set τ = 0.1 in NTL, and
chose Adam as the optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01. The
system comprises three upper-layer clients, each managing six

7020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

lower-layer clients. Among these, seven clients (one upperlayer and two lower-layer per group) were intentionally fed
contaminated training data.
To train the model utilizing the supplementary dataset DA ,
we refer to the related work [15] by employing the following
loss function:
La (x; θ) = −

K
X

log (1 − di (x)),

TABLE II
DATASET- INDEPENDENT S ETTINGS U SED IN EXPERIMENTS

(8)

i=1

where di (x) retains the same meaning as in Eq. 5. By substituting Eq. 5 and Eq. 8 into Eq. 1 and Eq. 3, we obtain the
loss function utilized by the lower-layer clients and upper-layer
clients, respectively.
We leverage FedAvg for aggregating models in the upperlayer aggregation. For the lower-layer aggregation, apart
from the algorithm proposed in HFL-AD (Section VI-B),
we further assess FedAvg [13], Krum [9], Trimmed mean
[10], FLTrust [11], and RFA [34] as baseline methods for
comparison. Notice that the latter four algorithms are specifically designed for robust aggregation. We adapt them to
address the data contamination issue in our work. Below, we
briefly introduce these four baseline methods, assuming that
each upper-layer client collects in total n trained models for
aggregation.
• Krum: Among n models, Krum selects one model that
is “nearest to the rest n − z − 2 models” as the aggregation
result, assuming that at most z models are malicious or
contaminated.
• Trimmed mean: It utilizes a coordinate-wise aggregation
strategy, assuming that at most z models are contaminated. For each parameter, Trimmed mean removes the z
largest and z smallest value, and uses the average of the
remaining n − 2z values as the aggregation result for that
parameter.
• FLTrust: This algorithm collects a clean root dataset
at the server. A gradient trained on this root dataset is
used as a basis. The aggregation result is the weighted
average of n normalized gradients, where the weights are
determined by the cosine similarity between the basis and
each of the n gradients (excluding gradients with a cosine
similarity less than 0).
• RFA: RFA calculates the geometric median of n models
as the aggregation result. To calculate the geometric
median, RFA employs an iterative method.
Compared to the baselines above, HFL-AD introduces novelty
in the following aspects: dynamic thresholding for contamination detection, leveraging attack traffic (rather than clean data)
for robustness, integration of contamination-aware training,
and hierarchical robustness. Table IV provides a comparison
based on these aspects.
Since there are at most three models contaminated in
each client group during our evaluation, we set z = 3 for
both Krum and Trimmed mean. As for FLTrust, each upperlayer client possesses a dataset DF comprising 30 labeled
normal samples (i.e., traffic flows), which serves as the root
dataset. We chose this size to be consistent with the labeled
supplementary dataset on each upper-layer client. Table II

details all dataset-independent settings. In addition, we list the
dataset-dependent settings in Table III. These parameters were
empirically determined to ensure optimal model performance.
All experiments were conducted on a system equipped
with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-14900K CPU and an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, using the PyTorch framework and
Python 3.9.
B. RQ1: Necessity of Supplementary Datasets and Dynamic
Thresholds
To answer this research question, we first present empirical
evidence that merely utilizing a clean DN is insufficient to
distinguish between clean and contaminated model updates.
Then, we underscore the necessity of dynamically determining the threshold. Across all datasets, we observe consistent
results, and for the purpose of illustration in this subsection,
we utilize findings from CICDDoS2019.
To do the analysis, we assess the gradients of trained
anomaly detection models in three distinct scenarios: (1) using
only a clean DN , (2) using both DA and clean DN , and
(3) using only a contaminated DN . For brevity, we introduce
the following terminology to represent these scenarios.
• type0: The model is trained on a purely clean batch
consisting of 1,024 normal samples, employing the loss
function outlined in Eq. 1.
• type1: The model is trained on a batch that includes
994 normal samples, along with 10 samples of NetBIOS
attack, 10 samples of Syn attack, and 10 samples of
LDAP attack, utilizing the loss function specified in Eq. 3.
• type2: The model is trained on a contaminated batch with
1,003 normal samples, including 7 samples of SNMP
attack, 7 samples of Portmap attack, and 7 samples
of UDPLag attack, using the loss function detailed in
Eq. 1. The contamination ratio within this batch is
approximately 2%.
Intuitively, the type2 gradient has a negative impact on the
training process. As indicated by prior work [6], the type1
gradient can alleviate the issue of data contamination to some
degree. Hence, our objective is to eliminate type2 gradients
and retain as many type0 and type1 gradients as possible.
To understand the probability distribution of cosine similarity

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

7021

TABLE III
DATASET- DEPENDENT S ETTINGS U SED IN EXPERIMENTS

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINES

Fig. 2. Differentiating capability of type0 and type1 gradients (training starts
from a randomly initialized model).

Fig. 3. Differentiating capability of type0 and type1 gradients (training starts
from a model that has been trained on 100 clean batches).

between gradients of different types, we repeatedly sample
two batches, train two gradients, and calculate their cosine
similarity. This calculation is repeated 1,000 times for each
“type pair.”
Fig. 2 shows the histogram of cosine similarity, where
the training starts from a randomly initialized model. In
Fig. 2(a), we present the cosine similarity between type1 gradients and gradients of type0, type1, and type2, respectively. The
choice of cosine similarity to compare gradients (type0/-type1/
type2) is grounded in its widespread use for measuring directional alignment in high-dimensional spaces, particularly in
federated learning (FL) robustness studies (e.g., [9], [11]).
It can be observed that type1 gradients exhibit the highest
cosine similarity with gradients of the same type, whereas
type2 gradients demonstrate the lowest cosine similarity with

type1 gradients. The overlap between type1-type1 and type1type2 gradients is minimal.
In contrast, Fig. 2(b) depicts the cosine similarity between
type0 gradients and those of type0, type1, and type2. Two
observations can be drawn from this subfigure: (i) The overlap
between the undesired type2 gradients (type0-type2, shown
in red) and the desired type0 gradients (type0-type0, shown
in green) is greater than that depicted in Fig. 2(a). (ii) The
overlap between the undesired type2 gradients (type0-type2)
and the desired type1 gradients (type0-type1) is substantial.
Therefore, it is challenging to distinguish these two types of
gradients in the type0 scenario.
We further show the histogram of cosine similarity in Fig. 3,
where the training starts from a model pre-trained on 100 clean
batches. From the figure, it becomes evident that the prior
analysis remains valid. Therefore, we propose the following

7022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V
S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE ( P - VALUES ) OF P ERFORMANCE C OMPAR ISONS B ETWEEN HFL-AD AND BASELINE METHODS

Fig. 4. Wasserstein distance of cosine similarity distributions.

aggregation rule in HFL-AD: utilizing type1 gradients as a
basis, we estimate a cosine similarity threshold to exclude
as many type2 gradients as possible. Specifically, we propose
that clients possessing DA (pertaining to the type1 scenario)
should be positioned in the upper-layer clients and tasked with
excluding contaminated gradients. In addition, by comparing
the corresponding cosine similarity values in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3,
we observe that the appropriate threshold undergoes significant
changes after training on 100 clean batches. This suggests that
a dynamic threshold needs to be estimated for each training
batch.
To better understand the cosine similarity distribution
throughout the training process, we leverage the Wasserstein
distance [38], a measurement method used to quantify the
difference between two probability distributions. We chose the
Wasserstein distance because it is sensitive to both shape and
location shifts in probability distributions. This dual-metric
approach ensures robustness against contamination by distinguishing type0/type1 and type2 updates. A larger distance
value indicates that the two distributions are more distinct,
facilitating a more accurate threshold determination in HFLAD. To assess this distance, we initiate the training process
using a model pre-trained on a batch range of 0 to 800.
Specifically, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 correspond to the 0th and
100th batch indices, respectively. We present the experimental
results in Fig. 4, where the blue line depicts the Wasserstein
distance between the cosine similarity distribution of type1type1 gradients and the distribution of type1-type2 gradients,
while the green line represents the distance between type0type0 gradients and type0-type2 gradients. It is evident that
the Wasserstein distance for the similarity distribution related
to type0 gradients (green line) is significantly smaller than
that of type1 gradients (blue line), aligning with our previous
analysis.
Based on the above results, we conclude that even with a
completely clean DN which corresponds to the type0 scenario,
it is challenging to identify contaminated training updates (i.e.,
type2 gradients). In contrast, the type1 gradient is able to
differentiate contaminated gradients from non-contaminated
ones, thus making it more suitable as a basis for use in
HFL-AD.
The Wasserstein distance analysis further validates our
assumption that gradient distributions evolve during training

(Figs. 2–3), justifying the need for adaptive thresholds. Static
thresholds would fail to capture this non-stationarity.
C. RQ2: Effectiveness of HFL-AD
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method from two different perspectives. Firstly,
we utilize the AUC (the area under the ROC curve) value
to assess the model’s performance on DDoS detection.
AUC-ROC is adopted due to its threshold-agnostic nature,
which is critical for unbiased evaluation under varying contamination ratios. This aligns with best practices in anomaly
detection literature [6], [15]. A higher AUC value indicates
better model performance, with a value of 1 representing perfect distinction between positive and negative samples. Notice
that the ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) against
the false positive rate (FPR) for all thresholds, providing a
comprehensive understanding of the model’s capabilities. This
also indicates the AUC value derived from the ROC curve is
indepedent of threshold determination.
Fig. 5 shows the performance of various aggregation algorithms across all three datasets, with contamination ratios of
0%, 1%, 2%, 4%, and 8%. We chose these ratios because they
align with empirical observations from [6] and [15], where
low-to-moderate anomaly fractions (typically less than 10%)
reflect realistic attack scenarios. The AUC value is evaluated
for all types of DDoS attacks. From the figure, it is evident that
HFL-AD achieves the highest AUC value across all contamination ratios. When the contamination ratio is 0%, indicating
that all clients possess clean datasets, HFL-AD effectively
leverages the model updates from all clients, yielding a result
that is comparable to FedAvg. As the contamination ratio
increases, HFL-AD effectively mitigates the adverse impact
of contaminated model updates.
Secondly, to further evaluate models, we leverage thresholddependent metrics, including accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1-score. Specifically, we utilize a small validation dataset
comprising 300 normal samples and 300 abnormal samples.
We adopt the threshold that yields the highest F1-score on
the validation dataset for testing. Fig. 6 presents the results
of different aggregation algorithms across all contamination
ratios. Overall, among all four metrics, HFL-AD achieves the
best performance, particularly reflected by the F1-score, which
represents a harmonious balance between precision and recall.
These results underscore the effectiveness of HFL-AD.
To verify the superiority of our proposed method, we
conducted two-sample t-tests comparing HFL-AD’s results

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

7023

Fig. 5. AUC performance among different aggregation algorithms on three datasets.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison among different aggregation algorithms under five contamination ratios. Notice that Avg, TM, FLT, H-A stand for FedAvg,
Trimmed Mean, FLTrust, and HFL-AD, respectively.

in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 with baseline methods. As shown in
Table V, the statistical results demonstrate that HFL-AD
achieves statistically significant superiority over all baselines
in Accuracy, F1-score, and AUC (with p-value ≤ 0.05), while
showing competitive performance in Precision and Recall
(where some p-values are slightly above 0.05).

D. RQ3: Scalability of HFL-AD
We answer this research question by presenting the AUC
score of HFL-AD, considering factores such as the number
of lower-layer clients per group, non-traffic data for anomaly
detection, and an alternative upper-layer aggregation algorithm. These factors are illustrated in Fig. 7, Fig. 8, and Fig. 9,
respectively.

Fig. 7. AUC performance of different aggregation algorithms under varying
numbers of lower-layer clients in a group.

1) Number of Lower-Layer Clients: The upper-layer aggregation in HFL-AD is based on FedAvg. As a result, HFL-AD
can support a large number (e.g., 100+) of upper-layer clients,

7024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 8. AUC performance of different aggregation algorithms on the Census
dataset.

HFL-AD remains effective when applied to non-traffic data. In
contrast, existing solutions exhibit considerable performance
degradation, highlighting HFL-AD’s superior adaptability and
scalability compared to these solutions.
3) Alternative Upper-Layer Aggregation Algorithm: In all
the aformentioned experiments, we leverage FedAvg as the
upper-layer aggregation algorithm in HFL-AD. However, the
design of HFL-AD is not dependent on a specific upperlayer aggregation algorithm. To validate this independence, we
replaced FedAvg with FedLAW [37] as an alternative upperlayer aggregation algorithm within HFL-AD and conducted
repeated experiments. Fig. 9 shows the results on the CICDDoS2019 dataset. It is evident that HFL-AD is adaptable to
different upper-layer aggregation algorithms, further showcasing HFL-AD’s exceptional scalability.
E. Practical Implications

Fig. 9. AUC performance of HFL-AD under different upper-layer aggregation algorithms.

similar to other FL solutions [3], [4], [22], [27], [28]. To
analyze the scalability of HFL-AD with lower-layer clients,
we conduct experiments using the CICDDoS2019 dataset. We
vary the number of lower-layer clients within each group to 3,
6, 9, 15, and 25, respectively. Notice that due to the dataset’s
limited sample size, 25 is the maximum number of lowerlayer clients that can be assigned to each group to ensure
viable training on each client. In this configuration, there are
a total of 78 clients, with each client receiving 942 training
samples. For each experiment, one-third of the clients are
contaminated with malicious data for training purposes. Fig. 7
depicts the experimental results. We can see that HFL-AD
maintains stable performance across various contamination
ratios (ranging from 0% to 4%). When the contamination
ratio reaches 8%, there is a notable decrease in HFL-AD’s
performance, especially when a higher number of lower-layer
clients is assigned to each group. However, this performance
decrement is minimal. Despite the higher contamination ratio
and reduced training data per client, the AUC performance of
HFL-AD still surpasses existing solutions (see Fig. 6).
2) Applicability to Non-Traffic Data: HFL-AD is designed
to train the anomaly detection model in a federated manner.
That said, beyond DDoS, HFL-AD can also detect other
anomalies, such as malware traffic (see Section VIII) or nontraffic anomalies. To assess the applicability of HFL-AD to
other types of datasets, we leverage the Census dataset [48],
a tabular dataset pertaining to income surveys. We follow
the same procedure as was employed for the traffic datasets
utilized in the network intrusion detection task. The last
column in Table III outlines the setting information pertinent
to the Census dataset. Fig. 8 shows the performance of
various aggregation algorithms on this dataset. We can see that

The experimental results demonstrate that HFL-AD effectively mitigates the impact of contaminated training data in
federated DDoS detection while maintaining scalability across
different network environments and anomaly detection tasks.
These findings have several real-world implications:
1) Robust Federated Learning for Cybersecurity: HFLAD enables organizations (e.g., ISPs, cloud providers, or
enterprise networks) to collaboratively train DDoS detection
models without sharing raw traffic data, preserving privacy
while improving threat detection. In addition, the dynamic
threshold mechanism ensures resilience against evolving traffic
patterns, making it suitable for real-world deployments where
normal network behaviors frequently change.
2) Adaptability to Diverse Threat Scenarios: Unlike prior
methods that struggle with low contamination ratios (1-8%),
HFL-AD maintains high AUC and F1-scores even when malicious clients inject subtle adversarial updates. This makes it
practical for real-world FL deployments, where attackers may
attempt to evade detection by introducing small perturbations.
The framework’s effectiveness on non-traffic data (e.g., Census
dataset) suggests broader applicability beyond DDoS, such as
fraud detection, IoT anomaly detection, or industrial sensor
monitoring.
3) Scalability for Large-Scale Deployments: HFL-AD
supports hundreds of clients without significant performance degradation, making it feasible for distributed threat
intelligence sharing among multiple organizations. The compatibility with different upper-layer aggregation algorithms
(e.g., FedLAW) allows integration into existing FL frameworks, reducing adoption barriers.
VIII. D ISCUSSION
HFL-AD detects DDoS attack traffic using hierarchical federated learning (FL). It operates in a semi-supervised manner
with limited labeled anomaly samples. Specifically, HFL-AD
addresses the following three problems in the real world:
(1) Data contamination exists in monitored traffic, which can
significantly impact model performance. It is impractical to
examine all collected traffic samples due to the immense
labor involved. (2) Traffic collected from a single host lacks

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

TABLE VI
OVERHEAD OF HFL-AD AND BASELINE M ETHODS ACROSS DATASETS

7025

per round, which is feasible for resource-constrained edge
devices.
Regarding communication cost, the hierarchical structure of HFL-AD alleviates server-side bottlenecks while
adding negligible overhead. The 0.003∼0.004% (equivalent to
0.13∼0.24 MB) increase stems from scalar cosine similarity
exchanges among upper-layer clients, preserving bandwidth
efficiency.
The moderate computational cost and minimal communication overhead are justified by HFL-AD’s superior accuracy
(Section VII-C), enabled by dynamic thresholding for contamination detection, attack traffic repurposing as signal,
contamination-aware training, and multi-layer hierarchical
defense.
B. Feasibility of Labeled Anomaly Data

diversity and is insufficient for DDoS detection. Model training
requires traffic data from various hosts. (3) Traffic collected
from different hosts may contain private data that cannot be
shared directly. Below, we discuss further aspects of HFL-AD
in terms of its overhead, convergence, and robustness.
A. Overhead
We evaluate the overhead of HFL-AD from the perspective
of computation and communication, measured in terms of
training duration and transmission load, respectively. Table VI
compares the overhead of HFL-AD and baseline algorithms
across three datasets. The results exhibit consistent trends, and
we analyze the CICDDoS2019 dataset as a representative case.
For computation cost, FedAvg is the most efficient due to its
non-robust averaging. Krum and FLTrust introduce moderate
overhead from pairwise distance calculations and gradient
normalization, respectively. Trimmed Mean and RFA incur
higher costs due to coordinate-wise filtering and iterative
geometric median computation. HFL-AD strikes a balance,
being only 17.2% slower than FLTrust and 18.4% slower than
Krum, while significantly outperforming them in robustness
(Section VII-C). Similar trends hold for CICIoT2023 and
CICIoMT2024, with RFA consistently being the slowest. In
practical deployments, upper-layer clients in HFL-AD incur
moderate computational overhead due to their dual role in
local model training and contamination detection. Based on
our experiments, the per-round computational time for an
upper-layer client (e.g., a mid-tier IoT gateway with 4 CPU
cores and 8 GB RAM) averages 2—3 seconds for local training and aggregation (100 epochs, batch size 32) and 15—38
seconds for contamination detection (dynamic thresholding
and cosine similarity calculations). This totals 17—41 seconds

While labeled anomalies (DA ) are required for contamination detection, their acquisition is realistically manageable
for the following reasons: i) Minimal data requirements:
DA is small (e.g., 30 samples per upper-layer client) and
can be sourced from historical attack traces (e.g., past
intrusion logs, synthetic attack replay), public threat intelligence (e.g., CICIDS, CIC-DDoS datasets), and lightweight
manual labeling (e.g., flagging anomalies during initial deployment). ii) One-time effort for long-term robustness: Unlike
FLTrust (which requires continuous clean data updates), DA
is static—once collected, it can be reused across rounds.
Furthermore, attack patterns (e.g., DDoS signatures) exhibit
temporal stability, reducing the need for frequent relabeling.
iii) Hierarchical delegation lowers burden: Only upper-layer
clients (a small subset of the network) need DA , not every
participant. In enterprise settings (e.g., IoT networks), these
clients can be operated by administrators with access to
security tools.
For heterogeneous scenarios where labeled anomalies are
hard to obtain uniformly, we propose: i) Transferable attack
representations: DA can include generalizable attack features
(e.g., packet size anomalies in DDoS) rather than clientspecific samples. Our experiments (Section VII) show robustness across multiple datasets (CICDDoS2019, CICIoT2023),
suggesting DA need not be exhaustive. ii) Federated anomaly
sharing: Upper-layer clients can securely share curated DA
(e.g., via differential privacy) to mitigate data scarcity. iii)
Fallback mechanisms: If DA is unavailable, HFL-AD can
default to weaker baselines (e.g., Krum), though with reduced
contamination resistance.
C. Robustness
To evaluate the robustness of HFL-AD in more complex
and varied environments, we have conducted additional experiments on the CICIoT2023 dataset, a large-scale IoT dataset
designed for robust evaluation in complex attack scenarios.
This dataset includes 33 attack types (e.g., DDoS, DoS, Recon,
Spoofing, Mirai) executed in a realistic IoT topology with 105
devices, providing a highly challenging environment for flowbased anomaly detection.

7026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 10. Performance of HFL-AD across different contamination ratios under varying configurations. Labels A-E on the X-axis represent five distinct
configurations. For each configuration, we evaluated different data samples at various contamination ratios, resulting in minor AUC value fluctuations.
TABLE VII
K EY E NHANCEMENTS IN J OURNAL V ERSION VS . P RIOR C ONFERENCE V ERSION [39]

Specifically, we designed five distinct configurations with
varying compositions of DDoS and non-DDoS attacks,
including:
1) Configuration A: 4 DDoS attacks (ICMP/UDP/TCP/
SY-N Flood).
2) Configuration B: 3 DDoS attacks + 1 non-DDoS (DNS
Spoofing).
3) Configuration C: 2 DDoS attacks + 2 non-DDoS
(Vulnerability Scan, DNS Spoofing).
4) Configuration D: 1 DDoS attack + 3 non-DDoS (Browser Hijacking, Vulnerability Scan, DNS Spoofing).
5) Configuration E: 4 non-DDoS attacks (Dictionary Brute
Force, Browser Hijacking, etc.).
For each configuration, attack samples were injected into
normal traffic at multiple contamination ratios to simulate
varying interference intensities. In addition, within each configuration, all attack types were equally represented to ensure
unbiased evaluation of our method’s resilience against diverse
attack interactions. The results (as shown in Fig. 10) demonstrate that HFL-AD maintains high detection performance
across all configurations, even under aggressive mixedattack scenarios. This comprehensive validation underscores
HFL-AD’s adaptability to heterogeneous, real-world IoT
threats.

gradient cosine similarity to filter contaminated updates.
Experiments demonstrate HFL-AD’s superiority over SOTA
methods in detection accuracy, scalability, and adaptability to
non-traffic tasks.
Practical Deployment Scenarios. HFL-AD’s robustness
and privacy-preserving design make it particularly valuable
for real-world collaborations:
• ISP Networks: Multiple ISPs can jointly train DDoS
detectors on traffic from geographically distributed networks without sharing raw data, enabling early threat
mitigation while complying with data sovereignty regulations.
• Industrial IoT: In smart factories, HFL-AD can
aggregate anomaly reports from sensor fleets (e.g., predictive maintenance alerts) across different manufacturers,
improving detection of adversarial tampering or equipment failures.
• Cloud Providers: Federated threat intelligence sharing
among cloud platforms (e.g., AWS, Azure) could identify cross-tenant attack patterns while isolating sensitive
customer data.
Future work should address dynamic client churn and reduce
reliance on labeled upper-layer data, further bridging research
and deployment gaps.

IX. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we proposed HFL-AD, a hierarchical federated learning framework for DDoS detection that mitigates
data contamination while preserving privacy and improving
data diversity. HFL-AD designates clients with supplemental labeled anomaly data as upper-layer clients, leveraging

A PPENDIX A
C OMPARISON TO C ONFERENCE V ERSION
Table VII explicitly highlights the novel advancements of
this work in design, algorithm, and evaluation compared to the
conference version.

GUI et al.: SOLVING DATA CONTAMINATION IN DDoS DETECTION: A METHOD BASED ON HFL

Specifically, we discuss the novel contributions of this work
over the conference version from four aspects.
1) Algorithmic Innovation.
• Aggregation Algorithm: The conference version
required training two local models in each upperlayer client for dynamic threshold calculation. In
this journal version, we propose training only one
local model per upper-layer client, which proves
more effective (Figs. 5–6).
2) Generalizability.
• Extended from DDoS-only detection to multiscenario anomaly detection (e.g., Census income
data in Section VII-D).
• Support for alternative upper-layer aggregators
(FedLAW in Fig. 9) and scalability to 25 lower-layer
clients per group (Fig. 8).
3) Enhanced Evaluation.
• Additional Metrics: Introduced more evaluation metrics (e.g., accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1-score) to comprehensively assess HFL-AD’s
performance (Fig. 6).
• Comparative Baselines: Added RFA [34] and FedLAW [37] to validate superiority over newer FL
methods.
4) Practical Implications.
• Added overhead analysis (Section VIII) showing
only 32% runtime increase versus FedAvg despite
dynamic thresholding.
• Real-world
applicability
discussion
(Section VII-E) for ISPs and IoT networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their valuable feedback on this paper.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

B. Bala and S. Behal, “AI techniques for IoT-based DDoS attack
detection: Taxonomies, comprehensive review and research challenges,”
Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 52, May 2024, Art. no. 100631.
S. Ranger. (Feb. 28, 2018). GitHub Hit With the Largest DDoS Attack
Ever Seen. ZDNet. [Online]. Available: https://goo.gl/BmqekG
J. Yan, H. Zhou, and W. Wang, “Intelligent network element: A programmable switch based on machine learning to defend against DDoS
attacks,” Inf. Syst. Frontiers, vol. 2025, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2025.
V. Pourahmadi, H. A. Alameddine, M. A. Salahuddin, and R. Boutaba,
“Spotting anomalies at the edge: Outlier exposure-based cross-silo
federated learning for DDoS detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4002–4015, Sep. 2023.
Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
S. Wu, J. Zhao, and G. Tian, “Understanding and mitigating data
contamination in deep anomaly detection: A kernel-based approach,”
in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 2319–2325.
Z. Wang, H. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Xu, H. Huang, and Y. Zhao,
“Accelerating federated learning with cluster construction and hierarchical aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 3805–3822, Jul. 2022.
W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim,
“Dynamic edge association and resource allocation in self-organizing
hierarchical federated learning networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3640–3653, Dec. 2021.

[9]

7027

P. Blanchard, E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer,
“Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient
descent,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, Dec. 2017,
pp. 118–128.
[10] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., Jul. 2018, pp. 5650–5659.
[11] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “FLTrust: Byzantine-robust
federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
[12] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–23.
[13] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Stat. (AISTATS), Jan. 2016,
pp. 1273–1282.
[14] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
[15] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2022, pp. 18153–18167.
[16] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks
to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur.
Symp., 2020, pp. 1605–1622.
[17] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Security Technol. (ICCST),
2019, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/CCST.2019.8888419.
[18] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
p. 5941, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.3390/s23135941.
[19] S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, R. Ferreira, R. C. Molokwu, S. Sadeghi,
and A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare devices—A multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device
security,” Internet Things, vol. 28, pp. 1–29, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.20944/
preprints202402.0898.v1.
[20] J. G. Almaraz-Rivera, J. A. Perez-Diaz, and J. A. Cantoral-Ceballos,
“Transport and application layer DDoS attacks detection to IoT devices
by using machine learning and deep learning models,” Sensors, vol. 22,
no. 9, p. 3367, Apr. 2022.
[21] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated
learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Oct.
2020.
[22] R. Benameur, A. Dahane, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel federated
learning based intrusion detection system for IoT networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2024, pp. 2402–2407.
[23] K. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, and J. Chao, “DDoS attacks detection with
AutoEncoder,” in Proc. NOMS-IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp.,
Apr. 2020, pp. 1–9.
[24] A. Zainudin, L. A. C. Ahakonye, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee,
“An efficient hybrid-DNN for DDoS detection and classification in
software-defined IIoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
no. 10, pp. 8491–8504, May 2023.
[25] D. Akgun, S. Hizal, and U. Cavusoglu, “A new DDoS attacks intrusion
detection model based on deep learning for cybersecurity,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 118, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102748.
[26] C. Xu et al., “A federated learning architecture for blockchain DDoS
attacks detection,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17, no. 5,
pp. 1911–1923, Sep. 2024.
[27] J. Mateus, G.-A.-L. Zodi, and A. Bagula, “Federated learning-based
solution for DDoS detection in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Big Island, HI, USA, Feb. 2024,
pp. 875–880.
[28] R. Doriguzzi-Corin and D. Siracusa, “FLAD: Adaptive federated learning for DDoS attack detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024,
Art. no. 103597.
[29] M. Kim, J. Yu, J. Kim, T.-H. Oh, and J. K. Choi, “An iterative method for
unsupervised robust anomaly detection under data contamination,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 13327–13339, Oct.
2024.
[30] Q. Su, B. Tian, H. Wan, and J. Yin, “Anomaly detection under contaminated data with contamination-immune bidirectional GANs,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5605–5620, Nov. 2024.

7028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[31] H. Zhang, L. Cao, P. VanNostrand, S. Madden, and E. A. Rundensteiner, “ELITE: Robust deep anomaly detection with meta gradient,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
pp. 2174–2182.
[32] J. Xu, H. Fan, Q. Wang, Y. Jiang, and Q. Duan, “Adaptive idle model
fusion in hierarchical federated learning for unbalanced edge regions,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 4603–4616, Sep. 2024.
[33] T. Zhang, K.-Y. Lam, and J. Zhao, “Device scheduling and assignment
in hierarchical federated learning for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 18449–18462, May 2024.
[34] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggregation for federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70,
pp. 1142–1154, 2022.
[35] Y. Dong et al., “HorusEye: A realtime IoT malicious traffic detection
framework using programmable switches,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur.
Symp., 2023, pp. 571–588.
[36] J. Yin et al., “Masked memory network for semi-supervised anomaly
detection in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19,
pp. 30636–30647, Oct. 2024.
[37] Z. Li, T. Lin, X. Shang, and C. Wu, “Revisiting weighted aggregation
in federated learning with neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2023, pp. 19767–19788.
[38] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 214–223.
[39] H. Huang, J. Gui, J. Hong, and C. Hua, “HFL-AD: A hierarchical
federated learning framework for solving data contamination in DDoS
detection,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2024, pp. 2376–2381.
[40] Z. Lin et al., “Hierarchical split federated learning: Convergence analysis
and system optimization,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early access,
Apr. 29, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3565509.

[41] J. Liu, X. Wei, X. Liu, H. Gao, and Y. Wang, “Group-based
hierarchical federated learning: Convergence, group formation, and
sampling,” in Proc. 52nd Int. Conf. Parallel Process., Aug. 2023,
pp. 264–273.
[42] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief, “Hierarchical federated learning with quantization: Convergence analysis and system
design,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 2–18,
Jan. 2023.
[43] Y. Deng et al., “A communication-efficient hierarchical
federated learning framework via shaping data distribution at edge,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 3,
pp. 2600–2615, Jun. 2024.
[44] H. Lu et al., “FL-AMM: Federated learning augmented
map
matching
with
heterogeneous
cellular
moving
trajectories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 12,
pp. 3878–3892, Dec. 2023.
[45] E. Owusu et al., “Online network DoS/DDoS detection:
Sampling, change point detection, and machine learning
methods,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 1,
pp. 15–35, 1st Quart., 2024.
[46] Y. S. N. Fotse, V. K. Tchendji, and M. Velempini, “Federated
learning based DDoS attacks detection in large scale softwaredefined network,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 74, no. 1,
pp. 101–115, Jan. 2025.
[47] S. P. Sanon, R. Reddy, C. Lipps, and H. D. Schotten, “DDoS attacks
in communication: Analysis and mitigation of unreliable clients in
federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf.
(CCNC), Jan. 2024, pp. 986–989.
[48] UCI Mach. Learn. Repository. (1997). Census-Income (KDD)
Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
Census+Income