1588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Spatio-Temporal Anomaly Detection for
5G-Clusters: A Multi-Scale Fuzzy Contrastive
Learning Approach
Luo Chao , Member, IEEE, Li Yinghua, Ding Fengqian, and Shao Rui
Abstract— Anomaly detection is an important data-mining
task closely related to specific applications. In recent years,
spatio-temporal data deriving from various networks has been
collected from many real-world scenarios, but how to detect
anomalies in such data is still an open problem. In this article,
we propose a novel anomaly detection framework, Multi-scale
Fuzzy Contrastive Anomaly Detection (MFCAD), by capturing
anomalous patterns of data from multiple spatio-temporal scales
so as to learn distinguishable feature representations. Different
from conventional reconstruction- or prediction-based anomaly
detection methods, this approach is not concerned with the
consistency of the encoded representation of the implicit layer
and the discriminability of the implicit layer of the anomalies.
MFCAD implements a more discriminative representation using
fuzzy contrastive learning and explicitly performs anomaly detection in the potential space by measuring the distance between
outliers and implicit values. This proposed method has been
applied for the anomaly detection of 5G mobile network clusters
(5G-MNCs) in China Mobile. Furthermore, in order to validate
the generalizability of the proposed method, it is further tested
on public datasets and experiment results show the promising
performance.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, fuzzy contrastive learning,
graph learning, spatio-temporal modeling.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection aims to discover anomalous
points/patterns from data that do not match normal
patterns. Anomaly detection plays a key role in many realworld applications, such as network intrusion detection [1],
financial fraud detection [2], equipment failure detection [3],
health monitoring [4], and so on. Mobile networks are the
current infrastructure for wireless communication. In recent
years, 5G mobile networks are gradually replacing 3G/4G
networks. The millimeter wave band of 5G technology brings
Received 8 January 2024; revised 5 August 2024; accepted 2 February 2025;
approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor D. Pei. Date of
publication 17 February 2025; date of current version 20 August 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62172264 and in part by Shandong Provincial Natural
Science Foundation under Grant ZR2019MF020. (Corresponding author:
Luo Chao.)
Luo Chao is with the School of Information Science and Engineering,
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China, and also with Shandong
Provincial Key Laboratory for Novel Distributed Computer Software Technology, Jinan 250014, China (e-mail: luochao@sdnu.edu.cn).
Li Yinghua is with the School of Information Science and Engineering,
Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China.
Ding Fengqian is with the School of Information Science and Engineering,
Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China.
Shao Rui is with the Center of Network Optimization, China Mobile
Shandong Company Ltd., Jinan 250014, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3540091

greater bandwidth and low latency, but it also leads to a
significant increase in the number of wireless base stations.
By the end of June 2023, China has more than 2,937,000
5G base stations for commercial operation and 676 million
5G users. Facing such a huge number of base stations, how
to effectively and timely detect anomalies has become a key
issue in daily operations.
5G mobile network clusters (5G-MNCs) can be defined
as collaborative regional systems within a specific coverage
area formed by a group of highly correlated base stations.
For instance, an example of 5G-MNC is shown in Fig.1,
where each node represents a base station, and the edge
represents the correlation between two base stations. It can
be observed that even within the same cluster, the degree of
mutual influence between base stations varies due to geographical distance. Maintaining the correlation between wireless
base stations is essential for ensuring continuous coverage
and efficient load distribution, facilitating signal switching
and load balancing as users move. To achieve these goals,
collaboration and virtualization techniques are employed to
enable resource sharing and dynamic scheduling within clusters. As a result, data generated by 5G-MNCs exhibits inherent
both spatial and temporal dependencies [5]. Due to the
aforementioned spatio-temporal characteristics, it significantly
increases the complexity of anomaly detection for 5G-MNC
data.
In the field of anomaly detection in mobile networks,
conventional approaches manually set fixed thresholds for
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of different base stations,
which requires the experience of domain experts [6]. Furthermore, these methods are designed for univariate sequences,
which means that each base station is monitored individually.
However, multiple base stations in 5G-MNCs interact with
each other due to the cooperation in a specific coverage
area. Consequently, it is unable to capture the spatio-temporal
synchronization correlations existing in the 5G-MNC data and
cannot reflect the overall state of the system well [5].
Recently, the efficacy of deep learning-based techniques
for anomaly detection has been well-established [7], [8],
[9]. Particularly, Thill et al. [10] introduced an auto-encoder
(AE) model based on temporal convolution, effectively applying it to anomaly detection in electrocardiogram (EEG)
recordings. Li et al. [11] devised a superimposed variational autoencoder (VAE) model employing graphical neural
networks (GNNs) for time series anomaly detection. Deng
and Hooi [12] proposed a predictive model based on GNN,

2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

Fig. 1.

An example of 5G-MNCs.

leveraging the discrepancy between predicted and actual values
to detect anomalies. He and Zhao [13] harnessed Temporal
Convolutional Networks (TCNs) for anomaly detection, utilizing prediction errors to compute anomaly scores. These
methodologies primarily ascertain whether a sample is abnormal by evaluating reconstruction or prediction errors, since
they assumed the model would fail to reconstruct or forecast the unseen abnormal samples. Nonetheless, their focus
primarily rested on reconstruction or prediction performance,
potentially overlooking the distinction between representations
of anomalous and normal samples. As a result, even anomalous
data might be well reconstructed or fitted [14]. Recently,
by possessing the ability to obtain discriminative features,
contrastive learning was also applied in temporal data anomaly
detection [15], [16]. However, existing works did not take into
account spatial factors and the multi-scale characteristics of
data in real applications. Furthermore, these approaches did
not readily apply to anomaly detection within 5G-MNC environments, as commercial 5G networks often exhibit intricate
dynamic temporal-spatial traits.
In this study, we have discovered that anomaly detection can be effectively carried out within the latent space
by measuring the representation distances between outliers
and normal data. Notably, this approach is achieved without
reliance on reconstruction or prediction models. Because the
latent representations are relatively low-dimensional compared
with the original 5G-MNC data with high dimensionality and
complicated structure. Performing anomaly detection on the
compact latent representations helps to concentrate solely on
the features that distinguish normal and anomalous. Based on
this idea, we propose a novel framework named MFCAD,
designed to tackle the challenge of anomaly detection in 5GMNCs. Firstly, we elaborate on an effective data augmentation
method for specific KPI time series in 5G-MNCs, where
fuzzy mechanism is involved for the nonlinear data processing.
And, a multi-scale fuzzy contrastive module is designed to
extract temporal and spatial features from raw data. To capture
anomalous behaviors at different scales, our proposed framework employs two GCN-based models that simultaneously
conduct node-level and subgraph-level contrastive learning.
Subsequently, the data is projected from the temporal and
spatial modules into distinct representations within the latent
space. Considering that KPI time series are often influenced

1589

by external factors and exhibit subtle pattern variations across
different periods, fuzzy C-means (FCM) [17] is applied to
cluster the learned representations from various time steps.
This process aims to derive corresponding prototypes. Finally,
the distances between the representations and their corresponding prototypes are utilized for anomaly inference, thereby
enhancing the robustness of detection performance.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as
follows:
• A novel framework for spatio-temporal anomaly detection is proposed, which not only is notably suitable for 5G
mobile networks in real-world scenario, but also exhibits
good performance on other public datasets.
• A multi-scale contrastive learning is first proposed to
capture anomalous patterns by obtaining temporal and
spatial features at different scales, where differences in
normal and abnormal features at diverse data granularity
are utilized.
• To better generalize the generated positive and negative
samples, intuitionistic fuzzy information is involved in
data augmentation, which combines with multivariate
dynamic time warping (MDTW) to achieve robustly
metric among samples.
• The real 5G-MNC datasets and two sensor datasets are
used for validation. Experimental results demonstrate the
capability of the method to achieve anomaly detection in
real-world scenarios.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series
In many scenarios, spatio-temporal data is presented in
the form of multidimensional time series. Existing researches
on anomaly detection in multivariate time series can generally be divided into two categories: prediction-based [12],
[13] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [18], [19], [20].
Prediction-based models detect anomalies by comparing the
deviation between predicted values and actual values. For
instance, Deng and Hooi [12] proposed a method that combines a graph structural learning module with Graph Neural
Networks (GNN) to detect anomalies based on the deviation between predicted and actual values. He and Zhao [13]
applied a temporal convolutional network for anomaly detection, where the prediction errors are fitted into a multivariate
Gaussian distribution and used to compute anomaly scores.
Reconstruction-based models typically utilize auto-encoders
(AE) or variational auto-encoders (VAE) [10], [19], [20] to
learn representations from normal data and perform anomaly
detection based on the reconstruction error between real samples and reconstructed samples. Thill et al. [10] proposed a
temporal AE architecture for anomaly detection, where the
reconstruction error is used as an indicator of anomalous
data. Su et al. [19] introduced a recursive neural network for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series data, utilizing
reconstruction probability to identify anomalies. Xu et al. [6]
proposed an unsupervised algorithm based on a variational
auto-encoder for anomaly detection in seasonal KPI data.
Zong et al. [20] designed a deep auto-encoder and Gaussian

1590

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Framework of the proposed MFCAD.

mixture model called DAGMM for modeling the density distribution of multi-dimensional data. However, these methods
typically focused solely on anomalies in either the temporal
or spatial aspect. As data with spatio-temporal features often
exhibits interdependencies and mutual influences, previous
methods may overlook underlying influences.
Recently, temporal and spatial dimensions in multivariate
time series have been explored [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26].
For instance, Tian et al. [21] introduced an anomaly detection
network that incorporated temporal and spatial information,
aiming to enhance the differentiation between normal and
anomalous instances by reconstructing the prediction error.
STDTB-AD [22] extracted features from trajectory data by
computing motion statistics within spatio-temporal units to
handle the heterogeneity of behaviors. Hu et al. [24] proposed
an anomaly detection algorithm based on the fusion of target
spatio-temporal context to fully leverage the spatio-temporal
contextual information of the targets for anomaly detection.
3G-Net [25], an end-to-end deep learning framework, was
proposed for detecting anomalies in spatio-temporal data in
the Internet of Things. Wang et al. [26] proposed a framework for anomaly detection based on spatio-temporal graph
neural network, utilizing spatio-temporal graph neural network
technique to extract feature data from information graphs
containing spatial and temporal features.
Both time and space can be divided into different scales.
For example, the difference in sampling frequency on the
temporal dimension leads to differences in the details of
data fluctuation features. And, the differences in the scope
of data aggregation at the spatial scale will affect the learning
of relevant features of adjacent data. However, the existing
methods commonly did not consider the impact on multiple
spatio-temporal scales. And, most methods also relied on the
reconstruction or prediction. Here, we incorporate multi-scale
spatio-temporal features into contrastive learning and perform

the anomaly detection in a compact latent space without
relying on reconstruction or prediction models.
B. Multi-Scale Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised approach. It has
achieved significant performance in the fields of computer
vision (CV) [27] and natural language processing (NLP)
[28]. The objective of contrastive learning is to learn better
feature representations of unlabeled data through unsupervised
learning, maximizing the consistency between samples and
their augmentations, thereby facilitating their application in
downstream tasks [29]. Many researchers have explored the
application of contrastive learning in representation learning
for time series data [30], [31], [32]. Tonkaboni et al. [30] proposed a self-supervised framework for learning a generalized
representation of non-stationary time series. Eldele et al. [31]
designed an unsupervised learning framework that leverages
time and context for contrastive learning, learning representations of time series. Zhong et al. [32] applied contrastive
learning to clustering to increase inter-class differences and
reduce intra-class differences. However, these methods overlook the complex relationships among spatio-temporal data.
In recent years, researchers in the field of graph anomaly
detection have adopted multi-scale contrastive methods [33],
[34], [35], [36], [37]. For example, Jin et al. [33] proposed
ANEMONE, a framework based on multi-scale contrastive
learning that captures richer anomaly information through
node-level and context-level contrasts. Zheng et al. [34]
introduced a self-supervised learning framework called SLGAD. This approach utilized multi-scale contrastive methods
to construct different contextual views, allowing for the capture of anomalies in structural space and enabling graph
anomaly detection. Zhang et al. [35] integrated multi-view
contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction-based models
to address anomaly detection in attribute networks. However,

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

these existing methods did not fully exploit the intrinsic
relationships among spatio-temporal data.
Recently, temporal data anomaly detection employing contrastive learning is attracting the attention of researchers. For
instance, in 2023, MGCLAD [15] adopted contrastive learning to capture multiple dependencies of signals to enhance
the discriminative power of feature representations. Meanwhile, DCdetector [16] introduced a dual-attention asymmetric
design that utilized contrastive learning to learn features
obtaining an invariant representation. Both of the above studies
achieved relatively competitive performance in time series
anomaly detection by utilizing contrastive learning. However,
there are still some open problems. Firstly, existing works
mainly focused on temporal data. But, as to spatial-temporal
data, more complex correlations and mutual influence existing
in both temporal and spatial dimensions. In this case, how can
one implement anomaly detection applying contrastive learning to obtain discriminative feature learning? Secondly, both
temporal and spatial dimensions essentially have multi-scale
characteristics, and obtaining various features from different
scales is meaningful. But existing works still extracted features
from temporal data based on a single scale, often neglecting
the learning of multi-scale spatial features.
Motivated by this insight, this study transforms
spatio-temporal data into corresponding graph structures and
applies multi-scale contrastive methods from both temporal
and spatial perspectives to capture more comprehensive
anomaly information. Through contrastive learning, the
learned latent representations can effectively distinguish
outliers from normal values.
III. M ETHOD
The proposed MFCAD framework is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The data augmentation module is used to generate enhanced
positive and negative samples for subsequent feature learning
from the raw 5G-MNC data. Subsequently, the spatio-temporal
data is transformed into corresponding graph structures. Correspondingly, multi-scale contrastive learning is then performed
from temporal and spatial perspectives. And, two graph attention networks are involved, as GAT has the inherent capacity
for relational modeling and the contrastive loss ensures the
discriminability of representations in the latent space. The
following sections provide more detailed information.
A. Problem Formulation
In this article, we transform the problem into an anomaly
detection task for spatio-temporal data with multiple variables.
The anomalous behaviors of neighboring nodes are to be
captured by converting the spatio-temporal features into graph
structures. Each univariate sequence represents a specific Key
Performance Indicator (KPI) sequence generated by a base station in 5G-MNCs. The KPI data in mobile networks typically
exhibit temporal correlations within each dimension sequence
(i.e., periodicity of sequences generated by a particular base
station) and spatial correlations between different dimension
sequences (i.e., collaborative relationships among base stations in a specific coverage area). We consider a dataset Ω

1591

Fig. 3.

Framework of the designed data augmentation method.

containing observations of 5G-MNCs as Ω = {X1 , X2 , . . . ,Xt ,
Xt = [Xt,1 , X t,2 , . . . , X t,B ], Xt,i ∈ RN ×T (e.g.Xt,1 =
[ 1t , 2t , . . . , Tt ]), where Xt covers one time period, such as an
hour, a day, or a week. Xt is divided into B segments (denoted
as Xt,i ) and each segment occupies T samples (denoted as
xTt ). N is the amount of the observed base stations. The
objective of this task is to design a learning framework to
learn discriminative representations for distinguishing normal
and anomalous behaviors, thus achieving anomaly detection
in spatio-temporal data.
B. Data Augmentation
Generally, contrastive learning frameworks aim to maximize
the similarity between positive pairs, which are samples and
their augmentations. Therefore, applying appropriate data augmentation is crucial in contrastive learning. Considering that
the KPI time series generated by 5G-MNCs typically exhibit
periodic patterns that occur regularly, we propose a specific
data augmentation method that treats data from the same time
period as positive samples and data from different time periods
as negative samples. The motivation behind this method is that
the patterns during the time period from 9:00 to 10:00 differs
from the one from 23:00 to 24:00, but which is similar to
the patterns during the identical time period on the previous
day. Because people’s behaviors may vary across different
time periods. The abstract framework of the designed data
augmentation method is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Specifically, given a batch of data, and the batch covers
only one period, which can be an hour, a day, or a week.
Here, the batch covers one day. For each batch, its previous
M batches are considered as its candidate batches. It is worth
noting that there are also slight differences between the same
time in different cycles. For example, people’s behaviors on
Monday morning may differ from those on Sunday morning.

1592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

To alleviate this phenomenon, multivariate dynamic time warping (MDTW) [35] is applied to select the top augmented
batches that are most similar to the current batch from the
M candidates. Specifically, the augmentation set selected for
Xt is as follows:

+ VX′t (Xt,i ) −v X′j (Xj,i )

dist,j = M DT W (Xt , Xj ) , j = 1, 2, . . . , M
φaug
= {Xk | k ∈ arg sort(dist, ) [: K]}
t

(1)
(2)

where dist, represents the MDTW distance of batch Xt
with the other M candidate batches, and φaug
denotes the
t
augmentation set for Xt with K augmentation batches. The
samples with the same index from the current batch and
its augmentation batches are considered as positive samples,
while those with different indexes as negative samples. To be
specific, for Xt,i in the current batch, its positive sample in the
k-th augmentation segment is Xk,i , and for all Xk,j (j ̸= i)
are its negative samples.
The data collected in real scenes is often affected by noise
and external interference. To improve the robustness of detection, the generated positive and negative samples need to have
generality. In this article, intuitionistic fuzzy set is introduced
into data augmentation, based on which MDTW distances are
calculated [39], [40]. Specifically, given a segment of data
Xt,i , it passes through a fuzzy operator to generate the output
data. First, the membership degree is calculated as follows:
t,i −µt,i
σt,i +ξ

X

U (Xt,i ) = e

2

 21
(5)


The distance between X′t and X′j is d X′t , X′j . And it satisfies
the following properties:

(1) 0 ≤ d X′t , X′j ≤ 1;
′
(2) d(Xt , X′j ) = d(X′t , X′j );
′
(3) d(Xt , X′j ) = 0, if and only if X′t = X′j .
The Hamming distance formula and the cosine similarity
function are also explored to compute the distance between
two fuzzy sets for measuring the closeness of their relationship. The Hamming distance formula is as follows:

d X′t , X′j


{[U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]} ,
=d
{[U (Xj,i ) , V (Xj,i )] , . . . , [U (Xj,B ) , V (Xj,B )]}
B
1 Xn
=
|UX′t (Xt,i ) − UX′j (Xj,i ) |
B i=1
o
+ |VX′t (Xt,i ) − VX′j (Xj,i ) |
(6)
And the cosine similarity function is as follows (7), as
shown at the bottom of the next page.
In the experimental section, we conducted an investigation
of three different calculation methods. The experiment proved
that utilizing the Euclidean distance for calculating the distance between two intuitionistic fuzzy sets works better.

2

(3)

where µt,i is the mean of Xt,i , σt,i is the standard deviation
of Xt,i , ξ belongs a very small decimal set to prevent zero in
the denominator.
Considering the uncertainty of membership degrees, hesitation [41] indicates a greater degree of uncertainty. To adapt
to fluctuations in sequence data, refer to [41], the hesitation
degree can be obtained online based on Femi formula as
follows:
1
V (Xt,i ) =
+ ϵu(Xt,i )
(4)
1 + exp (u(Xt,i ))
where ϵ is the interference value, which is set to 0.25 based
on discussion in the experimental section.
As a result, each segment is converted into the intuitionistic
fuzzy set that encompasses both membership degrees and
′
hesitations as follows: Xt,i
= [U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , X′t =
{[U (Xt,1 ) , V (Xt,1 )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )].
Thus, MDTW distance is to calculate the distance between
two intuitionistic fuzzy sets. Here, three distance methods are
applied, i.e. the Euclidean distance, Hamming distance and
the cosine similarity. The calculation method of Euclidean
distance between two intuitionistic fuzzy sets is as follows:

d X′t , X′j


{[U (Xt,i ) , V (Xt,i )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]} ,
=d
{[U (Xj,i ) , V (Xj,i )] , . . . , [U (Xj,B ) , V (Xj,B )]}
(
B 
2
1 X
=
UX′t (Xt,i ) − UX′j (Xj,i )
B i=1

C. Multi-Scale Contrastive Modules
Spatio-temporal data typically exhibit intrinsic correlations
in both temporal and spatial dimensions. Consequently, data
with spatio-temporal characteristics often display interdependence and mutual influence. From the perspective of spatial
features, taking 5G-MNC data as an example, one can naturally obtain a graph structure as shown in Fig.1. Therefore,
given that graph neural networks have demonstrated strong
capabilities in processing graph-structured data, we choose to
convert spatio-temporal data into graph structures and utilize
graph learning methods for anomaly detection. Furthermore,
the dependencies within spatio-temporal data are typically
nonlinear and exhibit different characteristics across various
temporal and spatial scales. Therefore, single-scale analysis
methods are often insufficient for comprehensively revealing
anomaly patterns in the data. To capture the comprehensive
anomaly information present in spatio-temporal data, a multiscale spatio-temporal contrastive module is designed. This
module enhances the ability to detect anomalies by learning
consistency information at different scales. Based on this
intuition, we develop a multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive
module that integrates temporal and spatial features to capture
more anomaly information.
The multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive module includes
two main components: the multi-scale module and the Graph
Attention Network (GAT) module. In the multi-scale module,
it mainly includes a node-subgraph contrastive network and a
subgraph-subgraph contrastive network.
In the node-subgraph contrastive network, the primary
objective is to capture anomalous information by comparing

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

1593

the temporal encoder Etemp is Xitemp . The feature extraction
formula is as follows:

i
Fspat
= conv Xispat
(8)

i
i
Ftemp = conv Xtemp
(9)

Fig. 4.

An example of the temporal subgraph construction process.

the consistency between node information and its neighboring
information. Node-level anomalies can cause their neighboring nodes to exhibit abnormal patterns, meaning that local
anomalies can also trigger global anomalies. By learning the
consistency of local and global information, the model can
capture potential anomalous features. Specifically, the target
node and the corresponding subgraph need to be mapped
into the same embedding space. For subgraph embeddings,
node features are propagated and aggregated through GCN,
followed by obtaining the final embedding representation via
an average readout function. The target node is mapped to
the same embedding space as the subgraph through a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). To measure the consistency between
subgraph embeddings and target node embeddings, a bilinear
function is used for calculation. The subgraph-subgraph contrastive network has a similar structure to the node-subgraph
network. It primarily captures anomalies by comparing different subgraphs, identifying differences and irregularities in the
data.
For example, consider base stations that record network performance indicators (KPIs) at different time points. These base
stations can be taken as nodes in the graph, with edges between
nodes representing their geographical proximity. To detect
anomalies, we first generate subgraphs from different time
segments. The node-subgraph contrastive network learns the
features of each base station in different time segments and
checks whether these features are consistent with those of its
neighboring base stations. The subgraph-subgraph contrastive
network captures anomalous information between entire subgraphs. When cross effects of multiple base stations within
a certain time segment exhibit abnormal patterns, that time
segment might have a global anomaly. For the segment Xt,1 =
[ 1t , 2t , . . . , Tt ], 1t ∈ RN ×1 the procedure of constructing
temporal subgraphs is shown in Fig. 4.
Before entering the multi-scale module, two parallel
1D convolution operations are initially applied to extract
high-level features from both temporal and spatial perspectives. Typically, given an input sample X i ∈ RN ×T , the
input to the spatial encoder Espat is Xispat and the input to

cosin = Dot X′t , X′j

i
i
where Fspat
and Ftemp
are the high-level features of the spatial
and temporal views of the augmentation data, respectively.
1) Node-Subgraph Contrastive Network: Specifically, in the
node-subgraph contrastive network, the subgraphs are used as
inputs, and graph convolutional networks (GCN) are employed
for learning. GCN is a deep learning model based on graph
structures, which allows for the propagation and aggregation
of node features on graphs. First, the l-th node embedding in
the subgraph obtained through GCN is as follows:


]
ℓs
ℓs
ℓs
Hspat = GCN Aspat Mspat Wspat
!
− 12
− 12
]
^
ℓs ^
ℓs
ℓs
ℓs
A
D
M
W
(10)
=σ D
spat

spat

ℓt
= GCN
Htemp



spat

spat

^
ℓt
ℓt
A
temp Mtemp Wtemp

^
ℓt
=σ D
temp

− 12

^
^
ℓt
ℓt
A
temp Dtemp

spat



− 12

!
ℓt
Mtemp
Wtemp

(11)

where ℓs and ℓt are the ℓ-th node in the spatial and temporal
ls
subgraphs respectively. Mspat
is the ℓ-th node feature matrix


]
ℓs
= Aℓs + I is the adjacency
in the spatial subgraph. A
spat

spat

^
ℓs
matrix added self-loop. D
spat is the degree matrix. Wspat is
the weight matrix of the GCN layer. σ (· ) is the activation
function, here the ReLU activation function is used.
ℓs
ℓt
Then, Hspat
and Htemp
are mapped to an embedding space
using an embedding function f (·), resulting in embedding
representations. The embedding representations are obtained
as:


ℓs
s
= f Hspat
(12)
Zℓspat


ℓt
t
Zℓtemp
= f Htemp
(13)
The final representations of the subgraphs are then computed by a Readout function, and here we use the average
function.
sub

sub
Zspat
= AvgReadout

spat
s


X
Zℓspat
s
Zℓspat
=
sub

ℓs =1

(14)

spat

sub

sub
Ztemp
= AvgReadout



t
Zℓtemp



=

temp
t
X
Zℓtemp

ℓt =1

sub
temp

(15)


PB

=r

i=1 {[U (xt,i ) · U (Xj,i )] + [V (xt,i ) · V (Xj,i )]}
n
o rP
n
n
o
PB n
2
2
B
2
2
[U
(X
)]
+
[V
(X
)]
×
[U
(X
)]
+
[V
(X
)]
t,i
t,i
j,i
j,i
i=1
i=1

(7)

1594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

sub
where sub
spat and temp are the numbers of nodes in the spatial
and temporal subgraphs respectively.
For the target node, we use multilayer perceptron (MLP)
to map it into the same embedding space as the subgraph.
The time step node embedding is similarly to the target
node. The feature matrix of the target node is denoted as
node
Mspat
. The calculation process of MLP is as follows:


node
node
node
Zspat
= M LP Mspat
Wspat = σ Mspat
Wspat
(16)


node
node
node
Ztemp = M LP Mtemp Wtemp = σ Mtemp Wtemp (17)

3) Advanced Feature Extraction: To fully utilize the spatial
and temporal structure information of the graph network to
detect anomalous behaviors, two parallel GAT layers with
multi-head attention mechanisms are used to capture the
relationships between nodes. For a general graph with n nodes,
i.e., {h1 , h2 , . . . ,hn }, adj is the adjacency matrix constructed
from the nodes. The output of the GAT layer is as follows:

Here, the weight is shared with the GCN.
To measure the consistency between the subgraph embedding and the target node embedding, a bilinear function is
utilized to calculate the similarity between them.

After that, a global maximum pooling operation is used to
extract the key features.

n−s
sub
node
sub
node
Sspat
= Bilinear(Zspat
, Zspat
) = Zspat
WBiliner Zspat

(18)
n−s
sub
node
sub
node
Stemp
= Bilinear(Ztemp
, Ztemp
) = Ztemp
WBiliner Ztemp

(19)
where WBiliner is the weight matrix of the bilinear function.
2) Subgraph-Subgraph
Contrastive
Network:
The
subgraph-subgraph contrastive network is similar in
structure to the node-subgraph contrastive network. The
final embedding representations of the subgraphs obtained in
the subgraph-subgraph contrastive network are as follows:

 X sub Zℓs
spat
spat
sub
s
Zspat
= AvgReadout Zℓspat
=
sub
ℓs =1

spat

 X sub′ Zℓs
′
spat
spat
sub
s
Zspat
= AvgReadout Zℓspat
=
sub′
ℓs =1
spat

 X sub Zℓt
temp
temp
sub
t
Ztemp
= AvgReadout Zℓtemp
=
sub
ℓt =1
temp
′
ℓ
t


sub
X
Z
temp
temp
sub′
t
Ztemp
= AvgReadout Zℓtemp
=
′
sub
ℓt =1
temp

(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)

′

sub
to denote the embedding representation of
Here, we use Zspat
′
another subgraph and sub
spat to denote the number of nodes in
another subgraph.
Next, the same bilinear function is used to compute their
similarity.




′



sub
sub′
Ztemp
, Ztemp

′

s−s
sub
sub
sub
′
sub
Sspat
= Bilinear Zspat
, Zspat
= Zspat
WBiliner
Zspat

(24)
s−s
Stemp
= Bilinear



sub
′
sub′
= Ztemp
WBiliner
Ztemp

(25)
Finally, the results of the node-subgraph contrastive network
and the subgraph-subgraph contrastive network are concatenated using a concatenation operation to serve as the inputs
for the next step.

n−s
s−s
i
Sspat
= concat Sspat
, Sspat
(26)

n−s
s−s
i
Stemp = concat Stemp , Stemp
(27)

i
Gispat = GatConv(Sspat
, adj)

(28)

i
Gitemp = GatConv(Stemp
, adj)

(29)

i
Pspat
= GlobalM axP ool(Gispat )

(30)

i
Ptemp
= GlobalM axP ool(Gitemp )

(31)

The fully connected layer is then used to obtain the most
representative feature representations.
i
i
rspat
= Dense(Pspat
)

(32)

i
i
rtemp
= Dense(Ptemp
)

(33)

Finally, a project layer fproj is used to obtain a fused
representation:
i
i
Zi = fproj (rspat
⊕ rtemp
)

(34)

The obtained fusion results are called time-slice embeddings
(TSEs) because they represent the embedded potential representations in a certain time slice.
4) Loss Function: To ensure that time slice embeddings
(TSEs) from different time slices are distinguishable in potential space, a customized loss of contrast is designed. TSEs with
the same indices from the current batch and its augmentation
batch are considered positive samples, while TSEs with different indices are considered negative samples. Let Xt denote
the current batch and Xk denote its k-th augmentation batch.
Then Xt,i ∈ Xt and Xk,i ∈ Xk are form a positive input
′
sample pair, and zt,i and zk,i
are the corresponding learned
TSEs. The loss of contrast between the current batch and its
k-th augmented batch can be expressed as:


. 
′
exp sim zt,i , zk,i
τ
XB


. 
Lk = −
log P
B
i=1
′
τ
j=1 I[i̸=j] exp sim zt,i , zk,j
(35)
where I[i̸=j]∈{0,1} is an indicator function and is 1 when i̸= j,
0 otherwise. τ is a temperature parameter. The total loss is the
weighted sum of the current batch and its corresponding K
augmented batches, as follows:
XK βk
L=
Lk
(36)
k=1 B
where βk is the coefficient between the current batch and its
k-th augmentation batch, and its formula is:
dist,k
βk = PK
u=1 dist,u

(37)

The training procedure of the proposed method is summarized
in Algorithm 1.

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm of the Proposed Method
Input: Training set Ω = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt }, where
Xt = [Xt,1 , Xt,2 , . . . , Xt,B ].
M : The number of candidate batches.
K : The number of augmented batches.
Output: A trained MFCAD model with parameters sets Θ.
for each iteration do
for current batch Xt in Ω do
Step1: Select M candidate batches for Xt .
Step2: For each Xt,i in Xt fuzzy the data into an
intuitive fuzzy set containing membership degrees and
hesitation degrees:
Xt′ =
{[U (Xt,1 ) , V (Xt,1 )] , . . . , [U (Xt,B ) , V (Xt,B )]}.
Step3: Calculate the MDTW distance between current
batch and its candidate augmented batches to obtain the
top-K candidates so as to form augmentation setφaug
.
t
Step4: Feed Xt and its augmented batches from φaug
t
into the multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive model
to obtain the generated TSEs for forming sample pairs.
Step5: Calculate the batch loss using Eq. (36).
Step6: Use optimizer to train the model.
end for
end for

D. Anomaly Detection
To achieve anomaly detection in latent space, a clustering
method is applied for each group of TSEs, where the clustering
centers are regarded as the corresponding prototypes. To this
end, the FCM clustering method is utilized. Given a group of
TSEs Zt = {zt,1 , zt,2 , . . . , zt,B }, where zt,i denotes the i-th
learned TSE from the t-th group. Calculating the clustering
centers can be achieved by minimizing the following problem.
XC XB
2
minJ =
um
rp (zt,i − ct,r )
r=1
i=1
XC
s.t.
um
∀i = 1, 2, . . . , B
(38)
ri = 1,
r=1

where C is the number of centers for a group, ct,r is the r-th
center for the t-th TSE group, um
ri is the membership degree
of sample i belonging to the r-th center, and m is a weighted
index. The ℓ2 distance between the TSE and its corresponding
prototypes is used to measure the inference score:

st,i = min ∥zt,i − ct,1 ∥2 , ∥zt,i − ct,2 ∥2 , . . . , ∥zt,i − ct,C ∥2
(39)
where st,i is the inference score for the i-th TSE which
calculates the minimum ℓ2 distance between the TSE and
its corresponding prototypes. An input sample is considered
anomalous if its TSE is distant from all the corresponding prototypes. Specifically, we identify an anomaly if the inference
score is larger than a threshold, where the Drift Peak Over
Threshold (DPOT) [44] is adopted to choose the threshold
dynamically.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, the datasets and experimental settings are
introduced. Subsequently, the performances of MFCAD are
assessed using real-world 5G-MNC data and public datasets.

1595

An interpretation analysis is then presented, followed by conducting ablation studies and sensitivity analyses. Additionally,
ablation studies and sensitivity analyses are carried out. Lastly,
the model’s generalizability is validated by applying it to an
industrial dataset.
A. 5G-MNC Dataset Description
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the
real-world 5G-MNC datasets are used. The datasets are collected by China Mobile Communication, and they contain the
KPI records from two 5G-MNCs. Wherein, MNC 1 contains
11 base stations, and MNC 2 contains 4 base stations. The
selected KPI for performing anomaly detection is the number
of Radio Resource Control (RRC) connection establishment
requests, and the KPI data is aggregated every 15 minutes.
The time period is from 3rd Sep 2021 to 3rd Jan 2022, and
the first two months of historical records are used as a training
set and validation set, and the rest serves as a test set. The
statistics of the two MNCs are shown in Table I.
In practical scenarios, anomalies within a 5G-MNC generally manifest in a continuous manner. Consequently, for two
datasets, the anomalies are annotated segment-wise, i.e., if a
segment contains an anomalous pattern, the entire segment
is annotated as anomalous. The annotation of anomaly labels
is carried out by domain experts from China Mobile. Two
illustrative examples are provided in Fig. 5. In the green area of
Fig. 5(a), there is an obvious boost in a base station. However,
sudden changes in a certain base station do not mean anomalies in the whole network system. While in Fig. 5(b), one
can find that the areas marked in red demonstrate anomalous
patterns compared to the other areas, which indicates there are
anomalies occurring in the system.
B. Experimental Settings
1) Evaluation Metric: To measure and evaluate the performance of the method, three common metrics, precision, recall,
and F1-score are utilized. These metrics are derived from the
following expressions:
TP
(40)
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
(41)
TP + FN
2 · P recision · Recall
F 1 − score =
(42)
P recision + Recall
where TP is the true positives, FP represents the false
positives, and FN stands for the false negatives. In real
applications, the anomalies generally occur in a continuous
manner, thus we do not care about the point-wise metrics.
Following the same evaluation strategy as [17], we mark the
whole segment as positive if any anomalous observation is in
this segment.
2) Baselines: We compare the proposed method with stateof-the-art anomaly detection methods, which are AE [45],
VAE [46], Local Outlier Factor (LOF) [47], Isolation Forest
(IF) [48], LSTM-VAE [49], DAGMM [20], MGCLAD [15],
and DCdetector [16]. Specifically, all the baselines follow the
P recision =

1596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

TABLE I
DATASET S TATISTICS

Fig. 6. Two clusters of 5G-MNCs (each marker denotes a base station) and
corresponding heat maps of weighted adjacency matrixes.

is computed based on the distances among base stations in the
mobile networked cluster. The weighted adjacency matrix can
be formed as:
!

2
2

 exp − ηij , i ̸= j and exp(− ηij ) ≥ ò
σ2
σ2
aij =


0,
otherwise.
(43)

Fig. 5.

Examples of 5G-MNC data.

architecture proposed in the original articles. Since not all
the anomaly detection methods are designed for 5G-MNC
anomaly detection, we performed all possible thresholds for
every model and reported the experimental results according
to the highest F1-score.
3) Implementation Details: The proposed method is implemented in Tensorflow Library and is trained on a 64-bit
Intel core i7-6700CPU@ 3.40GHz/16GB RAM configuration
computer. The Adam optimizer with learning rate is used for
training, and the training epochs are set to 50. The time slice
length T is set to 8, which means each time slice contains two
hours for sampling.
C. Data Preprocessing
Generally, there are often missing values and huge spike
values involved in the original data. Since the ratio of these
values is less than 5% in each series, just as in [50], we simply
remove the data that deviates the most from the mean value
and replace them with their neighboring normal observations.
Besides, we perform data normalization on both training and
testing sets to improve the robustness of the proposed method.
Furthermore, same as [51], the adjacency matrix of a 5G-MNC

where aij is the weight of the edge, and it is determined by
ηij , which is the distance between base station i and j. σ 2 and
ò are the thresholds to control the distribution and sparsity of
adjacency matrix, and they are set to 1e-5 and 0.3 in this work.
The two selected 5G-MNCs and corresponding heat maps of
weighted adjacency matrixes are shown as Fig. 6.
D. Parameter Comparison
During the experiment, we found that setting a suitable
interference value when calculating the hesitation degree can
better reflect the uncertainty. By setting different interference
values for exploration, the experimental results show that the
model’s performance is best when the interference value is set
to 0.25. That is to say, the experimental performance metrics,
including recall, precision, and f1 score, are relatively high
when the interference value is set to 0.25. This can be visually
presented in Fig. 7.
An appropriate distance formula is needed to measure the
similarity between two fuzzy sets when calculating the MDTW
distance. In this paper, we explore three distance formulas
including Euclidean distance, Hamming distance, and cosine
similarity function. The experimental results demonstrate that
using Euclidean distance yields the best performance compared to the Hamming distance and cosine similarity function.
This can be observed in Fig. 8.
E. Experimental Results
In this subsection, we conduct experiments on real-world
5G-MNC datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of MFCAD.

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

1597

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE OF WADI AND SWAT DATASETS ON D IFFERENT BASELINES

Fig. 7.

Experimental effects at different interference values.

anomaly detection method, like DAGMM, tries to predict the
values based on historical data and performs anomaly detection according to the forecasting errors. However, some data
are inherently unpredictable due to various internal/external
factors, especially complex, dynamic mobile network data.
Therefore, normal observations would be easily mistakenly
detected by DAGMM and cause a false positive. In the
proposed MFCAD, the spatio-temporal patterns of the original
data at different time intervals in a cycle are fully explored.
Moreover, MFCAD detects anomalies in latent space, which
does not require reconstruction or prediction of features. This
further mitigates the potential errors introduced by the model
itself. Therefore, MFCAD achieves the best performance compared with other methods.
F. Visualized Explanation

Fig. 8.

Experimental effects of using different distance formulas.

The overall experimental results of MFCAD with six methods
are demonstrated in Table II, where the best F1-score achieved
is in bold.
IF and LOF achieve the lowest F1-score since they are both
unsupervised anomaly detection methods that do not capture
temporal and spatial information. However, the information
hidden in the raw data is critical for anomaly detection.
AE, VAE, and LSTM-VAE are reconstruction-based anomaly
detection methods, which use sequential data as input so
that the temporal information can be retained. Nonetheless,
reconstruction-based anomaly detection methods mainly focus
on the performance of sample reconstruction, and do not care
about the distinguishability of the encoded features for abnormal and normal samples. Thus, it would cause even abnormal
data to be well reconstructed. Moreover, the prediction-based

To explain the performance of the proposed method on 5GMNC data, the TSEs from the same time slice generated
by MNC 1 in different cycles are visualized in Fig. 9.
From the figure, one can see that most TSEs are gathered
together indicating normal patterns, while the abnormal TSEs
are farther apart. To validate this phenomenon, we show the
original data corresponding to several of these TSEs. Upon
observation, one can see that the TSEs of A and E behave
abnormally, while the others behave normally.
Furthermore, to demonstrate the relationships between different TSEs, we also project all the learned TSEs into 2D
embedding space for visualization. The t-SNE plot is shown in
Fig. 10 where each colored point denotes an embedding vector
of TSE from a different time slice and different colored star
symbols represent the corresponding prototypes for each group
of TSEs. From the figure, one can see that the TSEs have a
significant aggregation phenomenon. It indicates that the TSEs
from the same time slices share similar patterns, while the
TSEs from different time slices share distinct patterns.
G. Ablation Study
In this subsection, the MNC 1 dataset is used for analyzing
the influence of different modules in the model. Detailly,

1598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 9. A t-SNE plot of the TSEs from same time slice and the time patterns
corresponding to five of these TSEs.

The designed data augmentation method enables a robust
contextual representation for each time slice in a cycle, therefore, a performance decrease is observed after disabling data
augmentation. Performing anomaly detection by the distance
between two TSEs of adjacent cycles uses only local information, while global information cannot be utilized, thus the
variant without clustering performs poorly. In conclusion, the
ablation of any of the modules in the designed architecture
leads to poorer performance. The variant without a multi-scale
contrastive module solely captures anomalies from a single
scale. This restricts its capacity to capture anomalous patterns
in neighboring time or space. As a result, its performance is
diminished. In summary, the removal of any module within the
architectural design can result in a decline in performance.
H. Sensitivity Analysis

Fig. 10. A t-SNE plot of different TSEs. Each color represents a different
time slice of a cycle, and the star symbols indicate the prototypes of each
group of TSEs.
TABLE III
C OMPARISON W ITH D IFFERENT VARIANTS

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AND BASELINES

we perform an ablation study by disabling a certain module
of MFCAD. Wherein, w/o spatial denotes the variant without
spatial GAT layer, and w/o temporal denotes the variant
without temporal GAT layer. We also compare MFCAD with
the variant that simply uses the last consecutive cycle as an
augmentation set and it is denoted by w/o data augmentation.
The variant denoted by w/o clustering performs anomaly
detection by using the distance between the two TSEs of
adjacent cycles to analyze the effect of the cluster module. w/o
multi-scale denotes the variant without multi-scale contrastive
module. The results are shown in Table III, from which one can
see that all the above modules of MFCAD are indispensable.
The variant without temporal or spatial module extracts
features from only one view, which prevents the full exploration of the spatial and temporal correlation of the data.

In this subsection, experiments using the MNC 1 dataset to
analyze the sensitivity of MFCAD have been done. Specifically, the dimension of TSEs D, the candidate augmentation
set size M , and the top-K augmentation set size K are utilized
for analysis. Fig. 11(a) shows the impact of a key hyperparameter D. Increasing the dimension of TSEs can improve
the capability of representation. However, a larger dimension
can harm performance as it adds redundant information.
Therefore, we empirically set the value of D to 18. Fig. 11(b)
demonstrates the results of varying M and K in a range since
they are used jointly to control the size of the data augmentation. According to the results, the F1 score shows an upward
trend with the increase of M and K and tend to flatten out at
the end. Such results demonstrate that applying an appropriate
size of data augmentation can improve the performance, while
excessive augmented data cannot guarantee the robustness of
the learned representations and further increase the burden of
training. Therefore, in practice, K is set to 3 and M is set
to 7.
Furthermore, in anomaly detection of multivariate time
series, the window size has an important impact on the
performance of the model. Different window sizes affect the
model’s ability to capture anomalies and its detection accuracy.
Therefore, we explore the effect of window size on model
performance using the 5G-MNC datasets. The experimental
results are shown in Fig. 12. The performance is relatively
good when the window size is around 12. And too large or
too small size will make the model performance decrease.
I. Industrial Data Applications
1) Datasets: To further verify the generality of the proposed
method, two sensor datasets based on water treatment physical
testbed systems SWaT and WADI are used for validation.
The SWaT dataset is derived from a water treatment testbed
coordinated by the Public Utilities Board of Singapore, which
is a dataset used for cybersecurity field research based on a
dataset of actual water treatment systems. The SWaT dataset
consists of 11 days of continuous operation, of which 7 days
of data were collected under normal operation, while 4 days
of data were collected through attack scenarios. WADI is
an extension of SWaT that absorbs some of the reverse

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

Fig. 11.

Sensitive experiments on partial hyper-parameters.

Fig. 12.

The effect of window size on the performance of model.

osmosis permeate and raw water from SWaT, thereby forming a complete and authentic water treatment, storage, and
distribution network. The WADI dataset consisted of 14 days
of continuous normal operation and 2 days of data collection
based on attack scenarios. The statistics for the two datasets
are shown in Table IV. The two datasets are available at
https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/ .
2) Baselines:
• KNN: Categories are determined by majority vote or
weighted average based on the distance between the
sample to be tested and the individual samples in the
training set [52].
• FB: The input signal is decomposed into a number of
subbands of different frequencies and a different filter is
applied to each subband for feature extraction [53].
• AE: The basic structure consists of an encoder and
decoder that learns a compressed representation of the
input data by minimizing the reconstruction error. Anomaly
detection is performed based on the reconstruction [54].
• DAGMM: Combine a self-encoder with a Gaussian
mixture model. Learning the representation of the data

1599

through the self-encoder and then using Gaussian mixture
models to model the normal data [20].
• LSTM-VAE: It Combines LSTM and variational selfencoder. By learning the temporal dependencies and
latent spatial representations of the data, anomalous
samples may exhibit different sequence patterns than
normal samples, allowing anomaly detection by comparing the distribution of reconstruction errors or latent
variables [49].
• MAD-GAN: It is a multi-class anomaly detection method
based on generative adversarial networks. By training
generators and discriminators, MAD-GAN can generate
normal samples and distinguish abnormal samples [55].
• GDN: This approach combines graph neural networks
and graph structure learning to identify anomalies by
leveraging graph attention-based prediction errors [12].
• STADN: Spatio-temporal information is combined and
anomaly detection is performed using GAT and Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [21].
• MGCLAD: MGCLAD utilizes a multi-view graph
contrastive learning approach. It considers both the
intra-signal graph structure and the relationship between
different signals to improve the performance of anomaly
detection [15].
• DCdetector: DCdetector is a state-of-the-art contrastive
learning-based anomaly detection method. It designs a
dual-branch attention structure based on contrastive learning to learn a permutation-invariant representation and
guides the learning process by using contrastive loss [16].
3) Effectiveness Assessment: We compare the precision,
recall, and F1 score of the proposed method MFCAD with the
baseline, and the results are presented in Table V. Based on the
experimental data, one can observe that MFCAD outperforms
all baseline methods in terms of F1 scores on both datasets,
showing significant improvement. F1 scores peak at 0.98 and
0.98, respectively. In addition, MFCAD improves the recall
to 97.43% and 99.78%. Higher recall value indicates that the
model can cover almost all anomalous samples. This proves
the effectiveness of MFCAD in anomaly detection tasks, as it
is able to capture the vast majority of anomalous samples.
And, ablation experiments are conducted on the WADI and
SWaT datasets shown in Table VI, which further verify the
effectiveness of each module to the model performance.
To comprehensively evaluate the proposed method, we further incorporate AUROC and AUPRC metrics. AUROC
measures the balance between the true positive rate and the
false positive rate at different thresholds and is commonly used
to assess the performance of classification models. The closer
the value is to 1, the better the model’s performance. AUPRC
focuses on the balance between precision and recall, with
higher values indicating better model performance. We compare the proposed method with two state-of-the-art models.
As shown in the table VII, the proposed method performs
well on most of the datasets.
J. Complexity and Robustness Analysis
The time complexity of the proposed method is primarily
contributed by the fuzzy data augmentation method and the

1600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

TABLE V
DATA FOR TWO P UBLIC DATASETS

TABLE VI
R ESULTS OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS W ITH WADI
AND SWAT DATASETS

TABLE VII
AUROC AND AUPRC M ETRICS FOR 4 DATASETS
ON D IFFERENT M ODELS

Fig. 13.

multi-scale spatio-temporal contrastive encoder. The data augmentation method involves similarity computation and sorting,
e n )·log( n )), where n denotes
with a complexity of O(n2 ·D+(
B
B
e
time series length, D denotes the feature dimension, B denotes
batch size. And, the time complexity of the spatio-temporal
e Furthermore, we evaluate
contrastive encoder is O(n2 ·D).
the efficiency of the proposed method by calculating the
average running time and memory usage. The experiments
run on a computer with a 64-bit Intel Core i7-6700 CPU @
3.40GHz and 16GB RAM configuration, implemented using
Python 3.6. Four datasets of different sizes are applied to
fully evaluate the performance, and the datasets are described

Experiments on complexity analysis.

Fig. 14. An example. Light blue line represents the original time series
data and the red part shows the changed data with different characteristics
distribution.

in Table I and Table IV. We also compared the proposed
method with two other methods based on contrastive learning.
The results are shown in Fig. 13. When the data size and

CHAO et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR 5G-CLUSTERS

1601

correlations existing in temporal features at different scales
also have valuable information to the construction of graph
structures. Therefore, in the future work, we would like to
find an effective way to further integrate multi-scale temporal
features on the basis of priori spatial features for graph
structure construction in the application of anomaly detection.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 15. Comparative experimental results between original data and changed
data.

dimensionality are small (e.g., MNC1, MNC2), the difference
in the running time of all methods is insignificant. When the
data size and dimension are large (e.g., WADI and SWaT), the
proposed method outperforms the other methods in terms of
both runtime and memory consumption.
To explore the model performance under longer and evolving environment, we further introduce intervention into the
datasets to simulate evolving network conditions by changing the characteristics of data distribution, as exemplified in
Fig. 14. And, in four datasets, we compare the results of the
proposed model between the original data and the changed
data, where the experimental results are shown in Fig. 15.
One can observe that data drift in characteristics distribution
does not significantly degrade the performance of the proposed
model, which still maintains a robust performance. These
experiments indicates that the model has the capability to
adapt to different environments in applications with long-term
deployment.
V. C ONCLUSION
We propose a novel universal anomaly detection model,
namely Multi-scale Fuzzy Contrastive-based Anomaly Detection (MFCAD), which is capable of detecting anomalies
in multivariate time series with spatio-temporal features.
MFCAD utilizes multi-scale contrastive learning to obtain
more discriminative representations and performs explicit
anomaly detection in the latent space by measuring the
distance between outliers and inliers. Our ablation experiments demonstrate that the spatio-temporal contrastive
model, data augmentation method, and multi-scale mechanism significantly enhance the anomaly detection performance
of MFCAD. Experimental results on real-world 5G-MNC
datasets demonstrate that MFCAD outperforms state-of-theart methods, achieving the best performance. Furthermore,
the effectiveness of MFCAD is further validated using an
industrial dataset. As a result, the proposed MFCAD model
holds practical value in rapidly and accurately diagnosing
anomalies.
How to effectively construct graph structure is an important
issue to the performance of anomaly detection with graph
learning. In this article, spatial features of data are mainly
applied to construct graph structures, which is a typical and
reasonable approach. However, from a data-driven perspective,

[1] Z. Ahmad, A. Shahid Khan, C. Wai Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
“Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, p. 4150, Jan. 2021.
[2] R. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, D. Yang, and S. Sun, “Internet financial fraud
detection based on graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1394–1401, Jun. 2023.
[3] J. Viola, Y. Chen, and J. Wang, “FaultFace: Deep convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) based ball-bearing failure detection
method,” Inf. Sci., vol. 542, pp. 195–211, Jan. 2021.
[4] S. P. Chatrati et al., “Smart home health monitoring system for predicting
type 2 diabetes and hypertension,” J. King Saud Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci.,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 862–870, Mar. 2022.
[5] X. Wang et al., “Adaptive multi-receptive field spatial–temporal graph
convolutional network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–7.
[6] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational
auto-encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World
Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[7] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1409–1416.
[8] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
[9] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
Dec. 2023.
[10] M. Thill, W. Konen, H. Wang, and T. Bäck, “Temporal convolutional
autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,” Appl.
Soft Comput., vol. 112, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 107751.
[11] W. Li, W. Hu, T. Chen, N. Chen, and C. Feng, “StackVAE-G: An
efficient and interpretable model for time series anomaly detection,”
2021, arXiv:2105.08397.
[12] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
May 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
[13] Y. He and J. Zhao, “Temporal convolutional networks for anomaly
detection in time series,” J. Phys., Conf., vol. 1213, no. 4, Jun. 2019,
Art. no. 042050.
[14] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao,
“Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 6440–6454, 2022.
[15] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multi-view graph contrastive
learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
[16] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[17] T. C. Havens, J. C. Bezdek, C. Leckie, L. O. Hall, and M. Palaniswami,
“Fuzzy c-Means algorithms for very large data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy
Syst., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1130–1146, Dec. 2012.
[18] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080,
Dec. 2023.
[19] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[20] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.

1602

[21] Z. Tian, M. Zhuo, L. Liu, J. Chen, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly detection
using spatial and temporal information in multivariate time series,” Sci.
Rep., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 4400, Mar. 2023.
[22] W. Yu and Q. Huang, “A deep encoder–decoder network for anomaly
detection in driving trajectory behavior under spatio-temporal context,”
Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 115, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103115.
[23] J. Mulerikkal, S. Thandassery, V. Rejathalal, and D. M. D. Kunnamkody,
“Performance improvement for metro passenger flow forecast using
spatio-temporal deep neural network,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 34,
no. 2, pp. 983–994, Jan. 2022.
[24] C. Hu, L. Zhu, and S. Lai, “Spatio-Temporal-based context fusion for
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Mach.
Vis. Intell. Algorithms (PRMVIA), Mar. 2023, pp. 187–192.
[25] S. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Chen, Q. Jiang, and H. Huang, “Spatio-temporal
data anomaly detection using 3G-net in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int.
Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Jan. 2023, pp. 770–777.
[26] Y. Wang, H. Peng, G. Wang, X. Tang, X. Wang, and C. Liu, “Monitoring
industrial control systems via spatio-temporal graph neural networks,”
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 122, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 106144.
[27] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with deep
neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 4037–4058, Nov. 2021.
[28] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[29] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 4650–4661.
[30] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” 2021,
arXiv:2106.00750.
[31] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112.
[32] H. Zhong, C. Chen, Z. Jin, and X.-S. Hua, “Deep robust clustering by
contrastive learning,” 2020, arXiv:2008.03030.
[33] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[34] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
Dec. 2023.
[35] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022,
arXiv:2205.04816.
[36] H. Lee, Y. Kim, and S.-G. Lee, “Multi-scale contrastive learning for
complex scene generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl.
Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 764–774.
[37] Z. Zhao et al., “MMGL: Multi-scale multi-view global–local contrastive
learning for semi-supervised cardiac image segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2022, pp. 401–405.
[38] A. Javed, B. S. Lee, and D. M. Rizzo, “A benchmark study on time series
clustering,” Mach. Learn. Appl., vol. 1, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 100001.
[39] Z. Xu and M. Xia, “Distance and similarity measures for hesitant fuzzy
sets,” Inf. Sci., vol. 181, no. 11, pp. 2128–2138, Jun. 2011.
[40] G. Wei, R. Lin, and H. Wang, “Distance and similarity measures for
hesitant interval-valued fuzzy sets,” J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 19–36, 2014.
[41] C. Luo, N. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Time series prediction based
on intuitionistic fuzzy cognitive map,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 6835–6850, May 2020.
[42] R. Sawhney, S. Agarwal, A. Wadhwa, T. Derr, and R. R. Shah, “Stock
selection via spatiotemporal hypergraph attention network: A learning to
rank approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 497–504.
[43] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[44] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[45] C. C. Aggarwal and C. C. Aggarwal, An Introduction to Outlier Analysis.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017.
[46] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, pp. 1–18,
Dec. 2015.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 33, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

[47] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[48] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[49] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[50] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs
for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp.
Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[51] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” 2017,
arXiv:1709.04875.
[52] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discovery.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2002, pp. 15–27.
[53] A. Lazarevic and V. Kumar, “Feature bagging for outlier detection,” in
Proc. 11th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2005, pp. 157–166.
[54] C. C. Aggarwal et al., Data Mining: The Textbook, vol. 1. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2015.
[55] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN).
Munich, Germany: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.

Luo Chao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Dalian University
of Technology, China, in 2013. He is currently a Professor with the School of Information Science and
Engineering, Shandong Normal University, China.
He has published more than 60 refereed articles. His
research interests include machine learning, complex
systems, and time series analysis.

Li Yinghua received the B.E. degree from Shandong
University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, China,
in 2021. She is currently pursuing the M.E.
degree with the School of Information Science
and Engineering, Shandong Normal University. Her
research interests include anomaly detection and
spatio-temporal data analysis.

Ding Fengqian received the M.S. degree from
Shandong Normal University, Shandong, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Qingdao, China. His
research interests are application of time series analysis and machine learning.

Shao Rui received the master’s degree in computer software and theory from Shandong University.
He is currently employed by China Mobile Communications Group Shandong Company Ltd., mainly
engaged in wireless network optimization and planning work for 5G/4G networks. His current main
research directions are 5G communication network planning, strategy optimization, SON, anomaly
recognition, and network structure optimization.