3746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

STMBAD: Spatio-Temporal Multimodal Behavior
Anomaly Detector for Industrial Control Systems
Jianzhen Luo , Yan Cai , Jun Cai , Member, IEEE, Wanhan Fang , and Wenwei Zheng

Abstract—Modern cyber attacks against industrial control systems (ICSs) are highly stealthy, persistent, and
targeted. Existing anomaly detection methods are mainly
based on a set of rules defining correct behaviors and
use loosely bounded detection thresholds, which can be
exploited by attackers to evade detection. In this article, we
propose STMBAD, a spatio-temporal multimodal behavior
anomaly detector based on spatio-temporal ICS behavior
analysis to improve the performance of ICS anomaly detection. STMBAD leverages the rich information available
in industrial multimodal data to achieve a deep understanding of complex ICS behaviors and enhance the ability to
detect stealthy attacks. To avoid data processing cross heterogeneous type/structure and temporal confusion caused
by unsynchronized time series, STMBAD embeds time series of individual modality separately into variate tokens
and applies the attention mechanism and feedforward network to capture multivariate correlations and interdependencies. Meanwhile, based on the attention mechanisms,
temporal evolution law and spatial correlation of different
modalities can be captured to model the characteristics
of the spatio-temporal multimodal behavior of ICS. When
detecting attacks, an adaptive detection mechanism combining global and local detection is proposed to utilize
dynamic thresholds at different levels and reduce errors
caused by a loose global threshold. The simulation results
show that the proposed method outperforms the baseline methods and yields the highest F1 score, reaching
95%.
Index Terms—Adaptive thresholds, anomaly detection,
industrial control system (ICS), multimodal data.

Received 7 October 2024; accepted 22 December 2024. Date of
publication 10 February 2025; date of current version 21 April 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China “Demonstration of Next-generation Communication and Network Application in Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater
Bay Area” under Grant 2019YFB1804403, in part by the Innovation Popularization Field of Science and Technology Department of Guangdong
Province under Grant 2023A1414020053, in part by the Provincial Scientific Research Project of General Universities of Guangdong Province
under Grant 2021ZDJS026, in part by the Key Project of Guangdong
Provincial Department of Education under Grant 2021ZDZX1031, and in
part by the Guangdong Province Key Construction Disciplines Scientific
Research Capacity Enhancement Project under Grant 2022ZDJS133 of
Guangzhou Institute of Science and Technology. Paper no. TII-24-5192.
(Corresponding author: Jun Cai.)
The authors are with the School of Cyberspace Security, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510635, China (email: luojz@gpnu.edu.cn; caiyan@gpnu.edu.cn; caijun@gpnu.edu.cn;
whfang@gpnu.edu.cn; zhengwenwei@stu.gpnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3528559

Fig. 1.

Attacks in ICS environments.

I. INTRODUCTION
NDUSTRIAL Internet is a promising technology that
combines industrial systems with Internet connectivity to
improve production efficiency and reduce production costs.
Industrial control systems (ICSs) are important in the industrial
Internet, providing process automation, distributed control, and
process monitoring. To fulfill the requirements of the industrial
Internet, ICSs are connected to enterprise networks, allowing
business users to access real-time data generated by industrial
systems. However, this new paradigm exposes insecure devices
to public networks and raises security issues as those devices
are more vulnerable to external attacks [1].
Anomaly detection is widely used to identify potentially
anomalous activities of a system when a lurking adversary
or malware starts to launch an attack on the system. Existing
anomaly detection technology solutions can be categorized into
mechanism-driven and data-driven methods. Mechanism-driven
approaches leverage expert knowledge of the underlying mechanisms to detect anomalies [2]. These approaches require comprehensive theoretical knowledge that is difficult to obtain for
highly complex ICSs. Data-driven anomaly detection methods
use techniques such as statistical analysis, data mining, and machine learning to automatically identify anomalous data points
or events that are significantly different from normal patterns
from a large amount of collected data [3]. The data-driven
methods are widely used because they do not need to consider
the increasingly complex physicochemical reaction mechanisms
in industrial processes.
However, since modern attacks against ICSs are usually
stealthy, persistent, and targeted, it is much difficult to detect
them. As shown in Fig. 1, attacker lurks in the target system for
a long time and uses a combination of attacks to gain control or

I

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

modify data by exploiting vulnerabilities in the system, such
as in the SolarWinds attack [4] and the Stuxnet attack [5].
Sophisticated attackers usually have a deep understanding of the
execution of the targeted ICSs and can hide their manipulation
in the system by closely following the expected behavior of the
system while injecting just enough false information at each
time step to achieve their goals [6]. Previous methods leverage
a set of rules defining the correct behavior of ICSs. However,
the rules define variable ranges across all possible ICS states,
leading to loosely bounded detection thresholds. Thus, attackers
can exploit these loose bounds and launch stealthy attacks that
evade detection without violating such rules.
To address these problems, anomaly detection systems need
to understand not just individual actions but also complex sequences of events over time so as to detect subtle changes in behavior that might be indicators of compromise. Thus, this work
leverages multimodal data to identify spatio-temporal behavior
patterns that might indicate sophisticated attacks in ICSs. Industrial multimodal data are collected from multiple sources and
commonly exhibit a large degree of heterogeneity in form, scale,
and resolution [7]. The fusion of multimodal data can reveal
the operational characteristics of the system more accurately,
hence effectively improving the accuracy of data analysis, such
as quality prediction [8] and anomaly detection [9]. Instead of
just looking at instantaneous values, we consider the trajectory of
variables over time, which can help detect subtle deviations that
might indicate a stealthy attack. Meanwhile, we also consider
correlations between different components or sensors in the ICS,
which can help detect attacks that manipulate multiple variables
in concert to stay within individual thresholds.
Based on a better understanding of ICS behaviors, we develop
algorithms to discover recurring patterns in the spatio-temporal
behavior of the system and monitor deviations from these patterns to indicate potential attacks. Leveraging the rich information available in ICS environments can significantly enhance
our ability to detect and respond to complex, stealthy attacks.
However, developing an anomaly detector for ICS that monitors
spatio-temporal multimodal behavior is challenging, at least
from the following perspectives.
1) Multimodal data are heterogeneous: The multimodal data
are heterogeneous in data type and structure, which poses
huge challenges to the development of data-driven models. Effective solutions have been proposed to address
the issues arising from multimodal data processing, such
as missing values resulting from heterogeneous sampling sequences [10]. However, one important problem
in multimodal data preprocessing is to integrate diverse
data types (continuous, discrete, categorical) from multiple sources with different formats and structures. The
state-of-the-art multimodal data analysis models, such
as transformer-based approaches [11] embed multiple
variates of the same timestamp into indistinguishable
channels and apply attention to these temporal tokens to
capture temporal dependencies. The unified embedding
for each temporal token that fuses multiple variates with
potentially unaligned timestamps may fail in learning
variate-centric representations and result in meaningless
attention maps.
2) Multimodal data are unsynchronized: Temporal alignment and synchronization are critical challenges in

3747

multimodal learning, especially when dealing with data
from ICS where various sensors and subsystems may
operate at different sampling rates and with different
timing constraints. When multimodal data are unsynchronized, the data points from a single time step cannot
reveal beneficial information due to the temporal confusion between multivariate. Besides, while modalities
can be greatly influenced by the sequence order, attention
mechanisms are improperly adopted on the spatial dimension to analyze the multivariate correlations. These issues
can significantly impact the accuracy and reliability of
data analysis and decision-making processes.
3) Threshold setting is critical to the effectiveness of
anomaly detection: The spatio-temporal multimodal behavior changes with the manufacturing process. Setting
appropriate thresholds for anomaly detection is often
a balancing act. Too sensitive thresholds lead to false
alarms, while too lax thresholds result in missed detections. Most existing anomaly detection methods use static
thresholds to determine anomaly results. However, the operating conditions, data distribution, and environmental
factors of ICSs would change according to manufacturing
processes. Thus, static thresholds cannot adapt to these
dynamic changes and lead to false alarms or missed detections [12]. Furthermore, due to ignoring spatio-temporal
dependencies, static thresholds cannot capture contextual
anomalies [13].
To address these challenges, this article proposes a spatiotemporal multimodal behavior anomaly detector (STMBAD)
for ICSs based on the spatio-temporal behavior analysis of
multimodal sequences. For challenges (1) and (2), STMBAD
employs inverted transformers (iTransformer) framework [14]
to industrial multimodal data. In the iTransformer, the roles of
the attention mechanism and the feedforward network (FFN)
are inverted. The time points of individual series are embedded
into variate tokens, which are then utilized by the attention
mechanism to capture multivariate correlations. Meanwhile, the
FFN is applied to each variate token to learn nonlinear representations. STMBAD embeds individual series into variate tokens
and uses the attention mechanism to capture multivariate correlations, thereby preserving the internal feature information of the
modality and avoiding the problem of temporal misalignment.
For challenge (3), which is about the threshold setting to enable effectiveness of ICS anomaly detection, STMBAD obtains
the sliding window-based loss values by comparing the reconstructed data within the sliding window with the real data. To better adapt the detection method to the changing data distribution,
the model updates the loss value of each window of the test data
to the loss value sequence of the training data in real time. Then,
the percentage method is used to determine the threshold value of
the current window, thus realizing adaptive anomaly detection.
The main contributions of this work are as follows.
1) A method for analyzing the spatio-temporal correlation
of industrial multimodal data is proposed: The proposed
method embeds the time points of individual series into
variate tokens and uses the attention mechanism to capture multivariate correlations, weakening the impact of
temporal interference and confusion caused by modality
heterogeneity and misalignment.

3748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

2) An adaptive threshold mechanism combining global and
local detection is proposed: It ensures that the system can
utilize dynamic thresholds at different levels and reduce
errors caused by insufficient local information or by only
processing global information.
3) A multimodal data-based framework is developed to identify anomalous events in the industrial process by mining
the spatio-temporal correlations between multivariate in
production equipment.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II overviews the related work on ICS anomaly detection.
Section III describes in detail the algorithm design of STMBAD.
The evaluation is discussed in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes this article.
II. RELATED WORK
The growing complexity of ICSs leads to the industrial data
exhibiting multimodal, nonlinear, and strongly coupled characteristics [15], which poses new challenges to anomaly detection
methods. In face of these challenges, statistical learning, machine learning, deep learning, and transformer-based methods
have emerged as widely employed approaches of anomaly detection based on multimodal data.
Statistical learning methods: Traditional techniques such as
cluster-based methods [16], independent component analysis
(ICA), and rule-based approaches [2] have been applied to
anomaly detection in multimodal data. Minjie et al. [17] extracted the key features of traffic through principal component
analysis and constructed a normal traffic behavior detection
model for power IoT terminals based on one-class support vector
machines (OCSVMs). Harrou et al. [18] combined ICA and Kantorovich distance-based processing of supervisory control and
data acquisition data with kernel density estimation to compute
thresholds. This makes the model more flexible in detecting sensor anomalies such as accuracy degradation and freezing faults.
However, the thresholds of this approach are determined based
on residuals during the training phase and cannot be dynamically
adjusted to adapt to the changing state of the system. Moreover,
these methods also suffer from information loss when dealing
with complex data distributions and high-dimensional data [19],
which significantly degrades the performance of ICS anomaly
detection.
Machine learning methods: Machine learning algorithms can
automatically learn the process dynamics and control strategies
deployed in an ICS, which leads to relatively easier and faster
creation of anomaly detectors [20]. Li et al. [21] proposed a
parallel mutual information computation based on the Spark
platform, which resulted in a weighted outlier attribute detection
scheme for mixed data and reduced the detection time of outliers.
In response to the fact that OCSVM is not suitable for feature
extraction for high-dimensional data, He et al. [22] proposed
combining dictionary learning with OCSVM to extract correlations and local dynamics in multivariate time series for sparse
representation and anomaly detection tasks. The accuracy of
these models is highly dependent on the quality of the input data.
Moreover, either undersampling or oversampling of multimodal
data affects model performance [23]. Xu et al. [24] addressed
this problem by using a synthetic few oversampling technique
algorithm and random undersampling to balance the dataset.
They also reduced the model by discarding features with low

computational mutual information to reduce computational cost
and improve overall performance.
Deep learning methods: Recently, deep learning has been
widely used due to its powerful feature extraction and representation learning capabilities [25]. For example, Zheng et al. [26]
integrated correlation learning into a spatio-temporal network of
multivariate time series and uses graph convolutional networks
to obtain spatial dependencies between variables and reconstruct
data. Notably, this model can identify the root causes of anomalous events by ranking the univariate variables that contribute
the most to the anomaly score, enabling early detection and
interpretability of anomalies. However, it has limitations in
capturing temporal evolution due to misalignment of multimodal
time series and distortion of internal modal features. Therefore,
Padmavathi et al. [27] combined the attention mechanism with
bidirectional LSTM and uses CNN to extract pattern features
to improve the accuracy of malicious node detection. In [28],
an efficient real-time sensor anomaly detection method is used
to detect instantaneous network anomaly information by recognizing sensor anomalies through Markov and LSTM-based
networks.
Transformer-based methods: However, in real industrial scenarios, the data collected by sensors can have information loss
due to a series of complex reasons. Meanwhile, real multidimensional time-series data have repetitive patterns in the long and
short term, which is intractable for LSTM-based models. Therefore, many articles have used transformer to capture long-term
dependencies in time series. To mitigate the overfitting problem,
Miao et al. [29] used an autoencoder based on a transformer
architecture to capture temporal dependencies in time series and
integrates the encoder into a generative adversarial network to
constrain the reconstruction process. Zhang et al. [30] introduced
the Conv-Transformer model by combining local and global
features of the image to achieve higher accuracy and use fewer
computational resources. Ma et al. [31] learned the temporal
patterns of transformer-based sequences and detects anomalies
through pattern differences to achieve adaptive detection of the
model. Although these models make up for the shortcomings
of LSTM, they still force multiple variables under the same
timestamp to be aligned into one token, which affects correlation extraction among variables to some extent and introduces
unpredictable noise at the same time.
III. ALGORITHM DESIGN
A. Architecture Overview
The framework of STMBAD is composed of two main
parts: behavior modeling module and anomaly detection module, as depicted in Fig. 2. Industrial multimodal data from
multiple sources (referred to as modalities), which generally
exhibit a significant degree of heterogeneity in form, scale,
resolution, and accuracy [7], is input into STMBAD. The behavior modeling module is developed based on iTransformer
framework [14]. In this module, the spatial-temporal correlation between data sequences is extracted to establish a spatiotemporal sequence behavior model of the normal industrial
process. In anomaly detection module, a data reconstruction
based anomaly detection module is implemented to monitor the
spatio-temporal behavior of multimodal data. In this module, the
test data is classified as benign or abnormal by using adaptive
thresholds.

LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

3749

Fig. 2. Algorithm architecture overview. The blue area is the behavioral modeling part and the yellow area is the anomaly detection part. In the
figure, h× represents an attention mechanism with a total of h attention heads. Q, K, and V denote Query, Key, and Value, respectively. Γ is the
result of a nonlinear transformation of each input feature and X is the result after reconstruction. Anomaly detection is a combination of global and
local anomalies, where ψ denotes a local threshold within each window.

The training data is defined as X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, where
N is the number of modalities. The nth modality is xn =
T
{x1n , x2n , . . . , xM
n } (n ∈ [1, N ]) with M as the length of xn .
To avoid information loss due to dimensionality reduction in
data preprocessing, STMBAD directly performs an independent
embedding operation on each sequence xn by using a shared
multilayer perceptron (MLP), denoted as F ∈ RN ×D , and D is
the embedding dimension. The test dataset can be denoted as
Xtest ∈ RN ×Mtest , which performs the same embedding operation as X, and Mtest is the length of test sequences. The behavioral modeling uses only the training dataset to learn the normal
behavior of system, while anomaly detection is performed on the
test dataset. Anomaly detection result is represented as a vector
L = {Lt } (t = 1, 2, . . . , Mtest ) consisting of predicted labels
Lt ∈ {0, 1} representing ICS is normal (Lt = 0) or abnormal
(Lt = 1) at time t.
B. Behavioral Modeling
To capture the relationships between modalities, STMBAD
employs a self-attention mechanism to compute the correlation
among them, and utilizes a multihead attention mechanism to
weight the values.
The queries, keys, and values Q, K, V ∈ RN ×dk are obtained
using linear projection, where dk is the projected dimension.
The ith attention head gets a set of Qi , Ki , Vi . The attentional
weights are obtained by calculating the similarity between the
query and the keys, using the attentional weight matrix to
perform a weighted summation on the value matrix V. The
weighted output A is defined as
A = Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh )M



Qi KTi
+ mask , i ∈ [1, h]
headi = Vi softmax √
dk

(1)

where h denotes the number of attention heads and M is a
learnable output weight matrix.
STMBAD treats the entire sequence of a modality as a token,
as shown in Fig. 3, while the correlation analysis focuses on
the interaction among modalities. Consequently, the A acquired

Fig. 3. STMBAD treats the entire sequence of a modality as a token,
focuses only on the internal features of the modality during embedding,
and then analyzes the correlation between modalities.

through the attention mechanism is a weighted representation
integrating global information and the self-attention mechanism.
This is because when Q and K perform the dot product operation, the information of one modality interacts with that of
other modalities. The obtained attention score indicates, to a
certain degree, the contribution of this variable to the entire
system. In further interaction with the value V, variables with
high correlation can obtain larger attention weights.
In the encoder, the self-attention mechanism is used to achieve
correlation extraction between different variables and layer normalization is used to obtain the intermediate variable Γ̂. Layer
normalization is applied to the feature representation so that the
feature channels of all variables are under a relatively uniform
distribution. For each weighted token Ai , perform Z-Score
normalization as
Ai − μ
, (i = 1, 2, . . . , N )
(2)
Γ̂ =
σ
where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of Ai .
Fully connected features are encoded for Γ̂ in an FFN and
the reconstructed result is obtained by projection and cropping.
Different from the FFN in the traditional transformer, which
encodes variables under the same time stamp, the FFN in this

3750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

The behavioral modeling procedure for spatio-temporal multimodal time series is given in the Algorithm 1. The algorithm takes as input the training data X, training epoch k,
and training window size ω. The output is reconstructed data
X . Algorithm 1 is an iterative process whose main process is
multimodal time-series correlation analysis as lines 5–10. To
avoiding overfitting, the process of training will be stopped when
the model performance improves no longer. In each iteration, the
loss function value is used as a performance indicator to compare
the current validation loss with the previous minimum validation
loss. There, we use the smooth L1 loss function to evaluate the
difference between the model reconstructed values and the true
values. The smooth L1 loss function is defined as

1 2
ς ,
if |ς| ≤ 1
Loss(ς) = 2
(5)
1
|ς| − 2 , otherwise

Algorithm 1: Behavioral Modelling.

article represents tokens for the entire sequence of variables
and calculates the global representation within the sequence.
As a part of each EncoderLayer, FFN consists of two fully
connected layers each of which has an activation function. The
input is linearly transformed by a one-dimensional convolutional
layer, which converts the dimensionality of the input from D to
a higher feedforward neural network dimensionality D . This
linear change can be expressed as W1 Γ̂ + b1 , where W1 is the
weight matrix of convolutional layer and b1 is bias vector.
The dimension of the output is transformed from D back to
D by a second one-dimensional convolutional layer in order to
add it to the Nonlinear rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation
function is applied to the output of the convolutional layer. As
a result, the entire computational process of the FFN can be
represented as
Γ = ReLU(W1 Γ̂ + b1 )W2 + b2

(3)

where W2 is the weight matrix of the second convolutional layer
and b2 is the bias vector and get Γ ∈ RN ×D .
After fully connected feature encoding using FFN, it is again
normalized by one layer to obtain F̂. Finally, each variable
representation is mapped to the reconstructed result separately
through a mapping layer, which is implemented by MLP as
XN ×M = F̂N ×D WD×M + b

(4)

where W is the parameter that the model wants to learn and
b is an M -dimensional bias vector. Projective mapping of the
encoder’s output yields the output X .

where ς is the difference between the reconstructed value and
the true value.
The best score is updated and the model weights are saved,
as shown in lines 13–20. If the current validation loss is not
significantly reduced or exceeds a certain tolerance range of
the minimum validation loss, an early stopping condition is
triggered. Meanwhile, a counter, denoted as Θ, indicating the
triggering times of early stopping. The training will be stopped
early when the counter exceeds the tolerance value.
The entire encoder can be represented as a stack of multiple encoder layers. In one encoder, by using MLP, nonlinear
transformations and feature extraction can be performed on the
inputs, resulting in a higher level representation of the input data.
At the same time, global correlation analysis and encoding of
features are performed in an inverted manner, avoiding information weakening and noise interference caused by temporal
misalignment.
C. Industrial Process Anomaly Detection
Existing detection methods utilize the statistical characteristics of normal parameters to determine a fixed threshold value
as the basis for system detection. However, when operating
conditions or the environment change, the internal properties of
the data will also change. The threshold value determined using
historical data will be unable to capture such changes, leading to
detection errors. Therefore, we implement a multiple detection
strategy in the detection phase. This strategy combines historical
and current information with a sliding window to ensure that the
system can make full use of different levels of information. By
doing so, it reduces errors that may be caused by insufficient
local information or global information processed individually,
thereby improving the comprehensiveness, accuracy, and robustness of the detection. In the real world, devices have a boot phase
for software or firmware loading. Hence, we take 30% of the
training set and use it to simulate the state changes during the
boot phase.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 4, multiple detection strategy
includes global detection and local detection. For each time
series xn , after reconstruction to obtain the loss sequence x̂n ,
we employ the sliding window and the three-sigma rule for
detecting the degree of deviation. Assume that the size of the
sliding window is w and window slide step is m, where m ⩽ w.
By sliding the window sequentially from the starting position of
loss series. The subsequence can be recorded as x̂[s:s+w−1] =

LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

3751

Fig. 4. Illustration of anomaly detection. In the figure, The window keeps sliding and each window outputs a local threshold value ψs . Then all
these ψs values are connected together to obtain Ψ. where μ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation of the subsequence within the window,
respectively. λ is the standard deviation multiplier, t and s denote the time point corresponding to the current window starting point, and w is the
local threshold of the window [s, s + w].

{x̂s , x̂s+1 , . . . , x̂s+w−1 }, the window mean μs and standard
deviation σs are obtained. STMBAD measures the extent of
deviation of the loss data within the window in terms of the
three-sigma rule to obtain a measured value as
ψs = μs + λσs

(6)

where λ = 3. As a rule of thumb, most data points can be
covered when λ = 3 to provide more conservative bounds [32].
Subsequently, STMBAD concatenates the obtained ψs to have
a dynamic sequence of measurements Ψ.
For global detection, the percentage method is applied to
determine the threshold. The percentage method is based on
the principle of data distribution, where the dataset is sorted
in ascending order and the pth percentile is selected as the
threshold. If any point in x̂n exceeds the threshold that point
in time is marked as an abnormal. This method ensures that the
threshold is set within a specific distribution of the data, thus
effectively identifying extreme values or anomalies in the data.
In localized detection, the local threshold is ψs . Since m ⩽ w,
this means that the window x̂[s:s+w] partially overlaps with the
previous window x̂[s−w−1:s−1] . The overlapping part undergoes
repeated detection, and the results may show bias due to noise
or sudden data changes. Therefore, to reduce the interference of
uncertainty and enhance the robustness of the detection method,
we apply the AND operation in the overlapping part to achieve
stricter detection criteria. This implies that the overlap is considered an exception only when both results of repeated testing
are abnormal.
Finally, in the face of the different results obtained from global
and local detection, we use the OR operation. Local detection
can provide fine-grained information, and global detection can
provide macroscopic contextual information. The OR operation
can combine local and global detection results. In this way,
anomalies missed in local detection due to strict criteria can
be supplemented by this operation. At the same time, possible
misdetections in global detection can be corrected by local
detection.

Fig. 5. Examples of segment detection. Adjustment of predicted labels
when predicted anomalies overlap with real anomaly segments.

In practice, anomalies typically do not occur in isolation but
rather manifest as a continuous segment of anomalies. Focusing
solely on the detection of a single point may overlook the
reality of the entire segment of anomalies. Therefore, STMBAD
employs a segment detection strategy [33]. Fig. 5 shows that in
this strategy, when any point in the actual abnormal segment
is detected, the segment is considered to have been correctly
detected. This approach reduces the reliance on isolated points
and avoids having false alarms at a single point affect the overall
assessment.
STMBAD proposes a multiple detection method with adaptive thresholds. This approach aims to enhance the accuracy
and robustness of anomaly detection by capturing long-term
trends and periodic changes in the system. It can flexibly and
automatically adjust thresholds to adapt to different time scales
and changing environmental contexts.
IV. EVALUATION
A. Datasets
The proposed STMBAD performed experimental simulations
in industrial water treatment processes and water distribution
(WADI) processes. Secure water treatment (SWaT), battle of
attack detection algorithms (BATADAL), and WADI are used to
evaluate the validity and performance. These scenarios simulate

3752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE I
CORE INFORMATION OF DATASETS

TABLE III
COMPARION OF HYPERPARAMETERS OPTIMIZATION THE BATCH SIZE IN THE
BATADAL DATASET

TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL HYPERPARAMETERS

physical attacks, such as water leaks and malicious data injection, in addition to attacks and defenses against programmable
logic controllers (PLCs) and networks. The core information of
these datasets is given in Table I.
The detailed description of each dataset is as follows.
1) SWaT [34]: SWaT is a water treatment testbed for research in the field of cybersecurity. During data collection,
the ICS was run for 11 consecutive days. Of these, 7 days
were in normal operation, and 4 days were in an attack
scenario. Attacks last anywhere from a few minutes to an
hour.
2) WADI [35]: WADI is a natural extension of SWaT, forming a complete and realistic network for water treatment,
storage, and distribution. The system operated continuously for 16 days, which included 14 days of normal
operation and 2 days of attacks. During these attacks,
the system was attacked 15 times.
3) BATADAL [36]: BATADAL dataset represents a WADI
network consisting of seven storage tanks. The training set
was generated from a year-long simulation and does not
contain any attacks. The test dataset contains three months
of continuous recordings and includes seven attacks.
In the experiments, only continuous time series are chosen
during the dataset preprocessing stage. Then, 25, 62, and 27
variables are actually used in SWaT, WADI, and BATADAL,
respectively.
B. Parameter Settings
STMBAD is implemented with Python 3.6.5. In our work,
20% of the training set is set aside to be used as the validation
set, while the remaining 80% is used for model training. The
training set is employed to initially train the model, and the
validation set is used to evaluate the performance of different
combinations of hyperparameters.
The hyperparameters of the model are carefully adjusted to
ensure optimal performance for each dataset, as shown in Table
II. The training set size of BATADAL is only 8761, which is too
small for deep model training. Table III shows that in the optimization experiment of BATADAL data, the loss is the lowest
when Bs = 1. This means that only one sample is used in each
training iteration to achieve higher flexibility in model training
with small datasets. The learning rate ε is adjusted using an exponential decay method as ε = 0.5epoch−1 εi (i = 0, 1, . . . , 100)

with an initial learning rate ε0 = 0.0001, a decay coefficient of
0.5, and training epochs of 100 for each dataset.
In the anomaly detection phase, a sliding window is used to
extract dynamic and localized information. To determine the
optimal sliding window size and sliding step size corresponding
to each dataset, several tests are performed. Fig. 6(a) shows the
tuning of w with a fixed m, it can be seen from that the model
performs best when w = 205 or w = 210. Then, m is adjusted
when w is 205 or 210, respectively. Fig. 6(b) shows that the
F1 score of the model obtains its maximum value when w =
205 and m = 20. Using the same methodology, the detection
parameters of w = 50 and m = 10 are obtained under the SWAT
dataset, and w = 135 and m = 10 are obtained under the WADI
dataset.
This article implemented several baseline algorithms, including transformer, PatchTST, and TimesNet-based anomaly
detection methods. The experimental results of these baseline
algorithms are then compared with that of STMBAD.
1) Transformer (2017, [11]) is a well-known neural network
model based on the attention mechanism. In sequential data processing, the attention mechanism allows the
model to attend to different time steps or elements of
the sequence, giving more weight to relevant parts and
reducing the influence of less important ones.
2) PatchTST (2023, [37]) is a transformer-based long timeseries prediction model. This model can effectively deal
with the length variation and imbalance of the time series.
It achieves this by using a patch-based approach where
the time series is divided into smaller patches, and then
transformer architecture is applied to these patches for
prediction.
3) TimesNet (2023, [38]) is a time-series-based anomaly
detection model. It combines CNN and LSTM networks
to capture local and temporal dependencies in time-series
data, effectively discovering abnormal behavior in timeseries data.
After extensive parameter tuning of the methods on the same
dataset, the combination with the best performance is selected
as the final training parameters. Meanwhile, all methods are
fully trained to ensure the authenticity and reliability of the
comparison.
C. Overall Detection Performance
1) ROC and AUC: To visualize the effectiveness of STMBAD, the degree of coverage between predicted labels and true
labels for our model and all baselines at the current time interval
is shown in Fig. 7. As can be seen from the figure, our model is
able to cover all anomalous regions in the sample, while the other
baselines have missed detections. Meanwhile, receiver operating

LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

3753

Fig. 6. Adjust the parameters of window size (w) and sliding step (m) size in the BATADAL dataset. (a) Window size (m = 30). (b) Sliding step
(w = 205). (c) Sliding step (w = 210).

Fig. 7. Capability of anomaly detection on the BATADAL dataset. The blue region represents the real anomalous region, while the yellow color
indicates the anomalous region detected by the corresponding model. (a) STMBAD. (b) PatchTST. (c) TimesNet. (d) Transformer.

Fig. 8. Comparison of model performance. (a)–(c) ROC curves and corresponding AUC values under different datasets. (a) SWaT. (b) BATADAL.
(c) WADI.

characteristic (ROC) curves are used to analyze the relationship
between the false positive rate (FPR) and the true positive
rate (TPR). The area under the ROC curves, namely AUC, is
computed to evaluate the overall performance. As shown in
Fig. 8, the AUC values of STMBAD on the BATADAL, SWaT,
and WADI datasets are 0.8502, 0.9508, and 0.8717, respectively.
The average AUC of our model is approximately 2% higher than
that of the model in second place. In testing, there is a small
bias in the optimal AUC. However, in anomaly detection, we
prefer to obtain the best F1 value because having an excellent
F1 value at a certain threshold is more important than having only
high but less excellent F1 values at most thresholds [33]. The
average values of FPR and TPR obtained by STMBAD in the
optimal state are 0.92% and 90.69%, respectively. Most of the
important metrics are higher than those of the baselines, which
indicates that our classifier performs better than the baselines.
The proposed method also achieves a high recall rate while
ensuring a low false alarm rate.

2) Precision and F1-Score: The model proposed in this article is combined with several classical neural network frameworks for anomaly detection. Comparative experiments are
conducted according to the original structure of the compared
models or open source code. In Table IV, the F1 scores of our
model on the SWaT, BATADAL, and WADI datasets are 0.9508,
0.8502, and 0.8717, respectively. The average precision rate of
STMBAD is 0.8757, and the average recall rate is 0.9069, with
the accuracy maintained above 98%. Compared with the average
recall rate of the second-ranked model, the average recall rate
has increased by 7.2%, and the average F1 has increased by
4.35%. This indicates that our model has high credibility and
more comprehensive coverage in anomaly detection. Although
the indicators of STMBAD on a single dataset are lower than
those of the baseline model, it is still in an advantageous position
from an overall analysis. In the SWaT dataset, the precision
of transformer is about 4.69% higher than that of our model,
but its recall rate is only 81.56%, which is 14.36% lower than

3754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF ANOMALY DETECTION RESULT OF DIFFERENT METHODS
UNDER THREE DATASETS

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF DETECTION INFERENCE AND LATENCY TIME OF DIFFERENT
MODELS UNDER THREE DATASETS

that of STMBAD. And in the WADI dataset, the performance
of our model ranks second. This is because the dataset has a
higher frequency of sample collection, higher data density, and
more serious data imbalance [39]. When training the model, the
generalization ability of the model itself is insufficient, resulting
in the test results being affected.
3) Inference and Delay Time: Across the three datasets under consideration, the inference time of STMBAD shows variation depending on the size of the dataset. As demonstrated in
Table V, in the relatively small BATADAL dataset, the inference time is a mere 63 s. Moreover, on average, only 0.003 s
are spent on inference per window. On the other hand, in the
large WADI dataset, the inference time amounts to 2542 s. The
average inference time over the three datasets is 2006 s, which is
approximately 25% faster than that of the model ranked second.
Evidently, STMBAD can perform detection rapidly and producing results in a timely fashion. It significantly enhances detection
efficiency and saves valuable time costs. When compared from
the perspective of latency time, it becomes clear that STMBAD
is consistently at the fastest response level. It has an average

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF F1 SCORES UNDER DIFFERENT METHODS

latency time of only 1.41 s. This model is 46.64% quicker than
the one ranked second. This indicates that STMBAD is highly
capable of detecting anomalies in a timelier fashion. It reduces
the time difference between the occurrence of anomalies and
their detection. In practical applications, this timely detection is
crucial as it allows for prompt action to be taken to address the
anomalies and prevent potential negative consequences.
4) Fixed Versus Adaptive Threshold: In this section, we will
analyze the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive threshold
setting method. The F1 scores of STMBAD on three different
datasets are presented in Table VI. When the model is without
the adaptive threshold, it obtains an average F1 score of approximately 0.7815. In contrast, our model with the adaptive threshold
maintains an average F1 score at around 0.8909, representing an
increment of 10.94%. This clearly demonstrates that the scene
adaptive threshold determination algorithm is highly effective
in identifying anomalies. Most existing algorithms typically
only consider the global characteristics of the time series while
neglecting the local trends of the data. As a result, this leads to an
increase in the false alarm rate of some detection results. On the
other hand, our model operates by computing local anomalies
through sliding a window over the data series. In addition, it
updates the global anomaly threshold based on the distribution
of the data. By doing so, our model is able to capture the changing
trends and periodicity of the data, thereby obtaining a more
desirable detection result.
Upon analyzing the abovementioned four dimensions, it becomes evident that the performance of our model under different
simulation datasets is at a high level. This proves that STMBAD
has the ability to effectively address the problem of anomaly
detection in multimodal spatio-temporal sequences.
V. CONCLUSION
This work propose an ICS anomaly detection approach,
called STMBAD, based on spatio-temporal multimodal behavior. STMBAD leverages the rich information available in
industrial multimodal data to deepen the understand of complex
ICS behaviors and enhance the ability of detecting stealthy
attacks. The proposed approach first embeds individual modality
sequence separately into variate tokens, then uses the attention
mechanism and FFN to capture multivariate correlations and
interdependencies. Meanwhile, it utilizes the attention mechanisms to model the characteristics of the spatio-temporal multimodal behavior of ICS. STMBAD performs anomaly detection
by evaluating the deviation of reconstructed variate tokens and
leverages an adaptive detection mechanism combining global
and local detection for variable industrial process. The simulation results show that the proposed method can effectively
identify the anomalies in the ICSs and show high performance
in anomaly detection tasks. STMBAD outperforms the baseline
methods in many aspects, including average AUC value, average
recall rate, average accuracy, and average F1 score. Moreover,

LUO et al.: STMBAD: SPATIO-TEMPORAL MULTIMODAL BEHAVIOR ANOMALY DETECTOR FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

the average detection duration per window of STMBAD is
0.008 s, and the average latency is 1.41 s, which indicates that
STMBAD responds much faster than the baseline systems.
In the experiment, it is found that the proposed model is more
sensitive to the quality, size, and distribution of the data. For
instance, when the data sample is unbalanced and the distribution
undergoes drastic changes, the performance of the model will be
affected. This indicates that the model’s generalization ability
is relatively degraded when facing with frequent changes in
data distribution. These limitations are the mainly aspects being
supposed to improve in future. By addressing these issues, the
performance and applicability of the proposed model can be
further enhanced in real-world anomaly detection scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Cai, Z. Wei, and J. Luo, “ICS anomaly detection based on sensor
patterns and actuator rules in spatiotemporal dependency,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 10647–10656, Aug. 2024.
[2] M. Salehi and S. Bayat-Sarmadi, “PLCDefender: Improving remote attestation techniques for PLCs using physical model,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 7372–7379, May 2021.
[3] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang,
“TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for Internet of Things time
series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[4] J. Yang, Y. Lee, and A. P. McDonald, “Solarwinds software supply
chain security: Better protection with enforced policies and technologies,”
in Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 43–58.
[5] P. Kumar, V. Govindaraj, V. S. Erturk, K. S. Nisar, and M. Inc, “Fractional
mathematical modeling of the stuxnet virus along with an optimal control
problem,” Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 14, no. 7, 2023, Art. no. 102004.
[6] D. I. Urbina et al., “Limiting the impact of stealthy attacks on industrial
control systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 1092–1105.
[7] N. Gaw, P. M. Pardalos, and M. R. Gahrooei, Multimodal and Tensor
Data Analystics for Industrial Systems Improvement. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2024.
[8] X. Yuan et al., “Quality prediction modeling for industrial processes using
multiscale attention-based convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2696–2707, May 2024.
[9] W. Lin, S. Wang, W. Wu, D. Li, and A. Zomaya, “Hybridad: A hybrid
model-driven anomaly detection approach for multivariate time series,”
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 866–878,
Feb. 2024.
[10] X. Yuan et al., “Attention-based interval aided networks for data modeling
of heterogeneous sampling sequences with missing values in process
industry,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5253–5262,
Apr. 2024.
[11] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[12] L. Xu, X. Ding, H. Peng, D. Zhao, and X. Li, “ADTCD: An adaptive
anomaly detection approach toward concept drift in IoT,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 10, no. 18, pp. 15931–15942, Sep. 2023.
[13] C. Lin, B. Du, L. Sun, and L. Li, “Hierarchical context representation
and self-adaptive thresholding for multivariate anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3139–3150, Jul. 2024.
[14] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024,
pp. 1–25, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.06625.
[15] P. P. Liang, A. Zadeh, and L.-P. Morency, “Foundations & trends in
multimodal machine learning: Principles, challenges, and open questions,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1–42, 2024.
[16] A. Belhadi, Y. Djenouri, G. Srivastava, A. Cano, and J. C.-W. Lin, “Hybrid
group anomaly detection for sequence data: Application to trajectory data
analytics,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9346–9357,
Jul. 2022.
[17] Z. Minjie and Z. Yilian, “Abnormal traffic detection technology of power
IoT terminal based on PCA and OCSVM,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Inf. Technol.,
Netw., Electron. Autom. Control Conf., 2023, vol. 6, pp. 549–553.

3755

[18] F. Harrou, K. R. Kini, M. Madakyaru, and Y. Sun, “Uncovering sensor
faults in wind turbines: An improved multivariate statistical approach for
condition monitoring using SCADA data,” Sustain. Energy, Grids Netw.,
vol. 35, 2023, Art. no. 101126.
[19] L. Yu, X. Zhao, J. Huang, H. Hu, and B. Liu, “Research on machine
learning with algorithms and development,” J. Theory Pract. Eng. Sci.,
vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 7–14, 2023.
[20] I. Bayane, J. Leander, and R. Karoumi, “An unsupervised machine learning
approach for real-time damage detection in bridges,” Eng. Struct., vol. 308,
2024, Art. no. 117971.
[21] J. Li and Z. Liu, “Attribute-weighted outlier detection for mixed data
based on parallel mutual information,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 236, 2024,
Art. no. 121304.
[22] J. He, Z. Cheng, and B. Guo, “Anomaly detection in telemetry data using a
jointly optimal one-class support vector machine with dictionary learning,”
Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 242, 2024, Art. no. 109717.
[23] O. Surucu, S. A. Gadsden, and J. Yawney, “Condition monitoring using
machine learning: A review of theory, applications, and recent advances,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023, Art. no. 119738.
[24] H. Xu, Z. Sun, Y. Cao, and H. Bilal, “A data-driven approach for intrusion
and anomaly detection using automated machine learning for the Internet
of Things,” Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 19, pp. 14469–14481, 2023.
[25] Y. Qiao, J. LÃŒ, T. Wang, K. Liu, B. Zhang, and H. Snoussi, “A
multihead attention self-supervised representation model for industrial
sensors anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 2190–2199, Feb. 2024.
[26] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial-temporal graph learning for
multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024.
[27] B. Padmavathi, A. Bhagyalakshmi, D. Kavitha, and P. Indumathy, “An
optimized Bi-LSTM with random synthetic over-sampling strategy for
network intrusion detection,” Soft Comput., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 777–790,
2023.
[28] V. Shanmuganathan and A. Suresh, “LSTM-Markov based efficient
anomaly detection algorithm for IoT environment,” Appl. Soft Comput.,
vol. 136, 2023, Art. no. 110054.
[29] J. Miao, H. Tao, H. Xie, J. Sun, and J. Cao, “Reconstruction-based anomaly
detection for multivariate time series using contrastive generative adversarial networks,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 61, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 103569.
[30] Y. Zhang, P. Zhou, and E. Ma, “Anomaly detection of industrial smelting
furnace incorporated with accelerated sampling denoising diffusion probability model and conv-transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
2024, Art. no. 3513811, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3375410.
[31] S. Ma, S. Guan, Z. He, J. Nie, and M. Gao, “TPAD: Temporal-pattern-based
neural network model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 23, no. 24, pp. 30668–30682, Dec. 2023.
[32] Y. Damine, N. Bessous, A. C. Megherbi, and S. Salim, “Early bearing
fault detection using EEMD and three-sigma rule denoising method,”
Mechanics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 302–308, 2023.
[33] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
2018, pp. 187–196.
[34] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Crit. Inf.
Infrastruct. Secur., 2017, pp. 88–99.
[35] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28.
[36] R. Taormina, S. Galelli, N. O. Tippenhauer, and E. Salomons, “The battle
of the attack detection algorithms: 1 disclosing cyber attacks on water
distribution 2 networks,” J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage., vol. 144, no. 8,
2018, Art. no. 04018048.
[37] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time
series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–24,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2211.14730.
[38] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–23,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.02186.
[39] P. Liu, Q. Han, T. Wu, and W. Tao, “Anomaly detection in industrial
multivariate time-series data with neutrosophic theory,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 13458–13473, Aug. 2023.