This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

Temporal-Spatial Decoupled Self-Supervised
Multi-Task Learning for Video Anomaly Detection
and Localization in Intelligent Transportation
Surveillance Systems
Dicong Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qilong Wang , Member, IEEE,
Qinghua Hu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Kaijun Wu , Member, IEEE
Abstract— Video anomaly detection (VAD) has become a critical research focus in the realms of computer vision and intelligent
transportation systems, particularly with the rise of generative
AI and advancements in self-supervised learning. These developments open up new frontiers in understanding complex scenarios
within intelligent transportation systems. Since previous methods,
confined to a single paradigm, inadequately captured intricate
feature information, which led to a bottleneck that constrained
the performance; individuals form unbiased and logical evaluations of matters through an in-depth review of a multitude
of factors and rationalizations. Decoupled multi-task learning
not only overcomes the limitations of single-task paradigms
but also meets the requirements for comprehensiveness and
objectivity in distinguishing things. Therefore, we propose a
self-supervised multi-task learning network with object-level
spatiotemporal decoupling in this paper. We decouple the video
anomaly detection task in both spatial and temporal dimensions
to construct multiple proxy tasks, optimizing overall performance
through joint learning. Specifically, we first utilize a pre-trained
object detector to construct spatiotemporal context cubes. Then,
on the decoupled dimensions, we design several related proxy
tasks, adjusting the context cube structure to accommodate
each proxy task, and providing reliable information for anomaly
detection through joint training. In the end, our method achieved
performance that surpasses existing methods on three traffic road
datasets, namely UCSD Ped2, Avenue, and ShanghaiTech, with
AUCs of 99.6%, 95.6%, and 87.7%, respectively. It demonstrates
the potential of generative AI-powered anomaly detection systems
in advancing intelligent transportation applications.

Received 4 January 2025; revised 15 March 2025; accepted 2 April 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62276186; in part by the Natural Science Foundation
Key Project of Gansu Province under Grant 23JRRA860; in part by Inner
Mongolia Key Research and Development and Achievement Transformation
Project under Grant 2023YFDZ0043, Grant 2023YFDZ0054, and Grant
2023YFSH0043; in part by the Key Research and Development Project of
Lanzhou Jiaotong University under Grant ZDYF2304; and in part by the Key
Talent Project of Gansu Province. The Associate Editor for this article was
T. R. Gadekallu. (Corresponding authors: Qilong Wang; Kaijun Wu.)
Dicong Wang is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China, and also with the School of Electronics
and Information Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070,
China (e-mail: wangdc_2021@tju.edu.cn).
Qilong Wang and Qinghua Hu are with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: qlwang@tju.edu.cn;
huqinghua@tju.edu.cn).
Kaijun Wu is with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou 730070, China (e-mail:
wkj@mail.lzjtu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3559166

Index Terms— Video anomaly detection, multi-task learning,
decoupling, generative AI, self-supervised Learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid development of intelligent transportation
systems, video surveillance, as a critical component of
traffic management, serving as one of the core technologies for
real-time traffic monitoring and anomaly behavior detection.
In particular, pedestrian anomaly behavior detection in road
scenarios is not only vital for traffic safety but also a key task
in enhancing the intelligence level of intelligent transportation
systems [1], [2]. In recent years, driven by an exponential
surge in surveillance video, video anomaly detection continues
to maintain its indispensability within the fields of computer
vision and pattern recognition. Video anomaly detection, as a
crucial component of intelligent video analysis, is widely
applied in various urban management sectors, including intelligent transport system, autonomous driving, and infrastructure
maintenance, within the construction of smart cities [3]. Additionally, in intelligent transportation systems [4], real-time
identification and processing of abnormal events in traffic flow
(such as traffic accidents, violations, emergencies, etc.) can
significantly improve traffic safety and management efficiency,
promote the intelligent and digital transformation of urban
traffic management, and optimize traffic flow and resource
allocation. Hence, augmenting the performance and efficiency
of video anomaly detection holds paramount significance
and value in realizing intelligent applications and propelling
relevant research endeavors forward.
Up to the present, various anomaly detection methods have
emerged under different supervisory settings, encompassing
remarkable techniques in unsupervised [5], [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11], [12], weakly supervised [13], [14], and semisupervised paradigms [15], [16]. In these regimes, early
reconstruction or prediction methods simply utilized either
motion or appearance information of objects for anomaly
detection. However, Cai et al. [6] combined both to capture
the consistency between motion and appearance. Although
this combination has somewhat advanced the progress in
addressing the consistency issue, the vanilla fusion of motion
appearances may overlook the fact that the same type of
abnormality could exhibit different patterns. In order to

1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

further explore higher-level visual features and investigate the
complex relationship between object motion and appearance.
Yang et al. [11] proposed a new paradigm for video anomaly
detection based on keyframe reconstruction, grounded in video
encoding theory. Although this method excels in maintaining
video continuity and consistency, its effectiveness heavily
depends on the representativeness of the selected keyframes.
In the real world, abnormal events are relatively rare, with
normal data typically dominating the dataset, leading to a
prevalent imbalance in favor of negative samples. Among the
existing unsupervised methods in use, particularly in detecting
rare anomalies, are significantly influenced by the abundance
of dominant negative samples. While the above-mentioned
endeavors have been continuously exploring and striving
within the domain of VAD, the detection of anomalies in
VAD still presents challenges with regard to two distinct
variables [2]: (1) Rarity or scarcity. Anomalies are rare,
making it challenging to acquire enough authentic examples
for training. (2) Ambiguity or vagueness. Anomalies lack fixed
semantics, as they encompass diverse events across varying
subjects and scenarios. Whether an event is normal or anomalous depends on the task’s context or overall scenario, thus
introducing variability and uncertainty. More recently, selfsupervised multi-task learning has emerged as another avenue
for VAD, yielding significantly improved results [17], [18],
[19], [20], [22], [23], [24]. Self-supervised learning methods
aim to explore supervisory signals by learning representations
from unlabeled data. It involves designing auxiliary tasks
(proxy tasks) to leverage unlabeled data for self-supervised
learning. These auxiliary tasks encompass various strategies,
including data augmentation by manipulating parameters of
existing data to transform it into new and unique samples;
employing temporally aware contrastive learning to address
performance issues arising from inconsistencies between individual auxiliary tasks and anomaly detection tasks [25];
combining different forms of predictive tasks or implementing
various variants of a single predictive task [10], [11]; and
utilizing different methods in one or more reconstruction tasks
to alleviate the “identity mapping” problem in reconstruction,
thereby better distinguishing anomalies [12]. The ultimate goal
is to empower models to discern valuable features within
the data and progressively assimilate an understanding of the
inherent structure and semantic information through the execution of these tasks, leading to enhanced overall performance.
Based on the preceding discussion, Individual
reconstruction- or prediction-based methods (Fig. 1(a))
struggle to capture comprehensive object representations,
especially for subtle anomalies, leading to suboptimal
performance. Dual-branch structures (Fig. 1(b)), which
separately learn spatial and temporal features, may suffer
from information loss when handling these dimensions
independently. Jointly training multiple correlated tasks
often outperforms single-task approaches, extracting more
comprehensive features. As shown in Fig. 1(c), multiple
proxy tasks can guide the model toward richer feature
representations, enhancing anomaly detection performance.
This synergistic approach improves the model’s consistency
and effectiveness in detecting subtle anomalies. In this work,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 1. Illustration of difference in various task paradigms for video anomaly
detection. (a) single-task paradigms lack subtle anomaly feature capture,
(b) temporal-spatial separation misses feature interactions, and (c) Ours is
a decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning approach.

we designed a more challenging proxy task by spatialtemporal decoupling, where we designed multiple proxy
sub-tasks along the time and space dimensions to process
time and spatial information at a finer granularity. First,
to extract key information from the video, we employed
an off-the-shelf object detector to detect each object in the
video and extract the corresponding feature information.
Next, for each detected object, we performed a series of
operations, including cropping along the object’s bounding
box to construct a spatiotemporal context cube centered
around the object, adapting the cube structure based on
the task requirements. In the spatial dimension. ① We
applied a mask operation to the segmented patches and
used them as input to train the model by reconstructing
the masked parts of the information. ② For each frame in
the spatiotemporal context cube, we decomposed it into
several equal-sized patches, scrambled the original positions
of these patches, and then trained the model to predict their
correct positions. These tasks help the model gain a deeper
understanding of the structural aspects of spatial information
and its relationship to the overall content of the video. In the
temporal dimension. ③ For all frames in the spatiotemporal
context cube, we shuffled their temporal order and then
trained the model to predict the correct position of these
frames in the original sequence. ④ We removed a specific
frame from each spatiotemporal context cube and used the
information from the preceding and succeeding frames to
predict the removed frame. Through these operations, the
model is able to capture anomalous patterns in time and
further enhance its ability to understand temporal information.
We believe that anomaly detection involves not only motion
anomalies but also appearance anomalies. Therefore, through
spatial-temporal decoupling, we perform multitask processing
along the time and space dimensions to more effectively
identify different types of anomalies. We highlight the main
contributions as follows:
– We have decoupled the video anomaly detection task into
both temporal and spatial dimensions, designing it as a
multi-task learning paradigm for anomaly detection.
– We approach video anomaly detection as a multi-task
learning challenge, wherein we consolidate diverse
self-supervised proxy tasks from various dimensions
within a unified model for joint learning.
– We were among the early adopters of decoupled selfsupervised multi-task learning in the domain of video
anomaly detection.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

3

– We have conducted experiments that illustrate the superiority of our approach over state-of-the-art methods across
three different traffic road scenario benchmarks.
The subsequent parts of this paper are organized in the
following manner: Section II delves into the related work on
self-supervised multi-task learning in video anomaly detection.
Section III offers a comprehensive description of the proposed
self-supervised multi-task learning method with temporalspatial decoupling. Section IV presents a series of experiments
conducted to evaluate the proposed method, along with a discussion of some of future directions and practical implications.
In the end, Section V provides a summary of the methodology
adopted for this paper.

and self-supervised learning. By using dictionary learning to
generate segment-level features and leveraging self-supervised
learning to generate pseudo-normal/abnormal samples, the
framework trains an anomaly detector. Although it effectively
distinguishes normal and abnormal events in most cases, it still
encounters false negatives when dealing with certain complex
anomalies, such as low-frequency anomalies. Zanella et al.
[28] leveraged existing vision-language models to generate
textual descriptions for each test frame, along with a specific
prompting mechanism to unlock the language model’s capabilities in temporal aggregation and anomaly score estimation,
making it an effective video anomaly detector.

II. R ELATED W ORK

As described by Zhang and Yang [29], we initially provide
the definition of multi-task learning:
Definition 1 (Multi-task learning): Given m learning tasks
m
{Ti }i=1
where all the tasks or a subset of them are related
but not identical, multi-task learning aims to help improve the
learning of a model for Ti by using the knowledge contained
in the m tasks.
Multi-task models have the capacity to learn both the
commonalities and differences among various tasks, resulting
in improved efficiency and model quality for each individual
task [30], [31]. Consequently, compared to single-task models,
the risk of over fitting diminishes, while the generalization capability strengthens. Georgescu et al. [20] pioneered
the treatment of video anomaly detection as a multi-task
learning endeavor. By combining knowledge distillation and
several self-supervised proxy tasks into a unified architecture,
they effectively tackled the complex challenge of anomaly
detection. Baradaran and Bergevin [30] incorporated three
complementary proxy tasks, establishing two branches for
future semantic segmentation and optical flow magnitude
estimation to achieve anomaly detection. Additionally, they
innovatively integrated factors such as the direction of object
motion and distance from the camera into the scope of
anomaly detection. Barbalau et al. [23] revisited the selfsupervised multi-task learning framework originally proposed
in [20]. Building upon this foundation, they explored alternative proxy tasks and adopted the convolutional vision
Transformer (CvT) [31] as the backbone, resulting in further
enhanced performance of the model. Therefore, leveraging the characteristics and advantages of multitask learning,
we designed several targeted proxy tasks and trained them
jointly. The model can fully explore the intrinsic correlations
and complementarities between the tasks, significantly enhancing its ability to understand and represent the data. Multitask
learning enables knowledge sharing across different tasks,
allowing the model to simultaneously learn and extract information from multiple perspectives. This not only enhances the
model’s generalization performance in complex scenarios but
also facilitates knowledge transfer and sharing between tasks.

A. Video Anomaly Detection
The advancement of deep neural networks has significantly enhanced anomaly detection by incorporating various
research paradigms, including knowledge distillation [20],
[21], self-supervised learning [22], [23], [24], [25], and metalearning [26]. These approaches collectively contribute to
the improved efficiency and accuracy of capturing anomalous behaviors within complex scenes. Georgescu et al. [19]
proposed an object-level approach that treats anomaly detection as a binary classification task. To overcome the issue
of lacking anomaly samples and to improve performance,
they created scene-independent pseudo-anomaly samples for
adversarial training and binary classifier training. However, the
introduction of optical flow significantly reduced the model’s
computational efficiency, potentially making it unsuitable for
real-time processing of high frame-rate or high-resolution
videos. Zhou et al. [27] proposed an appearance-motion
network to improve the accuracy of video-based accident
detection in congested traffic. Features are extracted through
parallel appearance and motion convolutional networks, and
auxiliary networks, optical flow learners, and temporal attention modules are introduced to enhance the model’s ability to
recognize complex traffic scenes. Additionally, a new traffic
anomaly dataset is constructed and effectively validated. However, the model occasionally misidentifies non-collision events,
such as vehicle malfunctions, as collisions due to the similarity
in motion features. Qing et al. [24] proposed a self-supervised
learning approach called hierarchical consistency (HiCo)
specifically designed for untrimmed videos that contain abundant visual and semantic information. This method tailors
the learning process to capture various levels of visual and
semantic consistency, adapting them based on the relevance
between visual and semantic components. Utilizing reconstruction or prediction has emerged as a prevalent approach
within the realm of video anomaly detection. These methods
are trained solely on data representing normal patterns, nevertheless, deep neural networks exhibit an impressive capacity
for generalization, enabling the model to adeptly reconstruct
(or predict) demanding anomaly samples as well, it introduces
the challenge of over-generalization. Wu et al. [17] devised
the self-supervised sparse representation (S3R) framework,
exploring the synergistic effect between dictionary learning

B. Multi-Task Learning on VAD

C. Self-Supervised Learning on VAD
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a general learning
paradigm with the aim of automatically constructing supervision signals from raw data, without external labels or manual

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

annotations. Its core principle is to leverage the inherent structure and information within the data for the learning process.
SSL can be divided into two main methods: constructing
proxy tasks and conducting contrastive learning. In proxy tasks
for images, researchers design a series of tasks such as data
rotation [32], jigsaw puzzles [33], prediction, or reconstruction [34], [35] to enable the model to learn visual features
from the data. Unlike image proxy tasks, video proxy tasks
have their unique attributes—temporal information. In video
proxy tasks, the focus is often on temporal information, such as
frame sequence ordering [22], frame playback speed [36], and
the arrow of time [20], [37], among others. Wang et al. [22]
introduced a novel proxy task for predictive sequence modeling that disentangles spatiotemporal components by shuffling
spatial and temporal cubes, simplifying the self-supervised
learning framework and achieves remarkable performance
improvements, although it requires substantial computational
resources due to the extensive use of permutation-based data.
Shi et al. [38] proposed a progressive learning strategy based
on the difficulty of proxy tasks, gradually introducing multiple proxy tasks in ascending order of task difficulty to
improve performance. If a proxy task is more challenging,
they typically encourage the model to learn more complex
features; the performance might be better, which is exactly
what our method achieves. In contrastive learning, models
are tasked with extracting features from the same sample
or distinct samples and learning by comparing the similarity
of these extracted features [16]. Liu et al. [26] proposed
a meta-learning method based on ensemble uncertainty for
anomaly detection in road scenes, particularly suitable for
autonomous driving. This method implicitly quantifies uncertainty by measuring the differences between different models,
detecting out-of-distribution (OoD) samples that deviate significantly from the training data distribution. However, due to
its reliance on the outputs of multiple semantic segmentation
models, inference requires running multiple models, which
may lead to longer inference times, posing certain limitations,
especially in real-time road monitoring systems. Wang et al.
[39] used an autocorrelation mechanism to map video features
into sub-feature spaces, supervised by contrastive loss to detect
anomalous videos. Still, it demands a substantial amount of
training data and task-specific data augmentation strategies.
Inspired by the significant success of self-supervised learning
in the field of image representation learning, we attempt to
extend this paradigm to the domain of anomaly detection,
exploring its potential in video analysis. By applying selfsupervised multi-task learning to video, we can fully exploit
the latent information within the video, thereby better learning
video representations and features. It will bring new perspectives and challenges to research and applications in the field
of video anomaly detection.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overview
Overview. An overview of the spatiotemporal decoupled
self-supervised multi-task learning network that we propose
at the object level is depicted in Fig. 2. The basic parts of

our approach are as follows: generating spatiotemporal context
cubes, developing spatiotemporal decoupled proxy tasks, and
joint training. To begin, we utilize an off-the-shelf object
detector such as YOLOv3 or YOLOv5 to obtain a series of
bounding boxes related to the object in the adjacent frames
of the video I = {Ii−l , · · · , Ii−1 , Ii , Ii+1 , · · · , Ii+l }, We then
perform cropping and resizing operations along these bounding boxes for the same object to generate the spatiotemporal
context cube. After that, in order to adequately take into
account the attributes of the spatial and temporal dimensions,
we apply an array of explores to develop adaptable proxy
tasks. Within the spatial dimension, two proxy subtasks are
introduced: “the spatial patches masking” and “predicting the
positions of the spatial patches”. The model learns information
of different spatial visual features through such tasks, thereby
improving its ability to pick up spatial structures and patterns
in videos. Within the temporal dimension, two proxy subtasks are established: “predict missing boxes” and “predict
temporal position”. These tasks contribute to the model’s
learning of the temporal evolution and changes that occur
during abnormalities. In the end, we train the aforementioned
proxy subtasks jointly by a shared backbone. Diverse proxy
subtasks are able to interact and connect by a shared visual
representation of features. By acquiring more extensive and
detailed feature information from various proxy subtasks, the
model enhances its performance. Furthermore, by sharing the
backbone, conflicts and competition among distinct proxy
tasks are minimized, which ended in a more stable and efficient
learning procedure for the model. The symbols and their
corresponding descriptions are presented in Table I of this
paper.
1) Backbone Architecture: Drawing on prior works [20],
[22], [40], we employ 3D convolutional neural network (3D
CNN) and Transformer blocks to construct the backbone
network, with each proxy subtask having its corresponding
prediction head. Initially, we model the spatiotemporal representation of the input using a 3D CNN block. Each 3D block
consists of two 3 × 3 × 3 3D convolutional layers and a
3D max-pooling layer, with each convolutional layer followed
by a batch normalization (BN) layer and a ReLU activation
function. Following that, we provide Transformer blocks that
are capable of effectively processing video sequences, the
output produced by the Transformer blocks is subsequently
subjected to global pooling in order to generate the final result.
B. Temporal-Spatial Decoupled Self-Supervised Multi-Task
Learning
Spatial dimension—Proxy subtask I. Spatial patches masking. Within the field of self-supervised learning, He et al.
[41] devised a straightforward yet exceptionally efficient
method: they reconstruct the missing pixels of the input image
after randomly masking a portion (or patch) of it. A significantly enhanced performance has been achieved through
the implementation of this approach. Encouraged by this,
we implemented the mask reconstruction task in the frames
at the object level and optimized the network utilizing the
L2 loss. In the testing phase, a random subset of the patches

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

5

Fig. 2. Method overview. We propose an object-centric spatiotemporal decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning network, which consists of three main
components: the construction of spatiotemporal context cubes; employing diverse strategies to generate flexible proxy tasks in both temporal and spatial
dimensions; and joint training using a shared backbone. We can simultaneously learn temporal and spatial features within a unified framework, thus better
capturing anomalies in videos.

TABLE I
N OTATIONS AND T HEIR D ESCRIPTIONS I NVOLVED
IN THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD

whether the current frame is anomalous by calculating the
difference between the original image and the completed
reconstruction.

Iˆ I = f T (I ; θ I ) ; θ f
(1)
2

Lsub1 = I − Iˆ I
2
1 Xm
Scor est1 =
Ii − IˆiI
i=1
m

in the input (64 × 64 in our settings) is masked for reconstruction. Finally, the anomaly score, which is calculated using
mean absolute difference (MAD), is utilized for determining

(2)
(3)

where, the ground truth of the i-th object-level frame is
denoted as Ii , Iˆ I represents the output obtained from the proxy
subtask I, T (∗; θ I ) represents the spatiotemporal context cube
with masked patches, f ∗; θ f represents the backbone of our
model, the 3D encoder, and the number of frames in the cube
is denoted by m.
Proxy subtask II—Predict the positions of the spatial
patches. First, each frame within the spatiotemporal context
cube is split into n × n the same patches, which are subsequently shuffled. To ensure that the content and relative
position of each patch within the context cube are correct,
we set the absolute positions of the patches to be arranged
sequentially from left to right and from top to bottom.
Concurrently, so as to preserve the natural temporal order,
the relative positions of each frame along the temporal axis
of the spatiotemporal context cube remain constant. After
inputting it into the backbone for training, use the spatial
patches position classifier to predict the absolute position of
each patch in every frame, and optimize the network using
cross-entropy loss, as shown in equation (5). During the
testing phase, we use context cubes containing the correct
patch position sequences. The model predicts the position of
patches in each frame and generates a position matrix. In the
position matrix, the diagonal values should be the largest
in their respective columns, indicating the probability that

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

the corresponding patch is in the correct position. Since the
model is trained only with normal data, when encountering
anomalous events during testing, the model often produces
large prediction errors at the correct anomalous locations,
resulting in significantly lower confidence in the predicted
outcome at these locations, which leads to the detection of
anomalies at those positions. Therefore, for anomaly scores,
the predicted probabilities along the diagonal of the matrix
are used as the anomaly scores for these patches. The matrix
predicted by the spatial patches classifier is denoted as Zs .
The diagonal of the matrix is extracted using diag(·), and the
minimum value is used to obtain Scorest2 . This value denotes
the object-level anomaly score. In a nutshell, the object-level
anomaly score is determined by selecting the minimum score
along the diagonal of the matrix. This is due to the fact that
a sample may be considered abnormal if a frame or patch is
incorrectly predicted.

Iˆ I I = f T (I ; θ I I ) ; θ f
(4)
1 Xn 2
C E(Is , IˆsI I )
(5)
Lsub2 = 2
s=1
n
Scor est2 = min (diag (Z s ))
(6)
where, Iˆ I I represents the output obtained from the proxy
subtask II, T (∗; θ I I ) represents the spatiotemporal context
cube with spatially shuffled patches. To align with the overall
trend of anomaly scores for the entire task, we invert the
frame-level anomaly scores. It implies that when the overall
anomaly score takes on higher values, it can be considered as
an anomaly, and vice versa.
Temporal dimension—Proxy subtask III. Predict temporal
position. Stephen Hawking [42], in his seminal work “A Brief
History of Time” introduced the concept of the “arrow of
time,” which suggests the reality of a distinct trajectory for
time and provides substantiation for the inexorable progression of forward-moving time that is unreversible. Influenced
by it, we adopted a strategy to address the spatiotemporal
context. To be more precise, we shuffle and reorder the frames
within the spatiotemporal context cube along the timeline and
then input them into the model for training. By predicting
the correct position of each frame, the model is guided
to more comprehensively capture the temporal relationships
between frames. During testing, we input context cubes with
the correct temporal order to generate the temporal position
prediction matrix Zt . Each element in the matrix represents
the predicted position of the corresponding frame on the time
axis. Afterward, we use the diagonal prediction probability
of the prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In terms of
network optimization, we utilize a cross-entropy loss function
as follows:

Iˆ I I I = f T (I ; θ I I I ) ; θ f
(7)
1 Xm
C E(Ii , IˆiI I I )
(8)
Lsub3 =
i=1
m
Scor est3 = min (diag (Z t ))
(9)
where, Iˆ I I I represents the output obtained from the proxy
subtask III, T (∗; θ I I I ) represents the spatiotemporal context
cube with shuffled frames.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Proxy subtask IV. Predict the missing box. Discarding (or
removing) a frame from the spatiotemporal context cubes and
predicting the frame using its contextual information. This
includes predicting not only the next frame based on the
preceding video sequence but also an intermediate frame using
the frames before and after it, and predicting the content of
a prior video frame using subsequent frames. This design
guarantees a comprehensive prediction process by including
various perspectives to capture the features of the object frame.
As a result of object-level frame prediction, the prediction
process is less susceptible to background interference, which
improves the accuracy of the missing frame prediction. During
training, we optimize the network using the L2 loss function,
and we utilize mean squared error (MSE) as the anomaly score
(Scorest4 ) to determine anomalies, as shown below:

Iˆ I V = f T (I ; θ I V ) ; θ f
(10)
Lsub4 = I − Iˆ I V

2

(11)

where, Iˆ I V represents the output obtained from the proxy
subtask IV, T (∗; θ I V ) represents the spatiotemporal context
cube with missing frames.
C. Joint Loss Function
To train the network, we utilize a 3D backbone with Transformer for joint optimization on all four of the aforementioned
proxy subtasks. The loss function therefore associated with
joint training is as follows:
Ltotal = 1 Lsub1 + 2 Lsub2 + 3 Lsub3 + 4 Lsub4 (12)
where, 1,...,4 represents the weights during joint training,
determining the trade-off among the four proxy tasks. The
training pseudo code for the method we employ is provided
by Algorithm 1.
D. VAD Inference
When testing, we utilize an object detector to perform
object detection on each frame. For each object, a series of
operations, including cropping, are conducted to generate the
corresponding object-level spatiotemporal context cube. The
model is trained using each spatiotemporal cube as input,
and its outputs correspond to the following subtasks: Scorest1 ,
Scorest2 , Scorest3 , and Scorest4 . In the spatial dimension,
for the spatial patch masking subtask, we use MAD as the
anomaly score. In the predict positions of the spatial patches
subtask, we choose the probabilities along the diagonal of
the spatial prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In the
temporal dimension, for the predict temporal position subtask,
we choose the probabilities along the diagonal of the temporal
prediction matrix as the anomaly score. In the missing frame
prediction subtask, we still use MSE as the anomaly score to
determine anomalies. The final anomaly score of an object is
calculated by averaging the anomaly scores supplied by each
prediction head:

Scor e(I ) = 14 Scor est1 + Scor est2 + Scor est3 + Scor est4 (13)
where, Scor est2 and Scor est3 represent negation, and higher
values indicate anomalies. Because the initial detection is

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

7

TABLE II

Algorithm 1 Training pseudo code of temporal-spatial
decoupled self-supervised multi-task learning

C OMPARISON A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASETS .
(#F RAMES\V IDEOS )

Input: D the training dataset with only normal frames;
object-centric spatiotemporal context cubes; Cube size; the
learning rate; 3D Encoder.
2: Output: optimally trained model.
3: Initialize all parameters.
4: for the number of training epochs do
5:
Sample object-centric spatiotemporal context cubes from D.
6:
Function multi − task(·):
7:
# Proxy subtask I of spatial patches masking.
1:

2

8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:

Lsub1 ← I− IˆI
2
# Proxy subtask II of predicts the positions of the
spatial patches.
Lsub2 ← CE(Is , IˆsII )
# Proxy subtask III of predicts temporal position.
Lsub3 ← CE(Ii , IˆiIII )
# Proxy subtask IV of Predict the missing box.
Lsub4 ← I− IˆIV
2

15:
16:
17:

return 1 Lsub1 + 2 Lsub2 +
Ltotal ← multi-task(·)
# parameter optimization

3 Lsub3 +

4 Lsub4

18:
19:

Update network parameters using the optimizer Adam.
end for

Fig. 3.

Examples of both anomalous and normal events in each dataset.

CUHK Avenue [43] is released by the Chinese University
of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 2013. It consists of 16 training
videos and 21 testing videos, with a resolution of 640 ×
360 pixels. The video clips cover various indoor and outdoor scenes and contain 47 different types of anomalies,
including running, crowding, loitering, and more.
• The ShanghaiTech Campus dataset [45] provides a variety
of scenarios and anomalous behaviors. It contains video
clips of both normal and abnormal behaviors, which
includes traffic accidents, sudden occurrences, assemblies, and more. The dataset consists of 330 training
videos and 107 testing videos, with 13 diverse scenes
and a wide range of abnormal categories. The resolution
of the videos is 856 × 480 pixels. The dataset contains
video clips with various lengths, perspectives, conditions
of lighting, and other details, making them more representative of the complexity of the actual world.
Fig. 3 depicts normal and anomalous samples from the
aforementioned datasets. The illustrations that were in the
figure depict video snippets of various scenarios, including
normal and abnormal actions such as walking, congestion,
battling, and traffic accidents, etc. Table II displays some
statistics regarding the various datasets, including the number
of video segments, the number of frames, and the kinds of
abnormal behaviors present in each dataset. This information
provides an overview of the characteristics and range of the
datasets utilized in the evaluation.
•

at the object level, it’s easy to locate the anomaly region.
As there are multiple objects in the video frame, each with its
own anomaly score, the overall anomaly score for the entire
video frame is determined by the maximum score among the
corresponding anomaly maps.
Let the frame-level anomaly score be Scorefra . For each
video frame where j objects are detected, the overall anomaly
score is as follows:



 max Scor e(I )1 , Scor e(I )2 , . . ., Scor e(I ) j ,
Scor e f ra =
(14)
j >0


0,
j =0

If there are no objects detected in a frame, the anomaly score
is assigned to 0.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
In this section, we evaluate our proposed method on three
publicly available datasets: the CUHK Avenue dataset [43], the
UCSD Pedestrian dataset [44], and the ShanghaiTech Campus
dataset [45]. We conduct both qualitative and quantitative
analyses of the experimental results to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.
• The UCSD Pedestrian dataset [44] consists of two subsets: UCSD Ped1 and UCSD Ped2, each corresponding
to a specific scenario. UCSD Ped1 includes 34 training clips and 36 testing clips, while UCSD Ped2 has
16 training clips and 12 testing clips. Both subsets provide frame-level and pixel-level ground truth annotations.
In this dataset, any non-pedestrian objects or abnormal
movements of pedestrians are considered anomalies.

B. Evaluation Metrics and Implementation Details
As per the evaluation metric that is commonly accepted
and used within the VAD community [20], [34], In video
anomaly detection, area under the curve (AUC) is a widely

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

employed evaluation metric. It assesses a model’s ability to
distinguish between positive and negative samples by measuring the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, depicted from the starting point (0,0) to the endpoint
(1,1). By employing AUC, subjective assumptions can be
circumvented during the threshold selection process. AUC
comprehensively considers all possible thresholds, providing
a more holistic evaluation of model performance compared
to other methods using fixed thresholds (e.g., accuracy and
recall), especially when dealing with imbalanced datasets.
Therefore, we employ AUC to evaluate our proposed method.
1) Implementation Details: In order to guarantee fairness
and generality in comparison, we followed the setup of previous outstanding works [22], [23], [46] and used YOLOv3 as
the object of interest extractor. For different datasets, we set
different confidence thresholds according to their characteristics to filter out low-confidence objects. Specifically, for
the medium-sized dataset Avenue and the large-scale dataset
ShanghaiTech, we set the confidence threshold at 0.8 to maintain high accuracy. For the smaller and earlier-released dataset,
UCSD Ped2, due to its lower pixel resolution and relatively
smaller data volume, we set the confidence threshold at 0.5.
We resized the input data to 64 × 64 and set the batch size to
128. The Adam optimizer is employed with a learning rate of
2e-4. The hyperparameters β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 are set up
for the Adam optimizer, with all other parameters remaining
at their default settings. To ensure that each task contributes
sufficiently during the multi-task learning process, we assign
equal weights to the hyperparameters 1,...,4 in Equation (12).
The entire network training and testing are conducted end-toend on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE III
C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS . T HE P ERFORMANCES
OF THE C OMPARED M ETHODS A RE S OURCED F ROM T HEIR
O RIGINAL PAPERS

C. Comparative Evaluation With State-of-the-Art (SOTA)
Methods
The comparison between our proposed method and the
existing state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark datasets
(Avenue, ShanghaiTech, and UCSD Ped2) is represented in
Table III. These methods are categorized into single-proxy
tasks (based on reconstruction/prediction), hybrid-proxy tasks,
and multi-proxy tasks according to different paradigms.
We found that whether it is a single proxy task based on
reconstruction or prediction, or a hybrid proxy task combining the both, the performance generally lags behind that
of self-supervised multi-proxy tasks, and this gap becomes
increasingly pronounced as the scenes become more complex.
In the self-supervised multi-task paradigm, the aggregation of
multiple complex task features enables the method to fully
exploit the data itself as supervisory information, thereby
demonstrating superior performance on larger-scale and more
complex datasets. Results on Ped2: the performance of various
proxy task methods is consistently above 90%. Compared to
the previous state-of-the-art method [57], our method offers
highly competitive performance, with a mere 0.1% disparity.
Due to the relatively old release date of the Ped2 dataset and
its lower pixel resolution, the images are not particularly clear.
Therefore, when performance approaches a bottleneck, the performance differences between methods are not so pronounced.

This, in turn, illustrates the effectiveness and superiority of our
method. Results on Avenue: consistent advancements in VAD
and the ensuing competition among different approaches have
undeniably resulted in substantial performance enhancements,
enabling methods to rival one another and go close to or
even surpass the 90% threshold [9], [11], [20], [46], [57],
[59]. Nevertheless, in comparison to these approaches, our
method’s performance still reaches the current optimal level,
specifically 95.9%, compared to the previous state-of-the-art
self-supervised method [61], our performance surpasses it by
around 2%. This indicates the benefits and potential shown
by the synergy between multiple tasks and the logical combination of proxy tasks in the self-supervised learning setting.
Results on ShanghaiTech: In terms of scene complexity and
data scale, the ShanghaiTech dataset is more intricate and
expansive in comparison to the ped2 and Avenue. However,
we unveiled the most optimal result at 87.7%, which is an
almost 2% improvement over the previous state-of-the-art
approach [59]. This also demonstrates the superiority of
self-supervised learning, which decouples the spatiotemporal
dimensions of VAD and integrates expression features from
multiple perspectives to optimize the model’s performance.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

TABLE IV

TABLE V

C OMPARISON W ITH THE O PTIMAL M ETHODS U SING D IFFERENT
M ODALITIES AS I NPUTS . W HERE , “ ” D ENOTES I NPUT AS RGB
I MAGE , “ ” R EPRESENTS I NPUT AS O PTICAL F LOW, “ ” S IGNIFIES
I NPUT AS S EMANTIC M AP, AND “ ” D ENOTES I NPUT AS
G RADIENT M AP. “ ” R EPRESENTS D EPTH M AP

P ERFORMANCE ON AVENUE AND P ED 2 W HILE VARYING
THE P ROXY S UBTASKS

9

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE ON AVENUE W HILE C HANGING
THE P ROXY S UBTASKS

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF E XECUTION E FFICIENCY W ITH
OTHER SOTA M ETHODS

In Table IV, we compared our method with state-of-the-art
approaches that use different modalities as inputs. From the
table, we can observe that despite prior methods using a single
modality (such as optical flow/RGB image) or combinations
of different modalities (such as RGB image + optical flow
/semantic segmentation map, etc.) as inputs, our method
remains competitive. Although the work [64] employed the
combination of optical flow and semantic segmentation maps
to reduce background interference in input data, making the
model more focused on dynamically changing foreground
objects, our approach continues to demonstrate superior performance. While the performance of [30] surpasses ours on
ShanghaiTech, it’s essential to note that they employed three
different modalities (RGB image + optical flow + depth
map), combining them, whereas our method solely utilizes
RGB image. The utilization of multiple modalities not only
enhances the capture of object appearance and motion but also
improves the performance of the model to a significant extent.
Inputs from modalities other than images reduce background
interference, benefiting the performance improvement of the
model, this contributes valuable insights to our future work.
The aforementioned analysis suggests that multi-task learning
can indeed acquire richer feature representations than a single
task, and even outperforms features learned when different
modalities with less noise are fused as inputs.
D. Ablation Study
In Table V, we provide a detailed presentation of the
individual performance of each proxy subtask on the Avenue
and Ped2 datasets. Encouragingly, each task exhibits unique
advantages and achieves satisfactory results within its respective domain. This indicates that each proxy subtask in our
multi-task approach contributes valuable information and features to the model training, thereby aiding in the overall
enhancement of model performance. After a more detailed
analysis of the data in the table, we can observe that different
proxy tasks exhibit unique performance characteristics in

TABLE VIII
A NALYSIS OF THE I MPACT OF H YPERPARAMETER
C ONFIGURATIONS

various scenarios. The performance of the same task varies
across different scenarios as well. However, these proxy tasks
effectively compensate for potential limitations of the overall
model under a single task by enriching feature information
density from their respective perspectives. This indicates that
introducing diverse proxy tasks to enrich feature information
can provide more comprehensive support for VAD, ultimately
leading to a significant improvement in the overall model
performance.
1) Relevance Between Proxy Subtasks: Caruana [68] once
made such a definition: If task A as auxiliary task can improve
the performance of the model in task B, then the task A and
task B are associated, that is, “related”. The performance variations resulting from various subtask combinations on Avenue

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Performance corresponding to different cube sizes.

are displayed in Table VI. We conducted a series of experiments initially, combining spatial dimension subtasks 1 and
2. The results indicate a significant performance improvement
compared to their respective individual subtasks. Subsequently,
a substantial enhancement in performance was also observed
in the combined experiment that includes subtasks 2 and
3. Further, we conducted experiments involving three tasks
and the combination of all tasks, the results demonstrated a
gradual improvement in performance. This also indicates that
the performance of anomaly detection can be substantially
improved through the synergy and combination of tasks. This
progressive performance improvement strongly supports the
effectiveness of our approach and highlights the advantages of
multi-task learning, as they can capture the complementarity
and correlation between different tasks.
2) Generating Object-Centric Spatiotemporal Context
Cubes: We use the bounding box of object o in the i-th
frame as the center and apply the same bounding box before
and after, forming a spatiotemporal context cube centered
around the object. Fig. 4 presents an analysis of the impact
of the quantity of frames included within the cube on the
performance of the model. The frame number was configured
within the range of 3 to 13, and its performance variability
was showcased using the Ped2 and Avenue datasets. It can
be observed that there is a beneficial correlation between
the number of frames within a specific range and the
performance of the model. Yet, when the quantity of frames
within the cube continually increases, the performance suffers
a decrease. It can be conjectured that if a context cube
contains too few frames, the same object may appear in
multiple cubes. This redundancy in object representation can
lead to duplicate feature information, which may overwhelm
the model with extraneous data during training and ultimately
reduce detection accuracy. On the other hand, if the number
of frames is too many, the context cube may contain multiple
objects. Given the potential for complex spatiotemporal
interactions between these objects, the model may encounter
greater uncertainty when distinguishing between abnormal
and normal behaviors, which could negatively affect the final
detection. Therefore, setting a reasonable number of frames
within the context cube is crucial to ensuring that the model
captures sufficient object features while avoiding excessive
complexity and redundant information.
3) Execution Efficiency Comparison: We compared the
efficiency of our method with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods

from different paradigms, as displayed in Table VII. The
results show that some methods trade higher performance
for lower efficiency, primarily constrained by complex operations such as optical flow calculations, as in the SSMTL++
[23] and object-centric [18] methods. In contrast, in selfsupervised multi-task methods, the simplified design of proxy
tasks significantly improves runtime efficiency while maintaining relatively high performance, as demonstrated by the
SLMPT [38]. Our method, within the self-supervised multitask framework, is able to maintain competitive efficiency
while ensuring high performance. The focus of our research
is primarily on improving performance, and with further
optimization of execution time in future work, its efficiency is
expected to improve further.
4) Analysis of Hyperparameter Effects on the Model: We
tuned and selected different hyperparameter configurations on
the Ped2 dataset to determine the optimal model settings,
as shown in Table VIII. Experimental results indicate that
with a fixed learning rate, model performance fluctuates with
changes in batch size. Similarly, when the batch size is held
constant, adjustments to the learning rate have varying impacts
on model performance, with smaller learning rates outperforming larger ones. This may be because larger learning rates tend
to cause overly large updates to the model parameters, thereby
affecting convergence stability. Overall, both the learning
rate and batch size influence model performance to different
extents, and appropriate parameter configurations can lead to
improved performance.
E. Visualization and Analysis
Figs. 5, 6, and 7 give qualitative illustrations of our
approach, encompassing anomaly score curves and exemplar
frames depicting both normal and abnormal events. Note that
we recognize and categorize normal and anomalous events in
each traffic road scene, with a focus on highlighting abnormal
ones. In general, when anomalous events take place, there
is a noticeable rise in the curve representing the anomaly
score, which then maintains a heightened level throughout the
duration of the abnormality. Once the event or behavior that
gives rise to the anomaly ceases, the curve rapidly descends
to a decreased level and maintains a relatively stable trend.
According to them, the method we have used has great
sensitivity to anomalies and can efficiently detect anomalous
events.
Fig. 5 illustrates how anomaly scores change during normal
and abnormal events in the UCSD Ped2 dataset. When the
video exclusively records pedestrians, the anomaly score curve
continually holds a lower level, however, it is seen that the
anomaly score experiences a significant spike as soon as a
rider enters the frame, and this heightened level is sustained
until the rider exits the frame. Fig. 6 illustrates how anomaly
scores change during normal and abnormal events in the
CUHK Avenue dataset. In Fig. 6, normal frames depict regular
pedestrian activities. When sudden abnormal behaviors occur
(e.g., a child running back and forth or a person pushing a
bicycle), the anomaly score curve sharply rises, whereas when
the subject of the abnormal behavior exits the frame (the child
runs out of it), the curve rapidly drops. In a similar vein,

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

11

rise. After the entire anomalous event is over, the curve
promptly reverts back to a lower and stable state.
F. Discussion

Fig. 5. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our
method on UCSD Ped2. The light red-shaded region and the white area
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events.

Fig. 6. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our
method on CUHK Avenue. The light red-shaded region and the white area
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events.

Fig. 7. Anomaly score curves and anomaly localization examples by our
method on ShanghaiTech. The light red-shaded region and the white area
correspondingly represent the ground truth of anomalies and normal events.

Fig. 7 illustrates the variation of anomaly scores for normal
and abnormal events on the ShanghaiTech dataset. In normal
frames, pedestrians walk normally at the intersection without
any abnormal behavior, and the anomaly score curve keeps at a
low level. However, in the case of a sudden abnormality, such
as a pedestrian’s bag being snatched or a physical altercation at
an intersection, the score curve suffers a rapid and significant

In this section, we will delve into the significant advantages
brought by our proposed method, analyze its feasibility in
practical applications, while also briefly introducing other possible methods in the field of video anomaly detection. Through
comparative analysis, we aim to comprehensively evaluate the
effectiveness of existing methods, while identifying potential
areas for improvement and research gaps.
We perform spatial-temporal decoupling of the video
anomaly detection task to separately capture temporal and
spatial information in the time and space dimensions. In the
temporal dimension, the focus is on the temporal sequence
patterns of events, identifying dynamic changes in abnormal
behaviors. In the spatial dimension, attention is given to the
spatial features and positional changes of objects, revealing spatial differences in abnormal events. By constructing
multiple proxy tasks related to each dimension, the model
can learn and process features at different levels, enhancing
its ability to tackle complex anomaly detection tasks. This
approach strengthens spatial-temporal feature understanding
through joint learning, improving robustness, generalization,
and efficiency. In practical applications, the spatial-temporal
decoupling method is highly feasible. By decoupling the
time and space dimensions, it effectively captures the
spatial-temporal information in videos, improving the model’s
ability to perform fine-grained detection of complex abnormal
behaviors. This method is particularly suitable for video data
such as surveillance footage and event logs, which exhibit
significant temporal and spatial feature differences. Additionally, constructing multiple self-supervised proxy tasks related
to time and space can promote knowledge sharing between
tasks, enhance learning efficiency and generalization ability,
reduce dependence on labeled data, and improve the model’s
adaptability in fields such as security surveillance, intelligent
transportation system, and traffic anomaly early warning.
It is often said that, “stones from other hills may serve to
polish jade.” the same holds true for the field of VAD. With the
development of technologies such as domain adaptation [69],
transfer learning [70], and federated learning [71], new solutions have been proposed for multiple bottleneck problems in
video anomaly detection, especially in the face of challenges
like scene variations and data distribution discrepancies. These
approaches provide new ideas and insights. The research on
domain adaptation technology in video anomaly detection
primarily focuses on enhancing the model’s generalization
ability to new environments and reducing the distribution
gap between the source and target domains. This is particularly important when annotated data in the target domain
is scarce, as it provides effective strategies for transfer and
adaptation. Meta-learning methods, applied in domain adaptation and multi-task learning, have significantly improved the
model’s ability to quickly adapt to new tasks and domains.
Transfer learning, by leveraging knowledge from one task,
enhances the model’s generalization capability in other tasks.
This is especially useful in scenarios with limited labeled

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

data, effectively addressing the data scarcity issue. Moreover,
by using methods such as similarity analysis to assess the
relationships between tasks, we can optimize model selection
in transfer learning, thereby improving detection performance.
This is particularly evident in anomaly detection tasks, where
leveraging knowledge from traffic surveillance scenarios can
significantly enhance model performance.
From the brief discussion above, it is evident that there are
still many directions in the field of video anomaly detection
that are worth exploring and researching in depth. These
methods not only provide valuable insights for addressing
the unique challenges in video anomaly detection but also
effectively enhance the performance of the model in several
aspects.
V. C ONCLUSION
In the field of intelligent transportation, traffic anomaly
detection plays a critical role in enhancing road safety
and optimizing traffic management efficiency. In this paper,
we propose an object-level spatiotemporal decoupled selfsupervised multi-task learning network for video anomaly
detection. Specifically, we decouple the task into spatiotemporal multi-task learning by constructing different forms of
spatiotemporal context cubes in both temporal and spatial
dimensions for joint learning of multiple tasks. Through
experimental validation and ablation analysis, we comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The experimental results indicate that our approach attains
optimal performance on widely utilized benchmark datasets,
regardless of whether it involves reconstruction, prediction,
or other hybrid methods. Our methodology maintains a high
level of competitiveness, even when compared to multimodal
input approaches. Furthermore, a succession of targeted ablation experiments confirmed the relevance and efficacy of the
different components of our method. Although our method
demonstrates outstanding capabilities, it is not devoid of
boundaries. When dealing with subtle or more covert anomalies, relying on object detectors may have certain limitations.
Therefore, future research should focus on improving the
model’s ability to detect these subtle anomalies while also
optimizing the relevance of task agents and the interaction
representations between tasks to further enhance the potential
application of video anomaly detection in intelligent transportation surveillance systems, ultimately, providing a more
robust technical foundation for intelligent traffic monitoring
and safety management.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Zhou et al., “Vision technologies with applications in traffic surveillance systems: A holistic survey,” 2024, arXiv:2412.00348.
[2] B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “A survey of
single-scene video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2293–2312, May 2022.
[3] Y. Fang et al., “Anomaly diagnosis of connected autonomous vehicles:
A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 105, May 2024, Art. no. 102223.
[4] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, P. P. Roy, and A. Mitra, “Vehicular
trajectory classification and traffic anomaly detection in videos using
a hybrid CNN-VAE architecture,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11891–11902, Aug. 2022.

[5] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[6] R. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Gao, and Z. Hao, “Appearance-motion
memory consistency network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 938–946.
[7] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented
appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335.
[8] D. Wang, Q. Hu, and K. Wu, “Dual-branch network with memory for
video anomaly detection,” Multimedia Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 247–259,
Feb. 2023.
[9] Y. Wang, C. Qin, Y. Bai, Y. Xu, X. Ma, and Y. Fu, “Making
reconstruction-based method great again for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
pp. 1215–1220.
[10] X. Wen et al., “Video anomaly detection based on cross-frame prediction
mechanism and spatio-temporal memory-enhanced pseudo-3D encoder,”
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 126, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 107057.
[11] Z. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wu, P. Wu, and X. Liu, “Video event restoration based
on keyframes for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 14592–14601.
[12] X. Wang et al., “Robust unsupervised video anomaly detection by
multipath frame prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2301–2312, Jun. 2022.
[13] H. Lv, C. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Localizing anomalies
from weakly-labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
pp. 4505–4515, 2021.
[14] C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Su, and Q. Huang, “Weakly supervised anomaly detection in videos considering the openness of events,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21687–21699,
Nov. 2022.
[15] S. Han, H. Song, S. Lee, S. Park, and M. Cha, “Elsa: Energy-based learning for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.15296.
[16] G. Wang, Y. Zhan, X. Wang, M. Song, and K. Nahrstedt, “Hierarchical semi-supervised contrastive learning for contamination-resistant
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022,
pp. 110–128.
[17] J. C. Wu, H. Y. Hsieh, D. J. Chen, C. S. Fuh, and T. L. Liu, “Selfsupervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745.
[18] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
[19] M. I. Georgescu, R. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and M. Shah,
“A background-agnostic framework with adversarial training for abnormal event detection in video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 4505–4523, Apr. 2021.
[20] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. Shahbaz Khan,
M. Popescu, and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via
self-supervised and multi-task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 12742–12752.
[21] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware
contrastive instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised
audio-visual violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2022, pp. 6278–6287.
[22] G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Qin, D. Zhang, X. Bao, and D. Huang,
“Video anomaly detection by solving decoupled spatio-temporal
jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022,
pp. 494–511.
[23] A. Barbalau et al., “SSMTL++: Revisiting self-supervised multi-task
learning for video anomaly detection,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
vol. 229, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103656.
[24] Z. Qing et al., “Learning from untrimmed videos: Self-supervised
video representation learning with hierarchical consistency,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 13821–13831.
[25] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WANG et al.: TEMPORAL-SPATIAL DECOUPLED SELF-SUPERVISED MULTI-TASK LEARNING FOR VAD AND LOCALIZATION

[26] Y. Liu, X. Wei, P. Lasang, S. Pranata, K. Subramanian, and H. Seow,
“Ensemble uncertainty guided road scene anomaly detection: A simple
meta-learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 9,
pp. 10754–10765, Sep. 2024.
[27] W. Zhou, L. Wen, Y. Zhan, and C. Wang, “An appearance-motion
network for vision-based crash detection: Improving the accuracy in
congested traffic,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 13742–13755, Dec. 2023.
[28] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci, “Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR).,
Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536.
[29] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “An overview of multi-task learning,” Nat. Sci.
Rev., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 30–43, Jan. 2018.
[30] M. Baradaran and R. Bergevin, “Multi-task learning based video
anomaly detection with attention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 2885–2895.
[31] H. Wu et al., “CvT: Introducing convolutions to vision transformers,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 22–31.
[32] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation
learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–16.
[33] Y. Chen, X. Shen, Y. Liu, Q. Tao, and J. A. K. Suykens, “Jigsaw-ViT:
Learning jigsaw puzzles in vision transformer,” Pattern Recognit. Lett.,
vol. 166, pp. 53–60, Feb. 2023.
[34] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for
anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545.
[35] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
[36] P. Chen et al., “RSPNet: Relative speed perception for unsupervised
video representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1045–1053.
[37] D. Wei, J. Lim, A. Zisserman, and W. T. Freeman, “Learning and using
the arrow of time,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 8052–8060.
[38] C. Shi, C. Sun, Y. Wu, and Y. Jia, “Video anomaly detection via
sequentially learning multiple pretext tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 10330–10340.
[39] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020,
pp. 2463–2471.
[40] Z. Tong, Y. Song, J. Wang, and L. Wang, “VideoMAE: Masked autoencoders are data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 10078–10093.
[41] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[42] S. W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time. New York City, NY, USA:
Bantam Books, 1998.
[43] C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 FPS
in MATLAB,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013,
pp. 2720–2727.
[44] V. Mahadevan, W. X. Li, V. Bhalodia, and D. M. M. M. Sigal, “Anomaly
detection in crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 1975–1981.
[45] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
[46] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, and Y. Wang, “Cloze test helps: Effective video
anomaly detection via learning to complete video events,” in Proc. 28th
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020, pp. 583–591.
[47] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and L. S.
Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016,
pp. 733–742.
[48] S. Saypadith and T. Onoye, “Video anomaly detection based on deep
generative network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS),
May 2021, pp. 1–5.
[49] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, J. Jiang, and F. Ren, “A cascade reconstruction model with generalization ability evaluation for anomaly
detection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 122, Feb. 2022,
Art. no. 108336.

13

[50] X. Feng, D. Song, Y. Chen, and Y. Wang, “Convolutional transformer
based dual discriminator generative adversarial networks for video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2021,
pp. 5546–5554.
[51] Z. Yang, P. Wu, J. Liu, and X. Liu, “Dynamic local aggregation network
with adaptive clusterer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 404–421.
[52] Y. Hao, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Wang, and X. Gao, “Spatiotemporal
consistency-enhanced network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 121, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108232.
[53] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
“Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 11996–12004.
[54] W. Luo et al., “Video anomaly detection with sparse coding inspired
deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43,
no. 3, pp. 1070–1084, Mar. 2021.
[55] Z. Liu, Y. Nie, C. Long, Q. Zhang, and G. Li, “A hybrid video anomaly
detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and
flow-guided frame prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 13588–13597.
[56] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren, “Bidirectional spatiotemporal feature learning with multiscale evaluation for video anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 12,
pp. 8285–8296, Dec. 2022.
[57] W. Liu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Diversity-measurable
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12147–12156.
[58] X. Huang, C. Zhao, and Z. Wu, “A video anomaly detection framework based on appearance-motion semantics representation consistency,”
in Proc. ICASSP - IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[59] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “An attribute-based method for video anomaly
detection,” 2022, arXiv:2212.00789.
[60] S. Yu et al., “Regularity learning via explicit distribution
modeling for skeletal video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 6661–6673,
Aug. 2024.
[61] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Hierarchical semantic contrast for scene-aware
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22846–22856.
[62] T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence
with appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283.
[63] C. Chen et al., “Comprehensive regularization in a bi-directional predictive network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 230–238.
[64] M. Baradaran and R. Bergevin, “Future video prediction from a single
frame for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Vis. Comput.,
2023, pp. 472–486.
[65] Y. Naji, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, M. Gouiffès, and R. Audigier, “Spatiotemporal predictive tasks for abnormal event detection in videos,” in
Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS),
Nov. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[66] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Video anomaly
detection via visual cloze tests,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 4955–4969, 2023.
[67] M. Zhang et al., “Multi-scale video anomaly detection by
multi-grained spatio-temporal representation learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 17385–17394.
[68] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 41–75, 1997.
[69] Y. Wu, M. Hong, A. Li, S. Huang, H. Liu, and Y. Ge, “Self-supervised
adversarial learning for domain adaptation of pavement distress classification,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1966–1977,
Feb. 2024.
[70] S. Zhao, W. Yi, J. Shi, Z. Jiang, and X. Lu, “An innovative crack
detection algorithm based on efficient feature fusion and progressive
transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 21469–21483, Dec. 2024.
[71] X. Wang, W. Liu, H. Lin, J. Hu, K. Kaur, and M. S. Hossain,
“AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection for intelligent transportation systems: A hierarchical federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4631–4640, Apr. 2023.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Dicong Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the College
of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
and the School of Electronic Information Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University. His research
interests include computer vision and video anomaly
detection.

Qilong Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China, in 2018. He is currently a Professor
with Tianjin University. He has published more than
40 academic papers in top conferences and refereed
journals, including ICCV/CVPR/NeurIPS/ECCV,
and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS
AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE /IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING /IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO
T ECHNOLOGY. His research interests include visual understanding and deep
learning, particularly deep models with high-order statistical modeling and
self-attention mechanism. He served as the Area Chair for CVPR 2024.

Qinghua Hu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1999, 2002, and
2008, respectively. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow
with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, from 2009 to 2011. He is
currently the Chair Professor of the College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, and
the Director of the SIG Granular Computing and
Knowledge Discovery and Chinese Association of
Artificial Intelligence. He was supported by the Key
Program, National Natural Science Foundation of China. He has published
over 300 peer-reviewed articles. His current research interests include uncertainty modeling in big data, machine learning with multi-modality data,
and intelligent unmanned systems. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YSTEMS, Acta Automatica Sinica, and Acta
Electronica Sinica.

Kaijun Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from Lanzhou Jiaotong University, China,
in 2017. He is currently a Professor with the
School of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Lanzhou Jiaotong University. His research interests
include intelligent algorithm optimization and image
processing.