IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

5012009

ToCoAD: Two-Stage Contrastive Learning for
Industrial Anomaly Detection
Yun Liang , Zhiguang Hu , Junjie Huang , Donglin Di , Anyang Su , and Lei Fan , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Unsupervised industrial anomaly detection methods
can identify product defects in industrial images using only
normal samples for training. Existing approaches perform well
on public industrial image datasets but struggle with specific
anomaly types due to the domain gap between pretrained feature
extractors and target-specific domains. To tackle this issue, this
article presents a two-stage training strategy, called ToCoAD.
In the first stage, a discriminative network is trained by using
synthetic anomalies in a self-supervised learning manner. This
network is then utilized in the second stage to provide a
negative feature guide, aiding in the training of the feature
extractor through bootstrap contrastive learning. This approach
enables the model to progressively learn the distribution of
anomalies specific to industrial datasets, effectively enhancing
its generalizability to various types of anomalies. Extensive
experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed two-stage training strategy, and our model produces
competitive performance, achieving pixel-level AUROC scores of
98.21%, 98.43%, and 97.70% on MVTec AD, VisA, and BTAD,
respectively.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, contrastive learning, industrial manufacturing, self-supervised learning, synthetic anomaly.

Fig. 1. Existing methods rely on frozen pretrained feature extractors, which
can lead to inaccuracies in anomaly detection. In contrast, our method utilizes
a two-stage training strategy to fine-tune the feature extractor under the
contrastive learning paradigm.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NDUSTRIAL anomaly detection aims to identify defective products during quality inspection sessions within
the production process, intending to improve the yield rate.
Recently, interest in this field has surged due to the growing
demands of industrial development [1], [2], [3]. The anomaly
detection models employ the image data of the sample, such
as battery images captured from a fixed position or screw
images at various rotation angles, to determine whether the
sample is anomalous or not and to localize the anomalies
within the image. Given the challenge of obtaining sufficient anomalous samples, the distribution of anomalies is
typically nonestimable, making this scenario classified as an
Received 8 July 2024; revised 8 October 2024; accepted 4 November 2024.
Date of publication 26 February 2025; date of current version 11 March
2025. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Yi Qin.
(Corresponding author: Lei Fan.)
Yun Liang, Zhiguang Hu, and Junjie Huang are with the College
of Mathematics and Informatics, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou 510642, China (e-mail: yliang@scau.edu.cn; huzhiguang2000@
stu.scau.edu.cn; junjie666@stu.scau.edu.cn).
Donglin Di is with Space AI, Li Auto, Beijing 101399, China (e-mail:
didonglin@lixiang.com).
Anyang Su is with the College of Software, Jilin University, Changchun
130012, China (e-mail: aysu17@mails.jlu.edu.cn).
Lei Fan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail:
lei.fan1@unsw.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3545987

unsupervised learning task. The objective is to train models
using only defect-free images, enabling them to detect and
localize anomalous regions during the testing phase. Specifically, during the training phase, only normal images are used to
train models in an unsupervised learning manner. For example,
feature embedding-based [4], [5], [6] methods typically use
Gaussian distribution or normalizing flow (NF) [7] to model
the distributions of normal samples, representing a normal
prototype or feature set. During the test phase, anomalies
are identified by comparing the features of the test image
with those in the coreset. On the other hand, reconstructionbased [8], [9], [10] methods utilize a reconstruction network
to generate an image that closely resembles the normal image
during training. Anomalies are then detected by analyzing the
differences between the input image and the reconstructed
image during testing.
Existing anomaly detection methods, predominantly leveraging deep learning techniques [11], [12], have shown superior
performance in industrial benchmarks [13]. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, the majority of existing methods, including feature
embedding-based [4], [5], [6] and synthetic anomaly-based
methods [14], [15], [16], have attempted to train a classifier
or discriminative network to identify anomalies by utilizing
a pretrained truncated model for extracting features. However, it is challenging to accurately identify all anomalies,

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5012009

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

primarily due to the indistinguishability of frozen pretrained
models from normal and anomalous features. This issue arises
from the domain gaps [17] between pretrained datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet [18]) and target-specific domains (i.e., industrial
images). Specifically, the anomaly detection task is limited by two factors. First, the covariate shift phenomenon,
caused by the domain gap between source and target data,
can hinder anomaly localization [19], making it difficult for
a pretrained network to extract discriminative features for
anomalies. Second, the features learned during pretraining
are typically optimized for different tasks, but they may not
be fully suitable due to the imbalance between normal and
anomalous samples [20]. For example, semantic segmentation
and image classification often use balanced datasets with
predefined labels, whereas anomaly detection is formulated
in an unsupervised learning manner, and data deviating from
the normal distribution is treated as anomalous. Recently,
reconstruction-based methods [8], [9] have been developed to
train a decoder and feature extractor jointly by learning an
identical map between the input and output. However, the
performance of these methods remains suboptimal, limited
by the training overhead and the ability to reconstruct large
areas of anomalies. Recently, the application of contrastive
learning has demonstrated considerable progress in crossdomain learning [21]. Fine-tuning the network using positive
sample pairs or negative samples has been demonstrated to
be effective in enhancing the network’s generalizability to
domain-specific datasets, indicating significant potential in the
field of anomaly detection as well. Contrastive learning has
recently proven effective for label-efficient fine-tuning [20],
[22]. It has the potential to mitigate domain gaps and help the
network adapt to the target domain data.
In order to mitigate the domain gaps between source and
target data, and to fully utilize the advantages of contrastive
learning in unsupervised fine-tuning training, we propose
a two-stage training strategy that incorporates a contrastive
learning framework to adapt to the target domain data by
learning robust features from target samples through selfsupervised learning [23]. Specifically, we initially leverage a
frozen feature extractor to obtain generalized features and train
a discriminative network progressively to identify anomalies
using synthetic anomalous samples. In the second stage, the
discriminate network is fixed to provide a negative guide,
while a bootstrap contrastive learning is employed to fine-tune
the feature extractor and contrastive learning network jointly.
This joint learning can be viewed as a form of adversarial
learning [24] of defect and defect-free features, where normal
features are compactly enclosed and distinct from defective
features. Finally, the fine-tuned feature extractor is used to
extract patch features to construct a memory bank through
coreset subsampling, and distance metrics between the test
sample features and the memory bank features are computed
to localize anomalies during the inference phase.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) We propose a two-stage training strategy to fine-tune the
feature extractor to bridge the domain gap between pretrained and target features. In the first stage, a network
is progressively trained to localize anomalies coarsely,

and then it is employed to facilitate the fine-tuning of
the extractor in the second stage.
2) We introduce a negative-guided contrastive learning
(NCL) paradigm, which utilizes the discriminative network guiding negative bootstrap contrastive learning to
fine-tune the feature extractor. A contrastive loss is introduced to regularize negative bootstrap joint learning.
3) Our model shows competitive performance on three
popular anomaly detection datasets. It achieves AUROC
scores of 99.10%/98.21% (image-/pixel-level) on
MVTec AD, 95.35%/98.43% on VisA, and 97.70%
(pixel-level) on BTAD.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Anomaly Detection
Most anomaly detection methods utilize a feature extractor
pretrained on ImageNet [18] to obtain generalized features. These methods can be classified into three types:
feature embedding-based, reconstruction-based, and synthetic
anomaly-based methods.
1) Feature Embedding-Based Methods: They typically utilize pretrained models to extract features and directly model
the distributions using various machine learning techniques.
For example, PaDiM [5] decomposes the image into patches to
obtain a probabilistic representation of the normal class using
multivariate Gaussian distributions. PatchCore [4] constructs
a memory bank for storing neighborhood-aware patch-level
features. Some methods are based on NF [7] to convert pretrained feature distributions into simple distributions.
CFLOW-AD [6] utilizes a pretrained encoder with multiscale pyramid pooling to capture rich features and leverages
conditional normalization flows to enhance anomaly detection efficiency. PyramidFlow [25] utilizes invertible pyramids
and coupled pyramid blocks to localize anomalies through
multiscale feature interaction. These methods use pretrained
feature extractors, such as ResNet [26], WideResNet [27], and
EfficientNet [28] to extract features for modeling distributions.
2) Reconstruction-Based Methods: They assume that models trained on only normal samples cannot accurately
reconstruct anomalous regions, thus allowing for the localization of anomalies by identifying differences between the
input and reconstruction results. For instance, RIAD [9] and
InTra [8] perform mask operations on normal samples, and
train reconstruction models to recover the masked regions.
DiffusionAD [29] uses a diffusion model [30] to reconstruct
normal samples as near-normal samples, and localizes anomalous regions using a segmentation network.
3) Synthetic Anomaly-Based Methods: They formulate
unsupervised anomaly detection as a binary classification
task, in which pseudo anomaly samples are generated to
train the discriminative network for identifying anomalies.
CutPaste [16] employs an augmentation strategy where a
smaller patch is replaced by other regions. DRAEM [14]
combines Perlin noise [31] and binarized masks of samples
to generate anomalous images for training their discriminative
networks. NSA [15] employs Poisson image editing techniques
to achieve a seamless fusion of anomalies.

LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5012009

Fig. 2. Overview of ToCoAD. First, a synthetic anomaly image is generated by anomaly generator G to train a discriminative network D. Then, the feature
extractor F is fine-tuned jointly by contrastive learning network C and pretrained D using synthetic anomaly images and augmented image pairs.

However, most of these methods [4], [5], [6], [32], [33],
[34], [35] rely on feature extractors pretrained on ImageNet [18], leading to a domain gap between pretrained
features and industrial target features. To alleviate this problem, our ToCoAD employs a two-stage training approach
that uses positive and negative samples to jointly fine-tune
the feature extractor, guiding it to acquire adaptive feature
representation capabilities.
B. Contrastive Learning
Recently, contrastive learning [36], [37], [38] has played a
significant role in self-supervised learning, offering a promising paradigm for exploiting unlabeled data without the need
for human annotations. The concept aims to enhance feature consistency and obtain invariant feature representations
between different views of the same sample while preserving
the differences among other samples. For example, SimCLR [39] constructs positive pairs from the same sample
and negative pairs from different samples, employing an
N-pair loss [40] to keep positive pairs close and negative pairs
far away. BYOL [37] avoids prediction crashes and removes
negative pairs by an exponential moving average model. SimSiam [36] addresses the issue of collapsing solutions without
using negative samples by employing a stop-gradient (SG)
operation and a predictor.
Given the capability of contrastive learning methods to
enable models to acquire robust and generalized feature representations [41], we propose a negative bootstrap contrastive
learning to fine-tune the feature extractor. Our approach uses
augmented positive samples to train the model by learning
feature representations of normal samples while simultaneously using synthetic anomaly samples to bootstrap the model,
ensuring its sensitivity to anomalous features.
III. M ETHOD
Given a training set Ttrain comprising N images and a test
set Ttest consisting of N ′ images, each image I ∈ R H ×W ×C
corresponds to a binary label c = {0, 1} where H , W , and

C denote the height, width, and the number of the channel
of the image. For unsupervised anomaly detection, all images
in Ttrain are categorized into normal (e.g., defect-free) images
with c = 0, while Ttest may contain anomalous images with
c = 1 and a corresponding binary annotation y ∈ {0, 1} H ×W ×C
indicating the anomalous regions. The normal images in the
training set and the test set come from the same normal
data distribution with similar sample characteristics, while the
anomalous images deviate from these normal samples. The
goal is to classify and localize anomalous regions in Ttest .
As shown in Fig. 2, we propose a two-stage training strategy
to learn a feature representation adapted to the target data
distribution. The first stage is to train a discriminative network
to detect anomalies and localize anomalous regions coarsely.
It includes an anomaly generator G, a feature extractor F
and a discriminative network D. In the second stage, the
discriminative network pretrained in stage I is incorporated
with the contrastive learning network C, and these networks
are jointly trained in a bootstrap contrast learning manner.
Finally, a memory bank M is constructed for storing the
normal features, which is used to estimate the anomaly score
maps during the testing phase.
A. Discriminative Network Pretraining
Given the unavailability of anomalous samples for training
a discriminative network, we initially utilize an anomaly generator G to synthesize pseudo anomalies from the training set.
The generation of anomalies can be implemented in various
forms by using self-supervised learning techniques [15], [16]
or by injecting noises into normal images [14]. To obtain
discriminative representations of various artificial defects,
we employ widely used Perlin noise [31] as the anomaly
generator G, which synthesizes pseudo-anomaly samples by
injecting Perlin noise into normal images. Anomalies synthesized using Perlin noise and texture images exhibit irregular
geometric traits yet share similar variations with real-world
anomalies in terms of color, shape, and location. These similarities allow the model to leverage synthetic anomalies as
reference boundaries for learning the boundary outside the

5012009

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 4. Detailed structure of contrastive learning network C. A normal image
I is augmented to obtain two views v 1 , v 2 , which are then passed through the
feature extractor and a contrastive learning network to obtain the projected
features z 1 , z 2 and predicted features p1 , p2 . The L cossim is calculated for two
branches, one of which has no predictor branch applying the SG operation.
Fig. 3.
Overview of anomaly generator G with Perlin noise. First, the
normal image I undergoes a random slight angle and 90◦ rotation to obtain
I R . Second, the Perlin noise P and the texture sample A are subjected to a
bitwise operation to generate the anomalous region A P . Finally, the anomalous
region A P and the rotated image I R are fused to obtain the synthetic anomaly
sample IG .

normal data. As a result, the model builds a more compact
and refined representation of normal data, effectively distinguishing between normal and anomalous data.
As shown in Fig. 3, random slight angle rotations and
{0◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ , 270◦ } rotations are applied to a base (normal) image to enhance normal sample diversity. Perlin noise
is then generated using a random seed, with its threshold
adjusted to control the size, quantity, and position of the noise.
An additional texture dataset, like the Describable Textures
Dataset [42], is used as a reference to combine with normal
samples based on the Perlin noise mask, creating synthetic
anomalous regions. These regions are then pasted onto the base
image to form the synthetic anomaly image and corresponding
mask. Perlin noise is utilized to generate masks with varying
shapes, sizes, and positions. These masks, when combined
with random anomalous data, introduce a wide range of
texture and color anomalies across different regions of the
image. In addition, when applied to the edges of objects, the
masks not only introduce visual irregularities but also induce
shape distortions, altering the form and outline of the object.
A normal image I ∈ Ttrain is passed through the anomaly
generator G to produce a pseudo-anomaly sample IG with an
anomaly mask yG ∈ {0, 1} H ×W ×C . A pseudo-anomaly dataset
can be obtained
TG = G(Ii ) ∀Ii ∈ Ttrain

(1)

where i = {1, . . . , N } denotes the index in the training set.
Then, each pseudo-anomaly image is used to train the
discriminative network D, where the pretrained feature extractor is fixed during the early stages of model training. The
architecture of the discriminative network is symmetric with
the feature extractor, such as the WideResNet50 [27]. This
network operates by successively up-sampling and splicing
the extracted features to finally output a feature map ŷ G as a
predicted mask with the same dimensions as the input image
IG . The training loss L dis is computed as
L dis = L focal ( ŷ G , yG ) = −αt (1 − pt )γ log( pt )

(2)

where αt is the scaling factor associated with the category t, γ
is an adjustable parameter, and pt corresponds to the predicted

pixel point classification with 1 for the anomalous category
and 0 for the normal category. The focal loss [43] effectively
addresses the sample imbalance problem in pixel-level oneclass classification. Upon completion of the discriminative
network training, the extracted feature map can coarsely
localize the probability of anomalies in the input image.
In contrast to the end-to-end simultaneous training
approach [14], [15] and the approach of training the backbone
network before training the discriminative network [34], our
method first leverages the powerful feature representation
capabilities of a pretrained network on ImageNet to train
an anomaly discriminative network, fostering coarse-grained
localization capability. Subsequently, we use the discriminative
network to reversely fine-tune the feature extraction network,
encouraging the latent space of normal samples more compact
and reducing the domain gap in the feature extraction network.
B. Negative-Guided Contrastive Learning
In stage II, the discriminative network D is employed
to train the feature extractor F and the contrastive learning
network C. Specifically, discriminative network D, pretrained
in stage I, acts as a guide for providing negative sample
features in bootstrap learning. We employ the advanced SimSiam [36] as the contrastive learning network C due to its
simplicity and exceptional capability in achieving robust and
generalized feature representation. As shown in Fig. 4, for
training the contrastive learning network C, a normal image I
is augmented using a data augmentation set S (such as random
crop, color jitter, and grayscale) to generate M different views
v 1 , . . . , v M . We begin by randomly cropping the image using
a scale factor ranging from 0.2 to 1 to obtain image patches.
Next, Gaussian filtering with a standard deviation of σ =
0.1− 2.0 is randomly applied to these patches, allowing certain
features to emerge in different states. Finally, to reduce the
model’s reliance on image orientation and mitigate directional
bias, we apply a random horizontal flip with a probability
of p = 0.5 to the patches. These views are fed into the
feature extractors F to extract features from different layers,
which are considered as generic feature representations from
a normal image, and these features contain both the low-level
texture detail feature representation and the high-level abstract
semantic feature representation.
For constructing contrastive instance pairs, we take an input
image I with two augmented views v 1 and v 2 (M set 2). As an

LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5012009

example, the features f 1 are extracted from v 1 using feature
extractor F and then are passed into the projector and predictor
sequentially to obtain z 1 and p1 , respectively. Then, the cosine
similarity loss can be obtained
z2
p1
(3)
·
D( p1 , z 2 ) = −
∥ p1 ∥2 ∥z 2 ∥2

where E(·) is the Euclidean distance and Nb is the b-nearest
neighbor coresets of c∗ in the memory bank. Finally, the
image-level anomaly score is calculated by the maximum
anomaly score for all patches in the image.

where ∥·∥2 denotes the L2 distance of an output feature.
Following previous work [36], [41], the SG operation is
employed to halt the gradient propagation of z 1 and z 2 , effectively preventing collapsing solutions. Since D is asymmetric,
the average bidirectional similarity between f 1 and f 2 is
computed to maintain equilibrium, as shown below

A. Experimental Settings

1
1
D( p1 , SG(z 2 )) + D( p2 , SG(z 1 )). (4)
2
2
When generating M augmented samples from each normal
sample, the symmetric cosine similarity loss is computed as
L cossim ( f 1 , f 2 ) =

M

M

XX
2
L cossim ( f i , f j )
M(M − 1) i j̸=i


M X
M 
X
D p j , SG(z i ) + D pi , SG z j
.
=
M(M − 1)
i j̸=i

L sym =

(5)

For synthetic anomaly sample, we obtain its pseudoanomaly mask yG′ and predictive feature map ŷ ′G , and compute
the focal loss L neg = L focal ( ŷ ′G , yG′ ) as (2). The training loss
in the second training stage is shown as
L ncl = λ · L sym + (1 − λ) · L neg

(6)

we followed the previous methods [14], [34], where λ is a
hyperparameter used to balance the two losses.
C. Memory Modeling and Anomaly Detection
During the inference phase, we utilize the feature extractor
as a backbone to extract adapted features from various layers.
These features are then compressed into a memory bank via
the coreset selection [4]. To concurrently harvest shallow texture information and deep semantic content, features extracted
from both layers 2 and 3 are aggregated to derive a comprehensive feature for each image. These features are then used to
construct the original memory bank M O . To minimize storage
and computation overhead, we use the greedy coreset sampling
algorithm to identify the most representative features. This
results in a sampled memory bank M obtained by solving
the following equation using iterative greedy approximation
suggested in [44]
M∗ = arg min max min ∥m − n∥2 .
M⊂M O m∈M O n∈M

(7)

When testing an input image It ∈ Ttest , the pixel-level
anomaly score st is calculated by the maximum Euclidean
distance between its adapt patch features pt and its nearest
normal adapted features coreset c∗ from memory bank M

E pt , c ∗
(8)
st′ = min
c∗ ∈M
!
exp(st′ )
st = 1 − P
st′
(9)
′
c′ ∈Nb (c∗ ) exp(E( pt , c ))

IV. E XPERIMENTS
1) Datasets: We use the MVTec AD [13], VisA [45], and
BTAD [46] datasets for our experiments.
MVTec AD consists of 15 categories including five types of
texture and ten types of object, and comprises 3629 training
images and 1725 test images. VisA contains 12 subsets with
a total of 10 821 images, of which 9621 are normal images
and 1200 are anomalous images. The dataset is comprised of
three categories: single-object images, multiobject images, and
printed circuit boards. BTAD consists of three industrial products, ranging in size from 600 × 600 to 1600 × 1600 pixels.
It includes 1799 images and 1031 images for training and
testing, respectively.
2) Evaluation Metrics: Since determining of normal and
anomalous samples is regarded as a binary classification problem, we use the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC) metric to evaluate the anomaly detection performance. Following the previous studies [4], [5], we calculate
the image-level and pixel-level AUROC scores for detection
and segmentation performance, respectively.
3) Implementation Details: We used a WideResNet50 [27]
pretrained on ImageNet [18] as the feature extractor.
An inverse WideResNet50 is utilized as the discriminative network, operated with up-sampling, concatenating,
and dimension compression operations. For the contrastive
learning network, we performed adaptive average pooling
operations on the feature maps of each layer and then fed
them to the projector and predictor, respectively. The projector
and predictor consist of a three-layer and one-layer MLP,
respectively. During training, we removed the gradient of only
the projector branch, and the projectors of both branches
shared the weights. For the contrastive learning network,
we used the same approach as [36] to construct two cropped
images as positive samples. In building the memory bank,
we employed a coreset subsampling percentage of 0.1 to obtain
a compact one.
In the discriminative network pretraining (DNP) training
phase, we used the Adam optimizer with an initial learning
rate of 0.0001. In the NCL training phase, we used the
stochastic gradient descent optimizer with a weight decay of
0.0001 and a momentum of 0.9, and employed the cosine
annealing algorithm to adjust the learning rate. For all classes
of the MVTec AD dataset and the VisA dataset, we trained
100 epochs in the first stage and another 100 epochs in the
second stage. For the BTAD dataset, we trained 150 epochs
in the second stage.
B. Experiment Results and Analysis
1) Performances on MVTec AD: We evaluated the anomaly
detection performance of our proposed model compared to

5012009

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE I
I MAGE -L EVEL AND P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON MVT EC AD DATASET

TABLE II
I MAGE -L EVEL AND P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON V IS A DATASET

advanced methods [4], [5], [6], [25], [32], [33], [34], [47],
[48].
As shown in Table I, our models achieved the best results
for at least seven categories in image-level anomaly detection,
with five of them reaching 100%, and produced the best
AUROC scores of 99.10% at the image-level and 98.21%
at the pixel-level compared to advanced methods. However,
the image-level results for some categories, such as cable,
carpet, grid, pill, and screw, were nearly 1% below the best
results. This could be attributed to that only the features at
different local regions of the image are used for fine-tuning,
which makes the model less sensitive to subtle color variations
in the anomaly image. By leveraging local information, the
model is better able to capture important, detailed features
that are crucial for identifying anomalies. While contrastive
learning may reduce sensitivity to subtle color variations,
this tradeoff allows the model to focus on more significant
irregularities, such as structural and textural anomalies, which
are more common in real-world scenarios. This approach
enhances the model’s ability to detect and analyze domainspecific defects, ultimately improving overall performance.
Regarding pixel-level anomaly localization performance, our
method achieved optimal performance for the tile category and
was within 0.7% of the best performance across almost all
categories. In terms of average metrics, our model achieved

the top three for both textures and objects by narrowing
the domain and allowing for the extraction of anomalous
discriminative features. We visualized some representative
samples for anomaly localization in the upper two rows of
Fig. 5, where we can observe that our models can accurately
localize anomalous regions on samples. We further presented
quantitative visualization results of our approach compared to
existing methods, as illustrated in Fig. 6(a). For example, in the
capsule and pill examples, our model accurately localized the
anomalies, whereas DeSTSeg [34] and other methods failed.
It demonstrates that our method exhibits higher sensitivity
to anomalous regions while effectively reducing background
interference.
2) Performances on VisA: We evaluated our proposed
method and the existing methods [4], [6], [14], [35], [47] on
the VisA dataset, as illustrated in Table II. Our model achieved
95.06% image-level AUROC score and 98.40% pixel-level
AUROC score based on CutPaste, while it achieved 95.35%
image-level AUROC score and 98.43% pixel-level AUROC
score based on Perlin noise. In particular, our model produced
the highest image-level and pixel-level AUROC scores in
three categories of VisA (Capsules, PCB1, and PCB4), due
to the extraction of adaptive features. However, the results for
Macaroni2 were lower compared to advanced methods. This
discrepancy is primarily due to the fact that only some regions

LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5012009

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD, U SING D IFFERENT H IERAR CHY L EVELS IN NCL T RAINING P HASE

TABLE V
Fig. 5. Visualizations of MVTec AD and VisA. The upper two rows are
derived from the MVTec AD, whereas the lower two rows are derived from
the VisA.

A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD, U SING O NLY NCL (CLO NLY ), W ITH B OTH DNP AND NCL

TABLE III
P IXEL -L EVEL AUROC (%) ON BTAD DATASET
TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT L OSS F UNCTION S ETTINGS

were used for fine-tuning but the global positional features of
regions within the entire image are missed. This limitation led
to the misclassification of positional variations as anomalies.
In the lower two rows of Fig. 5, we additionally visualized
some typical samples of VisA.
3) Performances on BTAD: We calculated the pixel-level
AUROC scores of the three categories and then obtained the
average score. We compared our proposed model with existing
methods [4], [5], [46], [47], [49], [50], as shown in Table III.
While using Perlin noise as the anomaly generator, our model
achieved the best 97.70% in average pixel-level AUROC score.
4) Ablation Study: We explored the optimal configuration
of our proposed method. We illustrated the anomaly generator
we used in our experiments.
a) Contrastive learning network: This study was performed to determine the optimal hierarchy levels for the
contrastive learning network. Table IV showed the results of
ablation studies with different hierarchy levels when using
CutPaste as an anomaly generator. We noticed that the model
using the features extracted from layers 3 and 4 achieved
the best performance among all the results, which means that
the positive sample comparison learning process requires rich
semantic information. Using only layer 4 lacked sufficient
detail, while combining layers 2 and 3, without layer 4,
produced lower results due to insufficient high-level semantics.
In summary, rich deep semantic information is crucial for
representing semantic features effectively.
b) Two-stage training strategy: We conducted experiments to investigate the role of DNP and NCL while using
Perlin noise as an anomaly generator, with results shown in
Table V. When only NCL was applied, the model trained
solely on augmented normal samples performed poorly due to
the absence of explicit negative sample guidance. Combining
both DNP and NCL, the model leveraged both negative and
positive samples to fine-tune the feature extractor, leading to

better pixel-level localization. As shown in Fig. 7, anomalous
regions were more clearly highlighted when both methods
were used, as the feature extractor learned more robust,
generalized representations and reduced domain gap.
c) Loss function: This study was conducted to explore
the effect of different settings on the loss function while
utilizing CutPaste as an anomaly generator. Table VI reported
the results of using cross-entropy (CE) loss and focal loss
for different values of the hyperparameter λ. We observed
that, when λ is set to 0.5, a balance was achieved between
the positive sample learning process and the negative sample
bootstrap learning process, and the model using focal loss
outperformed the counterpart when using CE loss. It can be
demonstrated that focal loss can fully consider the imbalance
between normal and anomalous samples. The hyperparametric
ablation results when using focal loss as L dis are depicted in
Fig. 6(b). When α = 0.5 and γ = 2, the best image-level
and pixel-level AUROCs were 98.82% and 98.13%, as this
configuration provides an improved balance between normal
and anomalous samples. When α and γ are set to different
values, the effect showed minor fluctuations due to the focus
on anomalous samples.
d) Synthetic anomaly strategies: We compared three
common methods as the anomaly generator: random
patches [16], random seamless patches [15], and Perlin
noise [31]. The first two methods produce anomalies that
are closer to the normal sample distribution, while the latter
generates anomalies with greater diversity in shapes. As shown
in Table VII, our methods incorporating Perlin noise achieved
the best AUROCs of 99.10% at the image-level and 98.21%
at the pixel-level. We considered that it is mainly attributed
to the diversity of the shape and distribution of the anomalies

5012009

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 6. (a) Anomaly samples with heatmaps on MVTec AD. The first two columns show the defect image and the corresponding mask, and the other
columns are the methods’ heatmaps. (b) Visualizations of different hyperparameters of L dis on MVTec AD. The horizontal and vertical axis represents α and
performance, respectively, and the lines in various colors denote different values of γ .

TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD U SING
D IFFERENT A NOMALY G ENERATORS

Fig. 7. Visualizations of results with the two-stage training strategy. From
left to right, the original image, the ground truth, the result without two-stage
training (pretrained), and the result with two-stage training (fine-tuned).
TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON MVT EC AD U SING D IFFERENT
F EATURE E XTRACTION N ETWORKS

smaller feature extractors. However, it has some limitations.
First, to fully leverage the feature representation capability
of the pretrained network, it requires two separate training
sessions, extending the overall training time. Second, inference
relies on memory bank feature matching, which slows down
as the number of stored features increases, making it less
suitable for real-time tasks. As shown in Figs. 5 and 6(a),
our method remains susceptible to background interference,
exhibiting subtle yellow regions appearing on the heat map.
To address these limitations, future research could prioritize
reducing resource consumption and lightweighting models.
First, eliminating redundant background features can significantly decrease training time and storage requirements,
as different sample backgrounds contribute minimally to
defect detection. Second, leveraging smaller models through
techniques, like lightweighting or distillation, helps mitigate
training costs. Finally, adopting incremental learning enables
efficient updates using small data batches as new information
in industrial production.
V. C ONCLUSION

generated by Perlin noise, enhancing the coarse localization
and bootstrap learning ability of the discriminative network.
e) Feature extraction network: We investigated the
impact of different feature extraction networks on model
performance, using Perlin noise as an anomaly generator, as shown in Table VIII. The best image-level and
pixel-level AUROCs were 99.10% and 98.21% while using
WideResNet50. The performance of WideResNet101 [27] is
comparable to that of WideResNet50, but it requires more
computational resources. When employing ResNet50 [26]
instead of WideResNet50, there was a slight decline in
performance due to the simpler network architecture, but
the discrepancy from the optimal outcome remains relatively modest. Moreover, the smaller network requires fewer
computational resources, thereby enhancing the feasibility of
deployment on compact devices.
f) Discussion: The proposed approach uses a two-stage
training strategy, enabling efficient fine-tuning with minimal
resource usage and negligible performance loss when using

To bridge the domain gap between the pretrained and
target-specific features for industrial anomaly detection tasks,
we proposed a novel two-stage training strategy, named
ToCoAD. In the first stage, a discriminative network is trained
to coarsely localize anomalies. In the second stage, the
pretrained discriminative network is used to provide negativeguided information, and the contrastive learning network along
with the feature extractor are jointly fine-tuned. Extensive
experiments were conducted to verify the superior performance of our proposed models, achieving 99.10% image-level
AUROC and 98.21% pixel-level AUROC on the MVTec AD
dataset, 95.35% image-level AUROC and 98.43% pixel-level
AUROC scores on the VisA dataset, and 97.70% pixel-level
AUROC on the BTAD dataset.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for
unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[2] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024.
[3] L. Fan, Y. Ding, D. Fan, D. Di, M. Pagnucco, and Y. Song, “GrainSpace:
A large-scale dataset for fine-grained and domain-adaptive recognition of
cereal grains,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 21116–21125.

LIANG et al.: ToCoAD: TWO-STAGE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

[4] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 14318–14328.
[5] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. ICPR. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 475–489.
[6] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
[7] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015,
pp. 1530–1538.
[8] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. ICIAP. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 394–406.
[9] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[10] L. Fan, Y. Ding, M. Pagnucco, and Y. Song, “Patch-wise augmentation
for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2024, pp. 5425–5429.
[11] L. Fan, A. Sowmya, E. Meijering, and Y. Song, “Cancer survival prediction from whole slide images with self-supervised learning and slide
consistency,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1401–1412,
May 2023.
[12] D. Di et al., “Generating hypergraph-based high-order representations
of whole-slide histopathological images for survival prediction,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5800–5815,
May 2023.
[13] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
[14] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively
trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
Proc. ICCV, 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[15] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic
anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2022, pp. 474–489.
[16] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[17] H. Nam, H. Lee, J. Park, W. Yoon, and D. Yoo, “Reducing domain gap
by reducing style bias,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 8690–8699.
[18] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[19] M. Wang and W. Deng, “Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 312, pp. 135–153, Oct. 2018.
[20] S. Li et al., “Unsupervised finetuning,” 2021, arXiv:2110.09510.
[21] M. Thota and G. Leontidis, “Contrastive domain adaptation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW),
Jun. 2021, pp. 2209–2218.
[22] X. Xu et al., “Revisiting pretraining for semi-supervised learning
in the low-label regime,” Neurocomputing, vol. 565, Nov. 2023,
Art. no. 126971.
[23] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What
makes for good views for contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33,
May 2020, pp. 6827–6839.
[24] C.-H. Ho and N. Nvasconcelos, “Contrastive learning with adversarial
examples,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 17081–17093.
[25] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution
defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 14143–14152.
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.

5012009

[27] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
arXiv:1605.07146.
[28] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
pp. 6105–6114.
[29] H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Wu, and Y.-G. Jiang, “DiffusionAD: Normguided one-step denoising diffusion for anomaly detection,” 2023,
arXiv:2303.08730.
[30] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[31] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985.
[32] D. Kim, C. Park, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “FAPM: Fast adaptive patch
memory for real-time industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023,
pp. 1–5.
[33] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[34] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[35] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[36] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
[37] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[38] S. Asgarian et al., “Multiview contrastive learning for unsupervised
domain adaptation in brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[39] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[40] K. Sohn, “Improved deep metric learning with multi-class N-pair loss
objective,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1857-1865.
[41] H. Wang, E. Ahn, and J. Kim, “A dual-branch self-supervised representation learning framework for tumour segmentation in whole slide
images,” 2023, arXiv:2303.11019.
[42] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
“Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
[43] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[44] O. Sener and S. Savarese, “Active learning for convolutional neural
networks: A core-set approach,” 2017, arXiv:1708.00489.
[45] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
pp. 392–408.
[46] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti,
“VT-ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE),
Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[47] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
[48] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Sun, and X. Chen, “Industrial anomaly detection with domain shift: A real-world dataset and
masked multi-scale reconstruction,” Comput. Ind., vol. 151, Oct. 2023,
Art. no. 103990.
[49] Y. Zheng, X. Wang, R. Deng, T. Bao, R. Zhao, and L. Wu, “Focus
your distribution: Coarse-to-fine non-contrastive learning for anomaly
detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo.
(ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[50] W. Shin, J. Lee, T. Lee, S. Lee, and J. P. Yun, “Anomaly detection
using score-based perturbation resilience,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 23372–23382.