4322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Towards Unsupervised Time-Series Anomaly
Detection for Virtual Cloud Networks
Zixuan Ma , Chen Li , Kun Zhang , and Bibo Tu
Abstract—Virtual cloud network (VCN) is a fundamental cloud
resource for endpoints (VMs or containers) to communicate
with each other and with the outside. Anomaly detection, a key
security approach for VCNs, faces serious challenges: 1) Current
feature models are difficult to apply to VCNs with significant differences from traditional networks. 2) Current anomaly detection
models lack the adaptability to learn multiple normal patterns
simultaneously. The need to train a dedicated model for each
endpoint causes serious scalability problems in VCNs. 3) Current
anomaly detection models have difficulty addressing the complex
temporal dependency and non-stationarity of VCNs. To address
these challenges, we propose a new multilevel feature model
MFM and a new unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
model GTGmVAE. By combining the basic features with the
topology features specifically designed for VCNs, MFM effectively
characterizes the patterns of VCNs. GTGmVAE combines the
new local-global feature extractor with the latent space following
a Gaussian mixture distribution to achieve the strong adaptability
to learn multiple normal patterns simultaneously, and achieves
the strong temporal modeling capability to effectively address
the complex temporal dependency and non-stationarity of VCNs
by adequately modeling the global temporal dependencies of
the input samples and latent variables. Extensive experiments
on the VCN anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 and the
time-series anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD show that
GTGmVAE with MFM achieves the desirable performance, and
GTGmVAE outperforms all nine representative state-of-the-art
detection models.
Index Terms—Virtual cloud network, anomaly detection, cloud
security, network security, time-series data.

I. I NTRODUCTION
LOUD computing [1] is a cornerstone of the modern
digital economy, enabling applications to be deployed,
managed and scaled with great flexibility and efficiency. As
the fundamental resource of the cloud, the network in the
cloud is a virtual network implemented through virtualization
technologies for containers or VMs (commonly referred to as
endpoints, EPs) to communicate with each other and with the
outside of the cloud, which can be referred to as the virtual
cloud network (VCN). VCN consists of two types of traffic:

C

Received 24 May 2024; revised 21 February 2025; accepted 4 April 2025.
Date of publication 16 April 2025; date of current version 29 April 2025. This
work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2023YFB3106303. The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Ning Zhang.
(Corresponding author: Chen Li.)
The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China (e-mail: mazixuan@iie.ac.cn; lichen@iie.ac.cn; zhangkun@iie.ac.cn;
tubibo@iie.ac.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2025.3561672, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3561672

communication traffic between EPs, called east-west traffic,
and traffic received and sent at the EP side to communicate
with the outside of the cloud, called north-south traffic. VCN
supports efficient and scalable data transfer and is the key
link for businesses in the cloud to interact with each other
and with the outside world. Therefore, the security of VCNs
is critical. Unfortunately, VCNs have become the target of a
variety of attacks [2], including attacks launched externally
against VCNs, such as DDoS, brute force exploits, etc., and
lateral movement attacks launched internally by compromised
EPs to expand the compromised surface, such as port scanning,
ransomware viruses, etc. These attacks cause serious consequences, such as leaking critical data and disrupting cloud
services, resulting in significant losses. Therefore, intrusion
detection for VCNs has become a key approach to securing
the cloud.
Currently, related work implements intrusion detection for
VCNs using signature based [3], [4] and supervised classification based [2], [5] methods. Unfortunately, these methods are
difficult to actually apply to VCNs: signature based methods
need to rely on a large number of known anomalous samples
to form “signatures” and use these signatures to match samples
to detect attacks, while supervised methods need to learn both
normal and anomalous samples in order to find the decision
boundary between them. However, it is extremely difficult to
collect a sufficient number of representative anomalous samples with rich categories due to the diversity of attacks faced
by VCNs. Meanwhile, signature based methods and supervised
methods are usually unable to identify attack categories that
are not in the training set. More seriously, VCNs are also
exposed to unknown novel attacks, which cannot be identified
by the above methods because they rely on existing anomalous
samples. In contrast, unsupervised methods only learn the
behavior pattern of normal samples, and any samples that
deviate from the normal behavior pattern are considered as
anomalous. Therefore, unsupervised methods fundamentally
avoid the above problems. Theoretically, it is capable of
detecting any category of attack, including novel attacks. In
this paper, we focus on the unsupervised detection method for
VCNs and try to learn only normal patterns and monitor for
deviations from the normal patterns to detect attacks. This is
known as anomaly based intrusion detection (hereafter referred
to as VCN anomaly detection). Although several methods
have been proposed for VCN anomaly detection, based on the
observation and analysis of the characteristics of VCNs and
the summary of the related work, we argue that VCN anomaly
detection still faces the following key challenges:
Challenge 1 (C1): Design the scalable and temporally
continuous feature model with the key consideration
of the uniqueness of VCNs to effectively characterize

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

the network patterns of VCNs. VCNs are dominated by
east-west traffic [6], which is significantly different from noncloud networks dominated by north-south traffic, and poses the
challenge of effectively characterizing the uniqueness of the
network patterns of VCNs. However, current network traffic
feature models [7], [8], [9], [10] mainly focus on non-cloud
networks and are difficult to apply to VCNs. Meanwhile, current mainstream flow-based feature models [8], [9], [10] face
the scalability challenge when used in VCNs typically containing large numbers of EPs: they need to maintain all the stateful
flows for each EP to compute flow-level features. However,
this not only leads to rapid growth of the state table with large
computational and memory overheads [11], but also requires
the traffic to be redirected to a dedicated middlebox for stateful
flow processing, which suffers from low scalability, single
point of failure, increased latency, and reduced throughput, and
is infeasible in real clouds [2]. In addition, flow-based feature
models focus on internal features of a single flow and construct
temporally uncorrelated samples, and thus cannot be used by
anomaly detection models to model the complex temporal
dependency of VCNs (see Challenge 3). Therefore, it is necessary to fully consider the uniqueness of VCNs to effectively
characterize their network patterns, to design stateless feature
models for VCNs to cope with the scalability problem, and to
construct temporally continuous feature samples for temporal
modeling.
Challenge 2 (C2): Design the anomaly detection model
with sufficient adaptability to learn the multiple heterogeneous normal patterns of VCNs simultaneously to address
the key scalability problem. EPs oriented to different services
have different network patterns. For example, the periodic peak
traffic of Web EP vs. the uniform traffic of Database EP; and
the uniform high traffic of Streaming Media Service EP vs.
the random burst traffic of File Storage Service EP. Due to the
heterogeneity of the network patterns of different EPs, current
network anomaly detection methods have to follow the “oneto-one” strategy by constructing and maintaining an exclusive
model for each EP that learns its normal network patterns.
However, given the typically large number of EPs in VCNs
and the high computational resources required by the detection
models (typically deployed on dedicated hardware, e.g., GPU),
this approach would incur huge training, inference, and model
maintenance overheads, and thus has serious scalability issues
in VCNs. For example, for a VCN containing 1,000 EPs, 1,000
models need to be trained, maintained and loaded separately
and simultaneously on GPUs for online inference. In addition,
EPs generated in batch, e.g. by dynamic scaling, are identical
in business patterns and therefore have similar network patterns, and it is wasteful to train separate exclusive models for
them. Therefore, there is a need to apply a new “one-to-many”
[12], [13] strategy for VCN anomaly detection, where models
are trained on samples from multiple EPs to simultaneously
learn their normal network patterns. Only one trained model
needs to be loaded for online detection, and samples from
multiple EPs can be detected simultaneously. This effectively
solves the key scalability problem. However, applying the
“one-to-many” strategy poses a key challenge to the model’s
adaptability: current anomaly detection models [7], [14], [15],
[16], [17], [18], [19] lack sufficient adaptability to simultaneously identify and learn multiple normal network patterns of

4323

different EPs, thus failing to achieve the desirable detection
performance.
Challenge 3 (C3): Design the anomaly detection model
with sufficient temporal modeling capability to cope with
the complex temporal dependency and temporal nonstationarity of VCNs. Network traffic is typically time-series
data, and the network patterns of VCNs have the complex
temporal dependency, typically including: 1) trending, e.g. the
steady increase and decrease of the business traffic carried
by EPs; 2) periodicity: the stable periodic traffic patterns
due to fixed business logics, e.g. the backend EP receives
the frontend request and then triggers the invocation of the
database. The complex temporal dependency of VCNs poses a
challenge to the anomaly detection model’s temporal modeling
capability, and insufficient such capability or even ignoring
the temporal dependency will make it difficult to characterize the network patterns of VCNs. However, current related
work either ignores the temporal dependency [7], [20] or
has insufficient capability to model it [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17], [18], [19], [21], [22], thus failing to achieve the
desirable detection performance. On top of that, VCNs also
exhibit temporal non-stationarity, i.e., the network patterns of
a single EP have multiple temporal dependencies that change
dynamically over time. Typical examples include: 1) EPs
hosting cloud services have different network patterns during
day and night due to different user activities; 2) dynamic
changes in network patterns due to business adjustments and
upgrades of EPs; and 3) EPs (e.g. VMs) running different
applications simultaneously have different network patterns at
different times. This poses the further challenge of requiring
not only that the model has the adaptability in C2, but also that
it is able to accurately capture the dynamic changes in network
patterns while effectively modeling the complex temporal
dependency. However, current related work either lacks the
adaptability [7], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] or fails to
accurately capture the dynamic changes in network patterns
and effectively model the complex temporal dependency [12],
[13], [20], [21], [22], thus failing to achieve the desirable
detection performance.
To address the above challenges, we model VCN anomaly
detection as an unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
problem and apply the “one-to-many” strategy. Based on this,
we propose a new unsupervised time-series VCN anomaly
detection method that consists of two parts:
(1) A new Multilevel Feature Model (MFM) for VCN
anomaly detection. MFM includes three levels of features, besides the basic packet frequency and throughput
features, new topology features are proposed based
on the observation and analysis of the uniqueness of
VCNs. By combining the multilevel features, MFM
provides a comprehensive and accurate characterization
of the network patterns of VCNs. Meanwhile, MFM
requires only simple packet header statistics to achieve
stateless EP-level feature construction and constructs
temporally continuous samples for temporal modeling
using the time window. Therefore, MFM can effectively
address C1.
(2) A new Global Temporal Dependency Gaussian mixture
Dynamic Variational Auto-Encoder (GTGmVAE) model
for unsupervised time-series VCN anomaly detection,

4324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

which contains several innovations: a) GTGmVAE contains a new local-global feature extractor that can
effectively extract and integrate the implicit structural
features of the input samples from both local and global
perspectives. This can effectively improve the model’s
representation capability and make the model better
learn the distribution of the input samples, thus improving the model’s adaptability and temporal modeling
capability. b) GTGmVAE contains a new global temporal dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, and
a new global latent-space temporal dependency Gaussian
mixture generation network. GTGmVAE achieves strong
temporal inference capability by capturing the global
temporal dependency of the input samples, and strong
temporal sample generation capability by capturing the
global temporal dependency of the latent variables. This
can effectively improve the capability to model the complex temporal dependency of VCNs, and help improve
the model’s adaptability and the capability to cope
with the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs. Meanwhile,
GTGmVAE makes the latent variable follow a Gaussian
mixture distribution, which is more adaptive than a
single distribution: different network patterns can be
corresponded to different categories of the latent variable
distributions, and the categories of the distributions to
which the latent variables belong are inferred based on
the global temporal dependency of the input samples to
accurately capture the dynamic changes of the network
patterns. Therefore, GTGmVAE is able to model both
the multiple network patterns of different EPs as well
as the multiple network patterns of a single EP. Taken
together, GTGmVAE can effectively address C2 and C3.
Our contributions are as follows:
(1) We propose a new multilevel feature model MFM (§ III)
for VCN anomaly detection, which requires only simple
packet header statistics for the stateless EP-level feature construction, and contains three levels of features:
packet frequency features, throughput features, and new
topology features designed for the uniqueness of VCNs.
Combined with the multilevel features, MFM provides
a comprehensive and accurate characterization of the
network patterns of VCNs.
(2) We propose a new unsupervised time-series anomaly
detection model GTGmVAE (§ IV) for VCN anomaly
detection: a) GTGmVAE contains a new feature extractor that can adequately extract and integrate the implicit
structural features of the input samples from both
global and local perspectives to effectively improve the
model’s representation capability and better implement
the temporal modeling. b) GTGmVAE has a strong
temporal modeling capability. By fully capturing the
global temporal dependency of the input samples and
latent variables, GTGmVAE obtains the strong temporal
inference capability and temporal generation capability.
c) GTGmVAE has a strong adaptability. By making the
latent variable follow a Gaussian mixture distribution
and based on the global temporal dependency of the
input samples to accurately infer the distribution categories of the latent variables, on top of which combining
the model’s strong temporal modeling capability with

Fig. 1. VCN anomaly detection framework.

the representation capability provided by the new feature
extractor, GTGmVAE is able to simultaneously learn the
multiple network patterns of different EPs and effectively
cope with the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs.
(3) We conduct extensive experiments (§ V) on the VCN
anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 [23] and the
time-series anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD
[15], which fully illustrate the effectiveness of GTGmVAE and MFM in VCN anomaly detection: a)
GTGmVAE outperforms all nine state-of-the-art representative methods in the comparison experiments,
illustrating its advantages in temporal modeling capability and adaptability; b) ablation experiments on
GTGmVAE illustrate the effectiveness of each component in GTGmVAE; c) ablation experiments on MFM
illustrate the effectiveness of each level of features in
MFM; and d) time efficiency experiments illustrate that
GTGmVAE and MFM can meet the real-time detection
requirement.
II. P RELIMINARIES
A. Problem Definition
Since the “one-to-many” strategy [12], [13]
˚ is used, the sample sequence of n-th EP is defined as xn = x1,n , x2,n , · · · , xT,n ,
where n = 1, · · · , N, N is the number of EPs, and T is the
sequence length of xn . The observation sample at time t is
xt,n ∈ Rv , where v is the dimension of the sample, i.e., the
number of features of the feature model. Time-series anomaly
detection for VCNs is defined as a task that determines
whether a specific sample xt,n from a specific EP is anomalous
or not. On top of that, the “one-to-many” strategy means that
the model is trained on samples from all N EPs to obtain
a unified model, and then it is used to determine whether
any of the samples from any of the N EPs is anomalous or
not. In contrast, the traditional “one-to-one” strategy involves
training N exclusive models for N EPs, and n-th model can
only be used to determine whether the sample from n-th EP is
anomalous or not. Note that in the following description, for
simplicity, we refer to xt,n simply as xt .
B. Overview of the Framework
The anomaly detection framework (Fig. 1) is divided into
three parts. 1) Data pre-processing. VCN traffic is natural timeseries data, so we first slice it using the time window. Second,
we compute features for the traffic in each time window using
the proposed MFM (§ III) to construct temporally continuous
training and test samples for each EP. Finally, we normalize
the samples using MinMax to facilitate model training and
inference. 2) Offline training. We feed the preprocessed training samples into the proposed GTGmVAE (§ IV) for training.
3) Online detection. We use the trained model to infer the
anomaly score of the samples from each EP online and use
the threshold to determine whether they are anomalies.

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

C. VAE and Dynamic Variants
Variational auto-encoder (VAE) [24] is a deep generative
model consisting of an inference network and a generation
network. Inference network aims to map the input x to a latent
space and the distribution (usually Gaussian) of the latent
variable z is parameterized as the mean µ and variance σ2 .
This can be denoted as qφ (z|x). Generation network aims to
reconstruct the input x from z sampled from the latent space,
denoted as pθ (x|z). The ability of VAE to capture the intrinsic
pattern of the input by learning its latent representation makes
it particularly suitable for anomaly detection: anomalies often
significantly differ from normal samples in patterns, and by
comparing the reconstruction loss of the samples, VAE can
effectively identify anomalies. The loss function of VAE is
shown below and consists of two parts: the log-likelihood
of the reconstructed x measures the reconstruction effect,
while the KL divergence measures the difference between the
encoded latent distribution and the prior distribution.



L(θ, φ; x) = Eqφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − KL qφ (z|x) ||pθ (z)
(1)
Dynamic variants of VAE have been extensively studied for
processing time-series data. They usually involve modifications to the structure of VAE, such as introducing recurrent
structures (e.g., RNN) into VAE for temporal modeling.
The most typical work is VRNN [14], which uses RNN
to temporally model the input sequence x and the latent
variable sequence z, i.e., ht = RNN (xt , zt , ht−1 ), and infers
the posterior distribution qφ (zt |xt , ht−1 ) of the latent variable
zt based on the temporal hidden variable ht−1 . Generation
network samples zt from pθ (zt |ht−1 ) and implements the reconstruction pθ (xt |zt , ht−1 ) in combination with ht−1 . Therefore,
VRNN is not only able to learn the latent representation of
the input, but also to capture its evolution over time, thus
enabling temporal modeling. The loss function of VRNN is
similar to that of VAE at each time t. We can conclude
from the design of VRNN that modifying the structure of
VAE to enable temporal modeling requires implementing
temporal modeling of the input sequence x and the latent
variable sequence z, and making the model reconstruct the
sequence x.
III. M ULTI -L EVEL F EATURE M ODEL (MFM)
This section details the proposed new multilevel feature
model MFM specifically designed for VCN anomaly detection,
which combines three levels of features. First, we use the
feature construction approach of Aldribi et al. [18] to construct
the packet frequency features as Level 1 features. Since Level
1 features only consider the packet count information, which
is too homogeneous, we further propose the new throughput
features as Level 2 features. Level 1 and 2 features characterize
the basic patterns of general networks, which is similar to the
current feature models [2], [7], but is not sufficient for VCN
anomaly detection as described in C1. Therefore, by observing
and analyzing the uniqueness of VCNs, we propose the new
topology features as Level 3 features. Combined with the
multilevel features, MFM can comprehensively and accurately
characterize the network patterns of VCNs. Meanwhile, MFM
constructs the temporally continuous feature samples for EPs
using the time window to allow anomaly detection models
to model the complex temporal dependency of VCNs. In

4325

TABLE I
BASIC F REQUENCY F EATURES IN THE F IRST L EVEL

addition, MFM requires only simple packet header statistics
to enable the stateless feature construction, thus avoiding the
use of dedicated middleboxes for stateful flow processing. In
summary, MFM can effectively address C1.

A. Level 1: Packet Frequency Features
We use the approach of Aldribi et al. [18] to construct the
packet frequency features, including basic frequency, load and
entropy features. Specifically, assume that the IP address of
the EP for which features are constructed is eip. The network
flow of eip can be divided into two categories based on
its directions. The egress flow is represented by the tuple
(eip, sp, dip, d p) (protocol is ignored in the representation
for convenience, same below), where sp is the source port,
dip is the destination IP, and dp is the destination port.
The ingress flow is represented by the tuple (sip, sp, eip, d p),
where sip is the source IP, sp is the source port, and dp is the
destination port. Note that the definition of such a flow requires
only simple packet header statistics and avoids maintaining
flow state, i.e., it is stateless. Let PC out (t, ∆t) and PC in (t, ∆t)
represent the number of packets in the egress/ingress flow at
time (t, t + ∆t), and the size of the time window is ∆t, then
the basic frequency features are defined as shown in table I.
Based on basic frequency features, frequency load features
calculate the ratio between the corresponding ingress and
in
egress frequency features: LF j, j0 (t) = f jout
0 (t)/ f j (t). Each row
in
in table I represents the corresponding f j (t) and f jout
0 (t).
Based on basic frequency features, frequency entropy features calculate the randomness
P of the packet frequency, which
is defined as: HF f (t) = − ( fi / f )log2 ( fi / f ), where i reprei

sents the variable in basic frequency features. For example,
in
consider f sip,eip
(t), where eip is fixed since we construct features for the EP corresponding to eip, but sip is not fixed and
in
can have multiple values.
! Therefore we have HF(
! f sip,eip , t) =
P in
P in
P in
in
−
f sip,eip / ( f sip,eip
) log2 f sip,eip
/ ( f sip,eip
) .
sip

sip

sip

The above three features characterize the normal patterns of
the packet frequency and are used as Level 1 features in MFM.
Among them, basic frequency features assume that the packet
frequency should be stable, load features assume that the ratio
between ingress and egress packet frequency should be stable,
and entropy features assume that the packet frequency should
have low randomness to distinguish from attacks with high
randomness (e.g. DDoS). However, Level 1 features are not
sufficient as they only consider the packet count information.

4326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE II
BASIC T HROUGHPUT F EATURES IN THE S ECOND L EVEL

Fig. 2. Comparison of the normal and anomalous behaviors of the microservice application Sock Shop [26]. (a) is the connection topology graph of the
microservice orders in a normal situation, and (b) is the connection topology
graph with three examples of attacks. Red nodes are internal EPs launching
the attacks and external attackers. Red lines represent attacks.

B. Level 2: Throughput Features
To further comprehensively and accurately characterize the
basic patterns of VCNs, we extend Level 1 features and
propose the throughput features as Level 2 features. Similarly,
it consists of basic throughput, throughput load and throughput
entropy features. Let FLout (t, ∆t) and FLin (t, ∆t) represent the
flow length (i.e., sum of packet size) of the egress/ingress flow
at time (t, t + ∆t), and the size of the time window is ∆t, the
basic throughput features are defined as shown in table II.
Based on basic throughput features, throughput load features
calculate the ratio between the corresponding ingress and
in
egress throughput features: LT j, j0 (t) = tpout
j0 (t)/tp j (t). Each
row in table II represents corresponding tpinj (t) and tpout
j0 (t).
Based on basic throughput features, throughput entropy
features calculate the randomness ofPthe flow

 throughput,
which is defined as: HT tp (t) = −
tpi /tp log2 tpi /tp ,
i

where i represents the variable in basic throughput features.
Throughput features assume that the throughput and its
load and entropy of different levels of flows should be stable.
Compared to Level 1 features that only consider packet count
information, it can effectively distinguish anomalies in packet
size, e.g. the packet from brute force attacks has a different size
from the packet from normal business traffic. By combining
Level 1 and 2 features that consider the flow length and packet
count of different levels of flows, we can comprehensively and
accurately characterize the basic patterns of VCNs.
C. Level 3: Topology Features
Level 1 and 2 features ignore the uniqueness of VCNs,
so they are still insufficient for VCN anomaly detection as
described in C1. Therefore, by observing, analyzing and
summarizing the network patterns of VCNs, we identify the
uniqueness of VCNs: VCNs are dominated by east-west traffic
typically generated by accesses between services hosted by
EPs [2], [18], [23], [25], such as invocations between the
containerized microservices and accesses between the frontend
and backend hosted by VMs. Since the business logic is fixed,
the connection behavior of an EP, i.e., the edges contained
by that EP in the connection topology graph, should have a
stable baseline pattern. In contrast, the connection behavior
of an EP will deviate from the baseline when attacks occur,
including: when this EP is exposed to external DDoS attacks
or internal lateral movement attacks such as port scanning
from compromised EPs, or when this EP is compromised and
launches lateral movement attacks against other EPs.
We further illustrate this with two examples in microservices
(container cloud) and VM cloud respectively. Fig. 2 shows the

Fig. 3. Comparison of the normal and anomalous behaviors of VMs in the
cloud [18]. (a) is the connection topology graph of VM8 in a normal situation,
and (b) is the connection topology graph with three real-world attacks. Red
nodes are external attackers. Red lines represent attacks.

connection topology graph of the containerized microservice
orders in the classic microservice application Sock Shop [26].
Fig. 2(a) is the connection topology graph of orders in a normal situation, which has a stable pattern as the business logic
is fixed. In contrast, Fig. 2(b) shows the connection topology
1
graph containing three assumed attack examples, where O
is the attack launched by compromised orders to other EPs
within Sock Shop (with which orders should not communicate
2 is the attack from outside the cloud to
in the business logic), O
3 is the attack launched by other compromised
the inside, and O
EPs in the cloud (e.g. the microservice catalogue) to orders.
Fig. 3 shows the real connection topology graph of VM8 on
the first day from ISOT-CID dataset [18]. VM8 has a stable
topology graph pattern in a normal situation (Fig. 3(a)). In
contrast, the topology graph changes significantly when real1 attacks launched
world attacks occur (Fig. 3(b)), including O
by an external attacker on VM8, leading to the compromise
2 a port scanning attack launched by VM8 on VMs
of VM8; O
3 a DoS attack launched by VM8 on VM4.
7, 9 and 10, and O
Based on the above observations, we arrive at the key
insight: characterizing the relatively stable normal patterns of
the EP’s connection topology graph can effectively discriminate between normal and anomalous behaviors. Therefore,
we propose the topology features as Level 3 features, which
characterize the EP’s connection topology graph from different
perspectives in as simple a way as possible to avoid additional
computational overhead. Specifically, the network flows that
eip receives and sends out during a time window of time
t and length ∆t can be denoted as Fout (t, ∆t) and Fin (t, ∆t).
We further determine whether the traffic belongs to inside or
outside the cloud, i.e., whether it is east-west (ew) traffic or
north-south (ns) traffic, based on the dip and sip. Finally, we
ew
ew
ns
obtain four types of flows: Fout
(t, ∆t), Fout
(t, ∆t), Fin
(t, ∆t)

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

4327

TABLE III
T OPOLOGY F EATURES

Fig. 4. Network structure of GTGmVAE. (a) Inference network. (b) Generation network.

ns
and Fin
(t, ∆t). On top of that, topology features simply and
effectively characterize the EP’s connection topology graph by
counting the number of different types of flows and the ratios
between them, which are defined as shown in table III. In
addition, in some special cases, distributed applications may
be deployed in non-VCNs, such as deploying internal business
systems in a private data center or deploying small applications
in a LAN environment. These special networks may exhibit
uniqueness similar to that of VCNs. However, such cases are
usually rare. Meanwhile, MFM is theoretically applicable.

D. Feature Computation
Having defined MFM, we now define how the features are
computed. For a time period T, we slice it by continuous and
disjoint time windows and compute all the features in each
time window (t, t + ∆t), totalling 91 dimensions. Finally, we
obtain a series of temporally continuous samples for training
and online detection. From the specific definition of MFM,
we can see that MFM only requires statistics on flow tuples
(i.e., (eip, sp, dip, d p) or (sip, sp, eip, d p)) and packet sizes in
the packet headers, and therefore no stateful flow processing
is required. We further discuss the flexibility and challenges
of deploying MFM in the cloud in § VI-A.
IV. VCN A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODEL GTG M VAE
This section details the proposed new VCN anomaly detection model GTGmVAE. It consists of a new global temporal
dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, which contains a new feature extractor, and a new global latent-space
temporal dependency Gaussian mixture generation network.
A. Global Temporal Dependency Gaussian Mixture Inference
Network
This section details the proposed new global temporal
dependency Gaussian mixture inference network, which is

Fig. 5. Probabilistic graphical model of GTGmVAE. (a) Inference network.
(b) Generation network.

used to infer the latent variable sequence z. Combined with
its probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a)), we give the joint
probability distribution of the inference network:
qφ (z1:T , e1:T , c1:T |x1:T , z0 )
= qφ (z1:T |e1:T , c1:T , x1:T , z0 )qφ (c1:T |x1:T , e1:T )qφ (e1:T |x1:T )
=

T
Y

qφ (zt |zt−1 , et , ct , xt ) qφ (ct |xt , et )qφ (et |x1:T )

(2)

t=1

In the following, we describe the computational process
based on the structure of the inference network (Fig. 4(a)).
1) Local-Global Feature Extractor: In VAE [24] and
dynamic VAE (e.g., VRNN [14]), the input sample x is
processed via multiple fully connections (also known as the
multilayer perceptron, MLP) to: 1) extract features from input
samples to obtain high-level representations while eliminating
feature redundancy; and 2) compress dimension to facilitate
subsequent latent variable inference and temporal modeling.
However, given the high-dimensional nature of the samples,
this approach ignores the implicit structural features of input
samples, thus affecting subsequent operations; and makes the
model lack the sufficient representation capability, preventing
it from achieving desirable adaptability. Some advanced work
[12], [27] uses the one-dimensional convolutional neural network (1D CNN) to extract the implicit structural features.
However, due to the limitations of convolutional operations,

4328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 6. Network structure of the Local-global Feature Extractor (LGFE).

they can only process local features and ignore the global
perspective.
Therefore, we propose a new Local-global Feature Extractor
(LGFE) (Fig. 6). Specifically, each sample xt ∈ Rv in the input
sequence x is a v-dimensional vector. We use each xt as an
input vector to LGFE, i.e., din = v. First, xt is processed by
n layers of 1D CNN, and the parameters of each layer are
(ki , si , ci ), representing its kernel size, step size, and output
channels, where si > 1, and ci gradually increases. This can:
1) effectively extract and integrate local features of xt , and
2) reduce the length of the token sequence (from din to dn )
while increasing the dimension of each token (from 1 to cn ),
which can effectively reduce the computational overhead of the
subsequent global feature processing while representing token
over a larger feature space to increase the richness of feature
representation. Then, we perform the layer normalization on
the output of n-th layer 1D CNN and obtain a token sequence
of length dn and dimension cn . To process global features,
we use Transformer Encoder [28], which effectively extracts
global features and enhances representation capability through
a self-attention mechanism. Similarly, we obtain the processed
token sequence by stacking k Transformer Encoder Blocks,
whose dimension is still (dn , cn ). We perform the reshape
operation on the token sequence to transform it into a vector
of (dn × cn , 1) and obtain the output vector b
xt with dimension
(dout , 1) by an MLP ((dn × cn ) → (dinner ) → (dout )), where
dinner ≥ dn × cn , dout < din . Here MLP has the effect of
further integrating global and local features and performing
dimension compression. Finally, we combine local and global
perspectives to achieve feature extraction and integration of xt
and obtain its compressed representation b
xt , which is able to
(a) fully extract and integrate the features of input samples
and eliminate feature redundancy; (b) contribute to better
subsequent latent variable inference and temporal dependency
modeling; and (c) effectively improve the representation capability of GTGmVAE to achieve the desirable adaptability.
2) Global Temporal Dependency Encoder:
Having
˚
obtained the compressed representation b
x = xb1 , xb2 , · · · , xbT ,
GTGmVAE further models its temporal dependency. Current
dynamic VAEs such as VRNN [14] and SGmVRNN [12]
usually implement temporal modeling via RNN, but they have
two problems: (a) RNN only consider historical information
and cannot obtain the global temporal dependency; (b) using
the same RNN to model temporal dependencies of both

deterministic input samples and stochastic latent variables,
and their interactions will degrade the modeling performance.
In oder to obtain a strong temporal modeling capability to
effectively address C3, we aim to obtain the global temporal
dependency of sequence b
x, which can fully exploit the
information about the current time sample b
xt itself, the past
and the future to better infer zt . Moreover, the temporal
modeling of the deterministic state b
xt and the stochastic state
zt is separated (§ IV-A.4). Specifically, from the knowledge of
the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a)), it is known that
the temporal hidden variable sequence e = {e1 , e2 , · · · , eT } is
calculated from all b
xt (i.e., qφ (et |x1:T )), and is thus able to
model the global temporal dependency, which is achieved by
the new Global Temporal Dependency Encoder (GTDE) in
Fig. 4(a). GTDE is stacked by several Transformer Encoder
Blocks [28], and through the self-attention mechanism, it
can effectively capture the global temporal dependencies of
samples in b
xt with each other, and process long sequences
better than RNN, thus effectively modeling the complex
temporal dependency of VCNs. The computational procedure
of GTDE is as follows:
(
b
x,
i=1
i
xinput = i−1
(3)
e , i>1

i
i
i
ai = MultiHeadAttntion xinput
, xinput
, xinput
(4)

i
i
i
anorm = LayerNorm a + xinput
(5)


i
i
i
e = LayerNorm FeedFoward anorm + anorm
(6)
By cyclically performing the above computational procedure
N times, we take the final eN as the global temporal hidden
variable sequence e = {e1 , e2 , · · · , eT }.
3) Inference of Indicator Variable c: To learn the multiple normal network patterns of different EPs as required
by the “one-to-many” strategy in C2, and to cope with the
temporal non-stationarity in C3, we need to accurately perceive different normal network patterns. Inspired by GmVAE
[20] and SGmVRNN [12], we denote the categories of the
latent variable distributions corresponding to different normal
patterns by introducing an indicator variable c, and capture
the different normal patterns by inferring the categories of c.
Specifically, c is a one-hot vector and follows a Categorical
K×1
, i.e., c ∼ Cat(π). Since
distribution with parameter π ∈ R+
changes in the normal network patterns of EPs are temporally
correlated, to accurately infer the indicator variable ct , we need
to consider not only the current time sample b
xt , but also the
global temporal dependency between b
xt and other samples in
b
x. However, existing work either ignores temporal dependency
[20] or considers only the historical information while ignoring
the future information [12]. Therefore, to fully consider the
global temporal dependency of b
xt to accurately infer ct , we
use the global temporal hidden variable sequence e obtained in
§ IV-A.2, where et represents the global dependency between
b
xt and other samples in b
x. Specifically, ct is calculated by:

πt = Softmax MLP Concat b
xt , et
(7)
ct = GumbleSoftmax (πt )
(8)
where we need to obtain the discrete distribution variable ct .
However, since it is unable to backpropagate the gradient
directly from the discrete distribution, the Gumble-Softmax
trick [29] is introduced here to approximate the discrete

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

distribution, whose differentiability guarantees that parameter
optimization can be performed by backpropagation.
4) Inference of Latent Variable z: Since we introduce the
indicator variable c to indicate the distribution category of
the latent variable z, the prior distribution of z is extended
to a Gaussian mixture distribution (§ IV-B.1). Accordingly,
the posterior distribution of z also depends on c and is
extended to a Gaussian mixture distribution. Combining the
knowledge of the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(a))
and Fig. 4(a), it is known that the variational posterior of
the current time latent variable zt is inferred from four parts:
(a) the previous time latent variable zt−1 , which introduces
its own temporal dependency for the variational posterior
inference of z. Meanwhile, the temporal dependency of the
stochastic sequence z is modelled separately from that of the
deterministic sequence b
x to avoid mutual influence. Specifically, for zt−1 , we obtain its nonlinear temporal dependency
factor by zd
d
t−1 = Tanh (Linear (zt−1 )) and use z
t−1 to infer the
posterior of zt . (b) The current time input b
xt , which introduces
information of the current time sample for variational inference. (c) The current time global temporal hidden variable
et , which represents the global temporal dependency of the
input sequence b
x to accurately infer the posterior of zt . (d) The
current time indicator variable ct , which indicates the category
of the posterior distribution of zt , thus providing GTGmVAE
with the adaptability to model different normal patterns. Taken
together, the variational posterior of zt is calculated by:

µφ,zt = MLP Concat zd
xt , et , ct
(9)
t−1 , b

σφ,zt = Softplus MLP Concat zd
xt , et , ct
(10)
t−1 , b
zt = µφ,zt + σφ,zt · t , t ∼ Uniform(0, 1)
(11)
where φ represents the parameters of the inference network.
By concatenating the one-hot vector ct , it can achieve the effect
of switching [12] using MLP, which determines the parameter
category (µ and σ) of the Gaussian distribution to which zt
belongs. Here we use the re-parameterization trick [24] of
sampling from the posterior distribution of the latent space
to obtain the specific posterior latent variable zt to enable
backpropagation. By simultaneously considering the four factors, GTGmVAE can model the temporal dependency of the
posterior latent variable and the global temporal dependency
of the input sequences to achieve strong temporal modeling
capability and accurate posterior variational inference of the
latent variable, with adaptability to different normal patterns.
B. Global Latent-Space Temporal Dependency Gaussian
Mixture Generation Network
This section details the proposed new global latent-space
temporal dependency Gaussian mixture generation network,
which is used to generate the sequence xT0 . Combined with
its probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)), we give the joint
probability distribution of the generation network:

0
pθ x1:T
, z1:T , dz1:T , h1:T , c1:T |x1:T , z0 , h0


0
= pθ x1:T
|z1:T , dz1:T , h0:T −1 pθ dz1:T |z1:T
× pθ (z1:T |h0:T −1 , c1:T , z0 ) pθ (c1:T ) pθ (h1:T |x1:T , h0 )
=

T
Y
t=1



pθ xt0 |zt , dzt , ht−1 pθ dzt |z1:T pθ (zt |zt−1 , ht−1 , ct )

4329

× pθ (ct ) pθ (ht |ht−1 , xt )

(12)

where p (ct ) is a Uniform distribution. In the following, we
describe the computational process based on the structure of
the generation network (Fig. 4(b)).
1) Prior of Latent Variable z: Since we introduce the
indicator variable c and make the latent variable z dependent
on c (§ IV-A.3), z follows a Gaussian mixture distribution:
p (zt ) =

K
X

πk N zt |µt,k , diag σ2t,k



(13)

k=1

where

K
P

πk = 1. Combining the knowledge of the probak=1

bilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)) and Fig. 4(b), it is known
that the prior of the current time latent variable zt is calculated
from three parts: (a) the nonlinear temporal dependency factor
zd
t−1 of previous time latent variable zt−1 , which is the same
as § IV-A.4. (b) Historical factor ht−1 , which captures the
historical temporal information of input sequence b
x using
LSTM, i.e., ht = LSTM b
xt , ht−1 . Note that we cannot model
the global temporal dependency of b
x here (the reconstruction
of b
xt in § IV-B.2 is similar): the global temporal information
contains information of b
xt itself, which causes the model to
reconstruct b
xt using only b
xt , and results in the KL divergence
of the posterior and prior of zt becoming 0, leading to model
failure. (c) The current time indicator variable ct , which
indicates the category of the prior distribution of zt , thus
providing GTGmVAE with the adaptability to model different
normal patterns. Taken together, the prior of zt is calculated
by:

µθ,zt = MLP Concat zd
(14)
t−1 , ht−1 , ct

σθ,zt = Softplus MLP Concat zd
(15)
t−1 , ht−1 , ct
where θ represents the parameters of the generation network.
The temporal modeling of b
x and the prior z is also separated
to avoid mutual influence. By simultaneously considering the
three factors, GTGmVAE can accurately select the Gaussian
distribution category via ct using b
xt and its global temporal
dependency, and integrate the historical temporal information
of the latent variable and input sequences, thus achieving
strong adaptability and temporal modeling capability.
2) Reconstruction of Input Sequence x: Combining the
knowledge of the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5(b)) and
Fig. 4(b), it is known that the reconstruction of the current
time sample xt0 is generated from three parts: (a) Historical
information ht−1 of the input sequence b
x. (b) The current
time latent variable zt . (c) The global temporal dependency
factor dzt of zt , which is obtained by the new Global Temporal
Dependency Decoder (GTDD). Similar to GTDE, GTDD is
stacked by several Transformer Encoder Blocks [28], and
through the self-attention mechanism, it can effectively capture
the global temporal dependency of zt in sequence z with each
other. The computational procedure of GTDD is as follows:
(
z,
i=1
i
zinput = i−1
(16)
dz , i > 1

ai = MultiHeadAttntion ziinput , ziinput , ziinput
(17)

i
i
i
anorm = LayerNorm a + zinput
(18)


i
i
i
dz = LayerNorm FeedFoward anorm + anorm
(19)

4330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

By cyclically performing the above computation N times,
we take the final d˚zN as the global temporal dependency
factor sequence dz = dz1 , dz2 , · · · , dzT . By introducing dz , the
global temporal dependency of the latent space can be fully
considered during reconstruction, which effectively improves
the capability of GTGmVAE to generate temporal samples.
Let xt0 follow a Gaussian distribution, we have:



xt0 ∼ N µθ,xt0 , diag σ2θ,xt0
µθ,xt0 = DCNN MLP Concat zt , dzt , ht−1

(20)


σθ,xt0 = Softplus DCNN MLP Concat zt , dzt , ht−1

(21)


(22)

Here DCNN is a one-dimensional deconvolutional neural network that can help to better generate structured samples [12].
By simultaneously considering the three factors, GTGmVAE
fully incorporates the global temporal dependency of the latent
variable sequence z and the historical information of the input
sequence b
x when generating the reconstructed samples xt0 , thus
achieving a strong temporal sample generation capability.

C. Model Training
According to the probabilistic graphical model (Fig. 5),
the prior distribution of c is pθ (ct ), the variational posterior distribution is qφ (ct |x1:T ), the prior distribution of
z is pθ (zt |zt−1 , x<t , ct ), the variational posterior distribution
is qφ (zt |zt−1 , x1:T , ct ), the generation distribution of x is
pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t ). Consistent with VAE, our goal is to maximize the log-likelihood of the observation sample xt while
minimizing the KL divergence between the variational posterior distribution qφ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x1:T ) and the prior distribution
pθ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x<t ). Below is the loss function of GTGmVAE,
the specific calculation of it is in Supplementary Appendix.
L (θ, φ; xt )


= Eqφ (zt ,ct |zt−1 ,x1:T ) log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t )

− KL qφ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x1:T ) ||pθ (zt , ct |zt−1 , x<t )


= Eqφ (zt ,ct |zt−1 ,x1:T ) log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t )


− Eqφ (ct |x1:T ) KL qφ (zt |zt−1 , x1:T , ct )||pθ (zt |zt−1 , x<t , ct )

− KL qφ (ct |x1:T ) ||pθ (ct )
(23)

D. Anomaly Detection
GTGmVAE learns the normal network patterns of EPs
during training. Therefore, with the same assumption as in
the previous work on anomaly detection, the more the input
sample of an EP matches the normal network patterns of that
EP, the higher the probability of its reconstruction. We use the
reconstruction probability S t of the sample xt as its anomaly
score to judge whether it is anomalous or not:
S t = log pθ (xt |z1:T , x<t )

(24)

The sample xt is considered anomalous if S t falls below the
specified threshold. Similar to previous work, we use POT
[15], [30] to implement automatic threshold selection.

E. Characteristics and Advantages of GTGmVAE
1) Strong Feature Extraction and Integration Capability:
Through the proposed new LGFE, GTGmVAE can effectively
combine global and local perspectives to extract and integrate
the features of input samples, which can help the model
to learn the distribution to which the input samples belong
more efficiently, thus contributing to the subsequent latent
variable inference and temporal dependency modeling, as
well as effectively enhancing the representation capability of
GTGmVAE to achieve the desired adaptability.
VAE [24] and its dynamic variants (e.g., VRNN [14])
typically compress the dimension of input samples through
fully connection networks, resulting in a large amount of
implicit structural information being discarded, which negatively affects subsequent latent variable inference and temporal
dependency modeling. Some advanced work [12], [27] uses
1D CNN to extract features from the input samples. However,
this approach is still insufficient: due to the limitation of
convolutional operations, it can only process the local features,
and thus remains unable to fully extract and integrate the
implicit structural information. In contrast, the LGFE included
in GTGmVAE achieves a strong feature extraction and integration capability by serially combining the 1D CNN and the
Transformer Encoder, first extracting the low-level implicit
structural features of the input samples from a local perspective, and then further extracting and integrating the high-level
features of the input samples from a global perspective.
2) Strong Temporal Modeling Capability: In the inference
network, GTGmVAE accurately infers the latent variables
based on the global temporal dependency of input sequences,
and the temporal modeling of latent variables and input
sequences are performed separately to avoid the negative
effects due to the interaction between stochastic latent variables and deterministic input sequences. In the generation
network, GTGmVAE improves the ability of temporal sample
generation by combining the global temporal dependency of
latent variables with the historical information of input sample
sequences.
Existing representative VAE-based time-series anomaly
detection methods [12], [14], [15], [16], [19] typically model
the temporal dependency of input sequences via RNN or
LSTM, but this can only model the historical temporal information, ignores the global temporal dependency, and performs
poorly on long sequences. Meanwhile, in the above methods,
LSTM-VAE [19] does not model the temporal dependency
of stochastic latent variables and ignores the temporal dependency of potential representations of the input sequences,
resulting in poor performance [16]. While the other methods
model the temporal dependency of stochastic latent variables,
they use the same RNN or LSTM to process both stochastic
latent variables and deterministic input sequences simultaneously, leading to negative effects. Finally, none of the above
methods further consider the temporal dependency of latent
variables in the generation stage, which is very effective in
improving the model’s ability to generate temporal samples.
Compared to VAE-based time-series anomaly detection
models, Transformer-based time-series anomaly detection
models [13], [17], [21], [22] use Transformer [28] to model
the input sequence, effectively capturing its global temporal dependency. However, Transformer-based methods are

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

typically deterministic and cannot model the stochasticity of
the data like VAE-based methods, and thus lack the robustness
to cope with uncertainty in the time-series data, which can
affect the accuracy of the anomaly detection, especially considering that VCNs have complex temporal non-stationarity.
We can see that GTGmVAE combines the advantages
of both VAE-based and Transformer-based methods: it both
considers the temporal modeling of stochastic variables and
captures the global temporal dependency using Transformer.
In addition, GTGmVAE effectively solves the above problems
faced by current time-series anomaly detection models through
posterior inference based on the global temporal dependency
of input sequences, separated temporal modeling of deterministic and stochastic variables, and generation of temporal
samples combining the global temporal dependency of latent
variables. Therefore, compared to existing methods, GTGmVAE can effectively model the complex temporal dependency
and non-stationarity of VCNs to cope with C3.
3) High Adaptability: Current time-series anomaly detection models [14], [15], [16], [19] typically make the latent
variable obey a single diagonal Gaussian distribution, which
limits their adaptability to learn different normal patterns.
GmVAE [20] and SGmVRNN [12] achieve “one-to-many”
adaptability to learn different normal patterns by making
the latent variable obey a Gaussian mixture distribution, and
introducing the indicator variable to denote the distribution
category of the latent variable corresponding to the different
normal patterns. However, they either neglect to capture the
temporal dependency of input sequences [20], or rely on
only the historical information rather than the global temporal information to determine the category of the indicator
variable [12]. Given that VCNs contain multiple EPs with
different patterns and have temporal non-stationarity, these
methods ignore the dependencies between the input sample
and other samples in the sequence, and thus fail to accurately
capture the dynamic change in the category of the indicator
variable.
In contrast, GTGmVAE not only introduces the Gaussian
mixture distributed latent variable, but also accurately infers
the category of the indicator variable based on the global
temporal dependency of input sequences, thus accurately capturing the dynamic changes in the category of the indicator
variable. Combined with the expressiveness of LGFE and
strong temporal modelling capability, GTGmVAE is able to
model the normal patterns of different EPs simultaneously, as
well as multiple different normal patterns contained in one EP
due to temporal non-stationarity, to effectively cope with C2.
V. E VALUATION
This section provides a detailed evaluation of the proposed anomaly detection model GTGmVAE and the feature
model MFM. First, we describe the experimental setup.
Second, we compare GTGmVAE with nine representative
state-of-the-art models to validate its performance. Third,
we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of each component in GTGmVAE
and the effectiveness of each level features in MFM. Forth,
we evaluate the online detection efficiency of the proposed
models. Finally, the experiments of hyper-parameters are in
Supplementary Appendix.

4331

A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: Currently, there are two representative public
VCN anomaly detection datasets: CIC-IDS2018 [23] and
ISOT-CID [18]. CIC-IDS2018 was constructed by building
a VCN on AWS and collecting 10 days of traffic for each
EP. According to the official records, there are 14 EPs (see
Supplementary Appendix for details) that suffered attacks,
i.e. have anomalous samples, and thus only these 14 EPs can
be used for evaluation. CIC-IDS2018 covers the main types of
attacks faced by VCNs, including external north-south attacks
against EPs, and internal east-west lateral movement attacks
launched by compromised EPs against other EPs. We cannot
use ISOT-CID for evaluation for the following reasons: 1)
ISOT-CID has two phases. The traffic collection of Phase1
uses random sampling, where each collection randomly lasts
from 2 s to 12 s and is repeated every 80 s. This disrupts
the temporal continuity of the original traffic, making the
model unable to perform temporal modeling; 2) The number
of available EPs in Phase2 is only 5, which is insufficient to
evaluate model’s adaptability. More importantly, phase2 lacks
the main attacks faced by VCNs such as external north-south
DDoS and internal east-west attacks. In addition, to further
validate GTGmVAE, we also evaluated it on a time-series
anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD [15]. Despite
being orientated towards a different scenario, SMD has similar
properties to VCN anomaly detection: it contains time-series
KPI data of 28 different servers and can be used to evaluate
the model’s adaptability and temporal modeling capability.
We use the proposed MFM to construct continuous samples
based on the fixed and disjoint time window for the 14 EPs
in CIC-IDS2018, with a dimension of 91 and a time window
size of 3 s. For each EP’s samples in a day, its first anomalous
sample appears basically near 50% of all samples. Therefore,
all continuous samples before the first anomalous sample are
used for training. If the first anomalous sample is located in the
last 50% samples in a day, the first 50% samples are used for
training. The remaining samples of the day are used for test.
For each EP, its 10-day training and test samples are spliced
separately. Therefore, the length of training sets after division
is less than the length of test sets, and they all have temporal
continuity. To address C2, we use “one-to-many” strategy, i.e.,
splice the samples from all 14 EPs in CIC-IDS2018 to form a
training set, train a model, and evaluate it on test sets of each
EPs. SMD is treated similarly using ‘one-to-many” strategy.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We use the most commonly
used metrics for unsupervised time-series anomaly detection,
including Precision, Recall and F1-score. F1-score balances
Precision and Recall and is currently the most concerned metric for unsupervised time-series anomaly detection. We follow
the point adjustment approach [31] taken by the vast majority
of unsupervised time-series anomaly detection methods, i.e.,
an anomalous segment is considered to be correctly detected if
any one of anomalies in it is detected. All experiments are oneoff effort and repeated 10 times to report the average metrics.
3) Compared Methods: We compared nine representative
state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection methods: 1)
VRNN [14]: extends VAE using RNN to make it capable of temporal modeling. 2) GmVAE [20]: improves the
adaptability of VAE by making the latent variable follow a
Gaussian mixture distribution. 3) OmniAnomaly [15]: a robust

4332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

stochastic RNN-based time-series anomaly detection model.
4) SDFVAE [16]: a robust static and dynamic factorized VAE
for time-series anomaly detection. 5) TranAD [17]: a timeseries anomaly detection model based on Transformer and
adversarial training. 6) Anomaly Transformer [21]: a timeseries anomaly detection model based on Transformer and
association discrepancy. 7) SGmVRNN [12]: a time-series
anomaly detection model combining VRNN and GmVAE with
temporal modeling capability and adaptability. 8) PUAD [13]:
a time-series anomaly detection model combining Transformer
and prototype learning with temporal modeling capability and
adaptability. 9) DCDetector [22]: a time-series anomaly detection model based on Transformer and contrastive learning.
The above methods are not only the recent state-of-theart, but also representative in feature extraction capability,
temporal modelling capability and “one-to-many” adaptability.
(a) For feature extraction capability, SGmVRNN and SDFVAE
use CNN to replace the fully connection networks in VAE
for dimension compression and feature extraction, which can
extract and integrate the implicit features of input samples
from a local perspective. In addition, to further improve the
representativeness of the compared methods, the implementations of VRNN and GmVAE adopt the SGmVRNN approach,
i.e., 1D CNN is used to improve performance. (b) For temporal
modelling capability, all of the above methods except GmVAE
have good temporal modelling capability. Among them,
VRNN, SDFVAE, OmniAnomaly and SGmVRNN are the current representative VAE-based time-series anomaly detection
models that can adequately represent the stochastic nature of
time-series data; while TranAD, Anomaly Transformer, PUAD
and DCDetector are the current representative Transformerbased time-series anomaly detection models. Compared to
the VAE-based methods, they can better model temporal
dependency from a global perspective and can better process
long sequences. (c) For adaptability, GmVAE, SGmVRNN
and PUAD are the representative methods that make the
model obtain “one-to-many” adaptability by making the latent
variables obey the Gaussian mixture distribution and introducing the prototype learning, respectively. Also, Anomaly
Transformer and DCDetector find the discrepancies between
the sample and others in the sequence rather than just learning
normal patterns, thus achieving a degree of adaptability along
with the temporal modeling capability. In summary, these
nine methods are both advanced and representative, and are
therefore able to comprehensively demonstrate the advantages
of GTGmVAE.
4) Hyper-Parameters: Since CIC-IDS2018 and SMD differ
in the sample dimensions (91 vs 38), the parameters of
LGFE are different: For CIC-IDS2018, (ki , si , ci ) are (3, 3, 8),
(3, 3, 16), (2, 2, 32), the number of Transformer Encoder
Blocks is 1 with heads of 2, dk and dv of 16. For SMD,
(ki , si , ci ) are (2, 2, 8), (2, 2, 16), (2, 2, 32), the number of Transformer Encoder Blocks is 2 with heads of 2, dk and dv of 16.
The output dimension of LGFE is 20. For GTDE and GTDD,
the number of Transformer Encoder Blocks is 6 with heads of
8, dk and dv of 64. The dimension d of the latent variable z
is 10. The dimension (i.e., K) of the indicator variable c is 5.
The Adam optimizer is used with learning rate of 0.0002. The
number of epochs is 20, the batch size is 512, and the sequence
length T is 20. Gumbel-Softmax has an initial temperature

TABLE IV
R ESULTS OF C OMPARISON OF GTG M VAE W ITH N INE R EPRESENTATIVE
S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

λ of 5.0 and a rate of decrease of 0.1 per epoch up to a
minimum value of 0.1. For SMD, the probability p associated
with the initial threshold used in POT is set to 0.003. For
CIC-IDS2018, as the percentage of anomalous samples varies
considerably between EPs, the value of p is 0.15 for EP1,
0.07 for EP2, 0.01 for EP4 and 0.015 for EP3 and EP5EP14. We present further experiments and discussion of the
main hyper-parameters in the Supplementary Appendix. For
GTGmVAE and all comparison methods, we uniformly use
the model of the last epoch for test. This removes setup bias
and ensures fairness of comparisons. Meanwhile, in “one-tomany” training, we cannot find a uniform epoch for N EPs:
the optimal training epoch may be different for each EP. Also,
this approach is the uniform and standard approach adopted by
SGmVRNN [12], which proposed the “one-to-many” method.
For GTGmVAE and all comparison methods, we use POT
with uniform parameters to determine thresholds on the test
set. Typically, POT thresholds are determined on the training
set [15]. However, in “one-to-many” task, POT thresholds are
determined on the test set [12]. This is because in “one-tomany” task, we splice the training data of multiple EPs and
evaluate the test set of each EP separately. Therefore, we
cannot determine a uniform threshold or determine thresholds
for each EP separately on such a training set. Meanwhile, this
approach does not rely on labels, does not affect the trained
model, and is able to adaptively adjust the threshold according
to the dynamic changes in distributions of the current sample,
thus better adapting to the temporal non-stationarity of VCNs.
5) Experimental Platform: All experiments are conducted
on a server with Intel Xeon Gold 5120 * 2 CPU, 128 GB
RAM and Nvidia Tesla T4 * 2 GPU. MFM and GTGmVAE
are implemented using Python 3.7.10 and PyTorch 1.9.0.
B. Comparison Experiments
The comparison results of GTGmVAE with nine representative state-of-the-art methods are shown in table IV. The
“one-to-many” strategy is used for all methods. As the main
metric, the highest F1 score of all methods is shown in bold.
GTGmVAE achieves the highest F1-score on both CICIDS2018 and SMD. For CIC-IDS2018, GTGmVAE combined
with MFM achieves the highest and desirable F1 score
(0.9465), fully demonstrating the effectiveness of GTGmVAE
and MFM in VCN anomaly detection, and the advantages of
GTGmVAE in temporal modeling and adaptability. Therefore,

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

4333

TABLE V

TABLE VI

R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON GTG M VAE

R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON MFM

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP3

MFM and GTGmVAE can effectively address C1, C2 and
C3. For SMD, GTGmVAE achieves the highest F1-score
(0.9412). Considering that SMD is one of the most commonly
used benchmark datasets for time-series anomaly detection
with similar properties to VCN anomaly detection, this fully
demonstrates the advantages of GTGmVAE in temporal modeling and adaptability, and its robustness to different tasks.
The following is a specific analysis of the methods compared. Of the methods compared, all except GmVAE have
the temporal modeling capability. The importance of considering temporal modeling in C3 is well demonstrated by the
comparison with GmVAE. In contrast, the comparison with
methods other than GmVAE demonstrates the advantages of
GTGmVAE in terms of the temporal modeling capability and
the adaptability. In addition, SGmVRNN, PUAD, Anomaly
Transformer and DCDetector all have both the temporal
modeling capability and the adaptability to different normal
patterns. However, their adaptability and temporal modeling
capabilities are insufficient to meet the requirements of VCN
anomaly detection. By comparing with these methods, it is
well demonstrated that GTGmVAE not only has the better
adaptability to address C2, but also has the better temporal
modeling capability to effectively model the complex temporal
dependency of VCNs and more effectively capture and model
the temporal non-stationarity to address C3.
C. Ablation Study for Detection Model GTGmVAE
To validate each component in GTGmVAE, we conduct the
following extensive ablation experiments. Type1: Replace the
latent variable distribution from a Gaussian mixture distribution to a single Gaussian distribution. Type2: Replace LGFE
with full connections. Type3: Replace LGFE with 1D CNN.
Type4: Remove the modeling of the global temporal dependency of latent variables in generation network. Type5: Further
replace the modeling of the global temporal dependency with
the modeling of the historical temporal dependency on Type4.
Type6: Disregard the modeling of the temporal dependency.
Type1 is used to validate the effect of using the Gaussian
mixture distribution on model’s adaptability. Type2-3 are used
to validate the proposed LGFE. Type4-6 are used to validate
the proposed optimizations of GTGmVAE in temporal modeling. The results of the ablation study are shown in table V.
The performance of Type1 is degraded due to its reduced
adaptability. Note that besides using the Gaussian mixture distribution, GTGmVAE also improves the adaptability through
LGFE (improves the model’s representation capability) and the
global temporal dependency modeling (improves the model’s

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP4

capability to model complex temporal dependencies), so Type1
still has a degree of adaptability and its performance is only
slightly degraded. The fully connection in Type2 is used in
VAE and its variants (e.g., VRNN), which just simply reduces
the input’s dimension, losing the implicit feature information.
The 1D CNN in Type3 comes from advanced methods [12],
[27] and has a better feature extraction capability, thus slightly
improving the performance compared to Type2. However,
compared to the proposed LGFE, 1D CNN only processes the
local features and ignores the global features. In addition, both
Type2 and Type3 reduce the model’s representation capability
and therefore its adaptability. As a result, their performance
is both degraded. The capability to generate temporal samples
in Type4 is reduced, which degrades the performance. Type5
further replaces all the global temporal dependency modeling
with the historical temporal dependency modeling on Type4,
reducing both the inference and generation capabilities and
further degrading the performance. This demonstrates the
advantages of the global temporal dependency modeling for
the inference of the indicator and latent variables and the generation of temporal samples. The performance is significantly
degraded in Type6 as no temporal modeling is considered at
all. This demonstrates the importance of modeling the complex
temporal dependency of VCNs highlighted in C3.
D. Ablation Study for Feature Model MFM
To validate the effectiveness of each level features in MFM,
we uniformly conduct ablation experiments using GTGmVAE
for each level features, and the results are shown in table VI.
The feature model of Aldribi et al. [18] is representative in
VCN anomaly detection task and is used to construct Level 1

4334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT F EATURE M ODELS ON EP2

features in MFM. However, since only the packet frequency
is considered, this feature model cannot comprehensively
characterize the basic network patterns of VCNs, resulting
in poor detection performance. Meanwhile, despite designing
the egress entropy features, Aldribi et al. only consider the
ingress direction while ignoring the egress entropy features
when actually constructing feature samples for the detection
model, and therefore ignore characterizing the randomness
of the traffic sent out from EPs, which we experimentally
demonstrate to be important for detecting attacks launched by
compromised EPs. Specifically, we use EP3 and EP4 in CICIDS2018 as examples for our study. After being compromised,
EP3 and EP4 launch port scanning attacks to other normal
EPs in the same network segment (usually as the first step
of the lateral movement attack), randomly probing for ports
that could be used for the attack. Since the feature model of
Aldribi et al. ignores entropy features in the egress direction
to characterizing the randomness of the traffic sent out from
EPs, it is difficult to distinguish such attacks, and thus the
F1-scores for EP3 and EP4 are 0.5243 and 0.4660, respectively
(as shown in table VII and table VIII). In contrast, we take into
account the egress entropy features when constructing Level
1 features, so that Level 1 features provide better detection
performance than Aldribi et al., which results from being
able to more effectively detect lateral movement attacks from
compromised EPs. As shown in table VII and table VIII, the
F1-scores for EP3 and EP4 are significantly higher when using
Level 1 features, and are 0.8034 and 0.7951, respectively.
Further, due to the more comprehensive characterization of
the basic network patterns of VCNs from both the throughput
and frequency perspectives, Level 1 and 2 features provide
better performance than Level 1 features alone. This is mainly
due to the better differentiation of anomalous samples and
generation of normal samples through the more comprehensive
characterization, resulting in an improvement of 0.0122 in
Recall and 0.0085 in Precision, leading to a higher F1-score.
Finally, the complete MFM incorporates key topology features on top of Level 1 and 2 features to comprehensively
and accurately characterize the network patterns of VCNs by
considering the uniqueness of VCNs. CIC-IDS2018 covers
the main types of attacks faced by VCNs, including attacks
launched externally against internal EPs, and lateral movement
attacks launched from internal compromised EPs. As described
in § III-C, these attacks will result in significant changes to the
stable normal patterns of the EP’s connection topology graph.
Specifically, we take EP2 as an example for our study. EP2
suffers from two typical DDoS attacks: LOIC (Low Orbit Ion
Cannon) and HOIC (High Orbit Ion Cannon) [23]. Among
them, LOIC mainly sends a large number of TCP, UDP and
HTTP requests to overwhelm the target EP, but usually relies
on a single client to launch the single attack. HOIC, on the

TABLE X
D ETECTION L ATENCY FOR D IFFERENT S IZED BATCH

other hand, has greater stealth and attack capability due to its
multi-threading, scripting support and automation, and thus
is more difficult to detect. However, both attacks lead to
significant changes in the connection topology graph of the EP
(mainly in malicious external nodes and edges). Therefore, by
effectively characterizing the connection topology graph of EP,
the complete MFM with the addition of Level 3 features can
effectively distinguish the above attacks compared to Level
1+ Level 2 features. As shown in table IX, the F1-score
for EP2 is significantly improved from 0.4128 to 0.9615.
Meanwhile, from an overall perspective, as shown in table
VI, the incorporation of topology features in MFM leads
to a significant performance improvement over Level 1 and
2 features, especially in terms of the better differentiation
of anomalous samples, resulting in an improvement of 0.07
in Recall, leading to a higher F1-score. This confirms the
validity of our observation, analysis and derived insight of the
uniqueness of VCNs. The comparison of the four experiments
fully demonstrates the effectiveness of MFM in addressing C1
and the effectiveness of each level of features in MFM.
E. Efficiency and Scalability of Online Detection
In this section, we evaluate the efficiency and scalability
of the real-time online detection of GTGmVAE, and the
efficiency of the feature computation for MFM.
As we use the “one-to-many” strategy, a trained model
can be used for online detection of multiple different EPs
simultaneously. Given the parallelization nature of dedicated
hardware GPUs mainly used for the model inference, online
detection of multiple EPs can be performed in parallel by
combining their samples into the same Batch, which greatly
improves the scalability. For example, for 512 EPs, we can
load a trained model using only one GPU, feed the samples
of these EPs as a Batch of size 512 and perform inference.
In contrast, the “one-to-one” strategy requires 512 exclusive
models to be trained for 512 EPs and fed through 512 GPUs
for inference, and each model can only be fed one sample at
a time, which is obviously inefficient and wasteful. Under the
“one-to-many” strategy, we evaluate the inference efficiency
for three scenarios: 1) one sample at a time (Batch size = 1); 2)
512 samples at a time (Batch size = 512); 3) 1024 samples at
a time (Batch size = 1024). The results are shown in table X.
Even with the consideration of the scalability for practical
detection, the detection latency of GTGmVAE is still very low
even when 512/1024 EPs are detected simultaneously (0.1958
s and 0.3636 s), which can clearly meet the requirement for
real-time online detection with the time window size of 3 s.
Besides the inference efficiency of GTGmVAE, for real-time
detection, we also need to focus on the feature computation
efficiency of MFM. In this paper, we use Python to implement
feature computation for CIC-IDS2018 in a single-threaded

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

manner. Since no flow states need to be maintained and only
a few packet header fields need to be counted, the average
time to compute features for constructing a sample is 0.0233
s. Therefore, with the time window size of 3 s, our detection
model GTGmVAE and feature model MFM can clearly meet
the requirement for real-time online detection. In addition,
MFM can easily compute features directly using the statistics
from the cloud built-in virtual switch [32] (§ III-D). Therefore,
implementing feature computation inside the cloud platform
will maximize the efficiency. We make it our future work.
VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Discussions on MFM
1) Flexibility and Challenges of Deploying MFM in VCNs:
The traffic statistics required for MFM are available in different
ways in VCNs. If a virtual switch with statistics capabilities
is built into the cloud (for example, the cloud virtual switch
VFP [32] directly provides statistics on flow tuples, packet
frequency and throughput), MFM can directly utilize these
statistics. Even if such switches are not deployed in the
cloud, in a VM cloud, we can develop plugins on the host’s
virtual switch (e.g., Open vSwitch [33]) to obtain the required
packet information, while in a container cloud, the required
packet information can be captured by plugging the eBPF
program into the host. The above approaches do not require
the deployment of specialized network middleware and the
traffic redirection, and do not lead to significant overheads
compared to traditional stateful flow processing. In summary,
the core idea of MFM is to characterize VCNs in a non-stateful
manner using only simple packet header information, and thus
it is very flexible: the information required for MFM can be
obtained in different types of clouds, either through virtual
switches or eBPF programs. In addition, MFM is essentially a
theoretical contribution, whereas in actual large-scale clouds, it
may face deployment challenges such as interface compatibility of virtual switches, and architectural design for distributed
implementations, etc. In future studies, we aim to validate and
optimize the implementation details of MFM in real clouds
(with or without the switches that natively support statistical
functions), and assess the possible deployment challenges and
system overheads at different scales.
2) MFM Vs. End-to-End Methods: Although end-to-end
methods have become an important trend in deep learning,
however, manually designed MFMs still have the following
advantages over end-to-end methods where the raw traffic data
is fed directly into a deep model: (a) Targeted extraction of
key features: VCN traffic has complex temporal dependencies
and needs to be characterized in multiple dimensions (e.g.
frequency, throughput, topology, etc.). These key features are
implicit in the raw data and have temporal relationships. In
addition, VCN traffic contains large redundant data (noise).
End-to-end methods are difficult to capture key features and
are susceptible to noise interference, while manually designed
MFMs can target and filter the most discriminative key features from multiple dimensions. (b) Real-time detection and
computational overhead: Anomaly detection systems require
fast decisions. End-to-end methods can incur a large computational burden due to redundancy and noise in raw data,
affecting the real-time and scalability of detection. In contrast,
manually designed MFM effectively reduces computational

4335

overhead and improves real-time detection through fixed time
windows and non-stateful feature computation.
B. Discussions on GTGmVAE
1) Coarse-Grained Detection: Given the wide variety of
attacks and unknown new attacks faced by VCNs, unsupervised methods are more suitable than supervised methods.
However, as with typical unsupervised anomaly detection
models, GTGmVAE can only detect anomalous behavior that
deviates from the normal pattern and cannot make further
judgments about the anomalies, such as the type of attack.
Combined with the fixed time-window design of MFM, GTGmVAE is capable of fast coarse-grained anomaly detection and
is suitable for use in alert systems or preliminary screening
phases, and needs to be complemented with other methods
(e.g., classification models) to make further judgements on
anomalies.
2) Interpretability Challenges: GTGmVAE introduces
Gaussian mixture distributed latent variables and models
global temporal dependencies of input and latent variable
sequences, which improves the model’s adaptability and
temporal modelling capability. However, this also leads to
challenges for typical interpretability methods (e.g., LIME
[34], SHAP [35]) in explaining the internal mechanisms of
GTGmVAE, e.g., the diversity of the Gaussian mixture distribution makes local modelling difficult; and the complex
long-range nonlinear relationships of time-series data make it
difficult for these methods to capture. Therefore, it is necessary
to consider improving the interpretability methods for VCN
anomaly detection, such as sampling different distributions and
slicing the input sequences into time series, to cope with these
challenges.
3) Dataset Limitation: Due to dataset limitation, we can
currently only evaluate the “one-to-many” adaptability of
GTGmVAE on CIC-IDS2018, which contains 14 EPs. However, despite the small number of EPs, the effectiveness of
GTGmVAE in improving the scalability can be validated:
GTGmVAE that considers adaptability achieves higher performance compared to other representative state-of-the-art
methods. Meanwhile, in the ablation experiments, models
without the design of adaptability (Type1, 2 and 3) all perform worse than GTGmVAE. We also conduct additional
experiments on the SMD dataset with more servers (28 in
total) to further validate the scalability of GTGmVAE on a
larger dataset. Finally, a key design of GTGmVAE to improve
scalability is to make the latent variable obey a Gaussian
mixture distribution, which intuitively reflects how the model
learns different patterns by categorizing the input samples and
corresponding to different Gaussian distribution components of
the latent space. Theoretically, in VCNs with more EPs, we
can adjust the number of categories of the Gaussian mixture
distribution to improve the scalability. In the future, we will
try to evaluate the scalability of GTGmVAE in a larger scale
scenario.
VII. R ELATED W ORK
A. Feature Model
1) Flow-Based Feature Model: Representative flow-based
feature models include NSL-KDD [8], NB15 [9], and

4336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

CICFlowMeter [10]. NSL-KDD and NB15 are classical intrusion datasets with self-contained flow-based feature models.
While CICFlowMeter is the latest flow-based feature model
and contains more and finer-grained flow-level features. However, as mentioned in C1, these feature models cannot cope
with the scalability challenge and ignore the uniqueness of
VCNs. In contrast, MFM addresses the scalability challenge
through non-stateful feature computation and combines multilevel features to comprehensively and accurately characterize
VCNs.
2) Time-Window Based Feature Model: The feature model
in Kitsune [7] is similar to Level 1 and 2 features in MFM
and can meet the scalability requirements of C1. However,
it lacks the consideration for VCNs and thus is unsuitable
for VCN anomaly detection. Aldribi et al. [18] proposed
a representative feature model for VCN anomaly detection.
However, as described in § III-B and § III-C, it only considers
the packet frequency and ignores the uniqueness of VCNs.
Compared to the above methods, MFM characterizes VCNs
more comprehensively and accurately by introducing topology
features that consider the uniqueness of VCNs. PrivateEye [2]
proposed a feature model for detecting compromised cloud
VMs. However, it is designed for supervised classification and
mainly characterizes the malicious behaviors of compromised
VMs, introducing the prior knowledge of attacks. Therefore,
it is not effective when used for unsupervised anomaly detection, which focuses on learning normal patterns rather than
recognizing predefined attacks. In addition, PrivateEye argues
that the compromised VMs differ from normal VMs in their
connection patterns, which shares commonalities with our
insight into the uniqueness of VCNs. However, we provide
a more generalizable insight based on the property that the
east-west traffic that dominates VCNs comes from the stable
business logic: Any malicious behavior, including attacks from
both external and internal sources against normal EPs (VMs
or containers), and attacks launched by the compromised
EPs against other EPs, can cause the connection patterns
of these normal or compromised EPs to deviate from the
baseline, while PrivateEye only considers compromised VMs.
In contrast, MFM has better generality and can be better
applied to unsupervised anomaly detection.
B. Detection Model
Kitsune [7] is a representative unsupervised intrusion detection method in resource-constrained environments (e.g., IoT)
using a set of auto-encoders. PrivateEye [2], SCAE [5] and
Aldribi et al. [18] are representative VCN intrusion detection
methods using stacked contractive autoencoders with SVM,
random forest and change point detection, respectively. However, they are either supervised [2], [5] or lack the necessary
temporal modeling capability and adaptability [7], [18], making them difficult to apply to VCN anomaly detection. In
contrast, GTGmVAE is unsupervised and has strong temporal
modelling capability and adaptability obtained via global temporal dependency modelling and Gaussian mixture distributed
latent space, which can cope with C2 and C3.
Recently, unsupervised time-series anomaly detection models have been widely studied, which have the temporal
modeling capability for the time-series data to achieve
good detection performance. We have introduced recent

representative state-of-the-art methods [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17], [21], [22] in § V-A. Among them, VRNN [14],
OmniAnomaly [15], SDFVAE [16], and SGmVRNN [12]
achieve temporal modeling capabilities through recurrent
structures (e.g., RNN) on VAE, while PUAD [13], TranAD
[17], Anomaly Transformer [21] and DCDetector [22] achieve
time-series anomaly detection by combining Transformer with
adversarial training, contrastive learning, and prototype learning. In addition, SGmVRNN, PUAD, Anomaly Transformer
and DCDetector have the adaptability to different normal
patterns besides the temporal modeling capability. In § IV-E,
we analyze these methods in feature extraction capability,
temporal modelling capability, and adaptability, and discuss
the differences and advantages of GTGmVAE over them.
Compared to the proposed GTGmVAE, these models either
lack the sufficient adaptability or lack the sufficient temporal
modeling capability to effectively cope with C2 and C3, and
thus perform poorly in VCN anomaly detection.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new multilevel feature model
MFM and a new unsupervised time-series anomaly detection
model GTGmVAE for VCN anomaly detection. Of these,
MFM incorporates the topology features that are specifically
designed for the uniqueness of VCNs and the packet frequency
and throughput features that characterize the basic network
patterns of VCNs, and is therefore able to comprehensively
and accurately characterize VCNs. GTGmVAE effectively
improves the representation capability through a new localglobal feature extractor, achieves the strong temporal modeling
capability by modeling the global temporal dependency of
the input samples and latent variables, and combines the
Gaussian mixture distributed latent space with its strong
temporal modeling capability and representation capability to
achieve the strong adaptability, therefore being able to learn
the normal patterns of multiple EPs simultaneously and to
effectively address the complex temporal dependency and nonstationarity of VCNs. Extensive experiments on the VCN
anomaly detection dataset CIC-IDS2018 and the time-series
anomaly detection benchmark dataset SMD show that GTGmVAE with MFM achieves the desirable performance, and
GTGmVAE outperforms all nine representative state-of-theart detection models. For future work, we consider evaluating
the challenges of deploying MFM in different types of clouds
and evaluating GTGmVAE in larger scale scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

The Nist Definition of Cloud Computing, Nat. Inst. Standards Technol.,
Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2011, doi: 10.6028/nist.sp.800-145.
B. Arzani et al., “PrivateEye: Scalable and privacy-preserving compromise detection in the cloud,” in Proc. 17th USENIX Symp. Networked
Syst. Design Implement. (NSDI), Feb. 2020, pp. 797–815.
B. I. Santoso, M. R. S. Idrus, and I. P. Gunawan, “Designing network
intrusion and detection system using signature-based method for protecting OpenStack private cloud,” in Proc. 6th Int. Annu. Eng. Seminar
(InAES), Aug. 2016, pp. 61–66.
C. Mazzariello, R. Bifulco, and R. Canonico, “Integrating a network
IDS into an open source cloud computing environment,” in Proc. 6th
Int. Conf. Inf. Assurance Secur., Aug. 2010, pp. 265–270.
W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intrusion detection method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and
support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 1634–1646, Jul. 2022.

MA et al.: TOWARDS UNSUPERVISED TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FOR VIRTUAL CLOUD NETWORKS

[6]

Cisco. (2016). Cisco Global Cloud Index: Forecast and Methodology.
[Online].
Available:
https://virtualization.network/Resources/
Whitepapers/0b75cf2e-0c53-4891-918e-b542a5d364c5 white-paperc11-738085.pdf
[7] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[8] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[9] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[10] Can. Inst. for Cybersecurity. (2022).Cicflowmeter. [Online]. Available:
https://www.unb.ca/cic/research/applications.html
[11] T. Dargahi, A. Caponi, M. Ambrosin, G. Bianchi, and M. Conti, “A
survey on the security of stateful SDN data planes,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1701–1725, 3rd Quart., 2017.
[12] L. Dai et al., “Switching Gaussian mixture variational RNN for anomaly
detection of diverse CDN websites,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., May 2022, pp. 300–309.
[13] Y. Li, W. Chen, B. Chen, D. Wang, L. Tian, and M. Zhou, “Prototypeoriented unsupervised anomaly detection for multivariate time series,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2023, pp. 1–18.
[14] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio,
“A recurrent latent variable model for sequential data,” in Proc. Annu.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Jan. 2015, pp. 1–9.
[15] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[16] L. Dai et al., “SDFVAE: Static and dynamic factorized VAE for
anomaly detection of multivariate CDN KPIS,” in Proc. Web Conf.,
2021, pp. 3076–3086.
[17] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[18] A. Aldribi, I. Traoré, B. Moa, and O. Nwamuo, “Hypervisor-based
cloud intrusion detection through online multivariate statistical change
tracking,” Comput. Secur., vol. 88, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 101646.
[19] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[20] N. Dilokthanakul et al., “Deep unsupervised clustering with Gaussian
mixture variational autoencoders,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02648.
[21] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–20.
[22] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[23] Can. Inst. for Cybersecurity. (2018).CSE-CIC-IDS2018 on AWS.
[Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
[24] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2013, pp. 1–14.
[25] X. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, X. Wang, and J. H. Chen, “Automatic policy
generation for inter-service access control of microservices,” in Proc.
30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Jan. 2021, pp. 3971–3988.
[26] Weaveworks.Sock Shop: A Microservice Demo Application. Accessed:
Mar. 1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/microservicesdemo/microservices-demo
[27] Y. Su et al., “Detecting outlier machine instances through Gaussian
mixture variational autoencoder with one dimensional CNN,” IEEE
Trans. Comput., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 892–905, Apr. 2022.
[28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017,
pp. 1–15.
[29] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparametrization with
gumble-softmax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–13.
[30] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[31] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.

4337

[32] D. Firestone, “VFP: A virtual switch platform for host sdn in the public
cloud,” in Proc. 14th USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Design Implement.
(NSDI), Mar. 2017, pp. 315–328.
[33] Linux Found. Open Vswitch. Accessed: Feb. 15, 2025. [Online]. Available: http://www.openvswitch.org/
[34] M. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust you?’:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. Conf. North
Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Demonstrations, 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[35] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Red
Hook, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 4768–4777.

Zixuan Ma received the B.S. degree in computer
science and technology from Nanjing University of
Information Science and Technology in 2019. He is
currently pursuing the dual Ph.D. degree with the
Institute of Information Engineering (IIE), Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS), and the University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS). His research
interests include cloud network security, intent-based
networks, software-defined networking, and microsegmentation.

Chen Li received the Ph.D. degree in computer
system architecture from the Institute of Information
Engineering (IIE), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), in 2023. She is currently an Engineer with
IIE, CAS. Her current research interests include
cloud data center security.

Kun Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
security from the Institute of Information Engineering (IIE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
in 2024. She is currently a Senior Engineer with
IIE, CAS. Her research interests include operating
system and virtualization security.

Bibo Tu received the Ph.D. degree in computer
system architecture from the Institute of Computing
Technology (ICT), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), in 2009. He is currently a Researcher with
IIE, CAS, and a Professor with the School of Cyber
Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS). His current research interests include
cloud data center security, trusted computing, and
software defined security.