IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

3503113

Variational Graph Attention Networks With
Self-Supervised Learning for Multivariate
Time Series Anomaly Detection
Yu Gao , Jin Qi , Member, IEEE, Hongjiang Ye , Ying Sun , Member, IEEE, Xiaoxuan Hu ,
Zhenjiang Dong , and Yanfei Sun , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are multidimensional and complex systems that integrate computing, networking, and physical environment, including various sensors
that can produce vast multivariate time series data. Recently,
scholars have proposed many unsupervised anomaly detection
methods to monitor and alarm potential faults of CPSs. However,
current methods still have some limitations. First of all, it is
challenging to capture spatial-temporal relationships explicitly.
In the second place, the anomaly detection model based on the
variational autoencoder (VAE) may not use the latent variable
and often falls into a kind of collapse, which is encouraged by
the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term. In the end, more
information about the anomalies is needed. This article proposes
a novel anomaly detection method called variational graph attention networks with self-supervised learning (VGATSL). We use
stacked spatial-temporal graph attention (STGAT) networks to
capture the temporal and feature correlations. Next, a VAE is constructed based on bidirectional gated recurrent units (BiGRUs),
and the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution is used as its latent
space. Indeed, this distribution places latent representation on
the surface of a unit hypersphere to allow for uninformed
priors, thus preventing the model collapse. Additionally, selfsupervised learning is introduced to simulate abnormal behaviors
and to help the model form more explicit normality boundaries. Extensive experiments on three public real-world datasets
demonstrate that VGATSL outperforms the baseline methods.
We also illustrate that VGATSL has superior interpretability and
flexibility.
Index Terms— Latent variable model, multivariate time
series, self-supervised learning, spatial-temporal graph attention
(STGAT) network, unsupervised anomaly detection.
Received 19 August 2024; revised 9 October 2024; accepted 21 October
2024. Date of publication 20 November 2024; date of current version
11 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471252, Grant 62172235, and
Grant 62402242; in part by the Primary Research & Development Plan
of Jiangsu Province under Grant BE2023025; and in part by the Natural
Science Research Project of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions under Grant
22KJB520028. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr.
Yang Song. (Corresponding author: Yanfei Sun.)
Yu Gao is with the College of Automation and College of Artificial
Intelligence, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
210023, China (e-mail: gynj610@163.com).
Jin Qi, Hongjiang Ye, Xiaoxuan Hu, and Yanfei Sun are with the School
of Internet of Things, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: qijin@njupt.edu.cn; HJ.Yep@foxmail.com;
xiaoxuanhu@njupt.edu.cn; sunyanfei@njupt.edu.cn).
Ying Sun and Zhenjiang Dong are with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
210023, China (e-mail: sunying@njupt.edu.cn; dongzhenjiang@njupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3502890

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

UE to the development of informatization, many sensors
are deployed in complex cyber-physical systems (CPSs),
such as autonomous vehicles and water treatment plants,
to produce vast multivariate time series data with different
characteristics, attributes, and scales [1]. CPSs are large-scale
and geographically dispersed. There may be implicit dependency relationships between sensors. The fault of a particular
sensor can spread to other related devices, causing cascading
failures of components or the entire system. Usually, detecting
abnormal time points from multivariate time series data helps
monitor and discover potential risks, threats, and faults of
CPSs, avoiding business interruption and even casualties.
However, in the real world, anomalies are rare, and annotating
data are expensive [2]. Based on this, unsupervised anomaly
detection has received widespread attention.
Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to train a robust
model with generalized patterns using unlabeled historical
normal data. Once this model cannot fit the current observation, it will alarm [3]. Recently, many methods have been
developed [4], [5], [6]. Specifically, prediction-based methods
focus on predicting multiple continuous values to discover
contextual anomalies, such as long- and short-term memory
(LSTM) [7] and temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) [8].
Reconstruction-based methods attempt to explore anomalies in
the overall distribution of sub-sequences, including generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [9] and autoencoders (AEs) [10].
Mainly, AEs use reconstruction error as the threshold. Some
promising models have also been proposed, such as variational
AE (VAE) [11] and convolutional AE (CAE) [12]. Additionally, transfer learning-based anomaly detection methods
have also attracted plenty of scholars to research, such as
DAAN [13], AICDA [14], and FS-ADAPT [15]. Nevertheless, these methods cannot capture the coupling relationship
between sensors, making it difficult for them to process nonEuclidean data.
Fig. 1 shows an inspired example from the secure Water
Treatment System (SWaT) dataset [16]. This example provides
four sensor signals. Overall, sensor signals are time-dependent.
The value of the next timestamp is closely related to the
trend of changes in the historical series. It can be observed
that the signal exhibits significant periodicity. Meanwhile,

1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 2. Visualization of related challenges. (a) If the latent space is a Gaussian
distribution, the KL term will force the instance to move toward the prior
(centered at the origin). N (·) represents the Gaussian distribution. (b) Lack
of abnormal data leads to the model learning biased decision boundaries.
Fig. 1. Illustrative example (from secure water treatment system dataset). The
anomaly event is marked as yellow. Four sensors (FIT101, LIT101, MV101,
and P101).

Fig. 1 shows an anomaly event (yellow span). This anomaly
occurred on sensor LIT101 (set the water level above H) [16].
During this period, the LIT101 value slowly increased, while
FIT101 and MV101 remained uninfluenced, and P101 dropped
to a low-level value. The above situation fully demonstrates
the coupling relationship between LIT101 and P101, and
they will interact. In addition, FIT101 and MV101 are not
useless, as they can also create an offsetting effect that changes
the dependency relationship with other sensors. Therefore,
it is challenging to identify anomaly events based on purely
temporal patterns. Learning the spatial correlation between
multivariate time series is crucial.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) [17] have successfully processed non-Euclidean data. The reason is that GNNs use a
message-passing mechanism to extract contextual representations of nodes, which helps to learn spatial features of multivariate time series. For example, graph convolutional network
(GCN) [18] has the characteristic of permutation invariance
and can use fast localized convolutional filters to process nonEuclidean data. Graph deviation network (GDN) [19] uses
attention mechanisms to extract spatial information. Other
methods, such as MTAD-GAT [6] and STGAT-MAD [20],
can jointly capture spatial-temporal correlations. However,
due to limitations of fitting, these methods cannot model the
stochastic interrelationships. Recent work has also attempted
to combine GNNs with probabilistic methods, considering
the randomness of multivariate time series, which helps to
reduce intrinsic information loss, such as the graph relational learning networks (GReLeN) [5] and variational graph
convolutional recurrent networks (VGCRN) [21]. However,
these methods cannot adaptively learn graph structures and
often lose discriminative dependencies in the time dimension.
Researchers have introduced self-supervised learning into variational GNNs, such as self-supervised variational graph AEs
(SS-VGAE) [22], and self-supervised multivariate KPIs
anomaly detection (MAD-STA) [23], to improve feature separability or dynamic graph structures. Unfortunately, they cannot access unknown abnormal knowledge and are difficult to
optimize. In summary, the research mentioned above has made
substantial progress but still faces some critical challenges.
1) It is difficult to capture spatial-temporal relationships
explicitly. Detection performance will decrease if the
implicit information is lost.

2) The VAE-based model is prone to collapse, which will
result in a local optimum. Probabilistic methods often
assume that the prior follows a Gaussian distribution.
Moreover, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term
in the loss function will encourage the posterior toward
the prior, which makes model optimization difficult,
as indicated in Fig. 2(a).
3) The lack of information about the anomalies. For
unsupervised anomaly detection, the model’s training
process relies on unlabeled historical normal data, which
makes it unable to access abnormal knowledge and
then form inaccurate normality boundaries, as indicated
in Fig. 2(b).
To address the abovementioned challenges, we propose a
novel variational graph attention network with self-supervised
learning (VGATSL) for unsupervised anomaly detection. First,
VGATSL adopts a graph feature extractor to capture the temporal and feature representations used for reconstruction. This
feature extractor consists of stacked spatial-temporal graph
attention (STGAT) networks. In the second place, VGATSL
uses the von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution as a substitute.
vMF distribution places latent representation on the surface
of a unit hypersphere. So, KL divergence can be fixed as
a constant, structurally preventing collapse and making the
model more robust. Last, VGATSL introduces self-supervised
learning to simulate abnormal behaviors, which attempts to
perturb the normal data to synthesize compelling anomalies
for the model.
To summarize, the main contributions of this article are as
follows.
1) We propose a novel unsupervised anomaly detection
method, which utilizes the graph feature extractor to
learn spatial-temporal information and builds a VAE
based on bidirectional gated recurrent units (BiGRUs)
to achieve the reconstruction task.
2) We utilize the vMF distribution instead of the Gaussian distribution as latent space, which places the
latent representation on the surface of a unit hypersphere to allow for uninformed priors and thus avoid
KL collapse.
3) We introduce self-supervised learning to address the
lack of information about anomalies. Specifically, this
module can generate different but realistic abnormal
instances to help the model obtain rich original information and learn more explicit normality boundaries.

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

4) Extensive experiments have been carried out on three
public real-world datasets to prove the effectiveness and
progressiveness of VGATSL.
This article is organized as follows. Section II introduces the
related work. Section III presents the preliminaries. Section IV
describes VGATSL in detail. Section V reports the experimental results and discussions. Section VI presents the limitations
and future work. Section VII draws the conclusions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
We review the vital anomaly detection research for
multivariate time series. Meanwhile, we discuss transfer
learning-based anomaly detection to help readers better understand current research hotspots. Considering that our method
relies on spherical latent space representation and selfsupervised learning, we summarize relevant work on these
topics.
A. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
Traditional methods are classified into statistical learning
(e.g., ARIMA [24]), clustering-based (e.g., OCSVM [25]),
density-based (e.g., LOF [26]), and isolation-based methods
(e.g., iForest [27]). Thanks to its powerful and robust feature
extraction capabilities, more and more unsupervised detection
tasks are adopting the deep learning paradigm.
Prediction-based methods attempt to observe the current
data point and alert for anomalies if its predicted value
deviates from the actual value. Recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are the
core architectures of prediction-based models. Hundman et al.
[28], proposed LSTM-NDT, which utilizes LSTM to achieve
accurate predictions and uses a nonparametric thresholding
approach to evaluate residuals. This method has been validated
in detecting spacecraft anomalies. Kravchik and Shabtai [29]
proposed an anomaly detection scheme based on the statistical
deviation. Its core architecture is a different variant of CNNs.
Lai et al. [30] proposed the LSTNet, which uses CNNs or
RNNs to extract time series’ local dependencies and trend
information.
Reconstruction-based methods focus on compressing data
into implicit representations and using the reconstruction error
as the detection threshold. Currently, AE is the most popular
method [10]. For example, Su et al. [1] developed a robust
anomaly detection scheme, which uses the stochastic variables
connection technique to learn the normal patterns and then
uses reconstruction probabilities to locate anomalies. Additionally, GANs have also been introduced [9]. MAD-GAN [3] sets
detection thresholds based on the discrimination and reconstruction errors. Chen et al. [31] proposed DAEMON, which
uses adversarial strategies to regularize implicit variables and
reconstructed data for robust learning of normal patterns. It is
worth mentioning that other methods, such as the deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model (DAGMM) [32], denoising AE
(DAE) [33], and Deep convolutional autoencoding memory
networks (CAE-M) [34], have also achieved good results.
However, the above methods cannot capture the complex
topological relationships between sensors, making it challenging to process non-Euclidean data with potential correlations.

3503113

Hence, this article attempts to use graph learning to address
this problem.
B. Transfer Learning-Based Anomaly Detection
Transfer learning is dedicated to transferring knowledge
from one field to another related field. It is widely applied
in anomaly detection tasks like machine monitoring, predictive maintenance, and energy management. Without loss of
generality, Transfer learning-based anomaly detection methods
mainly include instance transfer, parameter transfer, mapping
transfer, and domain-adversarial transfer [35], [36].
Intuitively, instance transfer assigns different weights to
source domain data. For example, Vincent et al. [37] selected
labeled instances with similar localized data distributions in
the source and target domains and then transferred them to
the target anomaly detection task. Parameter transfer starts
with pretrained model parameters and fine-tunes on the target task. For example, Wen and Keyes [38] proposed a
CNN-based transfer learning framework for anomaly detection. This framework pretrains the model on synthetic normal
data and then fine-tunes its weights on unknown univariate or
multivariate abnormal data.
The basic idea of mapping transfer is to learn the feature
representations of the target domain and minimize the distribution differences between the source and the target domains.
Typical measuring methods include Wasserstein distance [39],
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [40], maximum mean
square discrepancy [41], and variance discrepancy representation [42]. Qian et al. [42] proposed a vibration characteristicguided distribution alignment metric, which improves MMD.
It can express variance information and enhance discrepancy
representation ability. Cao et al. [43] utilized generalized
normality learning to minimize the distribution gap between
in-distributed and out-of-distribution normal samples.
Wang et al. [44] proposed an anomaly-aware contrastive
alignment model to align contrastive representations and
labeled normal representations. Qian et al. [14] proposed
an adaptive intermediate class-wise distribution alignment
model, which aligns the global and class-wise distributions of
different domains and adaptively achieves domain confusion.
Inspired by GANs [9], domain-adversarial transfer aims
to extract generalized features through adversarial training. For example, Mao et al. [13] proposed a novel deep
one-class Transfer learning method based on domain adversarial training, which adaptively transfers one-class detection
rules to improve end-to-end anomaly detection performance.
Li et al. [15] proposed a Few-shot anomaly detection framework, which uses a dueling triplet network to address the
constraints of unsupervised target information and learns
invariant features by adversarial training.
In summary, transfer learning-based anomaly detection
methods have attracted plenty of scholars to research.
We review these well-known works to help readers better
understand current research hotspots.
C. Graph Learning in Multivariate Time Series
GNN has succeeded in modeling multivariate time
series [45], [46], [47], [48]. For example, GDN [19] adopts

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

a flexible framework to construct graphs and uses attention
mechanisms to encode information. MTAD-GAT [6] treats all
timestamps and variables as different complete graphs and
jointly optimizes them. STGAT-MAD [20] uses multiscale
STGAT networks to capture spatial-temporal correlations.
These methods cannot model the stochastic interrelationships during reconstruction, considering the limited fitting.
Researchers attempted to combine probabilistic methods with
GNNs. Chen et al. [21], proposed VGCRN, which models the
channel dependence and randomness using the graph convolutional recurrent network (GCRN). GReLeN [5] combined
GNNs and stochastic relation learning mechanisms to capture
sensor interdependence and established a composite metric.
These methods have achieved impressive results, but they
cannot learn the evolutionary patterns of graph structures well
and may lose discriminative dependencies in time dimension.
Based on this, researchers introduced self-supervised learning into variational GNNs. For example, Zhang et al. [22]
proposed a SS-VGAE method. It searches for the optimal
center of the latent space, enhancing the separability of
mean features. Chen et al. [23] proposed a self-supervised
multivariate anomaly detection method that combines adaptive
graph structure learning with improved graph attention networks (GAT). Hojjati et al. [49] used self-supervised learning
to map the adjacent partitions into similar representations,
which helps the model learn discriminative features. However,
these anomaly detection methods based on SS-VGAEs still
cannot access abnormal knowledge and are prone to forming
inaccurate normality boundaries. In this article, we use selfsupervised learning to simulate abnormal behaviors, which
helps to synthesize compelling anomalies for the model. This
is significantly different from the previous research. Additionally, existing variational graph AEs typically assume that
the prior follows a Gaussian distribution, which makes model
optimization difficult and causes mode collapse. The proposed
method uses the vMF distribution as latent space, which places
the latent representation on the surface of a unit hypersphere
to allow for uninformed priors and thus avoid KL collapse.
It is worth mentioning that recent research has also introduced
theories such as discrete wavelet transform and adversarial
learning into GNNs [50], [51], [52], [53].
D. Self-Supervised Learning
Researchers are committed to developing self-supervised
multivariate time series methods suitable for downstream
tasks [54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60]. For example,
Eldele et al. [58] transformed the original time series data into
multiple views and used temporal and contextual contrastive
learning to capture robust representations. Yue et al. [59]
proposed TS2Vec, which adopts a hierarchical mechanism to
perform contrastive learning and utilizes an aggregation operation to capture the sub-sequence representation. Nevertheless,
these pretext tasks still cannot provide information related to
anomalies, making it difficult to simulate real-world abnormal
behaviors. Xu et al. [60], used a series of perturbation operations to generate abnormal instances. These instances help
the model to obtain rich abnormal information. Indeed, this

method can address the lack of knowledge about anomalies
and promote the model to learn more explicit normality
boundaries.
E. Spherical Latent Space
Probabilistic generative models (PGMs) have achieved
outstanding results in image classification, text translation,
sequence prediction, and other fields [61], [62], [63]. PGMs
often assume that the prior of the latent space follows a
Gaussian distribution. This may lead to collapse. Researchers
attempt to introduce non-Euclidean latent spaces to explore
more flexible priors. For example, Nickel and Kiela [64]
mapped data into an n-dimensional Poincaré space to capture
hierarchical representations. Liu and Zhu [65] used Riemannian manifolds as the latent space for inference models.
However, these methods still require prior information and
overlook the inherent spherical nature of some data. The vMF
distribution is another competitive choice, which places the
latent representation on the surface of a unit hypersphere to
allow for uninformed priors [66], [67]. For example, Guu et al.
[68] set the latent space of VAE as a vMF distribution and
applied it to sentence editing tasks. Davidson et al. [69]
replaced the Gaussian distribution with the vMF distribution and extended the reparameterization trick for rejecting
sampling. Guan and Smith [70], Xu and Durrett [71], and
Serban et al. [72] also reported superiorities of spherical latent
spaces, which inspired us.
III. P RELIMINARIES
Here, we introduce the concepts of GAT, VAE, and vMF distribution and analyze the limitations of Gaussian distribution.
A. Graph Attention Networks
Given a graph G(V, E) with d nodes, where V =
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vd } is the node set. E is the edge set. Thus, the
attention score [48] is calculated as
αi, j = P

exp(δ(ω⊤ · (vi ⊕ v j )))
⊤
k∈Ni exp(δ(ω · (vi ⊕ vk )))

(1)

where δ(·) is the LeakyReLU activation function; ω is the
learnable weight matrix; ⊕ is the concatenation operation;
Ni is the set of neighboring nodes of node i; The output
representation of the ith node is


X
hi = σ 
αi, j v j 
(2)
j∈Ni

where σ (·) is the Sigmoid activation function.
B. Variational Autoencoder
The VAE is based on variational Bayesian inference [11].
Let x ∈ X represent the observed vector and z ∈ Z represent
the continuous latent variable. The prior p(z) conforms to a
Gaussian distribution. Moreover, we use a neural network to
parameterize the conditional distribution pθ (x|z) for modeling
the data distribution. We will train VAE by maximizing

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

marginal log-likelihood log pθ (x). However, directly optimizing log pθ (x) is complex. Therefore, a posterior distribution
pθ (z|x) is introduced. Specifically, we use a parameterized
variational posterior qφ (z|x) to approximate the true posterior.
Based on this, marginal log-likelihood can be written as
Z
log pθ (x) =
qφ (z|x) log pθ (x) dz
Z


Z
pθ (x, z) qφ (z|x)
·
dz
=
qφ (z|x) log
qφ (z|x) pθ (z|x)
ZZ
pθ (x, z)
=
qφ (z|x) log
dz
qφ (z|x)
Z
Z
qφ (z|x)
dz
+
qφ (z|x) log
pθ (z|x)
Z

= L(θ, φ; x) + KL qφ (z|x)|| pθ (z|x) .
(3)
From this, the first term is called the evidence lower bound
(ELBO). The second term is the KL divergence of the variational posterior qφ (z|x) and the true posterior pθ (z|x). Hence,
we often use L(θ, φ; x) as the lower bound of marginal
log-likelihood [73].
Thus, we can expand L(θ, φ; x)
Z
pθ (x, z)
L(θ, φ; x) =
qφ (z|x) log
dz
qφ (z|x)
ZZ
p(z)
qφ (z|x) log
=
dz
q
φ (z|x)
Z
Z
qφ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) dz
+
Z

= −KL(qφ (z|x)|| p(z)) + Eqφ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)].
(4)
Intuitively, the first term encourages the variational posterior
qφ (z|x) to match the prior p(z). The second term is the
reconstruction loss. Since the Gaussian is a location-scale
family of distributions, we can use reparameterization tricks
to approximate ELBO.

3503113

where pdata is the real data distribution. We assume that
the distribution family for pθ (x|z) is flexible [74]. So, there
exists p ∗ in the distribution family that makes KL( pdata (x)
|| p ∗ (x)) = 0. Based on this, we make pθ (z|x) = p ∗ and
can obtain that the first term in (5) equals zero. When the
second term in (5) is also zero, we obtain the optimal ELBO.
In this case, we can get pθ (z|x) = qφ (z|x) = p(z). The above
situation demonstrates that the latent variable z provides no
information.

D. vMF Distribution
The vMF distribution [69] is placed on the (n − 1) dimensional sphere Sn−1 . It is parameterized by a direction vector µ
and a concentration parameter κ ≥ 0, where ∥µ∥ = 1.
If κ = 0, the vMF is a Uniform distribution. The Probability Density Function of the vMF distribution for the unit
vector z is defined as
q(z; µ, κ) = Cn (κ)exp(κµ⊤ z)
κ n/2−1
Cn (κ) =
n/2
(2π ) In/2−1 (κ)

(6)
(7)

where I represents the modified Bessel function.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Problem Statement
Given a multivariate time series X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , x T },
where xt ∈ Rm is the measurement value of m sensors at
timestamp t. We use a sliding window with a step size of τ to
divide it into the sub-sequence set S = {s1 , s1+τ , . . .}, where
st = {xt , xt+1 , . . . , xt+l−1 } and l is the window size. This
article aims to reconstruct sub-sequences without accessing
label information, and it takes the deviation of reconstruction
and actual values as the anomaly score.

C. Limitations of Gaussian Distribution
ELBO contains two gradient terms. One is the KL divergence term. Another one is the data likelihood (reconstruction
loss). When the parameterized neural networks are RNNs,
the KL divergence term regularizes the variational posterior
qφ (z|x) toward the prior p(z) [71], [74]. Because RNNs are
universal approximators that can express arbitrary distribution
and do not rely on latent variables. According to [63], the
variational posterior qφ (z|x) carries very little information,
which forces the model to ignore latent variables (the model
considers latent variables as noise sources). Based on this, the
model may fall into a local optimum, where qφ (z|x) = p(z),
which makes the KL divergence term in (4) equal to zero.
In other words, this issue is KL collapse.
Zhao et al. [74] provided theoretical explanations for the
above issue from the perspective of information preference.
We rewrite (4) as [11]
L(θ, φ; x) = −KL( pdata (x)|| pθ (x))
− E pdata (x) [KL(qφ (z|x)|| pθ (z|x))] ≤ 0

(5)

B. Overview
Next, we describe VGATSL in detail. As indicated in
Fig. 3, the model comprises three sub-modules: graph feature
extractor, VAE with vMF distribution, and self-supervised
learning module. Further, the workflow of this model is as
follows.
1) Add perturbations to the original sub-sequence s; Generate the abnormal instance s̃.
2) Graph feature extractor captures spatial-temporal information and obtains output representations h and h̃.
3) Establish a discriminator f c to classify output representations h and h̃. It can help the model learn more explicit
normality boundaries.
4) Encoder f e maps the output representation h to a latent
space H ∈ Rn . Meanwhile, the latent variable z ∈ Rn
conforms to the vMF distribution.
5) Decoder f d reconstructs the sub-sequence based on the
latent variable z.

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 3.

Structure of VGATSL. It consists of three sub-modules: graph Feature Extractor, VAE with vMF distribution, and self-supervised learning module.

Fig. 5. Graph Structures. (a) Feature-oriented graph structure. (b) Temporal-oriented graph structure.

Fig. 4.

Framework of graph feature extractor.

C. Graph Feature Extractor
This extractor aims to encode the spatial-temporal information of sub-sequences. It includes an embedding network and
stacked STGAT networks [20], as indicated in Fig. 4.
The Embedding Network extracts the unique characteristics
of each sensor [19]. Specifically, we use a 1-D CNN to
transform the sub-sequence into a feature information matrix
u = σ (Conv1D(s, W) + b)

(8)

where Conv1D(·) represent 1-D convolution operation; W is
the weight; b is the bias. This operation enables the subsequent
stacked STGAT network to understand and process them.
The stacked STGAT Networks use attention mechanisms to
capture the sub-sequences causal relationships and temporal
dependencies. We first construct graph structures in feature
and temporal dimensions.
1) Feature-Oriented Graph Structure: We treat the subsequence st as a complete graph G feat = (V feat , E feat ),
where V feat = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm } is the node set, and the
sequence st(i) at sensor i represents node vi . E feat is the
edge set. A correlation relationship between any nodes i
and j must exist. There may be implicit dependency

relationships between sensors. So, we set the adjacent
matrix Aifeat
= 1, where weight wi j , i; j ∈ [1, m].
j
Indeed, the dependency patterns between sensors are
symmetrical. Thus, the adjacent matrix Afeat should be
diagonal. In other words, we believe the nodes have
maximum connectivity, and each edge has a weight.
Fig. 5(a) shows the structure.
2) Temporal-Oriented Graph Structure: Meanwhile,
we treat all timestamps within a sliding window as
a complete graph G tmp = (V tmp , E tmp ), where V tmp is
the node set. Each node is a feature vector xt+c at the
timestamp t + c, and 0 ≤ c ≤ l − 1 represents
the time interval. E tmp is an edge set that reflects the
connection relationship between different timestamps.
Fig. 5(b) shows the structure. We believe there is a
connection between the past and current nodes [20].
It is reasonable. A sensor signal is a collection of data
points arranged in time order. Random variables change
over time and have continuity. Thus, we set the adjacent
tmp
tmp
matrix Aab = 1, where a ≥ b. In contrast, Aab = 0,
where a<b, and a; b ∈ [t, t + l − 1].
Then, we use the STGAT block to process feature-oriented
and temporal-oriented graph-structured data, as indicated in
Fig. 4. Indeed, the STGAT block contains a feature GAT layer
and a temporal GAT layer. Specifically, we input the matrix u
into the feature GAT layer to learn the spatial correlation,
according to (1) and (2). The output representation r ϑ can be
obtained, where ϑ represents the number of STGAT blocks.

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

Meanwhile, the same operation captures temporal correlation
in different timestamps. So, we can obtain the final output
representation h ϑ .
D. VAE With vMF
Based on the above discussion, we adopt the VAE
model [11] to achieve the reconstruction task and use
BiGRUs as the encoder f e and decoder f d . Compared with
LSTM-based models, BiGRUs have fewer parameters, faster
convergence speed, and superior performance [75]. Additionally, we choose the vMF distribution as the prior and
variational posterior to avoid KL collapse [63], [74].
Specifically, the encoder f e encodes the output representation h and obtains the latent variable z ∈ Rn . Here, we assume
that the prior p(z) is a Uniform distribution on the hypersphere
vMF(·, κ = 0). It is represented as one divided by the surface
area of a (n − 1) dimensional sphere 1/[2(π n/2 )/0(n/2)],
where 0(·) is the Gamma function [69]. Meanwhile, we use
the variational posterior qφ (z|x) = vMF(z; µ, κ) to approximate the true posterior pθ (z|x), where the mean parameter
µ is the output of the encoding neural network and the
concentration parameter κ is a constant. According to (6)
and (7), we can rewrite the KL divergence term in (4)
KL(vMF(z; µ, κ)||vMF(·, 0))

= KL qφ (z|x)|| p(z)
Z
qφ (z|µ, κ)
dz
=
qφ (z|µ, κ) log
p(z)
ZZ

=
qφ (z|µ, κ) log Cn (κ) + κµT z − log p(z) dz
Z
"
#
2 π n/2
= log Cn (κ) + κµEq [z] + log
0(n/2)
n

n
=
− 1 log κ − log(2π ) − log I n2 −1 (κ)
2
2
n 
I n2 (κ)
n
+κ
+ log π + log 2 − log 0
.
I n2 −1 (κ) 2
2

3503113

scheme [77] to sample ϖ ∈ [−1, 1] from the univariate
density g(ϖ |κ, n). According to [69], we can expand the
univariate density g(ϖ |κ, n) as follows:
 1 (n−3)
n
exp(κϖ ) 1 − ϖ 2 2
2 π2
 C n2

(10)
g(ϖ |κ, n) =
0 n2
B 12 , 12 (n − 1)
where B(·) is the Beta function. Thus, we can calculate the
latent variable z ′ ← (ϖ ; ((1 − ϖ 2 )1/2 )ε⊤ )⊤ under modal e1 .
Finally, we use orthogonal transform U (µ) to obtain a latent
variable z that conforms to q(z|µ, κ). Specifically, we use
Householder reflection to implement this operation, as shown
in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 1 Sampling Process
Require: Mean µ; Concentration κ;
1: Sample ε ∼ vMF(z|e1 , κ);
2: Sample ϖ √
∼ g(ϖ |κ, n) ∝ exp(κϖ )(1 − ϖ 2 )(n−3)/2 ;
3: z ′ ← (ϖ ; ( 1 − ϖ 2 )ε ⊤ )⊤ ;
4: U ← Householder(e1 , µ);
return U z ′ ;

Algorithm 2 Householder Transform
Require: Mean µ; Modal vector e1 ;
1: ν ′ ∼ e1 − µ;
ν′
2: ν ← ∥ν ′ ∥ ;
3: U ← I − 2νν ′ ;
return U ;
On this basis, we utilize decoder f d to reconstruct the subsequence. Its input is latent variable z. The loss function is
Lrec = Eqφ (z|s) [log pθ (s|z)]
− KL(vMF(µ, κ)||vMF(·, κ = 0))

(9)

It is evident that the modified KL divergence relies solely on
the concentration κ, and not on the mean µ. KL divergence
is a function of hyperparameters n and κ, which can be
precisely controlled [68]. Specifically, we consider κ as a
constant. Thus, the KL divergence term is also a constant,
and the KL collapse will not occur; there is qφ (z|x) ̸ =
p(z). At this point, we believe the latent variable z provides
rich information. However, when using Gaussian VAE, the
value of KL divergence is constantly changing. It exhibits
a concentrated probability mass around the origin. In other
words, the Gaussian VAE habit pulls the posterior toward the
prior [71]. In this case, the latent variable z does not provide
any information, which makes optimization difficult [76].
Next, we introduce the details of sampling latent variable
z from the vMF distribution. We follow Wood’s rejection
sampling scheme [77], as illustrated in Algorithm 1. It is an
improved Ulrich’s procedure [78]. Specifically, we sample ε
from the distribution vMF(z|e1 , κ) with modal vector e1 =
(1, 0, . . . , 0), where ε is a unit vector tangent to the hypersphere. Second, we use an acceptance–rejection sampling

(11)

where the first term is reconstruction loss, and the second term
is the KL divergence based on vMF distribution.
E. Self-Supervised Learning
This module uses pretext tasks to provide information about
anomalies. Actually, we add tailored perturbations to normal
sub-sequences to simulate abnormal instances. These instances
help to learn more explicit decision boundaries. Specifically,
contextual and collection transformations are adopted [60].
1) Contextual Transformation: Randomly select dimensions of the last observation of the input sub-sequence;
Calculate the mean of the previous values; Add offset to
the mean and obtain the contextual outlier; Replace the
data values of the selected dimensions with contextual
outliers. The offset is −0.5 or +0.5.
2) Collection Transformation: Randomly select a group of
dimensions; Randomly select a segment of the input
sub-sequence (its length not exceeding 0.2 l); Take the
last observation as the endpoint of the segment; Use the
collection outliers to replace the values of the segment
in the selected dimension.

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE I
I NFORMATION OF DATASETS

To learn intrinsic representations from these transformations, we use a discriminator f c to classify the output
representations h and h̃, as shown in Fig. 3. It helps determine whether the input sub-sequence is from the normal or
abnormal data. So, this process can be formulated as


Lssl = − ya log( f c (h)) + yb log f c h̃
(12)
where ya = 1 and yb = 0 are pseudo labels. Please note that
abnormal instances share the same pseudo labels.
F. Training and Inference
1) Training: In summary, we combine reconstruction and
self-supervised losses to train the model. The final loss function is
L = Lrec + λLssl

(13)

where λ is a tradeoff coefficient.
2) Inference: The VAE with vMF distribution attempts to
reconstruct the input sub-sequence. We use unlabeled historical normal data to train the model. Thus, based on the
reconstruction error value, we can judge whether the test
instance is normal or abnormal.
First of all, we calculate the abnormal score as
Score =

1
∥xt − x̂ t ∥2
m

(14)

where x̂ t is the predicted value. Second, consistent with [20],
we set a decision threshold based on expert knowledge. If the
abnormal score exceeds the threshold, the input is abnormal
and vice versa.

set is 11.97%. We downsample the SWaT dataset every
10 seconds to speed up the training.
2) Water Distribution Dataset (WADI) [79] is a simulated
large-scale urban water distribution system with more
realistic water treatment and distribution networks. The
system has been running for 16 days. In the first
14 days, we collected 118 795 normal data for training—
the last 2 days in attack scenarios. Thus, we collected
17 275 data for testing, of which 5.99% were abnormal. The testbed consists of 127 sensors and actuators.
We also downsample the WADI dataset.
3) Wind Turbine Dataset (WTD) [20] is collected by ten
sensors. The collection process lasts 1–2 years, with
a sampling interval of 10 min. Considering on-thespot operation and maintenance records from wind farm
operators, we labeled the data deviating from normal
mode. The proportion of abnormal data in the test set
is 43.70%.
Based on this, the data format is measured values with
timestamps, known as a multivariate time series. We use all
sensor records as input features for the model. Specifically,
we set sliding step τ = 1 and the sliding window size
l = 5 under SWaT, l = 5 under WADI, and l = 60
under WTD. Totally, we obtain 47 511 training samples and
44 982 test samples under SwaT (sample format is subsequence, with feature size of 51 and length of 5),
118 791 training samples and 17 271 test samples under WADI
(feature size of 127 and length of 5), and 24 074 training
samples and 28 598 test samples under WTD (feature size
of 10 and length of 60). Please note that once a timestamp
in a sub-sequence exhibits abnormal behavior, we will label
the entire sub-sequence as an abnormal sample. Furthermore,
we apply the same data preprocessing to all methods, i.e.,
using Minimum-and-Maximum normalization to scale the
SWaT, WADI, and WTD datasets. We randomly divide 20%
of the training data as the validation set.
2) Metrics: Consistent with [5], [6], and [19], we select Precision (Prec), Recall (Rec), and F1-Score (F1) as evaluation
indicators.

V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
A. Datasets and Metrics

B. Comparison Methods

1) Datasets: We evaluate and compare VGATSL on three
public and real-world datasets. As listed in Table I, we provide
helpful information such as dataset name and size, sample
dimension, and anomaly rate.
1) Secure Water Treatment Dataset (SWaT) [16] comes
from a water treatment testbed with 51 sensors.
The system has been running for 11 days. Further, the
system suffered 41 cyber and physical attacks in the
last 4 days. These attacks have different intentions and
durations. Please note that the collection is continuous.
Therefore, we label the overall sequential data based on
each timestamp’s normal and abnormal behavior. In the
experiment, we use 47 515 normal data collected in the
first 7 days for training and 44 986 data collected in
the last 4 days for testing. The anomaly rate in the test

VGATSL is compared with different popular and typical
methods.
1) PCA [80], which is used to find low-dimensional projections to capture most of the variance in the data.
2) iForest [27], which isolates each data point to a termination node. The path length from the termination node
to the root node is an anomaly measure.
3) LSTM-AE [10], which is a reconstruction-based method.
We set the encoder and decoder as a double-layer LSTM.
4) USAD [81], which is a typical unsupervised anomaly
detection method that uses an adversarial training
scheme based on encoder–decoder architecture to learn
reconstruction errors.
5) MAD-GAN [3], which is a GAN-based method that uses
LSTM-RNN to capture temporal correlations.

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

3503113

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHOD

6) GDN [19], which learns the topological relationships
between sensors and utilizes attention mechanisms to
predict the future values of nodes.
7) MTAD-GAT [6], which includes reconstruction and
prediction-based models, treating all timestamps and
variables in a multivariate time series as two complete
graphs to encode temporal and spatial correlations.
8) STGAT-MAD [20], which uses stacked STGAT networks
to capture the temporal and feature correlations.
The network structure of VGATSL is as follows: 1) the
number of STGAT blocks is two; 2) encoder or decoder is
BiGRUs with 150 neurons; 3) the dimension size of z is 15;
and 4) the discriminator is a double-layer, fully connected
network.
We train this model on an NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090 GPU. The Adam optimizer [82] is also selected,
and the initial learning rate is 0.001. We set the hyperparameter λ = 0.1, and κ = 25.
C. Results and Analysis
Table II reports the results. VGATSL achieved the best
results on all datasets. Compared with other methods,
VGATSL improves the F1-Score by 0.26% on SWaT dataset,
1.10% on WADI dataset, and 2.86% on WTD dataset. Overall,
as the size of the dataset increases, there is less performance
improvement. The main reasons are as follows.
1) Inaccurate label information.
2) Data contains more noise.
3) Differences in data distribution.
Because of the limitations of feature extraction techniques,
traditional methods perform terribly on three datasets. In deep
learning methods, LSTM-AE and USAD are susceptible
to noise interference, which makes identifying normality
boundaries in large-scale datasets challenging. MAD-GAN
performed well on the SWaT dataset. However, it performs
terribly on WADI and WTD datasets. Because the generative
ability of MAD-GAN is limited, it cannot capture all patterns
in complex data distributions. Graph learning methods, such
as GDN, MTAD-GAT, and STGAT-MAD, can extract spatial information, which helps improve detection performance.
However, these methods make it difficult to model the stochastic interrelationships during reconstruction.

Fig. 6. Confusion matrices on three datasets. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.

The competitiveness of VGATSL can be attributed to these
aspects. First, we use advanced network structures to model
multivariate time series, which compensate for the shortcomings of existing methods in spatial-temporal information
loss. Second, different signal transformations collaborate to
generate anomaly instances, which helps the model form
more explicit decision boundaries. Third, compared with the
Gaussian distribution, the vMF distribution learns stochastic
interrelationships, which helps to eliminate the KL collapse
of the Encode–Decode.
Next, we plot VGATSL’s confusion matrices. As indicated
in Fig. 6, VGATSL can effectively identify the abnormal class.
For SWaT dataset, the actual negative rate is 99.52%. For
WADI dataset, the actual negative rate is 99.43%. For WTD
dataset, the actual negative rate is 95.25%. The misclassification proportion is higher for normal data than for abnormal
data. This can be attributed to:
1) We do not use the “Point Adjust” scheme in this
experiment.
2) We do not use the “Reduction,” which can confuse the
decision boundaries.
D. Ablation Study
Meanwhile, ablation studies demonstrate the necessity of
different components. We set five variants.
1) Disable graph feature extractor (abbreviated as
w/o GFE).
2) Disable vMF distribution (replace with Gaussian distribution, and abbreviated as w/o vMF, G-VAE).
3) Disable vMF distribution (replace with AE, abbreviated
as w/o vMF, AE).
4) Disable self-supervised learning module (abbreviated as
w/o SSL).

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE III
A BLATION R ESULTS

Fig. 7. Parameter sensitivity analysis on wind turbine Dataset. (a) SWaT.
(b) WADI. (c) WTD.

5) Disable BiGRUs (replace with BiLSTM, and abbreviated as w/o BiGRUs).
Table III shows the results. After removing the graph
feature extractor, we observe that the F1-Score decreases
from 0.8855 to 0.8669. The feature extractor can encode
spatiotemporal information, which helps the model capture the
causal relationships and temporal dependencies. We also find
that w/o SSL reduces performance. Indeed, this module helps
the model learn more explicit normality boundaries.
The vMF distribution allows for uninformed priors, thus
avoiding the KL collapse. After replacing the latent space
with Gaussian distribution, F1-Score decreased by 3.53%;
After replacing the latent space with AE, F1-Score decreased
by 2.74%. It is because Gaussian VAE pulls the posterior
toward the prior. Moreover, BiGRUs are function approximators that can fit any probability distribution and do not
rely on latent variables. AE’s performance is slightly better
than G-VAE.
If the BiLSTM backbone network was used, F1-Score
decreased by 9.54% compared to the proposed method.
BiGRUs have fewer parameters, faster convergence speed, and
a superior ability to capture time series features.
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
To better illustrate the impact of different parameters, we set
three configurations: sliding window length l, tradeoff parameter λ, and dimensions of latent variables n.
This section provides a detailed performance comparison
of the WTD dataset. Fig. 7(a) shows the comparison results
of different sliding window lengths l ∈ [5, 30, 60, 100]. Here,
we set the tradeoff parameter to 0.1 and the dimensions of
latent variables to 15. The results indicate that the performance
gradually improves as the sliding window length increases.
When l = 100, F1-Score suddenly drops to 0.7797. This
is because a larger sliding window may not only provide
more temporal information to the model but also increase the
difficulty of encoding temporal representations.
In Fig. 7(b), we compare the test results with different
tradeoff parameters λ ∈ [0.1, 0.4, 0.7, 1.0]. It can be observed
that as the tradeoff parameter λ gradually increases, the overall
performance shows a downward trend. When λ = 0.7, the
model achieves the lowest F1-Score. Self-supervised learning
brings more raw anomaly information to the model. However,
during training, a larger proportion of self-supervised learning
losses can affect the performance of other components and
mislead the decision boundaries.

Fig. 8.
Detailed analysis of the proposed method. (a) Graph attention
network. (b) Self-supervised learning.

Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of dimensions
for different latent variables n ∈ [5, 15, 25, 50, 100]. Here,
we set the sliding window length to 60 and the tradeoff
parameter to 0.1. As indicated in Fig. 7(c), VGATSL is robust
to the latent dimensions, and the performance difference is
insignificant under different parameter settings. We find that
when n = 50, F1-Score decreases to 0.8288; When n = 100,
F1-Score reaches 0.9064.
F. Detailed Analysis
Previous experiments have demonstrated the importance
of the graph feature extractor. In Fig. 8(a), we analyze the
performance of different attention layers (i.e., feature and
temporal graph attention layer). The experiment is conducted
on the WTD dataset. When only using the feature or temporal
graph attention layer, the F1-Score significantly decreases,
with an accuracy decrease of over 3%. This indicates that
the relationship between the feature and the temporal graph
attention layers is complementary, playing a positive role
in extracting spatial and temporal information. We find that
under the same conditions, temporal-oriented graph attention
networks are superior to feature-oriented graph attention networks. This is because industrial data usually has temporal
characteristics such as dynamism and nonstationarity, which
contain the evolution laws and state information of industrial
systems and are more prominent than spatial characteristics
such as coupling in topological relationships.
Fig. 8(b) shows the comparative performance analysis of
different signal transformations. It can be observed that the
signal transformation of “Contextual” is competitive. When the
model only learns the enhanced data generated by the “Collection” signal transformation, its performance will significantly
decrease. We believe the anomaly examples generated by the
transformation of “Collection” are relatively rare in realistic
datasets. When the model is trained, its decision boundaries
will be blurred if all the enhanced data are such examples.

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

Fig. 9. Performance comparison under different percentage of anomaly.
(a) F1-Score. (b) AUC-PR.

3503113

Fig. 10. Case analysis on wind turbine dataset. (a) Multivariate time series.
(b) Anomaly score.

However, when the model jointly learns the enhanced data
generated by the transformation of two types of signals, it will
achieve complementary performance and achieve the best
detection results.
G. Percentage of Anomaly
Next, we set the anomaly ratios on the test set to 5%, 10%,
15%, 20%, and 25% to simulate possible anomalies that may
occur in the real world. We still use the WTD dataset as
an example. In particular, we chose USAD and GDN as a
comparison.
Fig. 9(a) shows the F1-Score under different anomaly
ratios. Meanwhile, we plot the corresponding AUR-PR values,
as indicated in Fig. 9(b). Overall, the performance of VGATSL
is superior to that of USAD and GDN. It is worth mentioning
that when the ratio values are 15% and 20%, the performance
of GDN reaches its best. This experiment demonstrates that
VGATSL has good stability and can address the problem of
imbalanced datasets in real industrial scenarios.

Fig. 11. Convergence of proposed method. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.

Fig. 12. Inference time of proposed method. (a) SWaT. (b) WADI. (c) WTD.
TABLE IV
M EASUREMENTS ON W IND T URBINE DATASET

H. Case Studies
We provide cases to demonstrate the interpretability of
VGATSL. Specifically, we use a downsampling technique
to reduce the sequence length. As indicated in Fig. 10(a),
we present test examples on the WTD dataset. The red
area represents the abnormal data we have detected. On this
basis, we calculate the average anomaly score, which helps to
locate the faulty sensor. To save space, we only analyze the
situation in region two. As shown in Fig. 10(b), darker colors
indicate higher average anomaly scores; therefore, wind speed
is considered the most likely sensor to fail. The anomaly is the
cracking of the main bearing, and frequent changes in wind
speed are the leading cause.
I. Convergence and Complexity Analysis
Fig. 11 shows the training loss of VGATSL. For the SWaT
dataset, this method converges at the 50th epoch; For the
WADI dataset, this method converges at the 80th epoch; For
the WTD dataset, this method converges at the 500th epoch.
In conclusion, VGATSL has convergence and stability and a
fast convergence speed.
Next, we evaluate the inference time of various methods
on different datasets. Here, we chose MAD-GAN, GDN,
and STGAT-MAD as comparative methods. As indicated in
Fig. 12, VGATSL is competitive regarding time efficiency.

Table IV lists the parameter sizes of different models
to compare their corresponding spatial efficiency. GDN has
the lowest number of parameters and model size. Additionally, VGATSL achieves the second-best spatial efficiency.
Compared with MAD-GAN, its model size has decreased
by 0.3 MB; Compared with STGAT-MAD, its model size
decreased by 1.17 MB. Therefore, the proposed method also
has flexibility in practical applications.
VI. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Although the proposed method reduces computational
costs (memory consumption, FLOP, parameter count),
it takes 15.52 s (0.345 ms/sample) to infer SWaT,
27.44 s (1.589 ms/sample) to infer WADI, and 1.87 s
(0.065 ms/sample) to infer WTD on NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090 GPU. We consider this to be due to multiple
spatiotemporal attention blocks in the network. In addition,
solving the vMF distribution is relatively cumbersome, and
using reparameterization techniques can reduce application
efficiency and feasibility.
In the future, we will research: 1) we attempt to incorporate prior knowledge into the proposed method to learn
intrinsic representations from mixed information sources and

3503113

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

achieve fault localization, monitoring, and other activities in
more complex industrial systems and 2) we will develop
more efficient and robust models and conduct comprehensive
theoretical analysis.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes an unsupervised anomaly detection
method called variational graph attention networks with selfsupervised learning. We have built a graph feature extractor
based on stacked STGAT networks to learn feature-oriented
and temporal-oriented topological structures. In particular,
the relationship between the feature and the temporal graph
attention layers is complementary, playing a positive role in
extracting spatial and sequential information. Additionally,
the vMF distribution is selected as the latent space, which
places the latent representation on the surface of the unit
hypersphere to allow for uninformed priors, thus preventing
the model from falling into the local optimum. We also find
that the performance of different signal transformations varies.
The self-supervised learning module can simulate abnormal
behaviors and help the model form more explicit decision
boundaries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that VGATSL
outperforms the baseline methods and can be applied to actual
industrial scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[2] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080,
Dec. 2023.
[3] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
[4] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc.
28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
[5] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[6] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[7] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutník, B. R. Steunebrink, and
J. Schmidhuber, “LSTM: A search space Odyssey,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2222–2232, Oct. 2016.
[8] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 156–165.
[9] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020.
[10] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
[11] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[12] M. Gutoski, N. M. R. Aquino, M. Ribeiro, A. E. Lazzaretti, and
H. S. Lopes, “Detection of video anomalies using convolutional autoencoders and one-class support vector machines,” in Proc. 13th Brazilian
Congr. Comput. Inteligence, Jan. 2018, pp. 1–12.

[13] W. Mao, G. Wang, L. Kou, and X. Liang, “Deep domain-adversarial
anomaly detection with one-class transfer learning,” IEEE/CAA J.
Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 524–546, Feb. 2023.
[14] Q. Qian, J. Luo, and Y. Qin, “Adaptive intermediate class-wise distribution alignment: A universal domain adaptation and generalization
method for machine fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., early access, Mar. 21, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3376449.
[15] H. Li, W. Zheng, F. Tang, Y. Zhu, and J. Huang, “Few-shot timeseries anomaly detection with unsupervised domain adaptation,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 649, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 119610.
[16] J. Goh, S. Adepu, M. Tan, and Z. S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in cyber
physical systems using recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
Int. Symp. High Assurance Syst. Eng. (HASE), Jan. 2017, pp. 140–145.
[17] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
[18] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 3844–3852.
[19] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[20] J. Zhan et al., “Stgat-mad : Spatial–temporal graph attention network
for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 3568–3572.
[21] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
pp. 3621–3633.
[22] L. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised variational graph autoencoder for
system-level anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–11, 2023.
[23] N. Chen, H. Tu, H. Zeng, and Y. Ou, “Anomaly detection for
key performance indicators by fusing self-supervised spatio-temporal
graph attention networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 300, Sep. 2024,
Art. no. 112167.
[24] Q. Yu, L. Jibin, and L. Jiang, “An improved ARIMA-based traffic
anomaly detection algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J.
Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2016, Art. no. 9653230.
[25] J. Ma and S. Perkins, “Time-series novelty detection using one-class
support vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., vol. 3,
2003, pp. 1741–1745.
[26] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[27] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Oct. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[28] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[29] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Detecting cyber attacks in industrial
control systems using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Workshop
Cyber-Phys. Syst. Secur. PrivaCy, Jan. 2018, pp. 72–83.
[30] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long-and shortterm temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. ACM
Conf. Res. Devel. Inf. Retrieval (SIGIR), 2018, pp. 95–104.
[31] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and
interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf.
Data Eng. (ICDE), Apr. 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
[32] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.
[33] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, “Extracting
and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proc.
25th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2008, pp. 1096–1103.
[34] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2021.
[35] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009.
[36] V. Vercruyssen, W. Meert, and J. Davis, “Transfer learning for time series
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IAL@ PKDD/ECML, 2017, pp. 27–36.

GAO et al.: VARIATIONAL GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS WITH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

[37] V. Vincent, M. Wannes, and D. Jesse, “Transfer learning for anomaly
detection through localized and unsupervised instance selection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 6054–6061.
[38] T. Wen and R. Keyes, “Time series anomaly detection using convolutional neural networks and transfer learning,” 2019, arXiv:1905.13628.
[39] J. Shen, Y. Qu, W. Zhang, and Y. Yu, “Wasserstein distance guided
representation learning for domain adaptation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2018, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1–8.
[40] E. Tzeng, J. Hoffman, N. Zhang, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell,
“Deep domain confusion: Maximizing for domain invariance,” 2014,
arXiv:1412.3474.
[41] Q. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, and Y. Qin, “Maximum mean square
discrepancy: A new discrepancy representation metric for mechanical
fault transfer diagnosis,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 276, Sep. 2023,
Art. no. 110748.
[42] Q. Qian, H. Pu, T. Tu, and Y. Qin, “Variance discrepancy representation:
A vibration characteristic-guided distribution alignment metric for fault
transfer diagnosis,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 217, Aug. 2024,
Art. no. 111544.
[43] T. Cao, J. Zhu, and G. Pang, “Anomaly detection under distribution
shift,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023,
pp. 6488–6500.
[44] Q. Wang, G. Pang, M. Salehi, W. Buntine, and C. Leckie, “Cross-domain
graph anomaly detection via anomaly-aware contrastive alignment,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4676–4684.
[45] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
[46] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and
applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, Jan. 2020.
[47] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[48] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
[49] H. Hojjati, M. Sadeghi, and N. Armanfard, “Multivariate time-series
anomaly detection with temporal self-supervision and graphs: Application to vehicle failure prediction,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn.
Knowl. Discovery Databases. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023,
pp. 242–259.
[50] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Change detection
in graph streams by learning graph embeddings on constant-curvature
manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6,
pp. 1856–1869, Jun. 2020.
[51] P. Qi, D. Li, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-SGCN: Multivariate anomaly
detection with self-learning graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Data Eng., 2022, pp. 1232–1244.
[52] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[53] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised learning for anomalous
channel detection in EEG graphs: Application to seizure analysis,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 7866–7874.
[54] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[55] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[56] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[57] C.-C. Chiu, J. Qin, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, and Y. Wu, “Self-supervised learning
with random-projection quantizer for speech recognition,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 3915–3924.
[58] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112.

3503113

[59] Z. Yue et al., “Ts2vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 8980–8987.
[60] H. Xu, Y. Wang, S. Jian, Q. Liao, Y. Wang, and G. Pang, “Calibrated
one-class classification for unsupervised time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5723–5736,
Nov. 2024.
[61] M. Tschannen, O. Bachem, and M. Lucic, “Recent advances in
autoencoder-based representation learning,” 2018, arXiv:1812.05069.
[62] Y. Miao, L. Yu, and P. Blunsom, “Neural variational inference for text
processing,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 48,
Jun. 2016, pp. 1727–1736.
[63] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai, R. Jozefowicz, and
S. Bengio, “Generating sentences from a continuous space,” 2015,
arXiv:1511.06349.
[64] M. Nickel and D. Kiela, “Poincaré embeddings for learning hierarchical
representations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
pp. 6341–6350.
[65] C. Liu and J. Zhu, “Riemannian stein variational gradient descent for
Bayesian inference,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 1–8.
[66] A. Banerjee, I. S. Dhillon, J. Ghosh, S. Sra, and G. Ridgeway, “Clustering on the unit hypersphere using von Mises-Fisher distributions,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, no. 9, 2005.
[67] R. A. Fisher, “Dispersion on a sphere,” Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, Math.
Phys. Sci., vol. 217, no. 1130, pp. 295–305, 1953.
[68] K. Guu, T. B. Hashimoto, Y. Oren, and P. Liang, “Generating sentences by editing prototypes,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 6,
pp. 437–450, Jul. 2018.
[69] T. R. Davidson, L. Falorsi, N. De Cao, T. Kipf, and J. M. Tomczak,
“Hyperspherical variational auto-encoders,” 2018, arXiv:1804.00891.
[70] H. Guan and W. A. P. Smith, “Structure-from-motion in spherical video
using the von Mises-Fisher distribution,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 711–723, Feb. 2017.
[71] J. Xu and G. Durrett, “Spherical latent spaces for stable variational
autoencoders,” 2018, arXiv:1808.10805.
[72] I. V. Serban, A. G. Ororbia II, J. Pineau, and A. Courville, “Piecewise latent variables for neural variational text processing,” 2016,
arXiv:1612.00377.
[73] X. Chen et al., “Variational lossy autoencoder,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02731.
[74] S. Zhao, J. Song, and S. Ermon, “InfoVAE: Information maximizing
variational autoencoders,” 2017, arXiv:1706.02262.
[75] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
arXiv:1412.3555.
[76] M. Abul Hasnat, J. Bohné, J. Milgram, S. Gentric, and L. Chen, “Von
Mises-Fisher mixture model-based deep learning: Application to face
verification,” 2017, arXiv:1706.04264.
[77] A. T. A. Wood, “Simulation of the von Mises Fisher distribution,”
Commun. Statist.-Simul. Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 157–164, Jan. 1994.
[78] G. Ulrich, “Computer generation of distributions on the M-sphere,”
J. Roy. Stat. Soc., Ser. C, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 158–163, 1984.
[79] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water
Netw., 2017, pp. 25–28.
[80] M.-L. Shyu, S.-C. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. W. Chang, “A novel
anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in
Proc. ICDM Found. New Direction Data Mining Workshop, Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2003, pp. 172–179.
[81] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[82] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.