7192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

When Federated Learning Meets Knowledge
Distillation to Secure Consumer Edge Network
Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Consumer networks face several security challenges
due to the distributed nature of edge devices and the sensitive
data they handle. Federated Learning (FL) presents a promising
paradigm for collaborative model training in distributed environments. However, its implementation in edge consumer networks
raises concerns about model heterogeneity, communication efficiency, and reverse engineering attacks. To address these issues,
in this paper, we introduce SKDFL, a novel framework that
leverages Knowledge Distillation (KD) and Secure Multi-Party
Computation (SMPC) techniques to enhance communication efficiency while preserving data privacy in edge consumer networks.
Through the use of KD, the distilled knowledge is transmitted
between devices, significantly reducing communication overhead.
Additionally, we incorporate lightweight encryption mechanisms
to protect soft-labels from reverse engineering attacks using
SMPC. We evaluate our proposed framework using two public
datasets and demonstrate its efficiency in reducing communication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reduction compared
to conventional FL methods. Moreover, SKDFL achieves high
performances in terms of accuracy and F1-score in both binary
and multi-class classification while preserving the privacy of
clients. Our obtained results show the potential of SKDFL to
address the challenges of communication efficiency and data
privacy in FL for edge consumer networks, paving the way for
secure and efficient collaborative learning in consumer networks.
Index Terms—TinyML, federated learning, knowledge distillation, edge consumer network.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, consumer networks have become more
complex, connecting many different devices ranging from
smartphones, smart home gadgets (such as thermostats and
security cameras), and Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
The rapid expansion of consumer networks has significantly
improved connectivity and convenience. However, it also
introduces critical security risks due to the growing number
of connected devices. Many of these vulnerabilities stem

I

Received 4 May 2024; revised 16 July 2024 and 23 September 2024;
accepted 7 November 2024. Date of publication 8 April 2025; date of current
version 14 August 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through
research under Grant RGPIN-2025-07140. (Corresponding author: Zakaria
Abou El Houda.)
Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the RSEC, UMR INRS-UQO, INRSEMT, University of Quebec, Gatineau, QC J8Y 3G5, Canada (e-mail:
zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca).
Hajar Moudoud is with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC J8Y 3G5, Canada (e-mail:
hajar.moudoud@uqo.ca).
Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of
Computing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3559004

from outdated software, weak authentication systems, and
inadequate security practices. As a result, attackers can exploit
these weaknesses, leading to data breaches, identity theft, and
unauthorized access to sensitive information. Addressing these
challenges requires robust security measures to protect users
and maintain network integrity [1], [2], [3].
The distributed nature of consumer networks, where
devices frequently connect and disconnect from the network,
complicates traditional security approaches. This dynamic
environment makes it challenging for centralized security
solutions to effectively monitor and defend against emerging threats in real-time. Additionally, the sheer volume and
diversity of devices in consumer networks exacerbate the
difficulty of enforcing consistent security policies across
all endpoints. Consequently, gaps in security posture can
emerge, leaving the network susceptible to infiltration and
compromise. The interconnected nature of consumer networks
introduces the risk of lateral movement, wherein attackers
exploit vulnerabilities in one device to gain access to other
interconnected devices or sensitive data within the network.
This lateral movement can propagate rapidly, escalating the
impact of a security breach and complicating remediation
efforts. Additionally, the increasing prevalence of IoT devices
in consumer networks introduces new attack vectors, as many
of these devices lack robust security features and are often
overlooked by users and manufacturers alike.
Addressing the security challenges inherent in consumer
networks requires a multifaceted approach that combines
proactive risk mitigation strategies with robust detection and
response mechanisms. This approach can leverage advanced
machine learning techniques, particularly for Intrusion
Detection Systems (IDS), to enhance the network’s defense
capabilities. By deploying machine learning algorithms trained
on historical data and real-time network traffic patterns, IDS
can autonomously identify anomalous behavior indicative of
potential security threats.
Machine learning-based IDS offers several advantages over
traditional rule-based systems. They can adapt to evolving
threats by continuously learning from new data, allowing
them to detect previously unseen attack patterns and zero-day
vulnerabilities. Additionally, machine learning algorithms can
analyze vast amounts of network data at high speed, enabling
rapid detection of security incidents without overwhelming network administrators with false positives. Moreover,
machine learning techniques can be applied to anomaly
detection, where deviations from normal network behavior
are flagged as potential security threats. By establishing a

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK

baseline of typical network activity, machine learning algorithms can detect deviations that may indicate unauthorized
access attempts, malware infections, or other suspicious activities. This proactive approach enables early detection and
containment of security breaches, minimizing their impact on
the network and reducing the time-to-response to security
incidents [4], [5].
While the usage of ML models can indeed be effective
in detecting attacks, it may not always be suitable for consumer devices with limited computing power, storage, and
energy resources. Consumer devices, such as smartphones,
IoT gadgets, and smart home appliances, often operate under
stringent resource constraints, making it challenging to deploy
and execute complex ML algorithms directly on these devices.
One primary concern is the computational overhead associated
with training and running ML models on resource-constrained
devices. Training sophisticated ML models typically requires
significant computational resources and large datasets, which
may exceed the processing capabilities of consumer devices.
Moreover, the memory and storage requirements for storing
model parameters and intermediate data can strain the limited
onboard resources of these devices, potentially impacting
their performance and user experience. Additionally, energy
consumption is a critical consideration for consumer devices,
especially those powered by batteries. Running ML algorithms
continuously on these devices can drain battery life rapidly,
leading to decreased usability and user dissatisfaction. This
energy consumption issue becomes even more pronounced in
the context of real-time ML inference, where devices must
process data streams continuously to detect and respond to
security threats promptly.
To address the challenges of deploying ML models
on resource-constrained consumer devices, researchers have
proposed an innovative solution known as TinyML. TinyML
focuses on optimizing ML algorithms and models for deployment on devices with limited computing power, storage, and
energy resources, making it an ideal candidate for enhancing
security on consumer devices. The key innovation behind
TinyML lies in the development of lightweight ML algorithms and model architectures specifically designed to operate
efficiently on microcontrollers and other embedded systems.
These algorithms are optimized for low computational complexity, minimal memory footprint, and energy efficiency,
enabling them to run effectively on devices with limited
resources. By leveraging techniques such as quantization,
pruning, and model compression, we can reduce the size and
complexity of ML models without significantly sacrificing
performance. On the other hand, Federated learning (FL)
emerges as a key solution by enabling many edge devices to
collaboratively learn a shared model while keeping the training
data on local devices. This helps protect privacy and improve
data security. Nevertheless, the vanilla FL approach still faces
challenges such as high communication overhead and the heterogeneity of device capabilities, which can severely hamper
the practical deployment and scalability of such models [6],
[7], [8], [9].
To address these challenges, we propose SKDFL, a novel
framework that integrates Knowledge Distillation (KD) into

7193

the FL process to create a communication-efficient and secure
learning environment for edge consumer networks. SKDFL is
designed to enhance the efficiency of model training across
diverse and resource-constrained edge devices without compromising the model’s effectiveness or the privacy of the data.
Through experimentation with the WSN-DS and UNSW-NB15
datasets, SKDFL demonstrates substantial reductions in communication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reduction compared
to conventional FL methods. Moreover, SKDFL maintains
good model performance, thereby offering a promising solution for deploying privacy-preserving intelligent systems in
edge environments. Knowledge Distillation serves as a strategic technique in this framework, enabling a “teacher-student”
model paradigm where a compact student model learns from a
more complex teacher model. By distilling knowledge from a
comprehensive teacher network to lightweight student models,
SKDFL significantly reduces the size and complexity of the
models that need to be trained and updated across the network.
This reduces the computing burden on each device and lowers
the amount of data sent during training, helping to solve a
major challenge in traditional federated learning.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
• We design SKDFL, a novel framework that leverages
Knowledge Distillation (KD) techniques to enhance communication efficiency while preserving data privacy in
edge consumer networks. Through the use of KD, the
distilled knowledge is transmitted between devices, significantly reducing communication overhead.
• We incorporate lightweight encryption mechanisms to
protect local model updates from reverse engineering
attacks using Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC).
• We evaluate SKDFL using the WSN-DS and UNSWNB15 datasets and demonstrate substantial reductions in
communication costs, achieving up to a 92.4% reduction compared to conventional FL methods. Moreover,
SKDFL achieves high model performances of 99% in
accuracy and F1-score, offering a promising solution
for deploying privacy-preserving and efficient intelligent
systems in edge environments.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II reviews
key studies that apply machine learning and TinyML for attack
detection in consumer networks. Section III describes the
proposed system model. Section IV evaluates the efficiency
of SKDFL and compares it with recent approaches. Finally,
Section V concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The rapid evolution of cyber-attacks necessitates advanced
and dynamic defense mechanisms. Traditional IDS, which
relied heavily on signature-based methods, struggled against
new and evolving threats. Recent advancements in ML have
significantly improved the capabilities of attack detection
systems, making them more adaptive, efficient, and capable of handling vast and diverse data streams in real-time.
This integration has facilitated the shift towards more robust
anomaly detection frameworks that learn from data to identify

7194

unusual patterns indicative of attacks. Deep Learning (DL),
a subset of ML, has been pivotal in this transformation.
Techniques such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) have been
employed to enhance the detection accuracy of complex attack
patterns in network traffic. In [10], Jiang et al., showed that
multi-channel LSTM networks can achieve high accuracy on
the NSL-KDD dataset, a well-known benchmark in network
security research. However, deep learning models often require
significant computational power, making them difficult to use
in resource-limited environments. This has led to growing
interest in lightweight ML models that offer strong accuracy with lower computational requirements. The integration
of machine learning into edge computing environments has
rapidly evolved, driven by the increasing need for on-device
intelligence and data privacy preservation. Traditional centralized training methods are often impractical due to their heavy
reliance on data transmission and processing power, which
are limited in edge computing scenarios. Federated learning,
first introduced by McMahan et et al. [11], offers a promising
alternative by decentralizing the training process, thus allowing
edge devices to collaboratively learn a shared prediction
model while keeping all the training data on the device. FL’s
application in IDS is particularly valuable in environments
where data privacy is paramount, such as in financial institutions or healthcare systems. Li et et al. [12] explored FL’s
potential to perform secure, decentralized machine learning
across multiple nodes, demonstrating that FL can effectively
reduce the risk of data leakage during the training process.
Moreover, FL facilitates the deployment of ML models in heterogeneous networks, where devices of varying computational
capabilities collaboratively contribute to the model’s training.
Konečný et al. [13] introduced optimization techniques for
FL that minimize the communication costs associated with
model training, which is crucial for bandwidth-constrained
environments [14], [15].
Despite its benefits, FL faces major challenges like high
communication costs and differences in device capabilities.
Konec̆ní et al. [13] highlighted these challenges, noting that the
frequent communication required to update model parameters
across a distributed network often becomes a bottleneck,
especially when dealing with large models or poor network
conditions. To address these issues, researchers have explored
various strategies to reduce the size of the transmitted data
and to compress model updates effectively [12]. Parallel to
advancements in federated learning, knowledge distillation
has emerged as a robust technique for model compression and acceleration, where a compact “student” model is
trained to emulate the behavior of a larger “teacher” model.
Hinton et al. [16] demonstrated that knowledge distillation
could effectively transfer the knowledge from a cumbersome
model to a lighter model without significant loss in accuracy.
This concept has been successfully applied across various
domains, including natural language processing [17] and
computer vision [16]. In the context of edge computing,
the application of knowledge distillation presents a unique
opportunity to enhance the efficiency of federated learning
systems. The work by Li et al. [18] represents an early attempt

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE I
TABLE OF N OTATIONS

to incorporate knowledge distillation within a federated learning framework, showing that it is possible to significantly
reduce the model size and computational requirements on
edge devices while maintaining high model performance. Our
approach, SKDFL, not only minimizes the communication
overhead associated with federated learning but also enhances
the privacy and security of the local model updates, making it
particularly suitable for secure edge consumer networks.
III. K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION -E NABLED F EDERATED
L EARNING IN E DGE C ONSUMER
A. System Architecture
The SKDFL system is designed to facilitate a
communication-efficient federated learning (FL) process
across a network of edge devices, leveraging knowledge
distillation techniques to enhance learning efficiency and
model accuracy. This system model aims to address challenges
associated with bandwidth constraints, limited computational
resources, and the need for privacy preservation in consumer
edge networks. We have considered a system architecture
(see Fig. 1) in which only encrypted logits/soft-labels are
exchanged between the server and clients. Thus, instead
of communicating model parameters Wi at each round, we
communicate knowledge in the form of soft-label outputs
using a public shared dataset X pub , as:


(1)
Yi ← fWi X pub
where fWi is the locally trained model parameterized by Wi .
B. System Model
Table I shows the table of notations. The SKDFL framework integrates the principles of federated learning (FL) with
knowledge distillation (KD), allowing edge devices (nodes)
to collaboratively learn a global model without sharing their
local data. Each node trains a local model on its dataset
and participates in a knowledge-sharing protocol that distills
information from multiple models into a singular, more generalized model. This method effectively reduces the required
communication bandwidth by transmitting compressed model
updates (knowledge) instead of raw data, ensuring efficient
use of network resources. In KD, initially, a global teacher

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK

Fig. 1.

7195

SKDFL system architecture.

model is trained on a centralized server or cloud using a
large dataset. This teacher model serves as the source of
knowledge to be distilled to local student models. Each
node in the network trains its student model using its local
dataset. The loss function optimized during this training is
given by the cross-entropy, which for a binary classification
task can be expressed as:
 
y log fi (x; θi )
Llocal (θi ) = −
(x,y)∈Di


+ (1 − y) log(1 − fi (x; θi )) ;

(2)

where fi (x; θi ) is the sigmoid output of the local model for
input x,θi are the parameters of the model at node i, and (x, y)
represents the training pairs in the local dataset Di .
After local training, each device conducts knowledge distillation by leveraging the pre-trained global teacher model. The
student model on each device learns to mimic the behavior
of the global teacher model by minimizing a distillation loss
function. This distillation process typically involves comparing
the output distributions or representations of the teacher and
student models and optimizing the student model’s parameters
to match those of the teacher. Knowledge distillation allows
student models to learn from the output distributions (soft
targets) generated by teacher models. These distributions are
softened using a temperature parameter T, enhancing the
information transfer about inter-class relationships:


zT (x)
, qS (x) = σ (zS (x)),
(3)
pT (x) = σ
T

where σ is the softmax function, zT (x) and zS (x) are the logits
from the teacher and student models, respectively.
The knowledge distillation loss is then computed as:


 
zT (x)
(4)
σ (zS (x)) ,
LKD = T 2 · KL σ
T
combined with the traditional hard target cross-entropy loss:
Lcombined = α · Lhard (qS , y) + β · LKD .

(5)

Once knowledge distillation is complete on each device,
the updated student models are aggregated to obtain a new
global model. This aggregation process may involve averaging the model parameters or using more sophisticated
techniques to combine the models effectively. Aggregation
can be performed in a decentralized manner, with devices
communicating directly with each other or through a central
server acting as an aggregator. After local updates, the models
are aggregated securely to update the global model. To ensure
privacy, the updates are encrypted before transmission and
decryption is performed during aggregation:
1
Enc(θi ),
N
N

θg =

(6)

i=1

θg ← θg + η · Dec θg ,

(7)

where Enc and Dec represent the encryption and decryption
functions, and  is the learning rate for updating the global
model.

7196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

In the SKDFL framework, secure aggregation of model
updates is crucial to maintain the privacy and security of the
data. We utilize Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC) to
perform this aggregation without revealing individual updates
to any of the participating nodes or to an external adversary. The security of this SMPC protocol relies on the
assumption that a sufficient number of nodes behave honestly
and do not collude. If a majority of the nodes are honest,
they can prevent any malicious node from learning about
individual updates or from influencing the aggregated result
unduly.
Assuming each node i has a model update θi , the goal is
to compute the sum of these Soft Labels securely. The process
involves the following steps:
1) Each node i splits its update thetai into N shares such
that the sum of these shares equals the update:
θi =

n


sij ,

sij ∈ Rd ,

(8)

where sij is the share of node i’s update given to node
j, and d is the dimensionality of the model parameters.
2) Each node i securely sends the share sij to node j.
3) Each node j aggregates the shares it receives from all
nodes:
n

sij .
(9)
Sj =
i=1

4) The nodes then combine their aggregates to compute the
overall update:
n

j=1

Sj =

n 
n


sij =

j=1 i=1

n


Input: Set of node models {Mi }N
i=1 , local datasets
{Di }N
.
i=1
Output: Optimized federated model parameters with
distilled knowledge
Initialize: Set a public dataset X pub .
1 Initial Phase: Generate a fixed finite field (i.e., a set of
integers from 0 to Q − 1 for a prime number Q) for all
computations to take place along with the initial global
model parameters W0 .
2 for r ← 1 to rmax do
3
for each Secure Aggregator n in N do
4
for each Consumer Edge Node i in I do
pub,c
5
Yr,i,n ← NodeUpdate(r);
6
7
8

j=1

θg =

Algorithm 1: SKDFL Pseudo-Algorithm

θi .

(10)

9

pub,c

pub,c
I
i=1 Yr,i,n ;
pub,c
pub,c
Yr+1 = N
n=1 Yr+1,n ;
pub
c ));
Yr+1 ← D(Decode(Yr+1
pub
Send Yr+1 to each Consumer Edge Node;

Yr+1,n = 1I

ClientUpdate (r): // Each Consumer Edge Node
(Student) executes this function;
11 for each Local client i in I in parallel: do
12
1. Perform knowledge distillation from the public
pub
pub
shared dataset: W ← train(W, Xr , Yr );
13
2. Local Training: Wr,i ← train(W, Xr,i , Yr,i );
pub
pub
14
3. Compute Soft Labels: Yr,i ← fWi (Xr );
pub,c
pub
15
4. Encode Soft Labels: Yr,i ← Encode(Yr,i );
pub,c
16
5. Encrypt Soft Labels: Split Yr,i into N shares;
pub,c
17
6. return Yr,i,n ;
10

i=1

This method ensures that the individual updates θi are
never revealed to other nodes or any external observer.
The use of SMPC allows the computation of the sum
of updates in a way that preserves the confidentiality of
the data. Algorithm 1 shows the main training process of
our SKDFL.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
We have implemented our proposed SKDFL, using PySyft,
a privacy-centric deep-learning library built on top of the
PyTorch framework. In our test environment, we considered
two datasets: the WSN-DS dataset and the UNSW-NB15
dataset. The WSN-DS dataset is used as the public dataset
shared between the organization and clients, while the UNSWNB15 dataset is treated as the local dataset. We divided the
UNSW-NB15 dataset among clients so that each client has
a subset containing samples of each attack type. To evaluate
SKDFL, we defined two scenarios: binary and multi-class
classification. In each scenario, we varied the number of
involved FL clients from 5 to 10 and adjusted the rounds
of training from 10 to 50 (see Table II). During each round,
clients distill knowledge using the shared WSN-DS dataset,
apply their subset of the local UNSW-NB15 data, and then
use the WSN-DS dataset to predict new labels. Figs. 2 and

TABLE II
C ONSIDERED S CENARIOS

3 show the considered student model (i.e., local model)
training loss for 5 and 10 clients, respectively, during 10
rounds, 25 rounds, and 50 rounds, respectively. We observe
that the student model loss, in both cases, decreases until it
reaches the minimum only after a few rounds of training (i.e.,
2 rounds). This demonstrates the communication efficiency of
the SKDFL framework, as it achieves significant loss reduction with minimal communication rounds. Such efficiency is
crucial in FL, where reducing the number of communication
rounds between clients and the central server helps minimize
bandwidth usage and latency, leading to more scalable and
practical FL implementations.
A. Performance Evaluation
The performance of our proposed framework is assessed
using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall (true positive
rate, TPR), F1-score, and the area under the receiver operating

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK

7197

Fig. 2.

Training loss of local model for 5 clients during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 3.

Training loss of local model for 10 clients during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4.

Confusion matrices of our SKDFL for (a) 10 training rounds; (b) 25 training rounds; and (c) 50 training rounds.

characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). The ROC curve visually
plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate
(FPR). A confusion matrix is also used, providing counts
of true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false
negatives.
Accuracy measures the model’s ability to classify data
correctly and is calculated as:
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(11)

Precision measures the proportion of correct positive classifications:
Precision =

TP
TP + FP

(12)

Recall (or TPR) indicates the proportion of actual positives
correctly identified:
TP
(13)
TP + FN
The F1-score, the harmonic mean of precision and recall,
balances both metrics:
2
F1 =
(14)
1
1
Precision + Recall
Recall = DR = TPR =

where True positives (TP) are correctly identified intrusions,
false negatives (FN) are missed intrusions, false positives (FP)
are incorrect intrusion classifications, and true negatives (TN)
are correctly classified benign instances. A high-performing
model will achieve strong accuracy, recall, and F1-score
while keeping false positives low. Fig. 4 shows the confusion

7198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 5.

ROC Curves of our SKDFL for (a) 10 training rounds; (b) 25 training rounds; and (c) 50 training rounds.

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF SKDFL AND R ECENT AI M ODELS
U SING THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET

matrices of our SKDFL framework across different training
rounds: (a) 10 training rounds, (b) 25 training rounds, and
(c) 50 training rounds. SKDFL achieves high accuracy and
an F1-score of 99%. Fig. 5 presents the ROC curves of our
SKDFL framework across different training rounds: (a) 10
rounds, (b) 25 rounds, and (c) 50 rounds. The curves illustrate the model’s performance in terms of the true positive
rate and the false positive rate for various classification
thresholds. A high-performance score of 99% was achieved
across all three training durations. Macro-average ROC curves
were also generated by calculating the TPR and FPR for
each class and averaging them, which is particularly useful
for balanced classes and assessing the classifier’s overall
performance. We consistently achieved a high performance
score of 99% for 10, 25, and 50 rounds. Figs. 6(a) and
6(b) show the total time taken to complete the federated
learning (FL) process for our SKDFL framework compared
to traditional FL (specifically FedAvg (without KD)) for both
binary and multi-class classification tasks. The results demonstrate significant reductions in communication costs, achieving
up to a 92.4% reduction compared to conventional FL
methods.
B. Comparative Analysis
In this section, we compare the performance of our
proposed SKDFL framework with several centralized AIbased schemes in detecting attacks in consumer networks. We

Fig. 6.
Total duration of SKDFL process training and FedAvg in the
(a) binary classification and (b) multi-class classification.

have compared our proposed framework (SKDFL) with recent
AI-based intrusion detection approaches from the literature,
including Fuzziness Semi-Supervised Learning [19], Random
Forest-Based IDS [20], IDS for Wireless Sensor Networks
(IDSWSN) [21], IDS using Outlier Gaussian Mixture [22],
and IDS for Cyber-Physical Systems (IDSCPS) [23]. Table III
presents the accuracy and F1-score for our SKDFL framework
compared to the centralized AI approaches on the UNSWNB15 Dataset. The results demonstrate that our framework

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: WHEN FL MEETS KD TO SECURE CONSUMER EDGE NETWORK

achieves the highest accuracy of 99% and the highest F1score of 99% with only 28.08 seconds of training time.
This shows that our proposed SKDFL framework not only
maintains the privacy of participants but also outperforms centralized methods in terms of detection accuracy and F1-score.
Overall, SKDFL is a promising framework, offering robust
protection against emerging attacks while preserving data
privacy.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposed a novel federated learning approach
for secure edge consumer network, called SKDFL. The
SKDFL framework uses a novel integration of federated
learning with knowledge distillation tailored to the needs
of edge computing in consumer networks. This approach
not only addresses privacy and communication efficiency
but also leverages advanced machine-learning techniques to
cope with the computational limitations of edge devices.
For future work, we intend to explore optimizing the tradeoffs between model accuracy and computational efficiency
to further enhance performance on resource-constrained edge
devices. Additionally, we intend to integrate Explainable AI
techniques, which could improve transparency and trust in the
model’s decisions, addressing concerns about the interpretability of local models at the edge.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Mumtaz, A. Alsohaily, Z. Pang, A. Rayes, K. F. Tsang, and
J. Rodriguez, “Massive Internet of Things for industrial applications:
Addressing wireless IIoT connectivity challenges and ecosystem fragmentation,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 28–33,
Mar. 2017.
[2] Y.-C. Lee, Y. Wei, H. Wang, H.-T. Au, Y. Liu, and K. F. Tsang, “DDoS
impact analysis index for edge internet of things system evaluation,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Product Compliance Eng. Asia (ISPCE-ASIA),
2022, pp. 1–5.
[3] H. R. Chi, C. K. Wu, N.-F. Huang, K.-F. Tsang, and A. Radwan, “A
survey of network automation for Industrial Internet-of-Things toward
industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2065–2077,
Feb. 2023.
[4] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, and B. Brik, “Federated deep reinforcement learning for efficient jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9334–9343, Jul. 2024.
[5] Z. A. E. Houda, D. Naboulsi, and G. Kaddoum, “A privacy-preserving
collaborative jamming attacks detection framework using federated
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164,
Apr. 2024.
[6] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
“Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
[7] H. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Ding, C. Yang, H. Zheng, and B. Qin, “Verifiable
federated learning with privacy-preserving data aggregation for consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 2696–2707, Feb. 2024.
[8] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, S. Islam, and
A. K. M. N. Islam, “Federated learning-based personalized recommendation systems: An overview on security and privacy challenges,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2618–2627, Feb. 2024.
[9] P. Chatterjee, D. Das, and D. B. Rawat, “Federated learning empowered
recommendation model for financial consumer services,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2508–2516, Feb. 2024.
[10] F. Jiang et al., “Deep learning based multi-channel intelligent attack
detection for data security,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 204–212, Apr.–Jun. 2020.

7199

[11] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2017, pp. 1–10.
[12] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, “Federated learning:
Challenges, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, May 2020.
[13] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richtárik, “Federated
optimization: Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence,”
2016, arXiv:1610.02527.
[14] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018.
[15] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, M. Lin, and J. Sun, “ShuffleNet: An extremely
efficient convolutional neural network for mobile devices,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 6848–6856.
[16] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” in Proc. NIPS Deep Learn. Represent. Learn. Workshop, 2015,
pp. 1–11.
[17] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “DistilBERT, a distilled
version of bert: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” in Proc. NeurIPS,
2019, pp. 1–5.
[18] X. Li, B. Chen, and W. Lu, “FEDDKD: Federated learning with
decentralized knowledge distillation,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, no. 15, pp.
18547–18563, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10489-022-04431-1
[19] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Evaluating hybrid quantumclassical deep learning for cybersecurity botnet DGA detection,”
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 197, pp. 223–229, Jan. 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877050921023590
[20] K. Singh, S. C. Guntuku, A. Thakur, and C. Hota, “Big data analytics
framework for peer-to-peer botnet detection using random forests,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 278, pp. 488–497, Sep. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025514003570
[21] C. D. McDermott and A. Petrovski, “Investigation of computational
intelligence techniques for intrusion detection in wireless sensor
networks,” Int. J. Comput. Netw. Commun., vol. 9, pp. 45–56, Jul. 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/10059/2526
[22] N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier gaussian mixture technique based on automated association features for simulating
and detecting Web application attacks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 245–256, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[23] N. Moustafa, E. Adi, B. Turnbull, and J. Hu, “A new threat intelligence
scheme for safeguarding industry 4.0 systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 32910–32924, 2018.

Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, in
2021, and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Technology of
Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2021. He is currently
an Assistant Professor with the National Institute
of Scientific Research (INRS), within the Energy,
Materials and Telecommunications Center (INRSEMT), where he leads the Resilient Cybersecurity
Reseach Laboratory. He is a member of the joint
INRS-UQO Research Unit on Cybersecurity and Digital Trust. Prior to joining
INRS, he served as a research scientist in various institutions, contributing
to significant research projects on the application of machine learning for
intrusion detection systems, and studying the explainability and robustness of
these systems. His current research interests include applied AI for intrusion
detection systems, security in distributed/federated machine learning, and
blockchain for network security.

7200

Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the
Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco,
in 2018, the first Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada,
in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer
engineering from the University of Technology of
Troyes, France, in 2022. She is currently a Professor
with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Canada. Her
research interests include the security of the Internet
of Things, applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detection systems, and
leveraging blockchain to enhance the security of next-generation networks
(5G and beyond/6G).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Engineer degree (Ranked First) in computer science,
and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Laghouat
University, Algeria, in 2010, 2013, and 2017, respectively. He is currently working as an Assistant
Professor with the Computer Science Department
of Computing and Informatics College, Sharjah
University, UAE. Before joining Sharjah University,
he worked as an Assistant Professor with the DRIVE
Department, Bourgogne University, France. He has
also worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
University of Troyes, CESI School, and Eurecom Research Institute, France.
He has been (still) working on resources management and security challenges
of 5G network slicing in the context of H2020 European projects, including
MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD, and 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests also
include 5G and beyond networks, explainable AI, and machine/deep learning
for wireless networks. He is an active member in many conferences’
organizing committees, such as Globecom, WCNC, ICC, GIIS, EAI, and EAI
CICom. He actively organized different special issues in prestigious journals
as well as conference workshops.