IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

12037

ZTID-IoV: Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection in IoV
Using Neurosymbolic AI Approach With
Federated Meta-Learning
Farhan Ullah , Gautam Srivastava , Senior Member, IEEE, Leonardo Mostarda , Member, IEEE,
and Umar Raza , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The rapid growth of the Internet of Vehicles
(IoVs) and smart consumer electronics has generated cybersecurity concerns that require an intelligent, adaptable, and
privacy-preserving Intrusion Detection System (IDS). This study
introduces ZTID-IoV, a novel neurosymbolic AI framework
that integrates federated learning, lightweight transformers, and
meta-learning to improve threat detection while preserving user
privacy in consumer IoVs. Our approach leverages neural components such as a transformer model for recognizing patterns
in network traffic, combined with symbolic AI techniques such
as self-organizing maps for interpretable client clustering and
rule-guided reasoning, to achieve robust cybersecurity in distributed environments. A lightweight transformer architecture
optimizes performance for resource-constrained edge devices, and
SOM-based clustering enhances model aggregation by grouping
devices with similar behavioral patterns. The proposed system employs Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) to enable
rapid adaptation to emerging threats across diverse consumer
devices, while federated learning ensures decentralized model
training without exposing sensitive user data. Experiments on
real-world IoT intrusion datasets demonstrate that our framework achieves higher detection accuracy compared to centralized
and pure neural approaches while maintaining low computational
overhead. Additionally, the neurosymbolic design provides interpretable threat explanations, crucial for consumer applications
where transparency is essential. The results highlight the potential of ZTID-IoV in enabling zero-trust security for IoV and
other connected consumer electronics. This work contributes to
the evolving landscape of AI-driven cybersecurity by addressing
critical challenges in privacy and adaptability, making ZTID-IoV
particularly suitable for next-generation IoV ecosystems.
Index Terms— Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence (AI), IoV
security, zero-trust IDS, federated learning, model-agnostic
meta-learning, self-organizing maps.
Received 30 June 2025; revised 11 August 2025 and 2 October 2025;
accepted 19 October 2025. Date of publication 23 October 2025;
date of current version 8 December 2025. (Corresponding author:
Gautam Srivastava.)
Farhan Ullah is with the Cybersecurity Center, Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd
University, Al Khobar 31952, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: fullah@pmu.edu.sa).
Gautam Srivastava is with the Department of Math and Computer Science,
Brandon University, Brandon, MB R7A 6A9, Canada, also with the Research
Center for Interneural Computing, China Medical University, Taichung 40402,
Taiwan, and also with the Centre for Research Impact and Outcome, Chitkara
Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Rajpura,
Punjab 140401, India (e-mail: srivastavag@brandonu.ca).
Leonardo Mostarda is with the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy (e-mail: leonardo.
mostarda@unipg.it).
Umar Raza is with the Faculty of Science and Engineering, Department
of Engineering, Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6BX Manchester,
U.K. (e-mail: u.raza@mmu.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3625081

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE rapid convergence of IoVs and smart consumer
electronics has resulted in the development of an interconnected transportation ecosystem that is revolutionizing
in-vehicle experiences, vehicle automation, and mobility services. These developments improve traffic management, road
safety, and user comfort, but also pose cybersecurity risks to
key infrastructure, user privacy, and vehicle operations [1].
Modern connected vehicles exchange sensitive data with roadside infrastructure, cloud platforms, and consumer electronics,
creating a complex attack surface. The real-time and privacy
requirements of consumer applications and transportation systems are supported by advanced security solutions, which are
designed to safeguard networks [2].
Centralized machine learning techniques are used in traditional intrusion detection to gather unstructured network traffic
from smart devices and vehicles. This centralized solution
exposes sensitive driver and vehicle operational data, which
raises privacy concerns. Moreover, the presence of a single
aggregation point introduces system vulnerabilities, where a
breach could lead to widespread failures. Federated learning
offers a potential alternative by reducing data centralization
and enabling remote model training. Its implementation in the
IoV may involve three major challenges. First, the current
implementations are insufficiently adaptable to the changing
attack vectors across a variety of consumer electronics and
automotive platforms. Second, they frequently fall short of the
transparent decision-making requirements necessary for vehicle safety certification. Finally, federated learning is vulnerable
to model poisoning and other adversarial attacks targeting
shared parameters [3], [4].
The cybersecurity of IoV-consumer ecosystems is facing
an increasing number of challenges as a result of their
unique characteristics. A variety of data patterns are generated by interdependent parts, such as entertainment systems,
personal smart gadgets, and vehicle control units. These are
challenging for conventional detection systems to effectively
process, as demonstrated by malicious applications that target
infotainment interfaces and spoofed attacks on tire pressure monitors [5]. Conventional detection systems struggle
to analyze data streams from connected devices such as
automotive ECUs, smartphones, and infotainment systems due
to their diversity. Automotive safety systems need extremely

© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

12038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

low latency responses, whereas consumer applications need
effective and easily understood security measures. Moreover,
attack methods against automotive and consumer networks are
always changing. This needs adaptive security systems that can
detect emerging threats without costly retraining or threatening user privacy via centralized data collection [6]. Current
solutions are inadequate in their ability to effectively address
the multifaceted security challenges that IoV-consumer ecosystems present. Although neural network-based methods are
highly effective at recognizing patterns, they frequently lack
transparency and provide limited insight into their decisionmaking processes. In contrast, rule-based systems are more
interpretable; however, they are unable to respond to new
threats or manage the complexity of multimodal data produced by contemporary interconnected devices. Furthermore,
many existing techniques treat vehicle and consumer device
security separately, ignoring valuable connections that result
from their combined behavior. A unified security architecture
that combines machine learning and symbolic reasoning while
protecting user privacy is needed to address these challenges.
This paper introduces ZTID-IoV, a zero-trust IDS framework
that is specifically designed for IoV and smart consumer
environments. This framework is founded on a novel neurosymbolic AI paradigm. This paper adds four significant
contributions to the domain:
1) We present ZTID-IoV, a neurosymbolic AI framework
that uses federated learning, lightweight transformers,
and meta-learning to improve threat detection and user
privacy. The framework combines transformers for processing multivariate data with SOM for interpretable
threat clustering of automotive systems and consumer
electronics.
2) This strategy supports user privacy while preserving
threat detection capabilities. MAML-based federated
meta-learning enables the rapid adaptation of vehicle
models to novel attacks. The method ensures data privacy and promptly identifies evolving risks from limited
instances, making it helpful against novel in-vehicle
system and consumer application attacks.
3) The proposed study adopts a zero-trust approach to
secure the federated learning process for intrusion detection across varied clients in the IoVs. To improve
robustness, cluster-aware aggregation is used, in which
clients are grouped according to behavioral similarities using SOM analysis. This system maintains rigid
trust boundaries, continuously checks client behavior,
mitigates poisoning risks, and reduces communication
overhead, following zero-trust principles. This strategy
is critical in IoV, as frequent vehicle-to-vehicle and
vehicle-to-infrastructure interactions create many attack
surfaces.
4) The proposed approach is rigorously assessed on four
standard datasets with differing client counts. This evaluation emphasizes the framework’s capacity to sustain
robustness, generalize, and scale effectively in a variety
of real-world scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Related
work is reviewed in Section II, the proposed scheme is

presented in Section III, the results and analysis are discussed
in Section IV, and the study is concluded in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Several research studies utilize SOM, MAML, and federated learning to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of
intrusion detection systems [1], [6], [7], [8]. The following
sections examine various approaches that utilize FL, as well
as the combined application of SOM and MAML, to enhance
cyberattack classification in distributed environments.
A. SOM/MAML Methods
The Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model
(DAGMM) has demonstrated superior performance in
comparison to conventional two-stage methods. However,
it is unable to maintain the input topology as a result of the
constraints imposed by its autoencoder design. Chen et al. [9]
proposed an SOM-assisted DAGMM to address this issue.
The model improves the accuracy of intrusion detection
by maintaining the topological structure and improving
the representation of features through SOM integration.
Almi’ani et al. [10] proposed an IDS that is based on a
clustered SOM. The system functions in two phases: initially,
a SOM is constructed, and subsequently, its neurons are
hierarchically clustered using k-means. This solution tackles
connection record sensitivity and processing time issues.
Lu et al. [8] introduced an IoT-based IDS that is specifically
designed for scenarios with restricted training samples. The
approach uses meta-learning and a two-layer MAML-based
training strategy to train a generalized model on malicious
traffic data from various attack types. Wang et al. [11]
utilized online meta-learning to design a network IDS that
includes anti-forgetting mechanisms and few-shot learning
capabilities. It learns efficiently with minimal input and
prevents major errors by saving and reapplying previous
models. Gong et al. [12] created a few-shot learning-based
IDS to overcome challenges in evaluating similar video
frames. The method uses a trained augmented MAML
framework on original video frames and segmented track area
masks. The goal of this work is to enhance training efficiency
by providing theoretical insight and practical solutions for
handling frame similarity during meta-learning. The strategy
improves typical supervised learning models in intrusion
detection and adaptation with few samples in real-world
railway video data simulations. Hu et al. [13] proposed a
privacy-preserving few-shot traffic detection approach based
on federated meta-learning. Clients can respond to local
threats while the server collects global data using dual-phase
updates. This method considers enhanced persistent threat
detection as a model generalization effort. This technique
detects advanced persistent threats with good accuracy, low
latency, and robust adaptability across domains.
B. FL-Based Methods
Mothukuri et al. [14] proposed a federated learning-based
solution for detecting anomalies using local device data.

ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH

Fig. 1.

12039

ZTID-IoV: Detecting Zero-Trust Intrusions in the Internet of Vehicles with a Neurosymbolic AI Approach and Federated Meta-Learning.

Gated recurrent units are incorporated into the model, and only
model parameters are sent to a central server. The ensemble
method improves privacy protection and detection over centralized methods. Huang et al. [15] proposed a federated-based
IDS for the IoT that prioritizes data privacy across edge
devices. This technique is adequate to low-resource settings because it uses a lightweight MobileNet-Tiny model
for feature extraction and turns network traffic into visuals.
Evaluation results indicate robust detection capabilities,
regardless of the presence of imbalanced data. Chen et al. [16]
proposed privacy score and evasion rate measures for evaluating federated learning-based intrusion detection, focusing
on adversarial impact and traffic similarity. The Kitsune
model can be circumvented by fraudulent communication,
as their research demonstrated. To address this, they devised
an optimization method that improves privacy and detection by
decreasing gradient similarity and boosting input variety. The
unequal distribution of IoT data limits edge-based intrusion
detection, which leads to a high rate of false alarms for
unknown attacks, as highlighted by Lu et al. [17]. To eliminate manual labeling, they suggested self-labeling using a
cosine similarity-based feature extractor and selective model
aggregation. The technique demonstrated high performance
on the CICIDS2017 dataset, even in the absence of human
labeling. Uddin et al. [18] identified significant problems
in cross-domain federated learning, including differences in
data properties, labeling, and security needs. Transfer learning, including fine-tuning global models with local domain
data, improves adaptability. Meta-learning techniques, such
as MAML, allow models to adjust quickly with minimal
data. Domain adaptation techniques and federated transfer
learning are also proposed for improved generalization while
preserving privacy across several domains. Yan et al. [19]
improved anomaly-based intrusion detection with federated
learning in response to growing cyber risks in IoT. Although
existing systems promote global performance, they frequently
overlook the adaptation of local models. Participant models
can be customized to local data using federated meta-learning.

The utilization of clustered gradient similarities to select
clients expedites convergence and enhances real-time intrusion
detection.
Our novel ZTID-IoV method detects IoT threats while
preserving data by utilizing lightweight transformers,
meta-learning, and federated learning. The method uses
interpretable device aggregation using SOMs, symbolic
reasoning, and transformer models to identify traffic patterns.
A lightweight transformer improves edge device efficiency,
while SOM-based clustering facilitates model aggregation.
ZTID-IoV responds swiftly to new threats via MAML, and
federated learning allows for secure, decentralized model
upgrades without releasing sensitive data.
III. ZTID-IoV: F EDERATED N EUROSYMBOLIC
Z ERO -T RUST I NTRUSION D ETECTION IN IoV
The proposed ZTID-IoV approach is shown in Figure 1.
This approach integrates meta-learning, federated learning, and
self-organizing maps to develop a cybersecurity solution that is
adaptive and maintains privacy in IoV environments. Effective
federated aggregation can be implemented by features such
as MAML, which enables rapid adaptation to new attack
patterns, a lightweight detection model based on transformers,
and SOM-based client clusterings.
A. Dataset Preparation
We evaluate the suggested method on four standard datasets.
The CICIOTDIAD20241 [20] is a comprehensive dataset of
IoT attacks developed by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. It comprises 33 attacks against 105 IoT devices to improve
the identification of devices and the detection of anomalies.
To address limitations of unreliable IDS datasets, the second
dataset, CICIDS2017,2 comprises realistic benign traffic and
several recent attacks [21]. It provides labeled PCAPs and
1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iot-diad-2024.html
2 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html

12040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE I
C LASS D ISTRIBUTION ACROSS A LL DATASETS

a fixed random seed random_state = 42. Importantly, each
experiment employed the same sampling method. The same
randomized selection method is consistently applied to either
complete or subsampled datasets. The data is partitioned
among client nodes to simulate federated environments following preprocessing, and an independent global test set is
maintained for the final evaluation. A training-to-testing split
of 80-20 ensures reliable model validation [24].
C. Lightweight Transformer Architecture
The intrusion detection model uses an improved transformer
architecture that is designed to analyze tabular data efficiently.
Equation 1 shows that the input features X ∈ Rn×din are first
translated into a lower-dimensional token space by a linear
projection [25].
Z0 = XWe + be

flow-based CSV files for accurate IDS evaluation by imitating
human behavior across protocols with the B-Profile system.
A variety of devices, sensors, communication protocols, and
edge configurations are utilized in the development of the third
dataset, CICIOV20243 [22]. This testbed is part of the IoT
and Industrial IoT ecosystem. The fourth dataset, UAVAttack4
[23], contains logs from simulated and real UAV flights under
benign and attack situations. It highlights the challenges of
GPS spoofing and interference, which are difficult to replicate
in a variety of research environments. Table I summarizes
network traffic distributions from four datasets. The “Dataset
& Class” field identifies each dataset as well as its traffic
categories. The terms “Samples” and “Percentage” indicate the
absolute traffic counts and the relative frequency of each class
in the dataset, respectively. The “Ratio” column compares
class ratios to other classes’ total samples in the dataset.
B. Data Preprocessing
Data quality and consistency are both improved during
the extensive preparation phase that the network traffic data
goes through. The integrity of the dataset is first ensured
by removing any columns with non-numeric values, missing
entries, or infinite values. The dimensionality is carefully
maintained by retaining only the relevant features that are
required for the learning task, as network traffic frequently
contains a high number of features. To normalize input
ranges, min-max normalization is used to transform all feature values to the [0,1] range, which improves convergence
during training. Label encoding is the process of converting
categorical attack types into numerical labels that may be
employed with machine learning models. Subsampling is
applied only when the dataset exceeds a predefined size limit
max_samples. Stratified random sampling is implemented to
ensure reproducibility and preserve class distributions, with
3 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iov-dataset-2024.html
4 https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/uav-attack-dataset

where We ∈ Rdin×dtoken , be ∈ Rdtoken
(1)

The compact embedding dimension is denoted by dtoken =
32 in this case. The h = 4 attention units and L = 2 layers
of multi-head self-attention are utilized by the transformer
encoder. Equations 2 and 3 determine how each layer l
computes.
MHSA(Zl ) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O
!
Qi KiT
Vi
headi = Softmax √
dk

(2)
(3)

Qi , Ki , Vi represent learnt query, key, and value projections
for head i, and dk = dtoken/ h. Equation 4 illustrates how
layer outputs include residual connections and layer normalization.
Zl+1 = LayerNorm(Zl + FFN(LayerNorm(Zl
+ MHSA(Zl ))))

(4)

The classification head implements linear projection subsequent to global average pooling, as illustrated in equation 5.
!!
n
1 X (i)
y = Softmax Linear
ZL
(5)
n
i=1

The efficient lightweight transformer features a lower token
size (dtoken = 32), fewer attention heads (h = 4), and a
shallow depth of only two layers (L = 2). These improvements lower computational and memory overhead, making the
model suitable for real-time intrusion detection in resourceconstrained environments. Despite its modest size, it may
capture complex feature interactions in tabular network traffic
data, enhancing the overall effectiveness of the proposed
technique.
D. Privacy-Preserving Federated Learning
The proposed method adopts a privacy-preserving federated
learning framework. A global model 2G is cooperatively
trained by K distributed clients without exchanging raw data.
Each client k keeps its local dataset Dk = (xi, yi )i = 1n k
and updates the local model using stochastic gradient descent,

ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH

as indicated in equation 6. Only model parameters are transferred to the central server, preserving data privacy throughout
the training process [26], [27].
(t+1)

2k

(t)

(t)

= 2k − η∇L(2k ; Bk )

(6)

A minibatch is indicated by Bk ⊂ Dk , and the learning rate
is η. Equation 7 shows that clients have the choice to use
MAML-based adaptation.
supp

2′k = 2G − α∇L(2G ; Dk

)

(7)

The support set Dk supp and the adaptation rate α are being
utilized. The servers use SOM to group clients into groups
according to their data distributions µk k = 1 K , where µk is the
mean feature vector of Dk . The SOM uses competitive learning
to create cluster allocations c(k) ∈ 1, . . . , C, as illustrated in
equation 8.
c(k) = arg min ∥µk − w j ∥

(8)

j

Cluster-aware aggregation computes weighted averages for
SOM weight vectors w j j = 1C using equation 9.


X
X
1
|S
|
c 
2k 
(9)
2G (r +1) =
c = 1C
K
|Sc |
k∈Sc

The clients in cluster c are denoted by Sc = k : c(k) = c.
Convergence is evaluated by the global validation loss, as illustrated in equation 10, and the federated rounds r ∈ 1, . . . , R
proceed until convergence.
|Lval(r ) − Lval(r −1) |
(r −1)

Lval

<ϵ

12041

query

tasks by gradient descent on query sets Dk , as shown in
equation 12 [28].
X
query
(12)
2 ← 2 − β∇2
LTk (2′k ; Dk )
Tk ∼ p(T )

It uses β as its meta-learning rate. The inner-loop adaptation
(Eq. 11) is conducted locally on each client during each
federated round, followed by query loss broadcast to the
server. During each federated round, the server does the metaupdate (Eq. 12) before the cluster-aware aggregation step in
Algorithm 1.
This ensures that the global initialization 2G is refined
each round while still benefiting from the clustering-based
aggregation. Equation 13 demonstrates that this formulation
allows for rapid adaptation to novel attack patterns Tnew with
few samples m.
m
)
2′new = 2 − α∇2 LTnew (2; Dnew

The meta-objective maintains global model generalization by reducing anticipated loss across tasks as shown in
equation 14.
query

min ETk ∼ p(T ) [LTk (2′k ; Dk
2

)]

This bi-level optimization rapidly customizes new client
environments and generalizes across varied intrusion patterns.
Thus, incorporating meta-learning into the federated setup
is critical for improving model adaptability, scalability, and
robustness in dynamic and heterogeneous intrusion detection
scenarios.
F. SOM-Based Client Clustering
The SOM originally proposed by Kohonen [29] uses an
unsupervised neural architecture to project high-dimensional
K
client data distributions µk k=1
⊂ Rd onto a two-dimensional
grid G = {1, . . . , M} × {1, . . . , N }. This allows for intelligent
client grouping [30]. According to equation 15 and Figure 2,
the Kohonen algorithm employs competitive learning to maintain a prototype vector wi j ∈ Rd for every grid node (i, j) ∈ G.
(i ∗ , j ∗ ) = arg min ∥µk − wi j ∥2
(i, j)∈G

E. Meta-Learning Integration
Client data is typically non-IID in federated learning environments, resulting in substantial variations in local model
performance. This approach integrates MAML into the federated learning architecture to promote generalization across
varied client tasks. Meta-learning learns a shared initialization
that can be readily adjusted to new client-specific tasks with
minimum data computation. This can be helpful in federated
environments where data heterogeneity and limited communication cycles prevent global convergence. The MAML
framework uses a two-stage optimization procedure to increase
the model’s flexibility [13]. The inner loop implements clientsupp
specific fine-tuning on support sets Dk for every client task
Tk ∼ p(T ), as illustrated in equation 11.
supp

(14)

(10)

The convergence threshold is denoted by the symbol ϵ. This
architecture preserves privacy while allowing for customized
detection through client-specific adaptation and effective
knowledge transfer via clustered aggregates. The current
architecture ensures privacy by utilizing federated learning,
in which clients never exchange raw data but only model
parameters.

2′k = 2 − α∇2 LTk (2; Dk

(13)

)

(11)

The inner loop learning rate is denoted by α in this scenario.
The meta-update optimizes the starting attributes across all

(15)

The SOM preserves topological relationships across neighborhood alterations, as shown in equation 16. Equation 17
shows the relationship between the Gaussian neighborhood
function h(·) and the decaying learning rate η(t).
wi j ← wi j + η(t) · h((i, j), (i , j ) ; t) · (µk − wi j)
!
|(i, j) − (i , j ) |2
, )
h((i, j), (i j ; t) = exp −
2σ 2 (t)

(16)
(17)

This leads to cluster assignments c(k) = (i , j ) , which
enable cluster-aware model aggregation, as demonstrated in
equation 18. Equation 19 demonstrates that the final global
model incorporates updates particular to each cluster.
1 X
2G (c) =
k ∈ Sc 2k , Sc = k | c(k) = c
(18)
|Sc |
X
|Sc | (c)
2G =
c∈C
2
(19)
K G

12042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 ZTID-IoV: Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection
for Internet of Vehicles
K , Attack classes C
Input: Client datasets: {Dk }k=1
Output: Global intrusion detection model 2G
Function ZTID-IoV({Dk }, C):
Initialization: Initialize global transformer model
2G with dtoken = 32, h = 4, L = 2;
Initialize SOM grid G = {1, . . . , M} × {1, . . . , N }
with random wi j ;
Data Preparation: for each client k do
Clean Dk : remove non-numeric, NaN, ±∞
values;
xi j −min(x j )
;
Normalize: x̂i j = max(x
j )−min(x j )
Encode labels: y ← LabelEncoder(C);
supp
query
Split Dk into support/query sets: Dk , Dk ;
for each federated round r = 1 to R do
Client Clustering: for each client k do
Compute mean feature vector µk = E[Dk ];
Find BMU:
(i ∗ , j ∗ ) = arg min(i, j)∈G ∥µk − wi j ∥2 ;
Update SOM: wi j ←
wi j + η(t)h((i, j), (i ∗ , j ∗ ); t)(µk − wi j );
Assign cluster: c(k) = (i ∗ , j ∗ );
Client Training: for each client k in parallel
do
if MAML enabled then
Inner-loop adaptation on client k;
Inner loop:
supp
2′k = 2G − α∇L(2G ; Dk );
Compute query loss:
query
Lk = L(2′k ; Dk );
else
Local SGD:
2k ← 2G − η∇L(2G ; Bk );
Send 2k to server;
Meta-Update (Outer P
Loop):
K
2G ← 2G − β∇2G k=1
Lk ;
Executed once per federated round, on the
server, before aggregation
Cluster-Aware Aggregation: for each cluster
c ∈ G do
P
(c)
2G ← |S1c | k∈Sc 2k ;
P
(c)
Update global model: 2G ← c |SKc | 2G ;
(r )

Convergence Check: if

(r −1)

|Lval −Lval
−1)
L(r
val

< ϵ then

Break;
Output: Return 2G for intrusion detection;

Fig. 2. Client clustering using Kohonen SOMs to group similar IoV devices.

√
O( K /C) compared to ordinary federated averaging [7].
Initializing the SOM grid dimensions M × N based on client
population K provides a default of 25 nodes.
To maintain
√
topology, we use the heuristic C = ⌊ 5K ⌋ to compute
the number of clusters on a near-square grid (M ≈ N ).
Initializing prototype vectors wi j through PCA sampling of
client data means {µk }, while neighborhood radii and learning
rates follow exponential decay schedules. This initialization
strategy guarantees the construction of robust clusters while
simultaneously preserving computational efficiency. Variations
in client participation during federated rounds are effectively
handled by the adaptive nature of our SOM implementation.
The SOM-based clustering approach operates by dynamically projecting only active clients into the SOM grid. Each
active client is assigned to the best-matching node based on
data distribution, without requiring full client participation.
Competitive learning updates pertinent nodes in the SOM
incrementally, preserving significant topological relationships.
This ensures a resilient and adaptable model updates even with
fluctuating client numbers by aggregating available clients
within each cluster.
IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS

The identified clusters are denoted as C. This technique
improves model accuracy on heterogeneous data by using
unique cluster-wise updates and accelerates convergence by

A. Performance Indicators
The ZTID-IoV architecture is evaluated across multiple
distributed clients to validate its effectiveness and robustness

ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH

Fig. 3.

Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with CICIoTDIAD2024 dataset using 15 clients.

Fig. 4.

Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with CICIoV2024 dataset using 7 clients.

Fig. 5.

Jamming: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 15 clients.

in real-world IoT and IoV environments. Equations 20 to 23
define the core classification outcomes: True Positives (TP),
False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False Negatives
(FN), which are used to compute key performance metrics
including precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy. Precision
is the proportion of intrusions that are correctly identified,
while recall is indicative of the capacity to identify actual
intrusions. The F1-score balances both, while accuracy reflects
total prediction accuracy.
TP
(T P + F P)
FP
Recall =
(F P + T N )
(2 ∗ T P)
F1 − scor e =
(2T P + F P + F N )
(T P + T N )
Accuracy =
(T P + T N + F P + F N )
Pr ecision =

(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)

B. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
Figure 3 displays the performance of the proposed method,
comparing epoch loss and accuracy for various clients. Some
clients outperform others, with client 10 achieving 96.26%
accuracy in Round 49 and client 14 reaching 95.51% in
Round 34, while client 6 lags with 82.64% accuracy in
Round 7, likely due to data or resource disparities. Figure 4
displays client training performance, including epoch-wise

12043

loss and accuracy. Initially, the models demonstrate low
accuracy (55–60%) and a high loss (0.9–1.0). clients 4 and
5 demonstrate the most rapid rate of improvement. Particularly
for clients 3 and 6, there is a substantial decrease in loss
(0.3–0.5) and an increase in accuracy (90–95%) between
Rounds 10–20. By the final stages, all clients achieve high
accuracy (99%) and low loss (0.06). Figure 5 displays the
training performance of 15 clients over 50 federated learning
rounds, with changing loss and accuracy. Most clients initially
have moderate accuracy (75-80%) and higher loss values
(0.5-0.6). Early rounds show increased accuracy, particularly
after Round 6, with several clients above 95% accuracy.
By the 20th round, almost all clients achieve convergence with
a loss of less than 0.01-0.02 and an accuracy of 99-100%.
The client-wise training performance over 50 rounds is presented in Figure 6. Clients initially exhibit greater loss values
(0.3–0.4) and moderate accuracy (80–90%). The majority of
clients achieve an accuracy rate of approximately 99% and
a loss rate of approximately 0.01–0.02 by the 15th round.
Figure 7 illustrates that clients experienced a rapid improvement in accuracy and loss, rising from ∼80–90% accuracy
with a high loss (∼0.4) to ≥99% accuracy and loss <0.01 by
Round 15. During the final rounds, all clients achieved 100%
accuracy with minimum loss, indicating strong convergence.
The performance parameters for the proposed method
employing the CICIoTDIAD2024 dataset for 10 clients are
shown in Table II. The model had high accuracy (95.59%),
with good precision, recall, and F1-scores for both benign

12044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 6.

Spoofing: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 10 clients.

Fig. 7.

Spoofing: Dynamic accuracy/loss curves with UAVAttack dataset using 12 clients.

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 10 C LIENTS U SING
CICIoTDIAD2024 DATASET

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 5 C LIENTS U SING CICIDS2017 DATASET

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 3 C LIENTS U SING CICIoV2024 DATASET

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 7 C LIENTS U SING CICIoV2024 DATASET

TABLE VII
TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 10 C LIENTS U SING
CICIDS2017 DATASET

and attack traffic. The MAML value is 0.1599, indicating
the model’s capacity to swiftly adapt to new tasks. Table III
displays data on the intrusion detection system’s performance
with 5 clients from the CICIDS2017 dataset. The model
scored 99.52% accuracy for most attack types, including
DDoS, PortScan, and WebAttacks. Infiltration attacks performed poorly, with a recall of 0.50. This MAML score of
0.0533 shows excellent adaptability to novel attack patterns.
Table IV provides a summary of the model’s performance
across 10 clients using the CICIDS2017 dataset. The overall
accuracy was 99.76%, and the MAML score of 0.0420 indicates great adaptation to changing data on clients. Figure V
shows the CICIoV2024 results for three clients, achieving
perfect spoofing detection and high scores for DoS and benign

P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS W ITH 15 C LIENTS U SING
CICIoV2024 DATASET

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS U SING UAVAttack
DATASET W ITH VARYING N UMBERS OF C LIENTS

traffic. A MAML score of 0.0635 indicates strong adaptability
with minimal training, and the overall accuracy is 98.92%.
The performance results of the CICIoV2024 dataset with
seven clients are presented in Table VI. The model scored

ULLAH et al.: ZTID-IoV: ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION IN IoV USING NEUROSYMBOLIC AI APPROACH

12045

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED P UBLISHED S TUDIES

TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE V ERSUS C ONVERGENCE T HRESHOLDS

TABLE XI
H YPERPARAMETER A BLATION S TUDY

Using more stringent thresholds (ϵ = 0.001) raises the computing cost but produces minimal improvements. The results
indicate that ϵ = 0.01 achieves an optimal balance between
model performance and training efficiency. The ablation
study is shown in Table XI. The lightweight configuration
(d_token=32, h=4, L=2) optimizes performance and efficiency, attaining 99.0% F1-score with the fastest convergence
(37–42 rounds). Larger values result in marginal benefits
(≤0.2% F1) but slower convergence, whereas smaller values
reduce accuracy (0.7–2.1%) despite requiring more rounds.
This validates our design selections for the proposed approach.
V. C ONCLUSION

99.09% accuracy, with excellent precision for benign and
spoofing classes and high overall scores. Table VII shows the
CICIoV2024 results for 15 clients, with precision, recall, and
F1-scores near 0.99 for DoS, GAS, RPM, Speed, and Steering
Wheel attacks. The system achieved 99.60% accuracy and
a MAML score of 0.0591, indicating strong adaptation and
generalization across diverse client data. Table VIII compares
the model’s performance on the UAVAttack dataset for 10, 12,
and 22 clients. The model achieved high precision, recall, and
F1-scores in both normal and anomalous classes. The accuracy
ranged from 99.59% to 99.86%. The MAML scores exhibit a
slight decrease (by 0.0213 and 0.0238) as the number of clients
increases, suggesting that the generalization is improved. This
means that the model adapts better to heterogeneous and dispersed data settings, handling variances over a wider number
of clients more efficiently. Table IX compares the proposed
ZTID-IoV technique with recent federated and meta-learningbased intrusion detection approaches. The comparison includes
several performance metrics, such as accuracy, precision,
recall, and F1-score. Some prior studies only reported partial
metrics, represented by “–” in the table. The suggested method
outperforms the baselines in all reported measures, with an
accuracy of 99.86%, precision and F1-score of 100%, and
recall of 99.00%. This demonstrates its exceptional performance in detecting attacks within the IoVs framework.
The convergence threshold ϵ = 0.01 was empirically
optimized using the UAVAttack dataset. Table X illustrates
that this value maintains training efficiency while achieving
optimal accuracy and F1-score (0.9986 and 0.99), respectively.

This study introduced the neurosymbolic AI framework
ZTID-IoV to address growing cybersecurity vulnerabilities
in smart consumer environments and IoVs. The application of SOM facilitates interpretable client clustering and
enhances model aggregation by grouping behaviorally similar devices. Experimental evaluations are conducted using
a diverse array of real-world intrusion datasets, including
CICIoTDIAD2024, CICIDS2017, CICIoV2024, and UAVAttack. The model typically achieved an accuracy of 95.59% to
99.86% for essential classes such as DDoS, DoS, Spoofing,
and WebAttacks, with F1-scores near 1.00. MAML scores
demonstrated exceptional adaptability across client distributions, in support of the model’s generalization to decentralized
environments. ZTID-IoV improves zero-trust security in nextgeneration IoV systems and offers a scalable and reliable
solution for AI-powered cybersecurity centers.
The proposed approach performs well; however, it may
have some research limitations. These limitations may include
performance degradation due to extreme data heterogeneity or
restricted computational resources at edge devices. Real-time
deployment, privacy-preserving aggregation, and adversarial
attack robustness may limit its applicability. Future research
could integrate multimodal data, use blockchain technology
to strengthen trust, and validate the framework in large-scale
real-world IoV scenarios to improve its applicability.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Rani et al., “Federated learning-based misbehavior detection for
the 5G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 4656–4664, May 2024.
[2] Q. Lai et al., “Improved transformer-based privacy-preserving architecture for intrusion detection in secure V2X communications,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1810–1820, Feb. 2024.
[3] T. Saranya, S. Sridevi, C. Deisy, T. D. Chung, and M. K. A. A. Khan,
“Performance analysis of machine learning algorithms in intrusion detection system: A review,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 171, pp. 1251–1260,
Jun. 2020.

12046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

[4] S. K. Datta, J. Haerri, C. Bonnet, and R. Ferreira Da Costa, “Vehicles as
connected resources: Opportunities and challenges for the future,” IEEE
Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 26–35, Jun. 2017.
[5] S. Safavat and D. B. Rawat, “Asynchronous federated learning for
intrusion detection in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), May 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[6] S. A. Abdel Hakeem and H. Kim, “Advancing intrusion detection in
V2X networks: A comprehensive survey on machine learning, federated
learning, and edge AI for V2X security,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 11137–11205, Aug. 2025.
[7] X. Qu et al., “A survey on the development of self-organizing maps for
unsupervised intrusion detection,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 808–829, Apr. 2021.
[8] C. Lu, X. Wang, A. Yang, Y. Liu, and Z. Dong, “A few-shotbased model-agnostic meta-learning for intrusion detection in security
of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24,
pp. 21309–21321, Dec. 2023.
[9] Y. Chen, N. Ashizawa, C. K. Yeo, N. Yanai, and S. Yean, “Multiscale self-organizing map assisted deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture
model for unsupervised intrusion detection,” Knowledge-Based Syst.,
vol. 224, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 107086.
[10] M. Almi’ani, A. A. Ghazleh, A. Al-Rahayfeh, and A. Razaque, “Intelligent intrusion detection system using clustered self organized map,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Softw. Defined Syst. (SDS), Apr. 2018, pp. 138–144.
[11] Z. Wang, Y. Lu, W. Wu, Y. Lu, and H. Wang, “A few-shot and
anti-forgetting network intrusion detection system based on online
meta learning,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2024,
pp. 3877–3882.
[12] X. Gong, X. Chen, Z. Zhong, and W. Chen, “Enhanced few-shot learning
for intrusion detection in railway video surveillance,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11301–11313, Aug. 2022.
[13] Y. Hu, J. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, and J. Cheng, “Privacy-preserving few-shot
traffic detection against advanced persistent threats via federated meta
learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560,
May 2024.
[14] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT
security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
Feb. 2022.
[15] K. Huang, R. Xian, M. Xian, H. Wang, and L. Ni, “A comprehensive intrusion detection method for the Internet of Vehicles based on
federated learning architecture,” Comput. Secur., vol. 147, Dec. 2024,
Art. no. 104067.
[16] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense
against gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 4561–4576, 2023.
[17] W. Lu et al., “Stones from other hills: Intrusion detection in statistical
heterogeneous IoT by self-labeled personalized federated learning,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 14348–14361, May 2025.

[18] M. P. Uddin, Y. Xiang, M. Hasan, J. Bai, Y. Zhao, and L. Gao, “A systematic literature review of robust federated learning: Issues, solutions,
and future research directions,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 10,
pp. 1–62, Oct. 2025.
[19] H. Yan, X. Lin, S. Li, H. Peng, and B. Zhang, “Global or local
adaptation? Client-sampled federated meta-learning for personalized
IoT intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
pp. 279–293, 2024.
[20] M. Rabbani et al., “Device identification and anomaly detection
in IoT environments,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10,
pp. 13625–13643, May 2025.
[21] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
ICISSp, pp. 108–116, 2018.
[22] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches
against DoS and spoofing attack in IoV can bus,” Internet Things,
vol. 26, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101209.
[23] J. Whelan, T. Sangarapillai, O. Minawi, A. Almehmadi, and
K. El-Khatib, “Novelty-based intrusion detection of sensor attacks on
unmanned aerial vehicles,” in Proc. 16th ACM Symp. QoS Secur.
Wireless Mobile Netw., Nov. 2020, pp. 23–28.
[24] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based network intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Secur., vol. 30, nos. 6–7,
pp. 353–375, Sep. 2011.
[25] S. Ullah et al., “TNN-IDS: Transformer neural network-based intrusion
detection system for MQTT-enabled IoT networks,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110072.
[26] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Federated learning
for data privacy preservation in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 50–56, May 2020.
[27] Z. Liu, J. Guo, W. Yang, J. Fan, K.-Y. Lam, and J. Zhao, “Privacypreserving aggregation in federated learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Big
Data, early access, Jul. 15, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TBDATA.2022.3190835.
[28] A. Yang et al., “Application of meta-learning in cyberspace security: A
survey,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 67–78, Feb. 2023.
[29] R. Wehrens and J. Kruisselbrink, “Flexible self-organizing maps in
Kohonen 3.0,” J. Stat. Softw., vol. 87, no. 7, pp. 1–18, 2018.
[30] S. Dey, Q. Ye, and S. Sampalli, “A machine learning based intrusion
detection scheme for data fusion in mobile clouds involving heterogeneous client networks,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 49, pp. 205–215, Sep. 2019.
[31] F. Ullah, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, M. J. F. Alenazi, C.-M. Chen, and
S. Kumari, “Federated edge intelligence for enhanced security in consumer intermittent healthcare devices using adversarial examples,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4574–4585, May 2025.
[32] K. Kumar and M. Khari, “Federated active meta-learning with
blockchain for zero-day attack detection in industrial IoT,” Peer-Peer
Netw. Appl., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1–47, Jul. 2025.
[33] S. He, C. Du, and M. S. Hossain, “6G-enabled consumer electronics
device intrusion detection with federated meta-learning and digital twins
in a meta-verse environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 3111–3119, Feb. 2024.