This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

ACHILLES: A Machine Learning Framework for
Explainable and Generalized Automotive
Intrusion Detection System
Nishat I. Mowla , Member, IEEE, Kyi Thar , Member, IEEE, Sarder Fakhrul Abedin , Senior Member, IEEE,
Aamir Mahmood , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhu Han , Fellow, IEEE, Mikael Gidlund , Fellow, IEEE,
Kabir Fahria, Konstantinos Giapantzis, Antonios Lalas, Joakim Rosell , and Mahshid Helali Moghadam

Abstract—This paper addresses the need for an explainable
and generalized intrusion detection system (IDS) for the invehicle networks (IVNs). While machine learning (ML)-based
IDS solutions show promising performance, there are still some
challenges, such as the lack of trustworthiness and scarcity of
attack representing data, hindering their adoption in the automotive cybersecurity. To address these issues, this paper proposes a
centralized ML model training and decentralized execution-based
framework, namely ACHILLES, that facilitates an explainable
and generalizable automotive IDS. Under ACHILLES, different
ML models can be trained centrally to enhance decentralized
and onboard intrusion detection performance with multiple
automotive datasets. In addition, we generate standard feature
formats to assess the ML model’s generalization efficacy, where
the quality of generalization and explainability is evaluated
with SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) by identifying the
importance of the feature. We also propose a meta-learning
scheme to construct suitable ML models trained by the proposed
standard feature formats. The proposed feature format exhibits
significant performance gain during ML model training and
Received 26 February 2023; revised 6 January 2024, 10 May 2024, 27 June
2025, and 28 October 2025; accepted 17 April 2026. This work was supported
in part by the VINNOVA Fordonsstrategisk Forskning och Innovation (FFI)
Project MAGIC-Meeting Automotive Liability Challenges through Forensics
Soundness under Grant 2024-03687, in part by the Vinnova INTelligent
sEcuRity SoluTIons for Connected vEhicles (INTERSTICE) Project under
Grant 2024-00661, in part by the EU H2020 SHOW-SHared automation
Operating models for Worldwide adoption under Grant 875530, and in part
by the European Union and Interreg Aurora project TRUST. The Associate
Editor for this article was R. Rajamani. (Corresponding author: Nishat
I. Mowla.)
Nishat I. Mowla, Sarder Fakhrul Abedin, and Kabir Fahria are with the
Department of Industrial Systems and the Department of Computer Science,
RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, 16440 Stockholm, Sweden (e-mail:
nishat.mowla@ri.se; sarder.fakhrul.abedin@ri.se; fahria.kabir@ri.se).
Kyi Thar, Aamir Mahmood, and Mikael Gidlund are with the Department of
Computer and Electrical Engineering (DET), Mid Sweden University, 85170
Sundsvall, Sweden (e-mail: kyi.thar@miun.se; aamir.mahmood@miun.se;
mikael.gidlund@miun.se).
Zhu Han is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004 USA (e-mail:
hanzhu22@gmail.com).
Konstantinos Giapantzis and Antonios Lalas are with the Centre
for Research and Technology—Hellas, Information Technologies Institute (CERTH/ITI), 57001 Thessaloniki, Greece (e-mail: kostasgiap@iti.gr;
lalas@iti.gr).
Joakim Rosell is with the School of Information Technology, Halmstad
University, 301 18 Halmstad, Sweden (e-mail: joakim.rosell@hh.se).
Mahshid Helali Moghadam is with the Cloud and Embedded Platform
Domian, Traton AB, 151 36 Södertälje, Sweden (e-mail: mahshid.helali.
moghadam@scania.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3688299

testing with four state-of-the-art controller area network (CAN)bus datasets containing real, advanced attacks. The experimental
results indicate that developing ML models using the generated
generalized features and the meta learning-based model building
process leads to enhanced performance. In particular, under
the dataset cross train-test setting, the proposed feature format
enhances the average accuracy by 40.1% for the baseline model,
32.4% for the meta-learned DNN, and 23.6% for the metalearned Random Forest, compared with the baseline feature
format.
Index Terms—In-vehicle networks (IVNs), automotive intrusion detection, generalizability, explainable AI (XAI).

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

S CONNECTED vehicles proliferate, safety and security
risks are rising sharply. With cyberattacks projected to
cost the sector $505 billion by 2024 and 84.5% of remote
attacks in 2021 [1], scalable IDS solutions are essential
to enhance cyber threat detection for connected vehicles.
Modern vehicles host many ECUs (e.g., PCM, CCM, BMS,
TCU [2]) operating as distributed systems; once an internal
network is breached, severe malfunctions and critical safety
issues can follow [3], [4]. The attacks may originate from
various entry points including sensors, infotainment systems,
telematics units, or direct physical interfaces. Recent work
reverse-engineering Kia’s IVI uncovered major software flaws
enabling CAN-bus manipulation across affected models [5].
The evolving threats and the advancement of attack methods highlight the need for adaptive intrusion detection and
response systems. Machine learning (ML) solutions show high
potential to address this challenge by enabling the IDS to learn
from the data representing the state of the vehicle, identify
patterns, and adapt to new threats. Thus, a trustworthy IDS
must address two aspects: (1) explainability of decisions and
(2) achieving generalizability for comprehensive and adaptive
detection. However, the data representing the state of the
vehicle under attack is scarce as not all potential attack
scenarios are known, and even among those known, practical
implementation on test vehicles is still limited, due to safety
concerns, cost and resource limitations, and ethical considerations. OEMs also limit disclosure of internal network designs
[6]. If the IDSs are trained using aggregated or vendor-agnostic
statistical features, as shown in [3] and [7], they can work

© 2026 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

and make inference without using proprietary layouts—which
can promote generalizability across brands/models and also
promote preserving the confidentiality of proprietary data.
Following this line, we use CAN telemetry statistics (timing,
frequency) instead of raw frames, reducing dependence on
OEM-specific content and lowering fleet deployment costs.
Guidance from ENISA, NHTSA [8], [9], ISO/SAE 21434
[10], and UNECE WP.29 [11] further supports interoperable,
lifecycle-oriented security. By leveraging high-level statistical CAN features (e.g., frequency and timing patterns of
message IDs), the proposed IDS is able to detect threats
without using proprietary CAN content, aligning with industry and regulatory trends toward unified, scalable security
measures.
A. Motivation and Challenges
Although many ML-based IDSs have been proposed,
deployment in automotive settings still requires investigation
[12], [13], [14]. Common models (RF, ANN, SVM) behave
as black-boxes [15], [16], making false-positive diagnosis and
breach forensics difficult—especially in multi-vendor contexts
[17], [18], [19], [20]. We address this with a generalized
framework that supports multiple vendors while improving
explainability and cross-dataset generalization [21]. Figure 1
contrasts traditional vs. generalized IDS and motivates two
core challenges:
• Challenge I: Scalability and Vendor Specificity. Standalone, vendor-tailored feature engineering hinders reuse
across datasets. Our approach standardizes inputs and
applies meta-learning to stay proprietary specifics of
individual vendors-agnostic while preserving accuracy.
• Challenge II: Transparency and Justifiability. Black-box
decisions erode trust. We integrate XAI (SHAP) to provide consistent, dataset-wide and per-window attributions,
enabling validation and debugging of IDS behaviour.
A key determinant of ML-based automotive IDS generalizability is deployment. A hybrid design, for example,
cloud-based centralized training with on-vehicle inference
mitigates the limits of cloud-only or vehicle-only IDS. In this
case, the ECUs on the CAN bus host the inference model,
while a cybersecurity service provider operates centralized
feature engineering and meta-learning–based model building.
This enables training with more data and compute, then distributing explainable updates to decentralized onboard models
across vendors for tailored yet generalized performance. The
model updates follow distributed learning practices [22] and
can be delivered periodically or fetched opportunistically by
the onboard IDS. There are also a number of automotive
standards proposing integration of cryptographic primitives
at the network layer to complement IDS functionality [3],
[23], [24], [25], [26]. For explainability, SHAP is modelagnostic, efficient, and provides a global view by aggregating
per-sample effects, aiding robust tuning and audit across
models [17] unlike local-only methods such as LIME [27]
or counterfactuals. We therefore pair SHAP with standardized
features and meta-learning to couple local fidelity with global
interpretability in a generalized IDS. ACHILLES uses centralized training with decentralized deployment of inference

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

model: a vendor-agnostic baseline runs fleet-wide on gateway
ECUs. The centrally trained model generalizes across vehicle
types and can be deployed directly, giving immediate coverage without per-model data collection. The new patterns
learned on any automotive brand are pushed to all vehicles.
The timing/frequency features avoid OEM payload disclosure,
enabling collaboration. Besides, SHAP on a shared feature
space provides consistent, auditable explanations across vehicles. Therefore, the proposed framework scales well when
vehicle-specific data are scarce.
B. Summary of Contributions
We develop an ML-based automotive IDS that unifies
explainability and generalizability for centrally supported,
multi-vendor fleets. Our key contributions are:
• First, we propose a centralized training + decentralized
execution IDS for vehicles. We use SHAP to provide
model- and feature-level explanations, enabling transparent diagnosis and tuning across vendors.
• Second, we propose a centralized meta-learning process
selects effective IDS configurations (DNN/RF and hyperparameters), which are then deployed to on-board units
for on-vehicle detection.
• We design standardized, vendor-agnostic CAN features
and show, via theory and experiments, that the resulting
IDS improves robustness and scalability across heterogeneous vehicles and attack types.
We organize our paper as follows. Section II discusses
the related works. In Section III, we describe our proposed
framework. In Section IV, we derive the evaluation results.
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
We group related studies into automotive IDS, explainable
AI (XAI) for IDS, and generalizability, and summarize remaining gaps for a deployable, generalizable, and explainable
automotive IDS. A. Automotive Intrusion Detection: CANbased IVNs lack native security, motivating IDS deployment
[3]. Prior work spans: 1) Frequency/Timing IDS: Packet-rate
and inter-arrival analysis detect anomalies efficiently [28], [29]
but struggle with evolving attacks and cross-vehicle data,
2)Deep Models: Fine-tuned DNNs on real/synthetic CAN
traces improve accuracy [30] yet act as black-boxes for stakeholders, and 3) Hybrid/Advanced: Signature+anomaly hybrids
[31] and attention CNN/LSTM models [32] boost detection,
but explanations remain limited. Two gaps persist: (i) explainability for safety/audit, and (ii) multi-vendor generalization.
Our framework targets both via XAI and standardized, vendoragnostic features across datasets. B. Explainable AI and IDS:
XAI has been applied to IDS for local/global insight using
SHAP/LIME and toolkits like AIX360 [33], [34], [35], [36].
Hybrid rule+ML systems and tree ensembles with SHAP
improve interpretability and efficiency [37], [38]. Recent work
underscores XAI’s value for automotive IDS [17], [39]. We
adopt SHAP to provide consistent local/global attributions
for RF/DNN while coupling them with generalized features
and meta-learning for model selection. Generalizability and
IDS: Early generate-and-test signature generalization [40] can

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

Algorithm 1 Meta Learning-Based Model Building Process
1: Input: Model searching and environment Meta-Data (i.e.,
J , f (.), Marc , M, µmin , µmax , νmin , νmax , W, W 0 .)
2: Output: Optimized trained model for IDS
3: /* Initialization Process */
4: Initialized learning models as meta-learning agents j ∈
J and those models with configurations Θ are randomly
assigned based on model_archi_DB.
5: /* Competition and Evolution Process */
6: for Each competition Round r = 1, . . . , R do
7:
Train j ∈ J in parallel or sequential based on the server
performance.
8:
Update the f ( j) values of j ∈ J in Meta Learner’s
Hierarchical Q-Tables.
9:
Generate random competition pairs jk ∈ J f irst ⊂
J,∀j ∈ J.
10:
for Each jk ∈ Jfirst do
11:
Determine j0k and j00k for each pair jk ∈ Jfirst based on
f (.).
12:
j00k ← Apply Alg. 2 Evolution( j0k , j00k )
13:
Update survivor list W ← j0k ∪ W and non-survivor
list W 0 ← j00k ∪ W 0 .
14:
Eliminating Survivors(|W|):
15:
while |W| , n do
16:
Generate elimination stage competition among pairs
in W randomly.
17:
Update W0 ← j00k ∪ W0.
18:
W ←Apply Alg. 2 Evolution (W, W 0 )
19:
Update W ← W\W0.
20:
end while
21:
end for
22: end for
23: /* Model Selection Process */
24: Choose the model j∗ = arg maxθ∈Θ f (θ, J ) which is basedon appropriate metrics (e.g., accuracy, precision).

miss novel attacks and scale poorly. Standardizing features
improves cross-dataset comparability and robustness (e.g.,
NetFlow formats) [21]; new datasets (IDSAI) further target
ML generalization [41]. Foundational work also highlights
the difficulty of generalization in neural networks [42]. Our
approach advances this line by enforcing vendor-agnostic
CAN features and centralized meta-learning, then deploying
selected models on-vehicle to improve cross-dataset performance with explainable reasoning.
III. P ROPOSED ACHILLES F RAMEWORK FOR
AUTOMOTIVE IDS
The proposed intrusion detection framework has three main
parts: a) data preprocessing, b) IDS model building, and
c) automotive IDS explanation and generalization approach.
A. Data Preprocessing
Most CAN bus messages arrive at fixed frequencies, and
attackers often inject anomalous frames that disrupt these
patterns [28], [29]. To detect such deviations, we adopt a

3

Algorithm 2 Evolution Process for Model Building
0
1: Input: ( j0k , j00
k ) or (W, W )
2: Output: Newly generated model for competition
3: Evolution(Input):
4: if rand(0,1) >  then
5:
/* Generating evolved model */
6:
j00k ← Exploit and construct the evolved model of j0k
with optimal θ∗ = arg maxθ∈Θ f (θ, W)
7: else
8:
/* Generating random model */
9:
j00k ← Explore randomly and construct learning model
with random θ based on model_archi_DB.
10: end if
11: Return j00
k
time- and frequency-based preprocessing strategy, as shown
in the Data Preprocessing block of Fig. 2. First, the raw
CAN logs are parsed by a microcontroller and then cleaning,
balancing, and scaling is conducted to produce aggregated
features. Using four public datasets (described in detail in
Section IV-A), we apply a sliding window approach [43] with
a window size of n = 10, which has been shown to be effective
in capturing timing and frequency trends. Each window of n
consecutive messages, shifted by one message at a time, yields
overlapping windows that preserve local context and increase
data volume. This uniform method is applied across all
datasets. Each window produces features in two categories. In
Table I, first, standard CAN fields include timestamps (t), data
bytes (D0–D7), and message IDs (ID_n). Second, we compute
a set of custom and generalized metrics such as inter-arrival
times (dt_n, dt_ID_n), frequency counts of the most/least
frequent message IDs (cmafid, cmifid) and payloads
(cmafpl, cmifpl), counts of unique IDs/payloads (uidc,
nuidc, uplcw, nuplc), and the mean inter-frame gap
(wmdt). These features are designed to highlight anomalies
caused by message injection or manipulation. Each window is
labeled as attack or normal based on the presence of malicious
messages, yielding a supervised learning dataset. Compared
to [43], our method incorporates new, tailored features with
higher importance to test model generalizability and explainability. By standardizing feature construction and focusing
on temporal-frequency signals, the framework supports robust
IDS model development and facilitates XAI techniques (e.g.,
SHAP) to trace model decisions to CAN-level indication for
malicious behavior.
B. IDS Model Building
The IDS Model Building block of the ACHILLES framework in Fig. 2 involves finding the appropriate ML model
configurations for a given set of the model architecture March .
Therefore, the proposed meta-learning approach searches for
the best configurations θ∗ for DNN and RF models. The model
building stage is comprised of two algorithms, model-building
(i.e., Alg. 1) and model evolution process (i.e., Alg. 2).
1) Model-Building Algorithm: In Alg. 1, the meta-learning
approach consists of three main steps: initialization, competition and evolution, and model selection. The meta-learning

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

Fig. 1. Comparison between the traditional and generalized approach for
automotive IDS development.

Fig. 2. Proposed ACHILLES framework with explainablility phases for IDS
construction and understanding IDS decisions for generalizability.

algorithm is set up and initialized during the initialization step
with default parameters (i.e., model’s type, model’s configuration, initialized model’s weights with the help of normal
distribution) from a given model architecture and configuration
database, model_archi_DB (lines 1 − 4, in Alg. 1). The
initialized learning models are considered as a set of metaagents J , and the performance of the agents is evaluated
with a fitness/reward function f (.). In the case of DNN, the
objective of Alg. 1 is to find the model-specific meta-data,
such as minimum (µmin ) and maximum (µmax ) number of
hidden layers, minimum (νmin ) and maximum (νmax ) number
of neurons in the hidden layers (line 1, in Alg. 1). During
the competition and evolution processes, the survivor/winner
and non-survivor/rejected model pairs are stored in the sets
W and W 0 , respectively. The competition process involves

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

running multiple iterations of the first and elimination stage
competitions and evolution, using different configurations for
each iteration (lines 5 − 22, in Alg. 1). Finally, in the model
selection step, the algorithm selects the model configuration that performed the best during the competition step
(lines 23−24, in Alg. 1). The number of competition rounds R
is finite, where at each round r, the competition and evolution
processes involve finding the optimized trained model and
configuration for the automotive IDS (line 6, in Alg. 1). Therefore, the meta-learning agents in J are trained in parallel,
where the performance of each j ∈ J is evaluated through
the fitness function f ( j) (line 7, in Alg. 1). The performance
value is then updated during each r and stored in the metalearners’ hierarchical Q-table (line 8, in Alg. 1). Through
random exploration of J , the random competition pairs jk
are generated and stored in a J f irst ⊂ J (line 9, in Alg. 1).
Based on model fitness value f (.), the survivor model j0k and
non-survivor model j00k are determined for each competition
pair jk ∈ J f irst (lines 10 − 11, in Alg. 1). Using j0k and j00k ,
the evolution process is applied through Alg. 2 within the
competition round r of model building (line 12, in Alg. 1).
2) Model Evolution Process: In Alg. 2, the exploration
and exploitation operations within the evolution process are
performed to generate either an evolved model or a random
one (lines 3 − 10, in Alg. 2). If the random value between
[0, 1] is greater than a probability threshold , the exploitation
operation generated evolved models in j00k with the best known
searching path based on the meta-learner’s hierarchical Qtable and constructs the evolved model of j0k with optimal
configuration θ∗ (lines 4 − 6, in Alg. 2). Otherwise, the model
evolution is done through random exploration operation where
the searching path is explored randomly to construct and
update the learning models j00k with random configuration θ
based on initially given model architecture (lines 7 − 9, in
Alg. 2). Once the model configurations are determined for
the model pairs in J f irst , the survivor and non-survivor lists,
W and W 0 are updated (line 13, in Alg. 1). The elimination
from the survivor list W is done to achieve a fixed number of
models (n) from |W| and their configurations (lines 14 − 20, in
Alg. 1). In the elimination stage, the non-survivor list W 0 is
updated by determining the eliminated winner j00k from pairs in
W based on f (.) (lines 16 − 17, in Alg. 1). At this point, using
W and W 0 , the evolution process is applied again through
Alg. 2 to find the model configurations and the final survival
list W (lines 17 − 18, in Alg. 1). With fixed W, the model
selection process results in a suitable configured model with
appropriate model performance evaluation metrics such as
model accuracy and precision (lines 23 − 24, in Alg. 1). A
detailed discussion of the evaluation metrics is provided later
in Section IV-B. The configured trained model from the IDS
model building phase is deployed at the vehicles’ OBU for onvehicle decision-making at the IDS Model Deployment phase
in Fig. 2.
C. Automotive IDS Explanation and Generalization
Approach
A typical IDS model development involves preprocessing
raw data that undergoes several steps, such as data cleaning,

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

data balancing, data scaling, feature engineering, and data
partitioning. The IDS model is often hard to explain and
is evaluated against standard evaluation metrics. In this proposal, as shown in Fig. 2, we add the Model and Dataset
Explanation block for IDS construction, which supports the
IDS model building by going through stages of pre-modeling
(i.e., dataset explanation), model building (i.e., model’s configuration explanation), and post-modeling (i.e., explanation
of relations between inputs, models and decisions). This
approach allows a more reliable evaluation of the ML models
that are otherwise blackbox systems. The model and dataset
explanation can be helpful for AI experts focusing on model
interpretability to achieve performance explanation and trust.
Also, data experts interested in model visualization and tuning
can better evaluate task and model performance. AI novices
(including traditional cybersecurity analysts using AI techniques) can benefit from algorithmic transparency, trust in the
detection systems, bias mitigation, and privacy awareness for
better task performance. In addition, the traditional ML models
generate specific predictions after receiving some features as
input. However, following the ML-based IDS model training,
the user can have questions such as why the model predicts
the input as attack or non-attack, when the model succeeds
in detecting attacks, and when it fails, when it can be
trusted, and how can an error be corrected. Therefore, the
model’s explainability significantly impacts ML applications
especially in safety-critical scenarios such as automotive systems. Besides debugging, directing feature engineering, data
collection, decision-making, and building trust, a model’s
explainability can also support creating a generalized model
that will fit well to multiple datasets from multiple vendors
by providing the contributions of the involved features. The
models can be explained using a variety of methods such
as LIME, SHAP, counterfactual explanation [35]. This paper
considers SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values as the
method can be essentially leveraged to compute the contribution of each feature to the prediction, which aids the process of
coming up with a set of generalized features. Moreover, SHAP
allows a simpler evaluation of Shapley values with fewer
coalition samples than the other explainable AI approaches.
In this work, the contribution of each attack prediction can
be measured using the input features by utilizing SHAP
values in the ML model explanation under the automotive
IDS framework. Some advantages of using SHAP values over
other SOTA techniques for automotive IDS include: 1) the
identification of additive CAN bus data feature importance
measures contributing to an attack prediction for vehicles,
2) guarantee of a unique attack detection outcome with a set of
relevant properties, 3) better compliance to the understanding
of cybersecurity and automotive expert intuitions, and 4) efficient computational complexity in terms of achieving fast
convergence and discriminating among prediction outcomes
for automotive IDS. In a typical linear model, the prediction
for a single data point x can be represented as
fˆ(x) = ξ0 + ξ1 x1 + . . . + ξ J x J , 1 ≤ j ≤ J,

(1)

where each x j is represented as feature value, ξ0 denotes the
initial weight, and ξ j denotes the weight corresponding to a

5

feature j. Using (1), the contribution Φ j of the jth feature on
the prediction fˆ(x) is calculated as [44],
Φ j ( fˆ) = ξ j x j − ξ j E(X j ),

(2)

where E(ξ j X j ) is the mean effect estimate for feature j. In (2),
the feature contribution, Φ j ( fˆ), is measured by subtracting the
average effect from the feature effect. By using (2), the sum
of all the feature contributions for one instance is defined as,
J
X
j=1

Φ j ( fˆ) =

J
X
(ξ j x j − E(ξ j X j ))
j=1

0
= @ξ0 +

J
X

1

0

ξ j x j A − @ξ0 +

j=1

= fˆ(x) − E( fˆ(X)).

J
X

1
E(ξ j X j )A

j=1

(3)

To capture the marginal contribution of a feature j in a
prediction outcome, we apply the Shapley value as [45],
X
|S|!(J − |S| − 1)!
Φ j (ν) =
J!
S⊆{1,··· ,J}\{ j}

(ν(S ∪ { j}) − ν(S)).

(4)

Here S is a subset of the features used in the model that
excludes the feature j in the prediction where x represents
the feature values of the instance to be explained. In other
words, the Shapley value of a feature indicates its contribution
to the prediction outcome that is weighted and summed over
all possible feature value combinations where J is the number
of features. Using (4), the feature contributions of a single
prediction outcome for any ML model can be defined via a
value function ν of feature set S. Therefore, ν x (S) denotes a
prediction for feature values that are marginalized over the
features that are not included in set S and calculated as,
Z
fˆ(x1 , . . . , x J )dQ x<S − EX ( fˆ(X)),
(5)
ν x (S) =
where Q is a set of features that does not include the feature
instance1 x ∈ S.
When these datasets2 are sent to the cloud, each dataset
goes through the preprocessing phases before being trained
by the machine learning detection models. Our proposal considers preprocessing datasets with standard feature formats, as
discussed in Section III-A, to facilitate dataset generalization.
To verify the generalization of the feature formats, we employ
the training with one vehicle dataset and validate with another.
As a result, a set of possible test combinations are generated
whose results are then compared. The generalization of the
test combination results is further evaluated with the abovedescribed XAI technique by extracting the associated feature
importance in each test case. It is worth noting that our
proposed framework is fundamentally designed to be modular
1 Equation (5) can be extended to perform the prediction, ν (S), for more
x
than one features that are not included in set S by applying multiple integration
operation.
2 Different publicly available CAN datasets are originally sourced from
various vehicle models. While they are typically anonymized or open-sourced
via research institutions (not directly by OEMs), these publicly available
datasets are from vehicles with heterogeneous specifications.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

and scalable, leveraging state-of-the-art ML technologies. It
can be seamlessly integrated into any ML-based automotive IDS that utilizes current leading-edge machine learning
models. Specifically, our framework employs a standardized
feature format based on CAN bus data, which is ubiquitous in
automotive systems. This standardization ensures that as new
ML models emerge, they can be easily incorporated by simply
adjusting the input features to fit this established format.
Furthermore, the meta-learning component of our framework
is designed to optimize hyperparameters dynamically, which
is essential for adapting to new ML models that might have
different requirements or capabilities. This approach allows
for continuous learning and adaptation without the need for
extensive manual reconfiguration. To assess and ensure the
generalizability and explainability of these new models within
our framework, we employ SHAP which provides a consistent
and robust method to evaluate the impact of features in ML
models. These properties of SHAP make it an invaluable
tool for maintaining transparency and understanding in IDS
applications as model technologies evolve while the modelagnostic nature of SHAP allows it to be applied consistently
across different types of machine learning models.

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF F EATURES

D. Complexity Analysis
Computing SHAP on large datasets and complex models
can be costly; we therefore summarise the dominant terms for
our IDS. For a DNN with H hidden layers and N neurons
per layer, the SHAP computation scales as O(H N M) for
M samples—linear in M but increasing with depth/width
[46], [47]. For a Random Forest with |S | features and T
trees, training is O(M |S | log |S |) and SHAP is O(M |S | T )
[48]. These complexities are practical on our target platforms
and align with prior scalability studies in high-dimensional
IDS settings [39]. In short, while cost grows with data size
and model capacity, the DNN/RF choices and SHAP-based
explanations remain tractable for automotive IDS and provide
transparent, defensible decisions.
IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Datasets
We evaluate on four public in-vehicle CAN datasets:
• Survival Analysis Dataset (SAD) [49]: Normal driving plus three real injection attacks (DoS/flooding,
fuzzing, malfunction) from Hyundai Sonata, Kia Soul,
and Chevrolet Spark. Attacks last 25–100 s with 5 s bursts.
Limitation: few, relatively simple attack types.
• Real ORNL Automotive Dynamometer Dataset (ORNL)
[50]: Physically verified CAN attacks (e.g., fuzzing, fabrication, masquerade) and two advanced non-fabrication
attacks. Logs captured on-road and on a chassis
dynamometer; vehicle identity (make/model/region) is
anonymized via metadata redaction.
• CAN intrusion detection dataset (CAN-IDS) [51]: Normal
traffic plus synthetic DoS, fuzzing, and impersonation
(masquerade) with labeled records (Timestamp, ID, DLC,
DATA[0–7]). Masquerade relies on spoofed remote-frame

behavior; utility may depend on IDS use of that protocol
aspect; injection timing details are coarse.
• Car Hacking: Attack & Defense Challenge 2020 Dataset
(CAR-HACK) [52]: Normal and four real attack types
(DoS/flooding, fuzzing, replay, spoofing) across preliminary/submission/final rounds (the last stationary for
safety). Rich captures with many instances per attack;
fields include Timestamp, Arbitration ID, DLC, Data,
Class, SubClass.
We chose SAD, ROAD, CAN-IDS, and CAR-HACK for
(i) attack diversity (fuzzing, replay, fabrication, masquerade,
etc.), (ii) realistic vs. simulated coverage (ROAD includes both
physically verified and simulated attacks), and (iii) community
adoption for benchmarking. Cross-dataset validation mitigates
overfitting to any single source, and our explainable metalearning aims to detect anomalies that generalize beyond
dataset-specific artifacts.
B. Performance Analysis of the Proposed Approach
The performance of the proposed framework was evaluated
on a machine with 128 GB RAM, an Intel Core i7-6850K CPU
@ 3.60 GHz (6 cores, 12 threads), and two NVIDIA TITAN
X GPUs (Pascal architecture, GP102, 12 GB VRAM each).
The test combinations generated for generalization evaluation
are tested with a baseline neural network [53], achieving
high performance in automotive IDS evaluation compared
with meta-learning-based DNN and meta-learning-based RF.
The choice of the selected models also allows evaluating
both the shallow learning and deep learning method. The
hyperparameters are tuned with the adopted meta-learning
approach. The meta-learning-based DNN model configuration

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

7

TABLE II
BASELINE M ODEL [53] G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS W ITHOUT M ETA -L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

TABLE III
P ROPOSED DNN M ODEL G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS W ITH M ETA -L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

among the constructed DNN configuration results in a model
having an input layer with 256 neurons, dense layers with 128
and 64 neurons, and a final output layer with two neurons. For
random forest-based automotive IDS, the meta-learning-based
model configuration consists of 100 estimators (i.e., RF). We
tested the models with a training size of 0.2, i.e., 20% of the
data, and a test size of 0.8, i.e., 80% of the data, as it is an
effective approach to testing the generalization of a model,
especially when a smaller amount of data is available [54].
We consider the original datasets, as ORNL, SAD, CAN-IDS,
CAR-HACK, respectively. ORNLproposed , SADproposed , CANIDSproposed ,and CAR-HACKproposed are the datasets containing
the new features discussed in Table I.
Table II presents the baseline model’s [53] performance
comparison without the proposed meta-learning model search
between the identical and cross-dataset train and test data
scenarios. The analysis includes metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, Cohen’s kappa, ROC AUC, and average
inference time per model (in seconds) measured over the
testing dataset. Specifically, we calculate on-average how long
each IDS model requires to process a given CAN frame or

batch of frames during inference. This metric provides insight
into each model’s computational efficiency under realistic
conditions, complementing the accuracy-related performance
metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, F1, Cohen’s kappa, and
ROC AUC). The performance is compared across different
training and testing datasets, including ORNL, SAD, CANIDS, and CAR-HACK. In the case of identical dataset (ORNL,
SAD, CAN-IDS, and CAR-HACK) scenarios, the average
performance in terms of accuracy is approximately 0.9679.
This performance indicates a high level of overall effectiveness
when the baseline model is trained and tested on the same
dataset. More specifically, the identical ORNL train and test
data scenario exhibits the highest accuracy of 0.9980. Like
ORNL, the CAR-HACK dataset in baseline model displayed
significant performance gain (i.e., the accuracy of 0.9942),
indicating robust learning from this dataset. The performance
with proposed ORNL and SAD dataset enhancements with the
generalized feature depicts improvements in accuracy (0.9800
and 0.9995), showcasing the effectiveness of the proposed
dataset enhancements. Similarly, considerable improvements
are visible in the proposed CAR-HACK scenario, where

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE IV
P ROPOSED RF M ODEL G ENERALIZATION A NALYSIS W ITH M ETA -L EARNING P ERFORMANCE

accuracy increased to 0.9987. There was a slight degradation in performance for proposed CAN-IDS dataset (0.8930)
compared to original CAN-IDS data (0.8069) in identical
train-test setup which could be caused by baseline feature
set becoming highly tuned. However, proposed CAN-IDS
showed better generalizability in cross train-test (0.7763 and
0.6540) compared to original CAR-HACK cross train-test
(0.6185 and 0.4785). In the case of efficiency and response
time, the model maintains a similar response time across both
original and proposed features in identical and cross traintest scenarios, with average times within the range of 4.31
to 4.43 seconds, indicating its efficiency in processing. The
baseline model consistently performed well in identical scenarios, indicating a strong fit to specific dataset characteristics,
the generalization challenges remain for the baseline method
without the meta-learning. In particular, the decreases in
performance in cross-dataset scenarios highlight the baseline
model’s difficulties in generalizing its learning to new, unseen
datasets.
Table III presents a comparative performance analysis of
the proposed DNN model with meta-learning, focusing on
proposed meta-learning and proposed generalizable feature
capabilities for model inference. The highest performance
across all metrics is observed when training and testing are
done on the same dataset and especially with proposed feature
formatted datasets. For instance, in the proposed ORNL and
SAD datasets, almost all metrics are close to 1 (99.97%
accuracy, 100% precision, 99.95% recall, etc.). This trend
is also seen in the proposed CAR-HACK dataset (99.97%)
but there is a similar drop in the proposed CAN-IDS dataset
(89.3%) compared to original CAN-IDS dataset (94.9%) in
the identical train-test scenario but the performance of the
proposed DNN model in both cases is better than the baseline
model in Table II. Moreover. proposed CAN-IDS performs
better (79.3% and 67.5%) than original CAN-IDS (69.2% and
48.2%) in the cross train-test scenario. The cross train-test
dataset performance degradation is also visible in the proposed
DNN model with original datasets and a performance gain
with proposed datasets. For example, when the origical ORNL

dataset is tested on the original SAD datset, the accuracy
drops to 49.1%, and similarly, the original SAD dataset tested
on original ORNL dataset shows a 52.2% accuracy. This
indicates a challenge in generalizing across different datasets,
even though the proposed models generally show significant
improvement. For example, comparing the original CAN-IDS
dataset tested on itself (94.9% accuracy) with the proposed
CAN-IDS dataset (89.3% accuracy), there’s a slight decrease
in performance. However, when tested on CAR-HACK, the
proposed dataset shows a substantial improvement (from
69.2% to 79.3% accuracy), indicating better generalization.
This indicates a 10.1% increase in accuracy, showcasing the
effectiveness of the proposed model in adapting to different
data types. High Cohen’s kappa and ROC AUC values in the
proposed datasets (especially in homogeneous training and
testing scenarios) indicate strong reliability and the ability
to distinguish between classes effectively. For instance, the
proposed CAR-HACK dataset has a Cohen’s kappa of 0.9995
and a ROC AUC of 0.9998 when tested on its own. In the
case of efficiency and response time, the model maintains
a reasonable response time similar to the baseline model
across scenarios, with average times ranging between 4.58 to
4.82 seconds, indicating its consistent efficiency in processing. Overall, Meta-learned DNNs outperform the baseline in
three of four averaged settings which are, identical train–test,
proposed-identical train–test, and cross train–test. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the meta-learning modelbuilding process and the proposed generalized feature for
cross-dataset generalization. These gains indicate a more
robust, adaptable DNN for complex datasets.
Table IV presents an extensive evaluation of the Proposed
RF model enhanced with meta-learning. In the case of identical train-test scenarios, the original ORNL data achieves
top-tier performance with an accuracy of 0.9982, precision of
0.9965, and recall at 1.0000. Similarly, significant performance
gains in terms of accuracy are observed in SAD, CANIDS, and CAR-HACK (i.e., 0.9990, 0.9782, and 0.9999).
The proposed datasets performance for ORNL and SAD are
also significantly high (i.e., 0.9997 and 1.0000) compared

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

9

Fig. 3. Performance evaluation of the deep neural network (DNN) and random forest (RF) model building stage of the proposed ACHILLES framework.

to the original datasets in the proposed RF model and
both original and proposed datasets in the baseline model.
There is a slight performance degradation in the CAN-IDS
dataset as observed before in both baseline and proposed
DNN model. The performance in the proposed CAR-HACK
(0.9997) remains relatively same with very slight change as
original CAR-HACK (0.9999). In the case of cross-dataset
scenarios, the model faces the expected challenge with a drop
in performance. For example, a drop in original ORNL-SAD
accuracy to 0.5048 and zero precision and recall, indicating
difficulty in applying learnings from ORNL to SAD. However,
the original SAD-ORNL case displays better adaptability with
an accuracy of 0.5807. In the case of CAN-IDS - CARHACK, the accuracy is moderate at 0.7093 and CAR-HACK CAN-IDS, there is a significant drop to 0.4467. However,
all these four results are higher compared to the base line
model (i.e., 0.4835, 0.5480, 0.6185, and 0.4785). In the
case of the proposed datasets on the proposed RF model,
there is also significant improvement in all four cases (i.e.,
0.7991, 0.7531, 0.5154, and 0.7023). The proposed SAD to
proposed ORNL (0.7991) and the proposed CAR-HACK to
proposed CAN-IDS (0.7023) in the proposed RF model is
also higher than the base line model corresponding cross
train-test scenario (i.e., 0.7471 and 0.6540, respectively). In
the case of efficiency and response time, the model not
only demonstrates high accuracy but also maintains a rapid
response time across scenarios, with times ranging from
0.03 to 0.04 seconds, indicating its efficiency in processing.
Overall, the proposed RF models with meta-learning show
performance gain on three out of four average dataset tests,
i.e., identical train-test dataset (average), proposed identical train-test dataset (average), and cross train-test dataset
(average), compared to the baseline model further confirming
the effectiveness of the meta-learning-based model-building

process and generalization capability of the proposed generalized features.
A comparative performance analysis among the baseline
model without meta-learning, the proposed DNN with metalearning, and the proposed RF models with meta-learning are
revealed through the detailed Table II, Table III and Table IV,
respectively. It is clear from all the three tables that, in general,
the highest performance gain (i.e., the numbers in bold) is
achieved with the proposed feature formatted datasets that
are trained and tested with the identical datasets. Moreover,
the average accuracy of proposed cross train-test datasets is
higher (0.7456 with Baseline, 0.7238 with DNN using metalearning, 0.6925 with RF using meta-learning) than the average
accuracy of original cross train-test datasets (0.5321 with
Baseline, 0.5468 with DNN using meta-learning, 0.5604 with
RF using meta-learning). Regarding cross-dataset generalization, the accuracy of the ORNL for train data and SAD for
test data scenario is 0.4835 in Table II. On the other hand,
in Table III, the proposed DNN model with meta-learning
with proposed ORNL train data and proposed SAD test data
demonstrates an accuracy of 0.708, which is a significant performance gain of 46.43% than the baseline method in Table II.
Such performance gain underscores the proposed DNN model
with meta-learning’s enhanced capability in cross-dataset generalization with proposed generalized feature enhancement
in the standard ORNL and SAD datasets, as depicted in
Table III. Furthermore, in Table III, the proposed DNN
model with meta-learning demonstrates an average accuracy
of approximately 0.9853 across identical dataset scenarios.
This represents an improvement of around 1.79% compared to
the baseline model without meta-learning’s average accuracy
of 0.9679 in Table II. This performance gain in Table III
demonstrates the DNN model with meta-learning’s enhanced
consistency and reliability across various metrics in identical

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

dataset conditions. Similar performance gain is also evident
in the case of the proposed RF model with meta-learning
in Table IV. In the case of identical dataset scenarios, the
average accuracy is approximately 0.9938, and relative to the
baseline model without meta-learning in Table II, this indicates
a 2.68% increase in accuracy. Besides, the RF model with
meta-learning in Table IV shows even greater consistency
and performance than the DNN model with meta-learning in
Table III in identical scenarios, suggesting significant adaptation to the dataset characteristics. However, regarding the
consistency across performance metrics, both the DNN and
RF models with meta-learning maintain a higher performance
level across various metrics (precision, recall, F1 score) in
identical dataset scenarios. This contrasts the baseline model
without meta-learning in Table II, which, while showing high
accuracy, does not consistently maintain high levels across
all metrics. The goal of the proposed dataset generalization is to prevent single-environment over-tuning observed in
the baseline on CAN-IDS. Therefore, feature standardization
(e.g., cmafid, nuidc) promotes cross-dataset generalization
but down-weights dataset-specific micro-patterns, which can
reduce accuracy. This effect is strongest on CAN-IDS: performance dropped in the original cross train–test yet improved
under the proposed cross train–test (Tables II–IV). The metalearning DNN and RF add another layer of generalization
that further suppresses micro-patterns, contributing to lower
accuracy on the proposed cross train–test (avg). The intended
objective is consistency rather than peak accuracy, and the
results are validated across scenarios. Both DNN and RF
models with meta-learning outperform the baseline on three
of four average settings: identical train–test (avg), proposedidentical train–test (avg), and the original cross train–test
(avg), confirming the value of meta-learning and the generalized feature for cross-dataset generalization. In the proposed
cross train–test (avg), their scores can be lower than the baseline, yet they consistently exceed the original cross train–test
averages (Tables II–IV), reflecting a substantial trade-off that
favors robustness across datasets over tuning to a single
split. Overall, meta-learning typically improves generalization,
with gains dependent on the proposed generalization feature,
and the dataset enhancement with preprocessing/augmentation
while enhancing model adaptability.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

indicates the efficacy of the proposed meta-learning-based
model-building process that optimizes the RF model for IDS
operations. Besides, the meta-learning with DNN computation
time outliers are relatively higher, which indicates the computing time spikes dramatically. It can be explained further
as the DNN model requires a substantially higher number of
neurons (i.e., mean 200 units in Fig. 3b) and has more hidden
layers (i.e., mean 6 hidden layers in Fig. 3c) compared to the
RF model’s depth (i.e., mean tree depth 25 in Fig. 3d) and
the number of trees (i.e., mean number of trees in RF 100
in Fig. 3e). However, despite the higher mean and median,
the DNN model’s mean does not appear to be excessively
influenced by the outliers since it aligns with the median. As
a result, the DNN model’s typical computing time is reliable
with occasional spikes rather than consistently high across all
model-building operations. The presence of these outliers in
the DNN model indicates that the model faces computational
scenarios that are innately more demanding, a common characteristic in DNN tasks that involve large datasets. Overall,
the RF model is more suitable for tasks that require fast and
consistent processing times, whereas the DNN model is more
suitable for complex tasks where higher computing times are
acceptable and expected. This comparative analysis assesses
the raw computing times and reflects on the nature of tasks
each model is likely tackling. It is also noteworthy to mention
that the optimized DNN model with meta-learning, despite
its slower performance, can deal with operations beyond the
optimized RF with meta-learning capabilities, justifying the
additional computation time requirements. The RF model’s
validation accuracy is stable, maintaining above 90% throughout the modeling process, indicating a reliable and consistent
model. On the other hand, the DNN model shows higher
variability in performance, with accuracy dipping below 85%
at times but also reaching peaks that surpass the RF model’s
accuracy. This suggests that the DNN model may be more
sensitive to the specificity of the validation data and could
potentially yield higher performance gains in certain scenarios.
Within ACHILLES, the RF model is fast, stable, and reliable
as it is well-suited to consistent, time-critical workloads. On
the other hand, the DNN is relatively slower with models
richer structure and can achieve higher accuracy in some
cases. Overall, the meta-learning of ACHILLES exploits these
complementary strengths to improve IDS performance.

C. Evaluation of DNN and RF Model Building Process With
Proposed Meta-Learning

D. Feature Analysis With SHAP and Generalizibility

Fig. 3 illustrates the impact of the proposed meta-learningbased model-building stages for the DNN and RF models
within the ACHILLES framework. In Fig. 3a, the RF model
demonstrates a narrow interquartile range (IQR), indicating
less variability in computation time. Specifically, the IQR
occupies about 16.67% of the RF model’s computing time
scale, suggesting a stable performance, which is crucial for
systems like IDS that require consistent processing times.
The DNN model, while having a similar proportion of IQR,
registers higher absolute values in computation time, with its
minimum exceeding the median of the RF model. This suggests that the RF performance under the proposed ACHILLES
framework is quite stable and predictable. Such consistency

The evaluation of generated feature formats with SHAP
for the RF and DNN models are shown in Fig. 4, and in
Fig. 6, respectively. We first analyzed the results shown in
Figs. 4a and 4c for RF, and Figs. 6a and 6c to understand
the global contribution of each SOTA SAD feature to classify
non-attack (N-Attack) or attack (Attack). As shown in Figs. 4c,
and Figs. 6c, dt_ID feature contributed the most to making
the final classification decision, where we observe that it is
possible to be attacked when the dt_ID values are high for
both RF and DNN models. Besides, it is likely an attack when
the ID values are small. Figs. 4b and 4d, and Figs. 6b and 6d
provide the realization of the global contribution of each
proposed SAD feature to classify non-attack (N-Attack) or

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

11

Fig. 4. Evaluation of generated feature formats with SHapley additive exPlanations (SHAP) for random forest model.

attack (Attack). As shown in Fig. 4d and Fig. 6d, the cmafid
feature contributed the most to making the final classification
decision, where we observe, it is possible to be attacked when
the cmafid along with the nuidc, cmafpl values are high.
As for the upic and uidc, it is possible to be attacked when
the upic and uidc values are small. Therefore, the users can
easily understand the decision of the Proposed SAD RF and
DNN models based on Figs. 4b and 4d, and Figs. 6b and 6d,
respectively. Then, we analyzed the results shown in Figs. 4e
and 4g, and Figs. 6e and 6g to illustrate the global contribution
of each SOTA ROAD feature to classify non-attack (N-Attack)
or attack (Attack). As shown in Fig. 4g, and Fig. 6g, we
can see that the d3 contributed the most to make the final
classification decision, where we can see that it is possible to
be attacked when the d3 along with the d1, d0 values are
high. Therefore, the decision of the SOTA ROAD RF, as well
as DNN models, can be easily explained based on Figs. 4e
and 4g, and Figs. 6e and 6g, respectively. Finally, we analyzed
the results shown in Figs. 4f and 4h, and Figs. 4f and 4h to
understand the global contribution of each Proposed ROAD
feature to classify non-attack non-attack (N-Attack) or attack
(Attack). As shown in Figs. 4h, we can see that the ID_2
contributed the most to make the final classification decision,
where we can see similar to Fig. 6h. Based on the Figs. 4f
and 6f, it is possible to be attacked when the cmafid along
with the nuidc, cmafpl values are high. As for the ID_2
and ID_3, ID_0 and dt_ID_1, it is possible to be attacked
when those values are small. Again, the relevant users can

easily understand the decision of the Proposed ROAD RF as
well as DNN models based on Figs. 4f and 4h, and Figs. 6f
and 6h. Fig 5 and 7 provide a comparison of SHAP value
analyses for Random Forest (RF) and Deep Neural Network
(DNN) models on CAN-IDS and CAR-HACK datasets. They
offer a clear view of how each feature influences the model’s
predictions for both non-attack and attack classifications.
Fig 5a shows the global SHAP values for the SOTA CANIDS RF model. The distribution for non-attack and attack
classifications suggests that certain features like d0 and d1
have SHAP values that significantly influence the model’s
predictions, extending past 0.25 for attacks. Fig 5c emphasizes
feature importance, with the highest SHAP value for nonattacks at approximately 0.383 for ID, indicating its significant
impact on the RF model. Fig 7a for the CAN-IDS DNN model
reveals that features such as d6 and d5 display SHAP values
with wide distributions for both non-attack and attack classes,
indicating a variable impact on the model’s predictions. Fig 7c
highlights feature importance for CAN-IDS DNN, with the
highest SHAP value for attacks at roughly 0.368 for nuic,
which shows its critical role in the DNN model. Fig 5e presents
a tightly clustered distribution of SHAP values for the SOTA
CAR-HACK RF, suggesting a more consistent feature impact
across predictions. Fig 5g shows a strong feature importance
for non-attacks, with d7 having a SHAP value of about 0.199,
making it highly influential in the RF model. Fig 7e for the
CAR-HACK DNN model indicates a wider spread of SHAP
values for features like d7 and d3, highlighting their variable

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 5. Evaluation of generated feature formats with SHapley additive exPlanations (SHAP) for random forest model.

Fig. 6. Evaluation of generated feature formats with SHapley additive exPlanations (SHAP) for DNN model.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

13

Fig. 7. Evaluation of generated feature formats with SHapley additive exPlanations (SHAP) for DNN model.

influence on the model’s predictions. Fig 7g displays the
highest SHAP value for non-attacks at approximately 0.282
for nuic, underlining its paramount importance in the DNN
model.
1) Generalizability Analysis: After recognizing the feature
characteristics utilized to make final classification decisions, we examine why the generalizability of the proposed
approaches outperforms SOTA SAD and SOTA ROAD in
terms of generalization performance. First, we analyze Figs. 4a
and 4e to understand the decisions made by SOTA SAD
RF and SOTA ROAD RF. As shown in the figure, common
features such as d0, d5, d7 have opposite contributions to
the model’s decision. Second, we analyze Figs. 6a and 6e to
understand the decisions made by SOTA SAD DNN and SOTA
ROAD DNN. As shown in the figure, common features such
as dt_ID, d3, 5 have opposite contributions to the model’s
decision. Third, we analyze Figs. 4b and 4f to understand the
decisions made by Proposed SAD RF and Proposed ROAD
RF. As shown in the figure, tailored features such as cmafid,
nuidc, uidc and dt_ID_0 have similar contributions to
the model’s decision. Fourth, we analyze Figs. 6b and 6f
to understand the decisions made by Proposed SAD RF and
Proposed ROAD RF. Tailored features such as nuidc and
uidc contribute similarly to the model’s decision. Therefore,
if the global SHAP values have similar contributions, we
observe that the models indicate significant performance gain
for cross-data. Meanwhile, in the case of Fig. 5 and Fig. 7, the
high importance of a few features, such as ID, indicates that

the RF model’s decision-making is significantly influenced
by these features, which may affect generalizability when
the importance of these features is specific to the CAN-IDS
training data as shown in Figs. 5a–5d. On the other hand, the
DNN model results in Figs. 7a–7d show a wider spread of
SHAP values, indicating a more complex interaction between
features and the model’s predictions. This signifies better
generalizability as the model does not rely on a small set of
features. The consistent importance of features like d7 across
non-attack and attack classes suggests the RF model may
generalize well when these features hold similar significance
in unseen CAR-HACK data, as shown in Figs. 5e–5h. In
the case of the DNN model with the CAR-HACK dataset in
Figs. 7e–7h, the model’s SHAP values are more spread out,
potentially reflecting a model that has learned a richer set of
patterns that could generalize well to new data. The dt_ID
feature holds particular importance as it appears prominently
across the SHAP value plots for both the RF and DNN models
on CAN-IDS and CAR-HACK datasets. In the SOTA CANIDS RF model in Fig. 5c, dt_ID demonstrates substantial
importance for non-attack classifications with a SHAP value
of 0.383, making it one of the top predictors. In the CANIDS DNN model (Fig. 7c), dt_ID also shows up as a key
feature for attacks, with a SHAP value of 0.160, indicating its
significant role in the DNN’s classification process. For the
proposed CAN-IDS DNN model (Fig. 7d), dt_ID continues
to be an important feature but is less dominant compared to
the SOTA model.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

V. D ISCUSSION
ACHILLES targets deployment via centralized training and
decentralized on-vehicle inference where the proposed metalearning runs off-board to select compact models and only
final weights are pushed to minimize ECU load. As shown
in Section IV-B, RF achieves ∼0.03–0.04,s per evaluation
window, enabling real-time use on gateway/security ECUs
(e.g., C400-class). The inference is windowed (n=10 frames)
and non-blocking on the gateway/security ECU. The measured
∼40 ms per-window inference does not introduce blocking
latency for actuators. Instead, it bounds the time to detect
and respond at the CAN bus level (e.g., filtering/rate-limiting
an offending ID or isolating a sender at the gateway) without delaying nominal ECU processing. Prior work supports
lightweight embedded IDS, which is, RF on real CAN attacks
[55] and compact DNNs with sub-ms latency [56]. Crossvehicle testing is the stress test: standardized timing/frequency
features enable a vendor-agnostic IDS to scale across mixed
fleets, share abstract statistics instead of proprietary payloads,
push central updates rapidly, and keep SHAP explanations
consistent. All heavy computation (meta-search/retraining)
remains off-board, preserving portability and transparency.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes an explainable and generalizable framework for an automotive IDS that leverages centralized machine
learning model training for decentralized model deployment.
We have generated augmented features and developed a metalearning algorithm for automotive IDS model building. The
proposed ACHILLES improves the generalizability of the
models that are tested with multiple feature sets using deep
neural networks and random forest models leveraging metalearning-based model building and evolution process. Also, the
proposed framework is evaluated using the XAI technique to
identify the most contributing feature sets. Our XAI evaluation
validate the explanation of the generalization and create trust
in the automotive IDS by demonstrating that the proposed
features lead to improved performance in a variety of tests and
evaluation metrics. The performance evaluation shows that,
under ACHILLES, the proposed generalized feature format
together with tuned model parameters jointly improves crossdataset automotive attack classification. While ACHILLES
demonstrates clear gains in cross-vehicle generalisation and
explainability, our feature set is CAN-centric. In future,
we will extend the feature-normalisation pipeline to mixedprotocol logs to extend the protocol scope for IVN. We
also plan to investigate adversarial poisoning and federated
defenses.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

N. Topman and A. Adnane, “Mobile applications for connected cars:
Security analysis and risk assessment,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–6.
S. Shirvani, Y. Baseri, and A. Ghorbani, “Evaluation framework for
electric vehicle security risk assessment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 33–56, Jan. 2024.
W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.

[4]

S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 11,
pp. 1–40, Feb. 2023.
[5] G. Costantino and I. Matteucci, “Reversing Kia motors head unit to
discover and exploit software vulnerabilities,” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking
Techn., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 33–49, May 2022.
[6] S. Checkoway et al., “Comprehensive experimental analyses of automotive attack surfaces,” in Proc. 20th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2011, p. 6.
[7] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2009.
[8] European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). (2019). Good
Practices for Security of Smart Car. [Online]. Available: https://
www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/smart-cars
[9] Cybersecurity Best Practices for the Safety of Modern Vehicles,
N. H. T. S. Administration, Washington, DC, USA, 2020.
[10] G. Macher, C. Schmittner, O. Veledar, and E. Brenner, “ISO/SAE DIS
21434 automotive cybersecurity standard-in a nutshell,” in Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security. SAFECOMP 2020 Workshops. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, Sep. 15, 2020, pp. 123–135.
[11] G. Costantino, M. De Vincenzi, and I. Matteucci, “A comparative
analysis of UNECE WP.29 R155 and ISO/SAE 21434,” in Proc. IEEE
Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy Workshops, Jun. 2022, pp. 340–347.
[12] M. Abdel-Basset, V. Chang, H. Hawash, R. K. Chakrabortty, and
M. Ryan, “Deep-IFS: Intrusion detection approach for industrial Internet
of Things traffic in fog environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7704–7715, Nov. 2021.
[13] S. Latif et al., “Intrusion detection framework for the Internet of Things
using a dense random neural network,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6435–6444, Sep. 2022.
[14] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “An intelligent two-layer intrusion
detection system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 683–692, Jan. 2023.
[15] A. K. Mishra and S. Paliwal, “Mitigating cyber threats through integration of feature selection and stacking ensemble learning: The LGBM
and random forest intrusion detection perspective,” Cluster Comput.,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 2339–2350, Aug. 2023.
[16] U. Haider, M. Waqas, M. Hanif, H. Alasmary, and S. M. Qaisar,
“Network load prediction and anomaly detection using ensemble learning in 5G cellular networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 197, pp. 141–150,
Jan. 2023.
[17] N. I. Mowla, J. Rosell, and A. Vahidi, “Dynamic voting based explainable intrusion detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 24th
Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol. (ICACT), Feb. 2022, pp. 406–411.
[18] R. Dwivedi et al., “Explainable AI (XAI): Core ideas, techniques, and
solutions,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–33, Sep. 2023.
[19] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, A. R. Sulthana, D. Ghosh, D. Dhingra, and
B. Sikdar, “A review of trustworthy and explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI),” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 78994–79015, 2023.
[20] O. Markouh, A. Adadi, and M. Berrada, “Blockchain and explainable
AI for trustworthy autonomous vehicles,” in Explainable Artificial
Intelligence for Intelligent Transportation Systems. Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press, 2023, pp. 241–254.
[21] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Evaluating standard feature
sets towards increased generalisability and explainability of ML-based
network intrusion detection,” Big Data Res., vol. 30, Nov. 2021, Art.
no. 100359.
[22] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and
B. A. Y. Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data,” in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Cadiz,
Spain: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research (PMLR), 2016,
pp. 1273–1282.
[23] AUTOSAR Consortium. (Nov. 2020). AUTOSAR Protection
of Communication (SecOC) Protocol Specification. [Online].
Available:
https://www.autosar.org/fileadmin/standards/R20-11/FO/
AUTOSARPRSSecOcProtocol.pdf
[24] H. Schweppe, “Security and privacy in automotive on-board networks,”
Ph.D. dissertation, École Doctorale Informatique, Télécommunication et
Électronique (EDITE), Télécom ParisTech, Palaiseau, France, 2012.
[25] N. Nowdehi, A. Lautenbach, and T. Olovsson, “In-vehicle CAN message
authentication: An evaluation based on industrial criteria,” in Proc. IEEE
86th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–7.
[26] M. J. Dworkin, “Recommendation for block cipher modes of operation:
The CMAC mode for authentication,” Nat. Inst. Standards Technol.
(NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. NIST Special Publication
(SP) 800-38B,, 2016.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
MOWLA et al.: ACHILLES: ML FRAMEWORK FOR EXPLAINABLE AND GENERALIZED AUTOMOTIVE IDS

[27] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust
you?’ Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[28] C. Young, H. Olufowobi, G. Bloom, and J. Zambreno, “Automotive
intrusion detection based on constant CAN message frequencies across
vehicle driving modes,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Automot. Cybersecurity, Mar. 2019, pp. 9–14.
[29] A. Taylor, N. Japkowicz, and S. Leblanc, “Frequency-based anomaly
detection for the automotive CAN bus,” in Proc. World Congr. Ind.
Control Syst. Secur. (WCICSS), Dec. 2015, pp. 45–49.
[30] D. Basavaraj and S. Tayeb, “Towards a lightweight intrusion detection
framework for in-vehicle networks,” J. Sensor Actuator Netw., vol. 11,
no. 1, p. 6, Jan. 2022.
[31] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[32] P. Cheng, M. Han, A. Li, and F. Zhang, “STC-IDS: Spatial–temporal correlation feature analyzing based intrusion detection system for intelligent
connected vehicles,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 9532–9561,
Aug. 2022.
[33] M. Wang, K. Zheng, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “An explainable machine
learning framework for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 73127–73141, 2020.
[34] S. Mane and D. Rao, “Explaining network intrusion detection system
using explainable AI framework,” 2021, arXiv:2103.07110.
[35] V. Arya et al., “AI explainability 360 toolkit,” in Proc. 3rd ACM India
Joint Int. Conf. Data Sci. Manage. Data, 2020, pp. 376–379.
[36] A. Heuillet, F. Couthouis, and N. Dı́az-Rodrı́guez, “Explainability in
deep reinforcement learning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 214, Feb. 2021,
Art. no. 106685.
[37] T. Dias, N. Oliveira, N. Sousa, I. Praça, and O. Sousa, “A
hybrid approach for an interpretable and explainable intrusion detection system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Design Appl., 2022,
pp. 1035–1045.
[38] T.-T.-H. Le, H. Kim, H. Kang, and H. Kim, “Classification and explanation for intrusion detection system based on ensemble trees and SHAP
method,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1154, Feb. 2022.
[39] H. Lundberg et al., “Experimental analysis of trustworthy in-vehicle
intrusion detection system using explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI),” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 102831–102841, 2022.
[40] J. C. Reynolds, J. Just, L. Clough, and R. Maglich, “On-line intrusion
detection and attack prevention using diversity, generate-and-test, and
generalization,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., Sep.
2003, pp. 1–8.
[41] G.-P. Fernando, A.-A.-H. Brayan, A. M. Florina, C.-B. Liliana, A.M. Héctor-Gabriel, and T.-S. Reinel, “Enhancing intrusion detection
in IoT communications through ML model generalization with a new
dataset (IDSAI),” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 70542–70559, 2023.
[42] D. H. Wolpert, “Constructing a generalizer superior to NETtalk via
a mathematical theory of generalization,” Neural Netw., vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 445–452, Jan. 1990.
[43] J. Rosell, C. Englund, A. Vahidi, N. Mowla, A. Magazinius, and E. Jarpe
et al., “A frequency-based data mining approach to enhance in-vehicle
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Fast Zero’ 21, Soc. Automotive
Eng. Japan, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[44] S. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 4768–4777.
[45] S. F. Abedin, A. K. Bairagi, M. S. Munir, N. H. Tran, and C. S. Hong,
“Fog load balancing for massive machine type communications: A game
and transport theoretic approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 4204–4218,
2019.
[46] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[47] R. Lee and I.-Y. Chen, “The time complexity analysis of neural network
model configurations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Math. Comput. Sci. Eng.
(MACISE), Jan. 2020, pp. 178–183.
[48] K. Hassine, A. Erbad, and R. Hamila, “Important complexity reduction
of random forest in multi-classification problem,” in Proc. 15th Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Jun. 2019, pp. 226–231.
[49] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh.
Commun., vol. 14, pp. 52–63, Oct. 2018.
[50] M. E. Verma et al., “A comprehensive guide to CAN IDS data &
introduction of the ROAD dataset,” 2020, arXiv:2012.14600.

15

[51] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc.
15th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2017, pp. 1–18.
[52] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[53] J. Zhang, F. Li, H. Zhang, R. Li, and Y. Li, “Intrusion detection
system using deep learning for in-vehicle security,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
vol. 95, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 101974. [Online]. Available: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870519304354
[54] D. Menotti et al., “Deep representations for iris, face, and fingerprint
spoofing detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 864–879, Apr. 2015.
[55] D. Caivano, C. Catalano, M. De Vincentiis, A. Lako, and A. Pagano,
“Marea: Multi-class random forest for automotive intrusion detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Product-Focused Softw. Process Improvement. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2023, pp. 23–34.
[56] S. Khandelwal, E. Wadhwa, and S. Shreejith, “Deep learning-based
embedded intrusion detection system for automotive CAN,” in Proc.
IEEE 33rd Int. Conf. Appl.-Specific Syst., Jul. 2022, pp. 88–92.

Nishat I. Mowla (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in computer science from Asian University
for Women, Chittagong, Bangladesh, in 2013, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and
engineering from Ewha Womans University, Seoul,
South Korea, in 2016 and 2020, respectively. She
is currently a Senior Researcher at the Industrial
Systems Department, RISE, Sweden. Her research
interests include intelligent network security and
cyber-physical systems. She awarded the best paper
award at the Qualcomm Paper Awards 2017, Seoul.

Kyi Thar (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s
degree in computer technology from the University
of Computer Studies, Yangon, Myanmar, in 2007,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineering from Kyung Hee University, South Korea,
in 2020. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering (DET), Mid Sweden University,
Sweden. His research interests include machine
learning, explainable AI, and edge computing.

Sarder Fakhrul Abedin (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in computer science from
Kristianstad University, Sweden, in 2013, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from Kyung
Hee University, South Korea, in 2020, supported by
the President Scholarship and the Brain Korea (BK)
21+ Program. He is currently a Researcher with
the Connected Intelligence Unit, RISE Research
Institutes of Sweden, Stockholm, Sweden, and previously served as a Senior Lecturer in computer
engineering at Mid Sweden University, Sweden. He
has led multiple AI/ML-driven research projects, holds several patents, and
has authored over 50 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests include
wireless networking, edge computing, network intelligence, and trustworthy
AI. He actively contributes to standardization efforts, including the IEEE
P1955 Standard for the 6G-Robo Working Group, and engages with the IEEE
Communications Society’s Technical Community on Intelligent Informatics
and Computer Communications. He also serves as a Section Board Member
for MDPI Sensors.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Aamir Mahmood (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from NUST,
Pakistan, in 2002, and the M.Sc. and D.Sc. degrees
in communications engineering from the School of
Electrical Engineering, Aalto University, Finland,
in 2008 and 2014, respectively. He worked as a
Research Intern with the Nokia Research Center,
Finland, in 2014, as a Visiting Researcher with Aalto
University, and as a Post-Doctoral Researcher with
Mid Sweden University, Sweden, from 2015 to 2018,
where he has been an Assistant Professor since 2019.
His research interests include radio resources and network management for
(critical) IoT networks.

Zhu Han (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University in 1997 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical and computer engineering from the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1999 and
2003, respectively. He is a John and Rebecca
Moores Professor with the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department and the Computer Science
Department, University of Houston, TX, USA. His
research interests include wireless resource allocation and management, wireless communications and
networking, game theory, big data analysis, security, and smart grid. He has
been an AAAS fellow since 2019, and an ACM distinguished Member since
2019. He received the NSF Career Award in 2010, the Fred W. Ellersick Prize
of the IEEE Communication Society in 2011, the EURASIP Best Paper Award
for the Journal on Advances in Signal Processing in 2015, the IEEE Leonard
G. Abraham Prize in the field of Communications Systems (best paper award
in IEEE JSAC) in 2016, and several best paper awards in IEEE conferences.
He also won the 2021 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award for outstanding early to
mid-career contributions to technologies that promise innovative applications.
He was an IEEE Communications Society Distinguished Lecturer from 2015
to 2018.

Mikael Gidlund (Fellow, IEEE) received the Licentiate of Engineering degree in radio communication
systems from the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from Mid Sweden University,
Sweden, in 2005. From 2008 to 2015, he was a
Senior Principal Scientist and a Global Research
Area Coordinator of wireless technologies with ABB
Corporate Research, Sweden. From 2007 to 2008, he
was a Project Manager and a Senior Specialist with
Nera Networks AS, Norway. From 2006 to 2007, he
was a Research Engineer and a Project Manager with Acreo AB, Hudiksvall,
Sweden. Since 2015, he has been a professor at Mid Sweden University.
His current research interests include wireless communication and networks,
wireless sensor networks, access protocols, and security.

Kabir Fahria received the B.S. degree in computer science from Asian University for Women,
Chittagong, Bangladesh, in 2013, and the M.S.
degree in human–computer interaction and social
media from Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, in
2016. They currently works as a Research Engineer at the Computer Science Department, RISE,
Sweden. Their research interest includes machine
intelligence and natural language processing.

Konstantinos Giapantzis received the M.Sc. degree
in applied informatics from the University of
Macedonia, Greece, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Digital
Systems, University of Piraeus, Athens, Greece. He
is a Research Associate at the Centre for Research
and Technology—Hellas, Information Technologies
Institute (CERTH/ITI). He is involved in developing
AI tools for cybersecurity.

Antonios Lalas received the Diploma and Ph.D.
degrees from the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki (AUTH), Thessaloniki, Greece, in
2006 and 2012, respectively. He is a PostDoctoral Researcher with the Centre for Research
and Technology—Hellas, Information Technologies
Institute (CERTH/ITI). His research interests include
V2X, AI, autonomous vehicles, counter-UAV, and
cybersecurity.

Joakim Rosell received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
from the Department of Physics, Lund University, Sweden, in 2005 and 2016, respectively. He
has worked as a Subject Matter Expert and a
Research Engineer for automotive LiDAR sensors
at Volvo GTT and is currently a Senior Researcher
at the Department of Mobility and Systems, RISE,
Sweden. His research interests include machine
learning, perception, sensors, and computer vision.

Mahshid Helali Moghadam received the B.Sc.
degree in software engineering and the M.Sc. degree
in AI from Iran University of Science and Technology (IUST), Tehran, Iran, in 2008 and 2011,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Mälardalen University, Sweden, in 2022,
where her research focused on intelligence-driven
software performance assurance. She is currently a
Senior Data Scientist and a Researcher at Scania
Research and Development (TRATON), Sweden.
Previously, she was a Researcher and the Project
Lead at RISE Research Institutes of Sweden. Her research interests include
machine learning testing, ML-driven software testing, automotive cybersecurity, and anomaly detection.