IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

681

Adaptive NetFlow IIoT Intrusion Detection With
Deep Transfer Learning, Genetic Optimization, and
Ensemble Methods for Network Management
Jing Li , Mohd Shahizan Othman , Xugang Ying, Dina S. M. Hassan , Hewan Chen, and Lizawati Mi Yusuf
Abstract—The growing demands of Industry 5.0 necessitate resilient Internet of Things (IoT) networks, which are
increasingly susceptible to sophisticated cyber threats. While
advancements in intrusion detection systems (IDS) have improved
attack detection, addressing the complexity of multi-class attack
scenarios and managing minority threats remains challenging.
This study proposes NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, an adaptive IoT IDS
for smart network management using NetFlow and IIoT data,
driven by deep transfer learning and enhanced with genetic
algorithm (GA) optimization. Our framework leverages pretrained CNN models to convert data into images, enabling
effective classification. GA optimizes hyperparameters to improve
model flexibility and performance, while a soft voting ensemble
ensures robust aggregation of predictions. The proposed IDS
achieves 100% classification accuracy among 5, 10, and 19
distinct attack classes of three IoT datasets, including two
NetFlow datasets (NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2) and one
industrial-based dataset (X-IIoTID), detecting threats such as
DDoS, ransomware, and theft in common IoT cyberattacks, as
well as MQTT subscription and crypto-ransomware attacks in
industrial IoT scenarios. Additional experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, which exceeds the classification performance results of three baseline models, including
LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN, by more than 37.2%, 0.25%,
and 1.25%, respectively, in the maximum among the three
datasets. Finally, experimental results demonstrate that NFIIoTDTL-IDS outperforms recent state-of-the-art solutions in terms of
multiclassification accuracy. This contribution advances adaptive
management frameworks for IoT security, offering scalable and
high-performance solutions for intrusion detection in modern
network management.
Received 18 October 2024; revised 8 June 2025 and 29 August 2025;
accepted 30 September 2025. Date of publication 6 October 2025; date
of current version 29 December 2025. This work was supported by the
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers through Princess
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Project
PNURSP2025R751. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was Y. Miao. (Corresponding author: Dina
S. M. Hassan.)
Jing Li and Mohd Shahizan Othman are with the Faculty of Computing,
University of Technology Malaysia, Johor Bahru 81310, Malaysia (e-mail:
lijing@gruaduate.utm.my; shahizan@utm.my).
Xugang Ying is with the Social Security System Section in Zhejiang
Provincial Human Resources and Social Security Information Center,
Provincial Human Resources and Social Security Information Center,
Hangzhou 310007, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: yxg@zjhrss.gov.cn).
Dina S. M. Hassan is with the Department of Information Technology
and the College of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah
bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
dshassan@pnu.edu.sa).
Hewan Chen is with the College of Information Engineering, China Jiliang
University, Hangzhou 310018, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: chw@cjlu.edu.cn).
Lizawati Mi Yusuf is with the School of Computing, University
of Technology Malaysia, Johor Bahru 81310, Malaysia (e-mail:
lizawati@utm.my).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3617765

Index Terms—IoT, NetFlow, IoT security, intrusion detection
system, deep transfer learning, CNN, genetic algorithm, ensemble
learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NDUSTRY 5.0, emphasizes the cooperation of humans
and machines in industrial processes, aiming to produce more customized, adaptable, and sustainable production
by fusing the capabilities of human labor with automated
systems [1]. This paradigm emphasizes human-centric innovation, resilience, and sustainability, extending beyond the
efficiency-driven goals of Industry 4.0 [2]. The Internet of
Things (IoT) forms the backbone of Industry 5.0, enabling
seamless data exchange among physical systems in industrial
environments. However, this extensive connectivity introduces
increasing security risks, including ransomware, malware,
and denial-of-service attacks, often because of weak device
configurations and insufficient encryption in common IoT
systems. To mitigate these threats, robust security mechanisms
are critical, particularly intrusion detection systems (IDS),
which can monitor network activity in real time to detect
and respond to anomalies [3]. IDS play a vital role in
preserving the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
IoT systems by preventing unauthorized access and ensuring
operational continuity. Despite advancement in using machine
learning-based IDS for IoT security, two major challenges
persist. First, the evolving and diverse nature of cyberattacks
makes it difficult to detect and classify unknown threats using
existing datasets [4]. Second, the heterogeneity of IoT data,
spanning varied features and sources, complicates the construction of generalized models [5]. These challenges highlight
the need for adaptive, intelligent detection systems capable
of evolving alongside emerging threats and dynamic data
environments.
A promising method for tackling this challenge is the
application of deep transfer learning, which leverages pretrained models to adapt quickly to new tasks with limited
labeled data [6]. This approach helps address the scarcity of
annotated IoT security data while maintaining high detection
performance [7]. Unlike conventional machine learning methods, transfer learning leverages more effective classification
performance of pre-trained models. By applying this capability
to IoT security, deep learning-based transfer learning enables
knowledge transfer from existing datasets to new or evolving
environments, improving the detection of unknown attacks [6].
This approach remains effective even when the source and

I

c 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.

For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

target data differ significantly, making it suitable for the
heterogeneous and dynamic nature of IoT systems. As a result,
transfer learning enhances the adaptability and robustness of
intrusion detection in complex IoT settings.
Addressing the second challenge of building generalized
IoT security models requires the use of datasets that accurately represent the diversity of real-world environments. This
includes capturing a wide range of traffic patterns and up-todate attack scenarios, such as common IoT threats like DDoS,
ransomware, and data theft, that can cause significant disruption to IoT infrastructure [8]. Through incorporating these
evolving threats, researchers can train more robust and comprehensive models capable of detecting varied attack types. To
be specific, the unified features derived from NetFlow data can
enhance generalization, as NetFlow captures rich, flow-level
information across protocols and devices [9]. Furthermore,
employing industrial IoT-based datasets can help to build a
model that can be scaled into a real-world industrial IoT
environment, which will serve as the foundation for industry
5.0 [10]. Thus, leveraging recent, industrial-scale datasets
with consistent NetFlow-based features helps overcome the
heterogeneity of IoT systems and supports the development of
more effective security solutions.
Thus, this article introduces an effective and resilient IDS
framework tailored for NetFlow-based IIoT environments,
termed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, which is grounded in deep transfer
learning methodologies. Six pre-trained convolutional neural
network (CNN) architectures, including Xception, MobileNet,
MobileNetV2, Inception, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0,
are utilized by the framework. The decision to use of the ideal
hyperparameters has a significant impact on how well these
pre-trained DL architectures work. Using a genetic algorithm
(GA), the selected architectures are optimized and trained
adaptively. The soft-voting ensemble technique is used to identify and combine the three most effective models after training
and validation. The proposed framework’s efficacy is then
evaluated using two recent NetFlow-based datasets, NF-TONIoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2, as well as one industrial-based IoT
security dataset. The study makes significant contributions in
three main areas:
Data preprocessing and transformation: The proposed work
applies a thorough preprocessing pipeline to NetFlow IoT
and IIoT datasets, including NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2,
and X-IIoTID datasets. The pipeline includes preprocessing of missing values, duplicates, and irrelevant features
and balancing by incorporating random under-sampling and
oversampling techniques to address realistic and skewed
distributions and conversion of original data into image representations to support subsequent deep learning.
Robust and adaptive NFIIoT-DTL-IDS Framework: A
novel deep transfer learning-based intrusion detection system,
NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, is proposed to effectively detect a wide
range of cyberattacks in IoT and IIoT environments. The
framework leverages six advanced pre-trained CNN architectures, each optimized using Genetic Algorithm (GA) for
hyperparameters tuning. A lightweight soft-voting ensemble
fuses the predictions of the top three models to enhance
stability, accuracy, and generalization.

Extensive comparative performance evaluation: The
proposed framework is evaluated on three IoT/IIoT datasets
under multiclassification settings. Extensive comparisons are
conducted with deep learning baselines including LSTM,
Transformer, and 3D CNN architectures in this study.
Furthermore, the framework’s performance is benchmarked
against several state-of-the-art approaches by recent literatures.
Results consistently show superior performance of the
proposed CNN-based ensemble in terms of classification
accuracy among the attack classes, confirming its effectiveness
across diverse real-world IoT environments.
The remainder of this work follows: Section II discusses
related work and existing challenges in IDS for IoT. Section III
presents the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, detailing each component of the methodology. Section IV shows
the experimental environment and performance assessment.
Section V provides results and discussion. Finally, Section VI
concludes the study, summarizing its contributions and potential for future research.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
In artificial intelligence, deep transfer learning is an effective
strategy that uses massive data sets with pre-trained models to
improve target task performance with less labelled data [7].
Since most DL models require the arrangement of a huge
quantity of labelled data, which is unachievable in many ML
situations, in the domain of IoT intrusion detection, deep transfer learning demonstrates benefits over conventional machine
learning and deep learning approaches. This section briefly
covers the state-of-the-art machine learning, deep learning,
transfer learning and approaches for IDS applications in IoT
security.
Machine learning (ML) methods have shown promise in
IoT IDS, but often require extensive manual feature engineering, particularly in dynamic environments. For example,
correlation-based feature selection (CFS) has been used to
reduce N-BaIoT’s 115 features [11], and a wrapper-based
method with bijective soft sets and CorrACC achieved high
accuracy on BoT-IoT data [12]. Hybrid ML approaches,
such as differential evolution combined with extreme learning
machine, have also outperformed traditional combinations like
CFS + SVM [13]. However, conventional ML approaches
struggle with the scale and heterogeneity of IoT data. The
evolution of deep learning addressed this by automatically
extracting features from raw data, making it more viable in
complicated IoT settings. These models excel at capturing
intricate patterns and detecting subtle intrusions. For instance,
autoencoder-based feature extraction improved detection rates
and reduced error in industrial IoT IDS [14], [15]. Other
approaches, such as dynamic line graph neural networks
and MF-Net, have achieved high anomaly detection accuracy by modeling traffic as sequential data with varying
frequencies [14], [16].
In addition, more deep learning models have been
explored by recent studies. For instances, LSTM networks
are widely explored for capturing temporal dependencies in sequential NetFlow traffic and have demonstrated

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

improved intrusion detection performance in time-series scenarios [17], [18]. However, they are sensitive to long
sequence dependencies and may underperform when handling
high-dimensional, imbalanced data or requiring extensive tuning [19]. Transformer-based models, with their self-attention
mechanisms, have shown promising results by capturing longrange relationships in traffic sequences more effectively [20],
but their computational overhead and demand for large-scale
data can be impractical for many real-world IoT deployments [21]. In addition, 3D CNNs offer another direction by
jointly learning spatial and temporal features, yet they are
often prone to overfitting and require significant computational
resources [22]. Thus, these deep learning approaches require
retraining or fine-tuning to maintain performance and scalability, highlighting the need for more scalable, adaptable, and
resource-efficient models.
Deep transfer learning addresses these challenges by finetuning pre-trained models on generalized tasks to the specific
nuances of IoT intrusion detection. It accelerates training and
improves generalization across heterogeneous IoT scenarios,
enhancing both accuracy and robustness. For example, [23]
introduced a transfer learning approach designed for limited
data availability, leveraging optimization methods like Lasso
and MCP to improve learning efficiency. In [24], transfer
learning was applied to intrusion detection for Internet-of-Cars
systems using minimal labeled data. Their method achieved
a 23% increase in accuracy on two AWID datasets, although
these datasets lacked recent traffic patterns and were not
specifically designed for IoT. Similarly, [25] proposed a
federated transfer learning framework to detect RPL routing
protocol intrusions in heterogeneous IoT networks. Using
a custom RPL-IIoT dataset, their model achieved 85.52%
accuracy, but it was limited to routing attacks and lacked
benchmark validation.
Other studies have explored transforming traffic data into
image representations to leverage pre-trained CNNs. In [26],
DeepInsight was used to convert time-based features into
3D images, enabling the use of models like VGG19 and
ResNet101. Their bi-level classification framework, coupled
with classifiers such as SVM and RF, achieved 96% accuracy on Darknet traffic data. However, this work did not
focus on IoT-specific traffic. In [27], TL-CNN-IDS combined
transfer and ensemble learning to address class imbalance
and limited training data. Tabular features were converted
into image format for CNN processing, with model selection and optimization conducted using Tree-Structured Parzen
Estimators. The final ensemble achieved 99.85% and 99.53%
accuracy on CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD, respectively, though
both datasets are outdated and non-IoT-specific. Lastly, [6]
developed a ResNet-based model using real-world traffic,
achieving 87% accuracy in distinguishing attack from normal
traffic even with limited labeled data. While effective, most
of these approaches still lack validation on modern, domainspecific IoT datasets, limiting their practical generalizability.
Existing literature on Deep Transfer Learning (DTL) for
intrusion detection in IoT networks has limitations that
need to be addressed. Many strategies focus on outdated
cybersecurity datasets and a limited number of cyberattacks,

683

failing to represent the real IoT environment. To overcome
this, our proposed approach utilizes the most recent IoT
statistics to evaluate models, ensuring relevance to current
IoT threats. Additionally, previous research lacks generalized
models due to the variety of IoT datasets, hindering robustness
in attack classification. We address this by using uniform
NetFlow-based IoT datasets, enhancing the effectiveness
of our approach in categorizing cyberattacks. Furthermore,
previous investigations often use a single pre-trained model
without optimization or integration, impacting accuracy and
resilience. To this end, our method incorporates six pre-trained
CNN architectures, optimizing hyperparameters with GA and
employing a soft voting ensemble approach to enhance attack
detection accuracy and robustness.
III. F RAMEWORK
The proposed framework’s overall research approach is
presented in this section. It begins by outlining the datasets,
data preprocessing, class balancing, data transformation, and
data splitting. Next, it goes over the CNN pre-trained deep
transfer learning method, hyperparameter optimization, and
soft voting ensemble approach. Afterwards, performance comparison is conducted with the models including LSTM,
Transformer, and 3D CNN, respectively, in order to validate
the effectiveness of the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework. Fig. 1 shows the proposed framework’s block diagram
and the performance comparison with the three benchmark
models in brief.
A. Datasets
In this study, three up-to-date and diverse datasets were
employed to comprehensively evaluate the proposed intrusion
detection framework, reflecting both consumer and industrial
IoT security scenarios. The NF-ToN-IoTv2 and NF-BoTIoTv2 datasets are NetFlow-based and regenerated from
the widely recognized TON-IoT [28] and BoT-IoT [29]
datasets. Developed by the University of Queensland, these
datasets simulate realistic, heterogeneous IoT environments
with updated traffic and a broad range of modern cyberattacks,
offering 10 and 5 distinct classes, respectively. Meanwhile,
X-IIoTID represents an up-to-date Industrial IoT dataset
structured according to the Industrial Internet Reference
Architecture (IIRA) [10]. It includes 19 classes across over
820,000 instances and 59 features, capturing complex behaviors in smart factory and industrial control systems. Together,
these three datasets form a comprehensive benchmark suite
that ensures robust, real-world validation of the proposed
NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework across the spectrum of modern
IoT and IIoT environments. The class distributions for these
datasets are presented in Fig. 2
Out of the 16,940,496 total data flows in the NF-TONIoTv2, 10,841,027 (63.99%) are attack samples and 6,099,469
(36.01%) are benign samples. Attack traffic in the dataset
is classified into nine categories: ransomware, password,
injection, DoS, DDoS, backdoor, scanning, and XSS. Of
the 37,763,497 data flows in the NF-BoT-IoTv2, 37,628,460
(99.64%) are attack samples, while 135,037 (0.36%) are

684

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Block diagram of NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework.

from dominant classes like RDOS (17%) and Scanning
Vulnerability (6%) to rare but critical threats such as CryptoRansomware (0.06%) and Fake Notification (<0.01%), thus
reflecting the realistic and diverse nature of industrial IoT
security scenarios.

B. Data Preprocessing

Fig. 2.

Class distribution of the datasets.

benign samples. The dataset has 4 different types of attack
traffic: Reconnaissance, DDoS, DoS, Theft. Each dataset
traffic type has the same 4 flow identifier features, 8 flow
features, and 31 extended flow features with the detailed
description in [30]. In addition, the X-IIoTID dataset consists
of 820,834 instances with 59 IIoT-specific features, offering a
highly imbalanced distribution across 18 attack types, ranging

Optimal training of machine learning or deep learning
models relies heavily on data preprocessing. The NFTON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets consist of 43
features each, with two binary labels and 10 and 5
attack classes, respectively. After loading the datasets,
we addressed missing values, finding none. Next, we
removed 3,804,615 duplicate instances from NF-TON-IoTv2
(22.46% of dataset) and 7,343,411 from NF-BoT-IoTv2
(19.45% of dataset). Unnecessary identifier features
(“IPV4_SRC_ADDR” and “IPV4_DST_ADDR”) were
dropped, retaining “L4_SRC_PORT” and “L4_DST_PORT.”
Post-drop, both datasets contained 13,135,881 and
30,420,086 instances, respectively, with 41 features.
No numerical encoding was needed, except for the
categorical feature “PROTOCOL,” which was dummy
encoded into “PROTOCOL_ICMP,” “PROTOCOL_IGMP,”
“PROTOCOL_TCP,” “PROTOCOL_UDP,” “PROTOCOL_
IPv6_Frag,” and “PROTOCOL_IPv6_ICMP.” Finally,
min-max normalization was applied, resulting in datasets of

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

13,135,881 rows with 48 columns and 30,420,086 rows with
47 columns. As for X-IIoTID dataset, three types of missing
values (“NaN”, “-”, and “?”) were identified and replaced with
–1 to indicate unavailability. Timestamp-related features were
dropped as they serve no predictive value. A total of 4,260
duplicate rows were found and removed, leaving 816,574
unique instances. Two categorical features, “Protocol” and
“Service”, were one-hot encoded, while remaining objecttype features were converted to numerical float types. This
transformation expanded the feature set from 65 to 79 features,
except for the attack labels. Finally, min-max normalization
was applied to scale the dataset.

685

TABLE I
C LASS D ISTRIBUTION OF THE DATA S ETS

C. Class Balancing
Imbalanced datasets pose significant challenges to classification models. The model may show biased behavior, have
a low detection rate for minority classes, and have difficulty
generalizing to new data due to the skewed distribution of
class occurrences [31]. To address these limitations, techniques
like over-sampling, under-sampling, and ensemble methods are
commonly used to improve model performance on imbalanced
datasets. In our study, we categorized classes into majority,
minority, and highly minority ranks for the three preprocessed
datasets, and in order to validate the robustness of the
proposed NF-IIoT-DTL-IDS, diverse class balancing schemes
are implemented on the three datasets, respectively.
For both NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2, considering there is a huge number of instances for the majority
and minority classes in the two datasets, respectively, the
random under-sampling technique is employed for the two
ranked classes, while the oversampling technique using
SMOTE generates synthetic instances for highly minority classes, except for “Benign” in NF-BoT-IoTv2, which
has enough instances to be processed for subsequent data
transformation. As for X-IIoTID, since there are no overwhelming instances for majority classes, which are kept as
the original ones, thus, SMOTE is only applied for the
highly minority classes including “Modbus_register_reading,”
“Dictionary,” and “crypto-ransomware,” etc. Thus, diverse
balancing schemes, including both undersampling and oversampling, are conducted on the two NetFlow IoT datasets,
while the oversampling technique is employed on the IIoT
dataset, which maintains the original distribution and ensures
necessary balance among the classes while reducing computational complexity in IoT environments. Table I provides
detailed information on the instances and class distributions.
D. Data Transformation
Within the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, we
implemented a classification framework utilizing pre-trained
CNN architectures. Typically, CNN models exhibit superior
performance with image-based datasets. Given that the preprocessed NF-IoT datasets are structured akin to tabular data, the
subsequent task involves transforming them into the format
resembling that of an image-based dataset. Transforming
tabular data into image data for input into pre-trained models
involves converting the structured information into a visual

format [32]. Data points of features are mapped to grayscale
picture points as the initial phase. Since each feature in the
tabular data represents a pixel intensity value in a grayscale
image, the assurance that every pixel intensity in a grayscale
image falls within the acceptable range by mapping the feature
values to the range [0, 255]. Pixel intensities of pictures in
grayscale go from 0 (black) to 255 (white).
The second stage is creating an image. In our research,
we do this by utilizing the RGB color model to convert the
tabular data into a color image. Each pixel is represented
by three values, involving red, green, and blue. These threecolor channels combine to produce a wide spectrum of colors.
Each channel’s intensity value ranges from 0 to 255. The
preprocessed NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset has 46 columns. Each
block comprising 138 consecutive samples and 46 columns
undergoes a transformation into a color image format with
dimensions of 46×46×3 (representing the three-dimensional
height, width, and channels). Conversely, in the preprocessed
NF-BoT-IoTv2 dataset, which consists of 45 columns, each
block of 135 consecutive samples is transformed into a
45×45×3 color picture [33], as depicted in Fig. 3. Similarly,
for the X-IIoTID dataset, which contains 79 columns after

686

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

NF-IIoT tabular data to matrix transformation.

preprocessing, each block of 237 consecutive samples is
converted into a 79×79×3 color image, enabling visual pattern
representation of IIoT traffic suitable for deep learning-based
intrusion detection.
After transformation, images are labeled based on their original attack classes. Benign samples are labeled as “Benign”,
while DDoS-affected images are labeled “DDoS”. This labeling extends to other attack classes. For NF-TON-IoTv2,
images are sorted into 10 classes: Injection, DDoS, Benign,
Password, XSS, DoS, Scanning, Backdoor, MITM, and
Ransomware. NF-BoT-IoTv2 images are classified into 5
classes: DDoS, DoS, Reconnaissance, Benign, and Theft.
Similarly, for X-IIoTID, images are categorized into 19 distinct
classes, including RDOS, Brute Force, Fake Notification,
and other representative industrial cyber threats. Resizing
images to 224x224 pixels is crucial for CNN training, ensuring consistent input sizes, simplifying architecture design,
and reducing memory requirements. Standardizing dimensions facilitates compatibility with pre-trained CNN models
like VGG, Inception, or Xception. Resizing promotes better
generalization across diverse datasets, focusing on extracting
meaningful features. After resizing, image data is checked for
each attack category, as shown in Fig. 4.
The Algorithm 1 outlines the main steps involved in preprocessing and generating images from tabular network flow
data as described in the task. Each step is outlined with a
placeholder function to represent the specific implementation
details required for that step.
E. Data Splitting
Training, validation, and test sets are established from the
transformed data. Cross-validation is often used to evaluate
model performance, involving dividing the dataset into folds,
training on subsets, and evaluating on the remainder. Due to
data and computational constraints, a fixed validation set with
sufficient epochs may be more practical. We monitor model
performance on a consistent subset during training without
frequent cross-validation. It’s crucial to ensure the validation
set adequately represents the data distribution [34]. Our study
initially splits data into 80% training and 20% test sets. The
original training set is then divided into new training and
validation sets, each comprising 80% and 20%, respectively.
Detailed statistics for the image dataset are presented in
Table II.

Fig. 4.

Resized representative image data of the datasets.

Algorithm 1 Tabular-to-Image Transformation for NF-IIoT
Data
Input: - Preprocessed tabular network flow data
Output: - Labeled color image dataset
1. Function TransformTabularToImages(tabular_data):
2. Initialize transformed_image_data ← []
3. For each class_label in unique(tabular_data.labels):
4.
class_data ← filter(tabular_data where label ==
class_label)
5.
For each block in split_into_blocks(class_data,
block_size):
6.
image ← convert_block_to_color_image(block)
7.
resized_image ← resize(image, 224, 224)
8.
transformed_image_data.append({“image”:
resized_image, “label”: class_label })
9.
representative ←
select_representative_image(transformed_image_data,
class_label)
10.
display(representative)
11.
Return transformed_image_data

F. CNN Transfer Learning Architectures
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are widely used
deep learning models for pattern recognition, known for
their ability to automatically extract hierarchical features
through convolutional, pooling, and fully connected layers.
This architecture enables strong generalization across tasks

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

TABLE II
T HE S TATISTICS OF THE T RANSFORMED NF-II OT I MAGE DATA

687

reuse and mitigate vanishing gradients. EfficientNet uses
compound scaling to balance depth, width, and resolution,
with EfficientNetB0 delivering strong performance under minimal computational load, which is ideal for IoT scenarios.
The selection of diverse architectures strategically leverages
their unique strengths to improve the model’s attack classification accuracy in resource-limited IoT security settings.
Consequently, individually optimizing the hyperparameters of
these models and ensemble them within the NFIIoT-DTLIDS framework offers a robust and comprehensive intrusion
detection approach for IoT environments.
G. Hyperparameters Optimization Using Genetic Algorithm

such as image processing and natural language understanding. Deep transfer learning builds on this capability by
adapting pretrained models, like CNNs, to new but related
tasks, especially where labeled data is scarce [35]. In this
study, the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework uses six
CNN architectures, namely Xception, Inception, MobileNet,
MobileNetV2, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0, which are
commonly pre-trained on the ImageNet database [36], a largescale visual database containing millions of labeled images
across thousands of categories. The pre-training on ImageNet
involves training these models on a vast array of images from
diverse categories, helping the models learn general features
and patterns present in various visual data.
To be specific, each CNN architecture brings unique
strengths to the task of attack classification for transformed
IoT image data [37]. The Inception architecture captures
multi-scale features using parallel branches with 1×1, 3×3,
and 5×5 convolutions and max pooling. Xception builds on
this by using depthwise separable convolutions for improved
efficiency and spatial feature extraction. MobileNet also
employs depthwise separable convolutions to reduce complexity, making it suitable for resource-constrained IoT devices.
MobileNetV2 enhances this with inverted residuals and shortcut connections for better accuracy at low cost. DenseNet
introduces dense inter-layer connections to promote feature

Fine-tuning hyperparameters plays a pivotal role in optimizing and strengthening learning models by systematically
adjusting configurable settings that influence the learning
process but are not learned from the data [38]. This process
significantly enhances a model’s performance, generalization,
and robustness by identifying optimal hyperparameter values.
In our approach, we selectively unfreeze top layers of pretrained architectures, allowing the model to adapt and refine its
representations with new datasets while preserving knowledge
from the source task. This strategy enables the model to better
capture characteristics of the new task, ultimately improving
performance in the target domain.
Common optimization algorithms for hyperparameter tuning
include Grid search (GS), Random search (RS), Gradientbased algorithms (GO), Bayesian optimization (BO), and
Metaheuristic algorithms like PSO and GA. Each method
offers advantages and drawbacks. GS is simple to implement
but time-consuming, especially with a wide range of hyperparameters, and may struggle with continuous parameters.
RS efficiently explores a broad search space by randomly
selecting values but may involve unnecessary evaluations and
lacks consideration of previous results, reducing efficiency.
Gradient-based algorithms (GO) are less common for hyperparameter optimization as they only work with continuous
hyperparameters and are limited in finding local optima in
non-convex issues rather than global ones [39]. Compared
to GS and RS, Bayesian Optimization (BO) has a lower
computing cost [40]. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),
as one of the metaheuristic algorithms, excels in extensive
parallelization and is well-suited for both continuous and conditional hyperparameter optimization [41]. Genetic Algorithms
(GA), a type of metaheuristic, is complex but effective for
optimizing diverse hyperparameters, supporting various types
and excelling in large configuration spaces with the potential
for near-optimal solutions even in a few iterations [42].
Considering multiple types of hyperparameters of complex
CNN network-based algorithms in diverse contexts of IoT
environments, GA can be the choice since it is suitable for
exploring large solution spaces efficiently, and it is robust
against local optima due to its stochastic nature. Moreover,
it can handle both continuous and discrete optimization problems.
In this study, GA was employed to obtain the best hyperparameters for selected pre-trained models effectively. The

688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 2 Optimized Hyperparameters Driven by GA
Input:
pop_size: Population size
num_generations: Number of generations
mutation_rate: Mutation rate
pretrained_models: Selected pre-trained CNN architectures
training_data, validation_data: Datasets for training and validation
Output:
best_hyperparameters, best_fitness_score
1. Define hyperparameter_space ← {
2. ‘frozen_layers’, ‘dense_units’, ‘activation_function’,
3. ‘dropout_rate’, ‘optimizer’, ‘learning_rate’, ‘epochs’
4. }
5. Initialize population ← initialize_population(pop_size,
hyperparameter_space)
6. For generation in range(num_generations) do:
7. Evaluate fitness_scores ← [
8.
evaluate_fitness(individual, pretrained_models, training_data, validation_data)
9.
for individual in population ]
10. Select
parents
←
select_parents(population,
fitness_scores)
11. Generate offspring ← crossover_and_mutate(parents,
mutation_rate, hyperparameter_space)
12. Update population ← replace_population(population,
offspring, fitness_scores)*
13. End For
14.Select best_individual ← select_best(population, fitness_scores)
15.Decode
best_hyperparameters
←
decode_individual(best_individual)
16.Evaluate
best_fitness_score
←
evaluate_fitness(best_individual, pretrained_models, training_data,
validation_data)
17.Return best_hyperparameters, best_fitness_score

process involves initializing a population of potential solutions
with defined hyperparameters, followed by fitness evaluation through training and validation on a dataset. Selection
methods like tournament or roulette wheel selection are
used to create a mating pool from individuals with higher
fitness scores. Crossover operations exchange genetic material to generate offspring, while mutation introduces random
alterations to sustain genetic diversity. This iterative process
continues until termination conditions are met when reaching
a maximum number of generations. The model with the
highest fitness score undergoes further training and validation
using optimized hyperparameters. Finally, the top 3 models
demonstrating the highest performance scores are selected
for ensemble operations, aiming for optimal classification
performance. Detailed steps of the entire GA-based HPO
procedure are delineated in Algorithm 2.
H. Soft Voting Ensemble Method
Ensemble methods in classification aim to enhance overall
performance by combining predictions from multiple base

Algorithm 3 Soft Voting Ensemble Method
Input:
input_data: Test data
base_classifiers: List of trained classifiers
Output:
final_predictions: Predicted class labels for the input data
1. Function soft_voting(input_data, base_classifiers):
2. Initialize
combined_probabilities
←
zeros(shape=(num_samples, num_classes))
3. For clf in base_classifiers do:
4.
probs ← clf.predict_proba(input_data)
5.
combined_probabilities ← combined_probabilities +
probs
6. Normalize
combined_probabilities
←
combined_probabilities / len(base_classifiers)
7. final_predictions ← argmax(combined_probabilities,
axis=1)
8. Return final_predictions

classifiers [43]. Voting is a simple and computationally inexpensive ensemble method that combines predictions without
training a meta-model. It mitigates the risk of overfitting
compared to methods like stacking or boosting. Additionally,
voting is versatile and can be applied to any base classifier, making it adaptable to various tasks and datasets
in resource-constrained IoT environments. In classification
ensemble methods, hard voting involves each classifier voting
for a class, with the majority winning, while soft voting considers the anticipated probabilities from classifiers, potentially
improving decision-making by leveraging more information.
The process of soft voting ensemble in this study is elaborated
in Algorithm 3.
I. Comparison With LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN
Models
To validate the robustness and generalizability of the
proposed image-based intrusion detection approach, we extend
the methodology using three sequence-learning baselines:
LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN models. Unlike the imagebased models that rely on visual pattern recognition, these
baselines operate directly on preprocessed tabular data that
is structured into time-series sequences. For each dataset, the
tabular features are segmented into fixed-length sequences,
ensuring that each sequence consists of samples from the same
class to preserve semantic consistency during training.
The sequence inputs are normalized, and the class labels
are one-hot encoded. The resulting tensors follow the format
(samples, timesteps, features), suitable for both LSTM and
Transformer models. For the 3D CNN model, the data is
further reshaped into 5D tensors by adding two singleton
spatial dimensions, enabling spatial-temporal feature extraction through 3D convolutional operations. Thus, these tensors
are further reshaped to (samples, timesteps, features, 1, 1),
allowing the convolutional layers to learn spatial-temporal
patterns across both dimensions.
To ensure consistency and fair comparison across all models, the same data splitting scheme is applied as the same

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

TABLE III
I NPUT DATA S HAPES FOR THE M ODELS AND DATASET A FTER S PLITTING

scheme applied in Section III-E, Data splitting for image-based
data. This stratified 3-way split ensures that the imagebased CNN models and the sequence-learning models (LSTM,
Transformer, 3D CNN) are trained and evaluated on the exact
same data distributions. The detailed dataset-specific settings,
including sequence length, feature dimensions, and class distribution, are detailed in Table III. The hyperparameters and
model configurations are kept consistent across experiments
and are presented in the subsequent section.

IV. E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT AND P ERFORMANCE
A SSESSMENT
This section outlines the experimental setup and assesses
the proposed scheme’s performance. It commences with a
delineation of the performance evaluation metrics, the platform
employed for model training, the hyperparameters utilized, and
the settings of the comparison models.
A. Experimental Environment
The NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework is deployed and evaluated
for performance on the Kaggle platform, leveraging Keras
libraries. Kaggle provides access to a Nvidia Tesla P100 GPU
equipped with 16 GB of graphic card memory and 19.5 GB of
RAM, ensuring seamless execution of neural network-based
algorithms. Initially, the raw network flow-based IoT data
is collected and transformed into image datasets along with
corresponding labels on the Kaggle platform. Subsequently,
six pre-trained CNN models are integrated into the Keras
applications with predefined and optimized hyperparameters.
In addition, to establish comprehensive performance benchmarks, we further implement and evaluate three additional
deep learning architectures: LSTM, Transformer, and 3D
CNN, which are widely used in time-series and spatialtemporal modeling tasks. These models are trained on the
same datasets and settings to ensure fair comparison. All bestperforming models, including CNN-based and comparison
models, are archived on Kaggle drive for final inference and
prediction of unknown test data.

689

B. Performance Assessment Metrics
Several performance metrics, including as accuracy,
precision, recall, F1 score, Cohen’s Kappa (CK) Score,
Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), and confusion
matrices, are used to evaluate the performance of the proposed
NFIIoT-DTL-IDS system. The following formulas are used to
compute these measures. A comprehensive indicator of the
model’s correctness, accuracy is the ratio of properly predicted
occurrences to the total instances; nonetheless, it might not
be the best choice for datasets that are unbalanced. Precision
emphasizes the accuracy of positive predictions and reduces
false positives by expressing it as the ratio of accurately
predicted positive observations to the total expected positives.
Recall highlights the model’s capacity to find all pertinent
cases and minimize false negatives by expressing it as the
ratio of accurately predicted positive observations to all actual
positives.
The performance metrics represented by equations (1)
through (6) are displayed below.
(TP + TN )
(1)
(TP + FN + FP + TN )
TP
Precision =
(2)
(TP + FP )
TP
Recall =
(3)
(TP + FN )
2 ∗ Precision ∗ Recall
F 1 − Score =
(4)
Presicion + Recall
Observed Agreement − Expected Agreement
Cohen Kappa score =
1 − Expected Agreement
Accracy =

(5)
TP ∗ TN − FP ∗ FN

MCC = 
(TP + FP )(TP + FN )(TN + FP )(TN + FN )

(6)

The F1 score, derived as the harmonic mean of precision
and recall, offers a balanced assessment, particularly valuable
in scenarios of disparate class distributions within IoT data.
Cohen’s Kappa (CK) score serves as a statistical indicator
evaluating agreement between two raters, surpassing chance
expectations, notably advantageous when confronting imbalanced datasets. The Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)
emerges as a performance metric gauging classification model
quality. It considers TP, TN, FP, and FN, yielding a nuanced
assessment of model performance, particularly crucial in
imbalanced class contexts.
C. Hyperparameters Schemes
To optimize the performance of neural network-based techniques, hyperparameters in deep transfer learning models
must be carefully tuned. Previous research highlighted the
significant impact of network type, depth, fully connected
layer neuron count, optimizer selection, and learning rate
adjustment on classification outcomes [44]. In this study,
we employ Genetic Algorithm (GA) for Hyperparameter
Optimization (HPO) across seven key parameters including,
frozen layers, dense units, activation functions, dropout rates,
optimizers, learning rates, and epochs within our NFIIoT-DTLIDS framework. The optimized hyperparameters are then used
to train all CNN models, with performance evaluated based
on classification accuracy. Two configurations are compared:

690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE IV
O RIGINAL H YPERPARAMETER S CHEMES OF P RE -T RAINED M ODELS

TABLE VI
K EY H YPERPARAMETERS AND S ETTINGS OF C OMPARISON M ODELS

TABLE V
O PTIMIZED H YPERPARAMETERS FOR THE P RE -T RAINED CNN M ODELS

V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, two sets of results will be presented and
evaluated: one will assess the effectiveness of the proposed
techniques within the NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework, and the
other will evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
against the three baseline models through experiments and
comparisons with state-of-the-art works, finally followed by
discussion.
A. Performance Evaluation

default settings and those optimized via the HPO algorithm.
One configuration represents the default settings for all base
learning models, as outlined in Table IV, while the other
is optimized through the HPO algorithm and presented in
Table V.
D. Settings of the Comparison Models
To ensure fair and reproducible evaluation against the
proposed CNN image-based models, the three baseline models are configured with consistent training hyperparameters
where applicable, including the use of the Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 0.02, categorical cross-entropy loss,
and 25 training epochs. The LSTM model utilizes two
stacked LSTM layers with 128 units each, followed by a
dense layer of 256 units. The Transformer model employs
a 64-dimensional embedding, a 4-head attention mechanism,
and a feed-forward network with 128 units. The 3D CNN
architecture consists of two convolutional blocks with 32
and 64 filters respectively, followed by a fully connected
layer with 256 units. Dropout regularization is applied to
mitigate overfitting. All layers are fully trainable, and no
frozen layers are used. These configurations are summarized
in Table VI to facilitate reproducibility and performance
comparison.

To evaluate transfer learning models and hyperparameter
optimization, three stages of experimentation and analysis are
conducted using NF-TON-IoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets.
The first stage assesses individual model performance.
Prediction results for all models without hyperparameter
optimization (HPO) are presented in Table VII. In NF-TONIoTv2, InceptionV3 achieves the highest accuracy (99.80%)
and effectively classifies nine out of ten attack types, while
Exception and DenseNet121 also perform well. However,
MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 show lower effectiveness.
In NF-BoT-IoTv2, Xception, MobileNet, and DenseNet121
demonstrate high accuracy (99.35%) and effectively classify four out of five attack types. In NF-TON-IoTv2,
InceptionV3 outperforms other models with 99.80% accuracy,
correctly classifying nine out of ten attack types. Exception
and DenseNet121 also show decent performance, while
MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 perform less effectively.
In NF-BoT-IoTv2, Xception, MobileNet, and DenseNet121
achieve high accuracy (99.35%) and effectively classify four
out of five attack types, except for Theft. InceptionV3
and MobileNetV2 exhibit moderate performance, while
EfficientNetB0 performs poorly across all metrics.
The subsequent phase involves the selection and aggregation of outcomes from several top-performing models. Three
models exhibiting the highest attack detection accuracy are
chosen, including Xception, InceptionV3, and DenseNet121,
for both datasets. Figures 7 and 8 illustrate a comparison
of these outstanding models in the non-HPO scenario, with
their respective bar graphs depicted on the left side. The
outputs of these models are merged utilizing the proposed Soft
Voting Ensemble methodology, which proves advantageous
in preserving model accuracy and enhancing robustness of
the models. The final ensemble model for NF-TON-IoTv2

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

691

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF N ON -HPO M ODELS ON T EST DATA

Fig. 6. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on
NF-BoT-IoTv2.

Fig. 5. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on
NF-TON-IoTv2.

achieves an accuracy of 98.47%, while for NF-BoT-IoTv2,
it reaches 99.34%. Additionally, the final IDS for NF-TONIoTv2 attains precision, recall, F1, CK score, and MCC
values of 97.04%, 98.47%, 97.73%, 98.14%, and 98.16%,
respectively. For NF-BoT-IoTv2, these metrics are recorded as
98.73%, 99.35%, 99.03%, 99.09%, and 99.10%, respectively.
Figs. 9 and 10 show the confusion matrices of the final
ensemble model in the non-optimized scenario on the left side.
In the second phase, the performance of individual transfer
learning models with HPO is presented and evaluated, moreover, the impact of models optimized by HPO is additionally
assessed, and the top three performing models are chosen
and amalgamated for the Soft Voting ensemble model. All
base learning models are trained using the optimized hyperparameters determined by GA, as outlined in Table V. In each
case, the training and validation accuracies along with their
respective losses for the optimized scenario are visualized

Fig. 7. Training and validation results of optimized pre-trained models on
X-IIoTID.

and depicted in Fig. 5, 6 and 7 for NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoTIoTv2, and X-IIoTID, respectively.
In NF-TON-IoTv2, the four figures of Xeption, Inception,
MobileNet, and DenseNet121 show that the optimized accuracy for both training and validation approaches converged,
while the loss of both training and validation approaches
minimal value starting from the 3rd epoch. The four models
show a consistent pattern between training and validation
accuracy, with the corresponding training loss and validation loss. MobileNetv2’s validation accuracy curve begins to
converge around the 18th epoch, while the validation loss
approaches the training loss by the same epoch. However,
the EfficientB0 model differs from the other five models in
that although the training accuracy increases, the validation
accuracy fluctuates until the optimized final epoch.
In NF-BoT-IoTv2, the four figures of Xeption, Inception,
MobileNet, and DenseNet121 show nearly the same pattern of those in the aforehand dataset. the four models

692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF HPO M ODELS ON T EST DATA

Fig. 8.

Performance of the top 3 models with Non-HPO and HPO.

show the optimized accuracy for both training and validation
approaches converged, while the loss of both training and
validation approaches minimal value after a range of epochs.
MobileNetv2’s validation accuracy curve starts to converge
around the 15th epoch, while the validation loss approaches the
training loss by the 22nd epoch. The EfficientB0 model, like
the results of the preceding dataset, differs from the other five
models in that, although training accuracy grows, validation
accuracy fluctuates until the optimized final epoch. The aforementioned best models are saved according to their highest
validation accuracy. All of the top base learning models are
saved to Kaggle’s memory drive for attack predictions on
unknown test datasets.
In X-IIoTID, the Xception model quickly converges, achieving near 100% training and validation accuracy by epoch
10, with training and validation loss dropping to nearly 0.
InceptionV3 follows a similar trend, reaching 100% accuracy
within the first few epochs and maintaining minimal loss,
indicating strong generalization. MobileNet also performs
exceptionally well, achieving 100% accuracy for both training
and validation by epoch 6, with losses approaching 0 early in
training. MobileNetV2, however, shows significant fluctuation
in validation accuracy, with accuracy stabilizing around 95%
after initial instability, and validation loss decreasing but not as
smoothly as in the other models. DenseNet121 reaches 100%

training and validation accuracy by epoch 5, with minimal loss,
indicating efficient learning. EfficientNetB0 shows some variability in both validation accuracy and loss, stabilizing around
98-99% accuracy but with more fluctuation in validation loss
compared to the other models.
Table VIII provides an overview of all improved models’ prediction results. Both the optimized MobileNet and
DenseNet121 models performed the same in NF-TON-IoTv2.
These two best-performing models correctly identify all
10 classes with 100% accuracy and achieve an impressive
100.00% attack detection accuracy. Additionally, Xception and
InceptionV3 share the second position, demonstrating similar
performance with accuracies of 99.90% and 99.98%, respectively. Lastly, the remaining two models, MobileNetV2 and
EfficientNetB0, share the third position, attaining accuracies
of 98.68% and 99.47%, respectively.
In contrast, in NF-BoT-IoTv2, the outcome differs from
that of the former dataset. The top two models, InceptionV3
and DenseNet121, both get an exceptional 100.00% accuracy
rate for attack detection and 100% accuracy rate for classifying all 5 classes. Moreover, Xception and MobileNet are
tied for the second position, exhibiting similar performance
with accuracies of 99.90% and 99.98%, respectively. Finally,
MobileNetV2 and EfficientNetB0 share the third position,
achieving accuracies of 99.02% and 99.19%, respectively.
In addition, in X-IIoTID dataset, MobileNet achieved
perfect performance across all metrics, indicating flawless classification of all 10 classes. DenseNet121 followed
closely with near-perfect scores, including 99.87% accuracy. InceptionV3 also performed strongly with 99.60%
accuracy. Xception and EfficientNetB0 showed comparable
results around 98.54%, while MobileNetV2 performed slightly
lower at 97.74%. These results highlight MobileNet and
DenseNet121 as the most effective models for X-IIoTID-based
attack detection.
Since the models with HPO have been accomplished,
Fig. 8 shows a comparison of the 3 selected top-performing

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

Fig. 9.

Confusion matrix of NFIIoT-DTL-IDS with HPO.

models without and with HPO for three datasets, the bar
charts demonstrate the improvement in accuracy for the
top-3 performing models on each dataset. In Fig. 8 (NFTON-IoTv2), DenseNet121 and MobileNet achieve perfect
accuracy (100%) after HPO, with DenseNet121 improving
from 98.47% and MobileNet from 94.09%. Xception also
shows a significant improvement, from 98.37% to 99.90%,
highlighting the effectiveness of HPO.
In addition, in Fig. 8 (NF-BoT-IoTv2), InceptionV3 sees
the most dramatic accuracy increase, from 67.59% to 100%,
which produce a 47.95% boost. DenseNet121 also reaches
100% accuracy post-HPO, slightly up from 99.34%. Xception
improves modestly from 99.35% to 99.67%, indicating consistent gains across the board.
In Fig. 8 (X-IIoTID), MobileNet achieves 100% accuracy
after HPO, rising from 98.80%, while DenseNet121 improves
from 97.74% to 99.87%. Interestingly, Xception’s accuracy
decreases slightly post-HPO, from 99.87% to 98.54%, suggesting that HPO may not always yield improvements and
highlighting the complexity of hyperparameter interactions.
In the third phase, the performance outcomes of the two soft
voting ensemble models are presented and contrasted using the
three datasets. Fig. 9 illustrate the normalized confusion matrices of the final ensemble model for the non-HPO (left) and
HPO (right) scenarios, on NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2,
and X-IIoTID respectively. The proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS

693

without Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) accurately classifies 8 out of 10 classes in NF-TON-IoTv2, excluding MITM
and Ransomware attacks, and 4 out of 5 classes in NFBoT-IoTv2, excluding Theft attacks. However, with HPO,
the proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieves precise detection of
all ten classes in NF-TON-IoTv2 and all five classes in
NF-BoT-IoTv2. The results indicate that the three attack
classes, MITM, Ransomware, and Theft, which can be
accurately identified, represent minority labels in the two
datasets. In addition, for X-IIoTID, before HPO, the model
performs well across most classes but struggles with the
“Fake_notification” and “Modbus_register_reading” attacks,
misclassifying 38% of Fake_notification as Exfiltration and
11% of Modbus_register_reading as Normal. After HPO, the
model achieves perfect classification across all attack types,
including previously misclassified categories, with 100% accuracy for all classes. This demonstrates a clear improvement in
the model’s ability to generalize and correctly classify complex
attack types after optimization, particularly resolving misclassifications in the minority classes like “Fake_notification”
and “Modbus_register_reading”, thereby enhancing its reliability for real-world IoT intrusion detection tasks. Thus,
the optimized base models with higher performance scores
contribute to enhancing the performance of the final ensemble
model.
Fig. 10 illustrates bar graphs comparing the key metrics of the final ensemble models for the two datasets. In
Fig. 10, utilizing NF-TON-IoTv2, the attack detection accuracy of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without HPO stands at
98.47%. Additionally, the other performance parameters for
final precision, recall, F1-score, CK score, and MCC are
97.04%, 98.47%, 97.73%, 98.14%, and 98.16%, respectively.
Conversely, the classification accuracy of the final ensemble
model with HPO achieves a perfect score of 100%, along
with other metrics including precision, recall, F1-score, and
CK score. As depicted in Fig. 10, utilizing NF-BoT-IoTv2, the
classification accuracy of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without
HPO is 99.35%, with other performance metrics for precision,
recall, F1-score, CK score, and MCC reaching 98.73%,
99.35%, 99.03%, 99.09%, and 99.10%, respectively. Similarly,
as for Fig. 10, utilizing X-IIoTID, the classification accuracy
of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS without HPO is 99.80%, with
other performance metrics for precision, recall, F1-score, CK
score, and MCC reaching 98.18%, 98.80%, 98.41%, 98.39%,
and 98.41%, respectively. With HPO application, all metrics
achieved perfect performance at 100.00%, yielding improvements of 0.20% in accuracy, 1.82% in precision, 1.20% in
recall, 1.59% in F1 score, 1.61% in Cohen’s Kappa, and 1.59%
in MCC. Consequently, employing the three IoT datasets, the
proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieves the highest accuracy in
detecting all threat classes.
B. Experimental Performance Comparison With Baseline
Models
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed NFIIoT-DTLIDS model, this section benchmarks its performance against
three baseline models, including LSTM, Transformer, and

694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE T HREE BASELINE M ODELS

Fig. 10.

Performance of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS models.

3D CNN, using six classification metrics, across the three
benchmark datasets (NF-TON-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and XIIoTID). In addition, all models were trained and evaluated
over 5 independent runs to ensure the comparison results,
each result reported in the tables above represents the average
performance across these runs. The comparative results for
each dataset are presented in Table IX.
On the NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset, the proposed NFIIoTDTL-IDS model achieves perfect performance (100%) across
all metrics, significantly surpassing LSTM by margins over
35% in all categories. Even compared to advanced models
like Transformer and 3D CNN, outperforms with a 0.09–
1.25% margin, demonstrating superior generalization and
robustness in multi-class intrusion detection. On the NF-TONIoTv2 dataset, the proposed model again outperforms all
baseline models, maintaining flawless detection rates. While
both Transformer and 3D CNN approach the upper limits
of performance (especially Transformer at 100%), LSTM
severely underperforms with scores below 73%, showing
that traditional sequence models struggle with the complex
traffic patterns in IoT environments. While LSTM achieves
remarkably high performance (above 99.9%) on X-IIoTID
dataset, the proposed ensemble-based NFIIoT-DTL-IDS still

maintains a marginal edge by reaching the perfect score across
all metrics. Compared to Transformer and 3D CNN, the
proposed model improves performance by 0.25–0.88%, which
indicates more consistent and error-free attack classification.
Thus, the results reveal that LSTM models consistently
exhibited lower performance, particularly on the NF-TONIoTv2 and NF-BoT-IoTv2 datasets, reflecting their limitations
in capturing complex spatial-temporal patterns in IoT traffic.
In contrast, Transformer and 3D CNN models demonstrated
significantly better results on structured traffic, yet still underperformed compared to the NFIIoT-DTL-IDS framework.
NFIIoT-DTL-IDS achieved perfect scores (100%) across all
evaluation metrics and datasets, highlighting its exceptional
effectiveness in multiclass intrusion detection, as well as
its strong consistency across multiple runs. These results
confirm the superior generalization and detection capabilities
of the proposed model in diverse and dynamic IoT intrusion
scenarios.
C. Performance Compared With the Recent Works
To finally assess the efficacy of the proposed NFIIoT-DTLIDS framework, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation
in three segments focusing on accuracy scores. Firstly, we
compared its performance against the latest IDS on the
same datasets, including NF-ToN-IoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and
X-IIoTID. Then, we compared the proposed NFIIoT-DTLIDS framework with state-of-the-art transfer learning-based
intrusion detection schemes. Despite growing interest in IoT
security, there remains a significant gap in the exploration of
both NetFlow-based and industrial IoT scenarios, particularly
in leveraging DTL methods. Most existing studies rely on
outdated datasets with limited attack diversity, restricting

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

their relevance to current threat landscapes. Moreover, DTL
approaches have been largely underutilized in these contexts,
limiting the adaptability and robustness of intrusion detection
systems. As a result, modern IDS can only forecast a small
percentage of cyberattacks.
Thus, the proposed framework uses the most recent NetFlow
and Industrial-based IoT security datasets, NF-ToN-IoTv2,
NF-ToN-IoTv2, and X-IIoTID which were published after
2022, and they combine NetFlow and industrial IoT-based features with more realistic and detailed data traffic to benchmark
ML/DL-based IDS methods. The proposed NFIIoT-DTL-IDS,
using the three datasets, can anticipate the most common
types of cyberattacks in IoT networks. The second significant
problem is that previous DTL research did not look into hyperparameters tuning for model training or ensemble techniques
for boosting model resilience and generalization. Incorporating
the renowned evolutionary algorithm, Genetic Algorithm
(GA), into our proposed hyperparameter optimization strategy,
we aimed to identify an optimal set of model parameters
ensuring optimal performance for each base learning model.
Additionally, employing the soft voting ensemble approach,
we enhanced the resilience of the final NFIIoT-DTL-IDS
models. As depicted in Table X, the attack detection accuracy
achieved by our framework exceeds that of conventional
machine learning approaches, deep learning-based IDS, and
preceding DTL approaches.

695

TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK W ITH
R ECENT W ORKS

D. Discussion
D1. Scalability
One of the key limitations in transforming NetFlow tabular
data into image representations is scalability, particularly about
the preprocessing overhead and storage costs. Converting a
large number of rows of tabular data into image blocks
significantly increases computational costs and disk usage. As
the dataset grows, this transformation process becomes more
resource-intensive, requiring more memory and processing
time, particularly for handling high-frequency flow-based data
in real-time systems. In addition, producing fixed-size image
matrices from variable-length network sessions introduces
rigidity, and this transformation process may limit the model’s
adaptability to real-world traffic scenarios with diverse characteristics. Despite these limitations, the approach offers notable
advantages in terms of computational scalability once the
data is transformed. Leveraging pre-trained CNNs allows the
use of transfer learning, which significantly reduces training
time and data requirements. The use of GPU-accelerated
batch processing optimizes inference speed, making the system
suitable for near-real-time deployment [49]. In addition, the
entire pipeline, from data ingestion to classification, can
be automated, enabling streamlined integration into modern
cloud-based or edge-based IDS [50]. Thus, while initial preprocessing may be computationally expensive, the downstream
benefits in terms of efficiency and deploy-ability make the
model scalable in practical applications.
D2. Interpretability
Another limitation of the proposed image transformation
approach is reduced interpretability. Converting the original

numerical feature vectors into pixels within an image grid
causes the semantic meaning of individual features to be
obscured. This loss of transparency makes it difficult for
security analysts to identify which specific network attributes
contribute to a given classification decision. Besides, the
relationships between the original features may not be easily
preserved meaningfully in the form of the spatial arrangement
of the transformed image style, which makes results less
intuitive compared to traditional models that operate directly
on raw original features. However, this limitation opens new
avenues for visual interpretability from the perspective of
the deep learning paradigm. Since CNNs are embedded with
techniques such as Grad-CAM and saliency maps, which
show important regions of an image that contribute most
to the predictions [51]. These techniques produce indirect
interpretation by identifying which areas, corresponding to
sets or patterns of features, are most relevant to the specific
attack type. Furthermore, CNNs excel at recognizing local and

696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

spatial patterns, potentially recognizing subtle traffic behaviors
or attack signatures that conventional statistical methods might
miss [52]. When features are stacked or grouped logically
within the image, the model can learn spatial hierarchies that
align with functional or protocol-based relationships, which
can provide a richer understanding of network behavior.
D3. Information loss
Another challenge of image data transformation is the
potential information loss, which is critical for capturing
network behavior over time. The NetFlow data, by nature,
consists of sequential events, in which the timing and order
can be critical in detecting outliers, anomalies, and intrusion
attempts. Converting this data into fixed-size image blocks
may abstract away certain temporal relationships, particularly
those that span across different blocks or rely on fine-grained
timestamps. This consequence could cause reduced sensitivity
to the type of attacks that manifest gradually or irregularly over
time. However, the proposed image transformation process
also brings intrinsic advantages. By leveraging 2D or 3D
CNNs, the automatic learning of spatial and cross-feature
correlations can be enabled, which are difficult to model with
traditional tabular analysis [53]. Moreover, block-wise transformation preserves a local temporal window (e.g., 138 flows
per block in the case of the NF-TON-IoTv2 dataset), allowing
the model to detect short-term patterns effectively. To address
the limitations regarding long-term temporal dependencies,
future work could explore hybrid models—for instance, combining CNNs for feature extraction with Transformers and
their variants to retain sequence-level information. This hybrid
strategy can potentially provide a more holistic understanding
of temporal behaviors in network flows while retaining the
advantages of deep image-based learning.
D4. Model Complexity
The proposed classification model is designed to improve
how well different types of attacks can be detected in IoT
networks. However, this integration results in additional computational overhead, including time and computing resources,
particularly in the training and optimization processes. This
complexity may limit the model’s real-time capability for
use in resource-constrained IoT systems at the edge or fog
layers, which are often deployed in IoT contexts. Thus,
in future work, the exploration of lightweight models such
as SqueezeNet or EfficientNet-Lite, which are designed to
operate efficiently on devices with limited processing power
and memory, can be employed. In addition, pruning and
knowledge distillation techniques can compress and accelerate
existing models without significant performance loss.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This study introduces NFIIoT-DTL-IDS, a robust deep
transfer learning-based intrusion detection framework tailored
for NetFlow and Industrial IoT environments. By employing six CNN architectures, including Xception, InceptionV3,
MobileNet, MobileNetV2, DenseNet121, and EfficientNetB0,
with preprocessing, image transformation, hyperparameter
optimization via genetic algorithm, and soft voting ensemble, the framework achieves exceptional intrusion detection

accuracy. Three benchmark datasets, including NF-TONIoTv2, NF-BoT-IoTv2, and X-IIoTID, are covered, and the
model consistently achieves 100% performance across all key
metrics, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting diverse
cyber threats and advanced industrial-specific attacks, such
as DDoS, ransomware, and theft in common cyberattacks
and MQTT subscription and crypto-ransomware attacks in
industrial IoT scenarios. In addition, the study compared
the proposed method with three baseline models, such as
LSTM, Transformer, and 3D CNN models, and the state-ofthe-art studies. NFIIoT-DTL-IDS shows superior classification
capability and generalization. Despite the promising results,
challenges remain in scalability, interpretability, temporal
information retention, and deployment efficiency, suggesting
future directions involving lightweight hybrid models and
broader dataset integration. In summary, this proposed framework signifies a meaningful advancement toward securing
Industry 5.0 and intelligent network management in nextgeneration IoT ecosystems.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Lou, R. Tan, Y. Zhang, M. Zhou, and C. Lv, “Personalized disassembly sequence planning for a human–robot hybrid disassembly cell,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 11372–11383, Sep. 2024,
doi: 10.1109/tii.2024.3403254.
[2] S. Rani, J. Dong, K. Shoukat, M. U. Shoukat, and S. A. Nawaz,
“A human–machine interaction mechanism: Additive manufacturing for
industry 5.0—Design and management,” Sustainability, vol. 16, no. 10,
p. 4158, 2024, doi: 10.3390/su16104158.
[3] M. Gopinath and S. C. Sethuraman, “A comprehensive survey on
deep learning based malware detection techniques,” Comput. Sci. Rev.,
vol. 47, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 100529, doi: 10.1016/j.cosrev.2022.100529.
[4] A. Khraisat and A. Alazab, “A critical review of intrusion detection
systems in the Internet of Things: Techniques, deployment strategy, validation strategy, attacks, public datasets and challenges,” Cybersecurity,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2021, doi: 10.1186/S42400-021-00077-7.
[5] “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data
sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022,
doi: 10.1109/jiot.2021.3085194.
[6] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, K. Ahmed, and R. Islam,
“Dependable intrusion detection system for IoT: A deep transfer
learning based approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 1006–1017, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/tii.2022.3164770.
[7] “Deep transfer learning: A novel collaborative learning model
for cyberattack detection systems in IoT networks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8578–8589, May 2023,
doi: 10.1109/jiot.2022.3202029.
[8] Y. Tang, S. Mishra, N. Alduaiji, P. Shukla, M. Yahya, and T. Pang, “An
advanced data analytics approach to a cognitive cyber-physical system
for the identification and mitigation of cyber threats in the Medical
Internet of Things (MIoT),” J. Supercomput., vol. 81, no. 4, p.623,
Mar. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s11227-025-07093-1.
[9] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “NetFlow
datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection
systems,” in Big Data Technologies and Applications, Z. Deze, H.
Huang, R. Hou, S. Rho, and N. Chilamkurti, Eds. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer Int., 2021, pp. 117–135.
[10] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID:
A connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for
Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3102056.
[11] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT Botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2018.03367731.
[12] M. Shafiq, Z. Tian, A. K. Bashir, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “IoT
malicious traffic identification using wrapper-based feature selection
mechanisms,” Comput. Security, vol. 94, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 101863,
doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.101863.

LI et al.: ADAPTIVE NFIIOT INTRUSION DETECTION WITH DEEP TRANSFER LEARNING, GENETIC OPTIMIZATION, AND ENSEMBLE METHODS

[13] W. L. Al-Yaseen, A. K. Idrees, and F. H. Almasoudy, “Wrapper
feature selection method based differential evolution and
extreme learning machine for intrusion detection system,”
Pattern Recognit., vol. 132, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 108912,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108912.
[14] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensic Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2022.3228493.
[15] P. L. S. Jayalaxmi, G. Kumar, R. Saha, M. Conti, T. Kim, and R. Thomas,
“DeBot: A deep learning-based model for bot detection in Industrial
Internet-of-Things,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 102, Sep. 2022, Art. no.
108214, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108214.
[16] Z. Ding et al., “MF-Net: Multi-frequency intrusion detection network
for Internet traffic data,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 146, Feb. 2024,
Art. no. 109999, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109999.
[17] H. Wan, S. Guo, K. Yin, X. Liang, and Y. Lin, “CTS-LSTM:
LSTM-based neural networks for correlatedtime series prediction,”
Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 191, Mar. 2020, Art. no. 105239,
doi: 10.1016/J.KNOSYS.2019.105239.
[18] A. Azzouni and G. Pujolle, “A long short-term memory recurrent
neural network framework for network traffic matrix prediction,” 2017,
arXiv:1705.05690v3.
[19] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational
LSTM enhanced anomaly detection for industrial big data,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TII.2020.3022432.
[20] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 35, 2020, pp. 11106–11115.
[21] Z. Wang, M. A. Goudarzi, and R. Buyya, “TF-DDRL: A
transformer-enhanced distributed DRL technique for scheduling IoT
applications in edge and cloud computing environments,” IEEE Trans.
Services Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1039–1053, Mar./Apr. 2025,
doi: 10.1109/tsc.2025.3528346.
[22] M. Fayyaz et al., “3D CNNs with adaptive temporal feature resolutions,” in Proc. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 4731–4740,
doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00470.
[23] Y. Gao and Y. Yang, “Transfer learning on stratified data: Joint estimation transferred from strata,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 140, Aug. 2023,
Art. no. 109535, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2023.109535.
[24] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based
intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547,
pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2020.05.130.
[25] N. Abosata, S. Al-Rubaye, and G. Inalhan, “Customised intrusion
detection for an industrial IoT heterogeneous network based on machine
learning algorithms called FTL-CID,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 321,
2023. doi: 10.3390/s23010321.
[26] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, and T. Geng, “DarknetSec: A novel
self-attentive deep learning method for darknet traffic classification and
application identification,” Comput. Security, vol. 116, May 2022, Art.
no. 102663, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102663.
[27] F. Yan, G. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Hou, and N. Yu, “TL-CNN-IDS:
Transfer learning-based intrusion detection system using convolutional
neural network,” J. Supercomput., vol. 79, no. 15, pp. 17562–17584,
Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s11227-023-05347-4.
[28] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AIbased security systems at the edge: Network TON_IoT datasets,”
Sustain. Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994,
doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.102994.
[29] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull,
“Towards the development of realistic botnet dataset in the
Internet of Things for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,”
Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019,
doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.05.041.
[30] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature set for network intrusion detection system datasets,”
Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022,
doi: 10.1007/s11036-021-01843-0.
[31] Y. Qing, X. Liu, and Y. Du, “Mitigating data imbalance to improve the
generalizability in IoT DDoS detection tasks,” J. Supercomput., vol. 80,
pp. 9935–9960, May 2024, doi: 10.1007/s11227-023-05829-5.
[32] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “DTL-IDS: An
optimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning
and genetic algorithm,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 221, Jan. 2024,
Art. no. 103784, doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2023.103784.

697

[33] X. Liu, Z. Tang, and B. Yang, “Predicting network attacks with
CNN by constructing images from NetFlow data,” in Proc. IEEE
5th Int. Conf. Big Data Security Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE Int.
Conf. High Perform. Smart Comput. (HPSC) IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Data Security (IDS), Washington, DC, USA, May 2019, pp. 61–66,
doi: 10.1109/BigDataSecurity-HPSC-IDS.2019.00022.
[34] K. I. E. Snell et al., “External validation of clinical prediction
models: Simulation-based sample size calculations were more reliable than rules-of-thumb,” J. Clin. Epidemiol., vol. 135, pp. 79–89,
2021.
[35] J. M. Abdullah and T. Ahmed, “Fitness dependent optimizer: Inspired
by the bee swarming reproductive process,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 43473–43486, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2907012.
[36] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
“ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255,
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
[37] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking
the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[38] S. Shao, S. McAleer, R. Yan, and P. Baldi, “Highly accurate machine fault diagnosis using deep transfer learning,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2446–2455, Apr. 2019,
doi: 10.1109/TII.2018.2864759.
[39] M.-A. Zöller and M. F. Huber, “Benchmark and survey of automated
machine learning frameworks,” 2021, arXiv:1904.12054.
[40] H. Victoria and G. Maragatham, “Automatic tuning of hyperparameters using Bayesian optimization,” Evol. Syst., vol. 12, pp. 217–223,
Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12530-020-09345-2.
[41] P. R. Lorenzo, J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok, L. S. Ramos, and J. Ranilla,
“Particle swarm optimization for hyper-parameter selection in deep
neural networks,” in Proc. Genet. Evol. Comput. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:25761026
[42] A. Sohail, “Genetic algorithms in the fields of artificial intelligence
and data sciences,” Ann. Data Sci., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1007–1018,
Aug. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s40745-021-00354-9.
[43] A. Alhowaide, I. Alsmadi, and J. Tang, “Ensemble detection model
for IoT IDS,” Internet Things, vol. 16, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 100435,
doi: 10.1016/j.iot.2021.100435.
[44] W. Ding, I. Alrashdi, H. Hawash, and M. Abdel-Basset, “DeepSecDrive:
An explainable deep learning framework for real-time detection of
cyberattack in in-vehicle networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 658, Feb. 2024, Art.
no. 120057, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2023.120057.
[45] D. Krishnan and P. Shrinath, “Robust botnet detection approach for
known and unknown attacks in IoT networks using stacked multiclassifier and adaptive thresholding,” Arab. J. Sci. Eng., vol. 49, pp.
12561–12577, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s13369-024-08742-y.
[46] D. Attique, W. Hao, W. Ping, D. Javeed, and P. Kumar, “Explainable
and data-efficient deep learning for enhanced attack detection in IIoT
ecosystem,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 38976–38986,
Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3384374.
[47] H. C. Altunay and Z. Albayrak, “A hybrid CNN+LSTM-based
intrusion detection system for industrial IoT networks,” Eng.
Sci. Technol. Int. J., vol. 38, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 101322,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2022.101322.
[48] D. Singh, A. Shukla, and M. Sajwan, “Deep transfer learning framework
for the identification of malicious activities to combat cyberattack,”
Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 125, pp. 687–697, Dec. 2021,
doi: 10.1016/j.future.2021.07.015.
[49] Y. Xu et al., Intrusion Detection Based on Fusing Deep Neural Networks
and Transfer Learning. Singapore: Springer, 2019, pp. 212–223,
doi: 10.1007/978-981-15-3341-9_18.
[50] X. Li and B. Zou, “An automated data engineering pipeline for anomaly
detection of IoT sensor data,” 2021, arXiv:2109.13828.
[51] Y. Gao, J. Liu, W. Li, M. Hou, Y. Li, and H. Zhao, “Augmented
Grad-CAM++: Super-resolution saliency maps for visual interpretation
of deep neural network,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 23, p. 4846, 2023,
doi: 10.3390/electronics12234846.
[52] M. M. Taye, “Theoretical understanding of convolutional
neural network: Concepts, architectures, applications, future
directions,” De Computis, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 52, 2023,
doi: 10.3390/computation11030052.
[53] E. Lee, M. Nam, and Y. C. Lee, “Tab2vox: CNN-based multivariate
multilevel demand forecasting framework by tabular-to-voxel image
conversion,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 18, 2022, Art. no. 11745,
doi: 10.3390/su141811745.

698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Jing Li received the B.Sc. degree in computer
science from China Jiliang University, in 1999,
the M.Sc. degree in information management from
Zhejiang University, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree
in informatics engineering from Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia, in 2025. He is an Assistant Professor
with the School of Computing and Data Science,
Xiamen University Malaysia. His research interests
include machine learning, deep learning, computer
networking, the Internet of Things, cybersecurity,
digital twins, big data, high-performance computing,
and applications of large language models.

Dina S. M. Hassan received the Engineering
degree in electronic engineering from Mansoura
University, Egypt, in 1997, the master’s degree
from the University of Manchester, U.K., in
2002, and the Ph.D. degree in wireless networks
from Ain Shams University, Egypt, in 2011.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Information Technology, Princess
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University. Her current
research interests include wireless networks, cloud
computing, deep learning, the Internet of Things, and
fog computing.

Mohd Shahizan Othman received the B.Sc. degree
in computer science from Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia (UTM), in 1998, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in information technology, specializing in
Web information extraction, information retrieval,
and machine learning from Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, in 2001 and 2008, respectively. He is an
Associate Professor with the Faculty of Computing,
UTM. His expertise includes data analytics, artificial
intelligence, machine learning, optimization, Web
mining, content management, AI-driven education
analytics, e-learning, social learning, and business intelligence.

Hewan Chen received the B.Sc. degree in computer
science from China Jiliang University, in 2003,
and the M.Sc. degree in software engineering from
Hangzhou Dianzi University, in 2008. She is an
Associate Researcher and Staff Engineer with the
Digital Reform Office, China Jiliang University.
Her research interests include digital reform, smart
campus construction, information systems, artificial
intelligence applications, and data-driven decisionmaking. She has published work on high-efficiency
wireless networks, digital campus development, data
transmission, and digital transformation and innovation in higher education.

Xugang Ying received the Bachelor of Engineering
degree in computer science and technology from
China Jiliang University, in 2003, and the Master
of Public Administration degree from the Graduate
School of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, in
2011. He currently serves as a Senior Engineer,
Nationally Accredited (China) with the Zhejiang
Provincial Human Resources and Social Security
Information Center. His current research and work
focus on information management and technology related to social security, including systems,
networks, big data application, and information security.

Lizawati Mi Yusuf received the B.Sc. degree
in computer science from Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia (UTM), in 2000, and the M.Sc. degree in
information technology from Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, in 2005. She is a Senior Lecturer with
the Faculty of Computing, UTM. Her expertise
spans optimization, Web information extraction
and retrieval, machine learning, artificial intelligence, computational intelligence, e-learning, social
learning, business intelligence, high-performance
computing, numerical analysis, and data mining.