IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

4509

Advancing Pre-Trained Teacher: Towards Robust
Feature Discrepancy for Anomaly Detection
Canhui Tang , Sanping Zhou , Member, IEEE, Yizhe Li , Yonghao Dong ,
and Le Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the wide application of knowledge distillation
between an ImageNet pre-trained teacher model and a learnable
student model, unsupervised anomaly detection has witnessed
a significant achievement in the past few years. The success
of this framework mainly relies on how to keep the feature
discrepancy between the teacher and student model, in which it
has two underlying sub-assumptions: (1) The teacher model can
represent two separable distributions for the normal and abnormal patterns, while (2) the student model can only reconstruct
the normal distribution. However, it still remains a challenging
issue to maintain these ideal assumptions in practice. In this
paper, we propose a simple yet effective two-stage industrial
anomaly detection framework, termed AAND, which sequentially
performs Anomaly Amplification and Normality Distillation to
enhance the two assumptions. In the first anomaly amplification
stage, we propose a novel Residual Anomaly Amplification (RAA)
module to advance the pre-trained teacher encoder with synthetic
anomalies. It generates adaptive residuals to amplify anomalies
while maintaining the feature integrity of pre-trained model.
It mainly comprises a Matching-guided Residual Gate and an
Attribute-scaling Residual Generator, which can determine the
residuals’ proportion and characteristic, respectively. In the
second normality distillation stage, we further employ a reverse
distillation paradigm to train a student decoder, in which a
novel Hard Knowledge Distillation (HKD) loss is built to better
facilitate the reconstruction of normal patterns. Comprehensive
experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and MvTec3D-RGB datasets
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Hui-design/AAND
Index Terms—Industrial anomaly detection, teacher-student
model, knowledge distillation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NDUSTRIAL Anomaly Detection (IAD) is a crucial task
that focuses on detecting and localizing anomalies in
images of industrial products. The scarcity of anomaly samples
poses a challenge, leading IAD to be typically approached as

I

Received 3 May 2024; revised 3 February 2025, 29 May 2025, 8 October
2025, and 6 January 2026; accepted 4 April 2026. Date of publication 17 April
2026; date of current version 30 April 2026. This work was supported in
part by the National Science and Technology Major Project under Grant
2023ZD0121300; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant 62572384, Grant U24A20325, Grant 62125305,
and Grant 62503384; and in part by the Key Research and Development
Plan of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2024PT-ZCK-80. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Xinchao Wang. (Corresponding author: Sanping Zhou.)
The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine
Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, Institute of Artificial Intelligence and
Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail:
spzhou@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2026.3683277

Fig. 1. Illustration of teacher-student feature discrepancy, whose success relies
on how to keep the feature discrepancy between teacher and student model.
This line of methods has two underlying assumptions that have not been well
addressed: (1) The teacher model can represent two separable distributions
for the normal and abnormal patterns; while (2) the student decoder can only
reconstruct the normal distribution.

an unsupervised problem that relies solely on normal samples
for training. Moreover, industrial anomalies are hard to detect
and localize due to their diverse and uncertain nature, which
can range from subtle texture changes to significant structural
defects. In practice, feature extractors pre-trained on ImageNet
[1] have been widely applied in the IAD task [2], [3], [4],
in which they are utilized to generate representations for
the diverse normal and abnormal patterns. By capturing and
modeling the distribution of pre-trained features for normal
samples, subsequent anomaly detection can be achieved by
identifying deviations from the learned distribution.
Recent advances [3], [5], [6], [7], [8] often adopt knowledge
distillation to take advantage of the pre-trained model, which
involves a multi-scale feature reconstruction of the pre-trained
features. As shown in Fig. 1, it solves the anomaly detection
problem by focusing on the “teacher-student discrepancy”, i.e.,
the feature discrepancy between a fixed pre-trained teacher
encoder and a learnable student decoder. To make the “teacherstudent discrepancy” hypothesis more robust, particularly
ensuring larger discrepancies when anomalies are presented,
two underlying sub-assumptions need to be satisfied: (1) The
teacher model can represent two separable distributions for
the normal and abnormal patterns, while (2) the student
decoder can only reconstruct the normal distribution. However, these ideal assumptions are hard to meet in practice,
which requires researchers to improve them from different
perspectives.
For the first assumption, it is important yet has been overlooked in current methods. As shown in Table I, we measure

1941-0042 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

TABLE I
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF T EACHER M ODEL ON THE V IS A [9] DATASET.
“ ” I NDICATES THE A SSUMPTION I S N OT F ULLY G UARANTEED , AND
“IC D ISTANCE ” R EPRESENTS THE I NTER -C LASS C OSINE D IS TANCES OF M ULTI -L AYER F EATURES (1/2/3 LAYERS ). F OR
FAIR C OMPARISON , THE S TUDENT M ODEL I S
S ET C ONSISTENT

the cosine distance of multi-layer teacher features between
normal patches and abnormal patches. We can observe a
significant reduction in inter-class distance and a performance
(I-AUC) drop when the teacher model is randomly initialized
in the well-known RD [3] framework. Although the pre-trained
model can alleviate this issue, it still remains a challenging
issue to generate discriminative features in solving the IAD
problem. To the best of our knowledge, the challenge mainly
arises from two aspects: (1) Difference between task objectives.
In pre-training on ImageNet, models aim to discriminate
between different object categories; while in the IAD task,
models need to discriminate between normal and abnormal
instances within a single object category. (2) Scarcity of abnormal data. Abnormal objects are far less common than normal
objects in the real world, therefore the models have fewer
opportunities to learn representations of anomalies during pretraining. Due to these factors, the pre-trained embeddings may
become over-compressed and learn some irrelevant semantics
to the IAD task, which limits the pre-trained teacher model’s
ability to discriminate between normal and abnormal industrial
instances. When it comes to the second assumption, earlier
methods [3], [6] give a natural constraint, i.e., anomalies
cannot reconstruct abnormal representations since they are
absent in the training process. To guarantee the student model
consistently outputs normal patterns, some recent works [7],
[8] impose stronger constraints on the student model to suppress anomaly signals. Despite these, less attention has been
drawn to the reconstruction capacity of the student decoder
in dealing with challenging normal patterns, such as the finegrained normal textures and rare normal patterns.
To this end, we consider how to extend the teacher
encoder’s discrimination capacity and how to enhance the
student decoder’s normality distillation ability. In this paper,
we propose a two-stage framework to achieve robust feature
discrepancy between the teacher and student model. Specifically, it consists of an anomaly amplification stage and a
normality distillation stage, which address the first and second
assumptions, respectively. In the first stage, we propose a
novel Residual Anomaly Amplification (RAA) module to
advance the fixed teacher with the exposure of synthetic
anomalies. Instead of proposing pioneering operators [10],
[11], the primary novelty of our RAA lies in building a
robust anomaly amplification mechanism that enhances the
pre-trained teacher’s discrimination ability using synthetic
anomalies. Pre-trained features have learned a universal distribution of normal patterns, while over-reliance on synthetic
anomalies may lead to catastrophic forgetting [12] of this pretrained knowledge. To address this, our RAA module employs
an adaptive residual learning mechanism. This module comprises two components: a matching-guided residual gate and
an attribute-scaling residual generator, which determine the
proportion and characteristics of residuals, respectively. This
model effectively amplifies the sensitivity to anomalies while
maintaining the feature integrity of pre-trained model. In
the second stage, we employ a reverse distillation paradigm
to train a student decoder that can only reconstruct normal
representations, in which a novel hard knowledge distillation
(HKD) loss is built to better facilitate the reconstruction of
normal patterns. Without losing generality, the teacher-student
discrepancy is utilized for anomaly detection during inference.
Comprehensive experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and
MvTec3D-RGB datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We design a novel two-stage anomaly detection framework based on the two underlying assumptions of
knowledge distillation, which can obtain robust feature
discrepancy between the teacher and student model.
• We design a novel residual anomaly amplification module
in the anomaly amplification stage, which can enhance
the discrimination capacity of the vanilla teacher encoder
with the help of synthetic anomalies.
• We design a novel hard knowledge distillation loss in
the normality distillation stage, which can enhance the
reconstruction capability of the student decoder in dealing
with challenging normal patterns.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review
the related work in Section II. Section III describes the
technical details of our proposed AAND. Section IV presents
the experiment details and results. Finally, we summarize the
paper in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review some related works on IAD.
The current works can be categorized into four types:
reconstruction-based, synthesis-based, embedding-based, and
distillation-based methods.
A. Reconstruction-Based Methods
As anomaly detection is typically treated as an unsupervised
problem, reconstruction-based methods have emerged as a
natural approach. It aims to reconstruct normal inputs and
assumes that the reconstruction error is larger for anomalies.
Early methods often employ GAN [13], AE [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], or VAE [19], [20] to train reconstruction models. To
make the anomaly pixels more difficult to reconstruct, RIAD
[21] proposes a reconstruction-by-inpainting approach, which
removes partial pixels to reconstruct the images. Inspired by
the ability of latent diffusion model [22], [23] in generating high-quality and diverse images, more and more recent
approaches [24], [25], [26], [27] utilize diffusion models to

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

model the image reconstruction as a denoising process. Nevertheless, the pixel-level reconstruction methods may easily
generalize to anomalies, resulting in the well-reconstruction
of some anomalies. To address this issue, some research
has focused on exploring knowledge distillation, with a shift
towards reconstructing inputs at the feature level.
B. Synthesis-Based Methods
Due to the lack of abnormal samples in training, it is
challenging for the IAD task to find the boundary between normality and anomaly. Thus, synthesis-based methods propose to
synthesize anomalies by introducing noises into normal images
[28], [29], [30], [31]. For example, in the case of DRAEM
[28], textures are sampled from an external texture dataset
[32], and Perlin [33] noise is employed to generate random
anomaly masks for creating anomalies. Besides, Cutpaste
[29] randomly selects augmented regions from an image and
pastes it onto other random regions of the image. NSA [30]
innovatively employs Poisson image editing to seamlessly
blend patches of varying sizes from different images, which
provides an excellent anomaly synthesis method. Additionally,
some methods synthesize noise at the feature level, such as
SimpleNet [34] and DSR [35]. However, real-world anomalies
exhibit a wide range of patterns and uncertainties that cannot
be fully covered. Consequently, over-reliance on synthetic
anomalies may overfit the seen anomalies, while getting bad
performance on unseen anomalies. In our method, we utilize
synthetic anomalies to amplify the sensitivity of the pre-trained
model to anomalies, while keeping its original discrimination
ability on some unseen anomalies. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to enhance the pre-trained teacher model
with synthetic anomalies in solving the IAD problem.

4511

involve a student model to reconstruct the multi-scale pretrained embeddings of a teacher model on normal samples.
The mainstream methods can be roughly categorized into
forward distillation and reverse distillation methods. In particular, the forward distillation approaches [5], [6] often adopt
similar networks between student and teacher models to
train the distillation process. Nevertheless, they suffer from
the similarity of student and teacher architecture, where the
abnormal data is mapped closely, resulting in an undesirably
small feature discrepancy for anomalies. To address this issue,
RD [3] adopts a reverse distillation paradigm. Rather than
directly receiving raw images, the student network takes the
one-class embedding of the teacher model as input, to restore
the teacher’s multi-scale representations. Besides, AST [44]
proposes a framework comprising a pre-trained encoder and
two decoders, in which a normalizing flow decoder serves
as a teacher for density estimation, while a conventional
feed-forward network acts as a student. To guarantee the
student network consistently outputs normal patterns, recent
methods impose stronger constraints on the student network.
For example, RD++ [7] introduces multi-scale projection
layers and incorporates several loss constraints, so as to facilitate the student model in suppressing abnormal signals from
pseudo-abnormal regions. Besides, DeSTSeg [8] introduces a
denoising stage to train a denoising student that reconstructs
the normal patterns both for normal and abnormal inputs.
However, most distillation-based methods solely focus on
the student model, while overlooking the limited discrimination ability of the teacher model. Unlike previous methods, we
both focus on enhancing the teacher model’s discrimination
capacity and the student model’s normality distillation ability.
III. M ETHOD

C. Embedding-Based Methods
Thanks to the development of models pre-trained on extensive external datasets, such methods [36], [37] can effectively
represent both normal and abnormal patterns for anomaly
detection. In practice, the embedding-based methods usually
utilize ImageNet pre-trained models to encode normal samples
into high-dimensional feature spaces. For example, Padim [38]
calculates the inverse covariance matrix to model the normal
distribution, Patchcore [2] stores representative features in
memory banks, and M3DM [39] constructs multiple memory
banks to store features from different modalities. What’s
different, some methods [4], [40], [41], [42] employ additional
decoders to learn the distribution of normal samples using
normalizing flows [43]. For example, CS-Flow [41] proposes a
simple framework that jointly processes multiple feature maps
of different scales. Besides, CFlow [4] models a conditional
normalizing flow with a position encoding, and adopts a multiscale generative decoder to estimate the likelihood of encoded
features. Since these methods largely rely on the pre-trained
model, their performances are limited by the discrimination
capacity of pre-trained model.
D. Distillation-Based Methods
This line of methods can combine the advantages of both
reconstruction-based and embedding-based methods, which

In the context of unsupervised industrial anomaly detection,
let X train = {In1 , In2 . . . , InN } be a training set containing only
normal images, and X test = {It1 , It2 . . . , ItM } be a test set
including both normal and abnormal images. The goal of
anomaly detection is to train a model to identify and localize
anomalies in the test images.
A. Revisiting Teacher-Student Discrepancy
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [3], [7], [8] has achieved
promising results in the industrial anomaly detection task.
They solve the anomaly detection problem by focusing on
the “teacher-student discrepancy”, i.e., the feature discrepancy
between a fixed pre-trained teacher encoder and a learnable
student decoder, which can be formulated as follows:
D(FT , FS ) = 1 − s(FT , FS ),

(1)

where s(, ) denotes the cosine similarity. FT and FS represent
the teacher features and student features, respectively. It is
hypothesized that anomalies have larger discrepancies than
normal samples as follows:
D(FaT , FS ) > D(FnT , FS ),

(2)

where the superscript n and a represent normal and abnormal
samples, respectively. To make the hypothesis work, as shown

4512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed AAND. I. Anomaly amplification Stage for enhancing Assumption I (Ass. I): the vanilla teacher model encodes the input
image into K-level features FT k , and then these features are advanced to FAk through our proposed Residual Anomaly Amplification module (RAA). The
RAA module generates adaptive residuals, effectively amplifying anomalies and preserving the integrity of the pre-trained model. It comprises a matchingguided residual gate and an attribute-scaling residual generator, which determine the proportion and characteristics of the residuals, respectively. II. Normality
Distillation Stage for enhancing Assumption II (Ass. II): a student model decodes features FS k , and these features are trained to distill the representation of
advanced teacher only on normal samples, where “BN” denotes a bottleneck module and LHKD represents our proposed Hard Knowledge Distillation loss.
During inference, the “teacher-student discrepancy” is used for anomaly detection.

in Fig. 1, two underlying sub-assumptions are required in
the recent KD-based frameworks. (1) Assumption I: The
teacher encoder can represent two separable distributions for
normal and abnormal patterns, which is implicitly satisfied
by employing an ImageNet pre-trained encoder. (2) Assumption II: The student decoder is designed to reconstruct only the
normal distribution, which is indirectly achieved by training
exclusively on normal samples. If the two assumptions were
satisfied, the abnormal teacher features FaT would fall outside
the boundary of the normal features FnT , thereby exceeding
the reconstruction capabilities of the student network FS . As
a result, anomalies would exhibit larger discrepancies than
normal samples, which would lead to a robust “teacher-student
discrepancy” as illustrated in Eq. (2).
However, these ideal assumptions are hard to meet in
practice, which motivates us to enhance them from various
perspectives. As shown in Fig. 2, we propose a simple yet
effective two-stage anomaly detection framework, which comprises an Anomaly Amplification Stage (Stage I) to address
Assumption I and a Normality Distillation Stage (Stage II) to
address Assumption II.
B. Anomaly Amplification Stage
ImageNet pre-trained encoders are widely used [2], [3],
[7] in the industrial anomaly detection task, where the pretrained embedding is directly used as teacher representation
without any adaption. However, as outlined in Table. I, the gap
between ImageNet pretraining and IAD task poses significant
challenges in fulfilling Assumption I. To mitigate this issue,
we introduce an anomaly amplification stage to increase the
teacher model’s ability to discriminate between normal and

anomalous patterns. Moreover, we propose an RAA module
with adaptive residual generation to amplify anomaly and
preserve the pre-trained model’s generalizability. The training
within this stage incorporates synthetic anomalies.
Anomaly synthesis. Given the normal images from the
training set X train , we use a widely used anomaly generator
[28] to generate abnormal masks and images. First, Perlin
noise [33] is generated and binarized into an anomaly mask
a
M ∈ {0, 1}H×W to determine the locations of anomalies. Then,
texture samples are obtained from the source texture dataset
[32] to serve as the content for these locations. For a normal
image In ∈ RC×H×W , the corresponding synthetic abnormal
image is denoted as Ia ∈ RC×H×W . Considering the anomalies
are typically on the foreground object, we follow [45] to
f
extract a foreground mask M ∈ {0, 1}H×W with grayscale
binary thresholding algorithms. The resulting pseudo-anomaly
mask M is then obtained by taking the intersection of the two
masks.
During the first-stage training, we take the corrupted image
Ia as input of the teacher encoder. The encoder extracts
K-level features FTk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk . At the k-th level of feature
extraction, a total of Hk × Wk patches are obtained. By
subsampling the anomaly mask at the same scale, denoted as
Mk , and using it to label the normal and abnormal locations,
these patches can be divided into Nkn normal patches and Nka
abnormal patches. The corresponding features are denoted as
n
a
FnTk ∈ RNk ×Ck and FaTk ∈ RNk ×Ck respectively.
Residual Anomaly Amplification. Considering overreliance on synthetic anomalies may lead to catastrophic
forgetting [12] of pre-trained knowledge, we propose a novel
RAA module, which utilizes an adaptive residual learning

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

4513

as wnk j , j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, and the anomaly weights, denoted as
wak j , j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, are derived as follows:
wnki j =

Fig. 3. Illustration of our proposed RAA module. It utilizes an adaptive
residual learning mechanism to amplify anomalies while maintaining the
integrity of pre-trained model.

exp(s(qik , mnk j ))
Z

where wak ∈ [0, 1]Hk ×Wk represents the anomaly weights predicted by the residual gate, and ∆ak ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk is the residual
signals generated by the residual generator.
1) Matching-Guided Residual Gate: This module aims to
regulate the proportion of residuals, which functions as a
robust binary classifier that predicts the weight of residuals.
This prediction is informed by the matching results between
the queries and the learned memory items.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we take the feature map FTk ∈
RCk ×Hk ×Wk extracted from the frozen teacher block as input.
The input is first added with a position encoding pc [41], and
then passed through an MLP, Φkθ1 (·), for projection:
qik = Φkθ1 (FiTk + pic ),

(4)

where FiTk ∈ RC and pic ∈ RC are the input feature and position
encoding at the i-th patch, respectively. In addition, qik ∈ RC
represents the projected feature. To represent the memory of
normality and anomaly, we configure a normal memory Mnk =
{mnk1 , mnk2 , . . . , mnkL } containing L learnable normal embeddings, and an anomaly memory Mak = {mak1 , mak2 , . . . , makL }
containing L learnable anomaly embeddings. These embeddings are initialized with a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1).
Subsequently, a matching process is conducted between the
query and memories, which involves computing their cosine
similarity and normalizing the similarity scores using the
softmax function. Consequently, the normal weights, denoted

Z

,

(5)

where
Z represents
the normalization factor, ensuring that
PL
PL
n
a
w
+
w
j=1 ki j
j=1 ki j = 1. When presented with an abnormal
patch query qak , it has a higher affinity to the anomaly memory.
Conversely, for a normal patch query qnk , it has a higher
affinity to the normal memory. Afterwards, the sum of anomaly
weights is taken as the outputs of the residual gate:
waki =

mechanism to enhance anomaly detection without compromising the integrity of the pre-trained model. This module
comprises two critical components: a matching-guided residual
gate and an attribute-scaling residual generator. As shown
in Fig. 3, the residual gate suppresses residuals on normal samples to maintain the integrity of pre-trained model
while encouraging residuals on synthetic inputs to promote
deviations. Additionally, the residual generator is designed
to adaptively learn the characteristics of residuals, which
directly influence the distribution of emergent abnormal features. By embedding these RAA modules into the pre-existing
framework, we have successfully crafted an advanced teacher
encoder that robustly enhances anomaly detection capabilities.
The extracted feature at the k-th block of the advanced
teacher model, denoted as FAk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk , is calculated as
follows:
FAk = FTk + wak · ∆ak ,
(3)

exp(s(qik , mak j ))

, waki j =

L
X

waki j = 1 −

j=1

L
X

wnki j ,

(6)

j=1

where the anomaly weight waki ∈ [0, 1] represents the anomaly
probability of inputs. To supervise the anomaly weight, we
adopt the well-known focal loss [46]. The ground truth waki ∈
{0, 1} is from the pseudo-anomaly mask Mk , which equals to 1
when it is a synthetic abnormal patch, while equaling to 0
when it is a normal patch. Under binary label supervision, the
discriminative ability of the residual gate is guaranteed. As
for diversity, by matching with varied normal and synthetic
abnormal features, the dual memories will implicitly learn the
diverse feature distributions. Within the RAA module, the role
of memory is to control the proportion of adaptive residual
generation for a robust teacher-student discrepancy. Given that
the module constitutes only a part of our AAND framework,
we do not impose further constraints to maintain its simplicity.
2) Attribute-Scaling Residual Generator: Due to the influence of residual characteristics on the distribution of new
abnormal features, we address this challenge by introducing
an attribute-scaling residual generator. The residual noise aims
to emphasize the attributes that are relevant to anomalies
while diminishing those irrelevant attributes. Specifically, the
key designs are the channel weight module and the anomaly
amplification loss.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we initiate the process by projecting
FiTk using another MLP, denoted as Φkθ2 (·). Subsequently, each
channel of the projected feature is mapped to the range (−1,1)
through a tanh function, yielding scaling weights Σik ∈ RC
for each channel. Finally, the generated residual ∆ak i ∈ RC
is calculated by multiplying the channel weights and input
features as follows:
∆ak i = Tanh(Φkθ2 (FiTk ))

FiTk ,

(7)

where
denotes element-wise multiplication. To obtain the
updated features and avoid interfering with the parameters of
the residual gate, we replace the predicted anomaly weights
ŵai with the ground truth anomaly weights wai during training
as follows:
FnAik = FnTik + 0 · ∆ak i ,

FaAik = FaTik + 1 · ∆ak i ,

(8)

where the superscripts ai and ni denote the abnormal and
normal patches, respectively. Here, FaAik represents the learnable
features updated by the residuals, while FaTik , FnAik , and FnTik
remain frozen. This ensures that the optimization is confined

4514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

exclusively to the synthetic anomaly features, specifically on
the residual ∆ak i .
To supervise the residuals, we propose an anomaly amplification loss to push the abnormal features outside the
boundaries of normality. Unlike traditional contrastive learning
employing both “push” and “pull” actions, our method focuses
solely on pushing anomalies away from normal samples using
a dynamic margin, enhancing discriminability while preserving pre-trained priors. The loss is calculated as follows:
Nka

Nkn

1 XX
n
f
max(s(FaAik , FTkj ), Sre
LA = a n
ki j ),
Nk Nk

(9)

i=1 j=1

f
where Sre
∈ RNk ×Nk is a dynamic margin matrix calculated
k
based on the similarity matrix produced by the vanilla teacher
model, which is denoted as follows:
a

n

n

f
ai
j
Sre
ki j = s(FT k , FT k ) − α,

(10)

where α is a hyper-parameter to control the degree of reduction. It is noteworthy that the loss function LA is specifically
designed to reduce the similarity between abnormal and normal features. For normal samples, we utilize the residual gate
to suppress the residuals instead of pulling them as in standard
contrastive learning. This approach preserves the integrity of
the pre-trained model, thereby preserving its ability to capture
a diverse representation of normal samples.
The overall loss of this stage is summarized as follows:
L1 = L f ocal + LA ,

Fig. 4. Illustration of our proposed HKD loss. It facilitates the reconstruction
on challenging normal patterns by selecting the Kh normal patches with the
highest distillation loss for further training.

(11)

where the focal loss and anomaly amplification loss supervise the anomaly weight wak and the residual signals ∆ak ,
respectively. Under the supervision, the abnormal features are
trained to be pushed outside the boundaries of normality. As a
result, Stage I enhances Assumption I, i.e., the teacher model
can represent two separable distributions for the normal and
abnormal patterns.
It should be noted that even if Stage I provides a good foundation, the “teacher-student discrepancy” of unseen anomalies
is still hard to guarantee. Thus, we need Stage II to model
the distribution of normal features, allowing anomalies to be
naturally identified as deviations from the learned distribution.
C. Normality Distillation Stage
Upon enhancing the discrimination capabilities of the
teacher encoder, our objective shifts to training a student
decoder, designed to reconstruct only the normal distribution.
To accomplish this, we employ a reverse distillation paradigm
[3] to train the student decoder. Within this framework,
we introduce a hard knowledge distillation loss, specifically
designed to improve the reconstruction of normal patterns.
In this stage, the advanced teacher is fixed and only receives
normal samples. Its output normal features FnAk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk
are then passed to a one-class bottleneck embedding module
[3], which aggregates the multi-scale embeddings to obtain
a compact representation. Subsequently, the learnable student
decoder predicts multi-scale features FnS k ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk , which

is trained to fit the target features from the teacher model using
a knowledge distillation loss:
n

n

LKD = 1 − s(F̃Ak , F̃S k ),
n
F̃Ak

(12)

n
F̃S k

where the features
∈ RCk Hk Wk and
∈ RCk Hk Wk are
n
n
obtained by flattening the features FAk and FS k through vectorization, respectively.
Furthermore, considering the difficulty in accurately reconstructing the features of certain fine-grained normal textures
and rare normal patterns, we propose a hard knowledge
distillation loss as follows:
Kh

LHKD =

1 X
(1 − s(FnAdk .FnSdk )),
Kh

(13)

d=1

where Kh represents the number of selected hard samples,
while FnAdk and FnAdk denote the selected features. As illustrated
in Fig. 4, the HKD loss specifically emphasizes the distillation
of the top-Kh hard normal instances, which helps the student
decoder to achieve a more accurate reconstruction of these
challenging patterns.
The overall loss function for the normality distillation stage
is formulated as follows:
L2 = LKD + LHKD .

(14)

By exclusively training with normal samples and leveraging
the compact embedding design of reverse distillation [3], the
student decoder will be effectively constrained to reconstruct
only the normal distribution. With the HKD loss, the normality
recall ability towards challenging normal patterns is further
strengthened. As a result, Stage II enhances Assumption II,
i.e., the student decoder can only reconstruct the normal
distribution. To summarize the two-stage training procedure
of our AAND, we show the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
D. Inference
During inference, the anomaly detection is based on the
feature discrepancy between the advanced teacher model and
the student model. Given a test image It , the advanced teacher
encoder extracts K-level features FAk , then the student decoder

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code of AAND Training

4515

AD. It not only contains multiple instances of a single object
category but also has different types of Printed Circuit Boards
(PCB) with complex structures.
3) MVTec3D-RGB: It is a multi-modal dataset that comprises 2,656 training 2D-3D pairs and 1,197 testing 2D-3D
pairs. Some anomalies are more significant in geometry while
having subtle changes in appearance, making it particularly
challenging to detect anomalies based solely on the visual
appearance of RGB images. Considering the computational
cost with point cloud data, we follow the recent work [45]
to employ only the RGB images for anomaly detection and
localization.
B. Implementation Details

aggregates the features and reconstructs the multi-scale features FS k . The feature discrepancy, denoted as D(FAk , FS k ), is
calculated using the negative cosine similarity as follows:
D(FAk , FS k ) = 1 − s(FAk , FS k ).

(15)

The advanced teacher model is capable of generating discriminative features for both normal and abnormal inputs,
whereas the student network is tailored to reconstruct only the
normal features. This configuration results in a minor feature
discrepancy in normal samples, while a pronounced discrepancy when anomalies are present. To effectively localize
anomalies, anomaly maps are generated across the K network
blocks. These maps are then upsampled and aggregated to
obtain an anomaly score for each pixel:
K
X
ŜA =
Upk (D(FAk , FS k )),
(16)
l=1

where ŜA is the predicted anomaly score map, and Upk (·)
denotes the bi-linear up-sampling. A higher score in the
anomaly map indicates a higher likelihood of anomaly at
that position, and the maximum value in the anomaly map
is considered as the image-level anomaly score.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Dataset
To assess the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
conduct comprehensive experiments on three datasets: MVTec
AD [47], Visa [9] and MVTec3D-RGB [48].
1) MVTec AD: It is a well-studied benchmark for anomaly
detection and localization. It consists of 3,629 anomaly-free
training images, and 1,725 testing images, which include both
normal and abnormal samples. The dataset has been widely
explored with the results almost reaching saturation.
2) VisA: It is a large industrial anomaly detection dataset
that is composed of 10,821 high-resolution color images of
12 objects. The anomaly type covers both surface and
structural defects. The dataset is more challenging than MvTec

1) Experimental Settings: We utilize the WideResNet50
[36] encoder as the backbone with the output embeddings
from three layers (K = 3). During training, images are resized
into 256 × 256, batch size is set to 16, and Adam is used
as the optimizer with a learning rate of 0.005. We train the
first stage for 100 epochs and then train the second stage for
another 120 epochs. Besides, the hyper-parameters α, L, and
Kh are set to 0.3, 50, and 10, respectively. For the synthetic
anomalies, we follow [42] to extract foreground masks with
grayscale binary thresholding algorithms to control the noise
only in the foreground, which brings the synthesis closer to
real conditions.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate the AD performance
using the area under the receiver operator curve (AUROC)
based on the generated anomaly scores. We utilize image-level
AUROC (I-AUC) to evaluate anomaly detection performance,
while pixel-based AUROC (P-AUC) and the PRO metric [49]
were employed to assess anomaly localization. Unlike P-AUC,
the PRO metric is not influenced by the size of the anomaly
regions. As a result, it can more effectively reflect the model’s
performance in detecting hard samples with subtle anomalies.
C. Main Results
We conduct a comprehensive comparison of the performance of anomaly detection and localization. We mainly
compare the Knowledge Distillation-based (KD) methods
[3], [5], [7], [8] and other popular paradigms for anomaly
detection, such as reconstruction-based approaches [45], [47],
synthesis-based methods [28], [34], and embedding-based
methods [2], [4]. For the MvTec AD dataset [47], reported
results are directly obtained from the published papers. For the
newly published VisA [9] and MVTec3D-RGB [48] datasets,
due to some anomaly detection methods have not yet been
evaluated on these datasets, we re-train them using their opensource code and evaluate their performance on both datasets.
Table II shows the comparison results of anomaly detection
and localization on the MVTec AD, VisA, and MVTec3DRGB benchmarks. In the widely studied MVTec AD dataset,
our method slightly outperforms the current state-of-the-art
methods. Since the anomalies of this dataset are relatively
easier to identify, the current methods have already achieved
a high level of performance, leaving limited potential for
substantial advancements. In the VisA and MVTec3D datasets,

4516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

TABLE II
A NOMALY D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE ON THE MVT EC AD [47], V IS A [9] AND M V T EC 3D-RGB [48] DATASET. S INCE THE
MVT EC AD B ENCHMARK H AS A PPROACHED SATURATION , O UR M ETHOD S HOWS O NLY S LIGHT ENHANCEMENTS . W HEN A PPLIED TO THE
M ORE C HALLENGING V IS A AND MVT EC 3D-RGB DATASETS , M ORE S IGNIFICANT I MPROVEMENTS C AN B E O BSERVED . C OMPARED TO
P-AUC, THE PRO M ETRIC O FFERS A M ORE E FFECTIVE R EFLECTION OF THE M ODEL ’ S A BILITY TO D ETECT H ARD S AMPLES

TABLE III
E VALUATION OF A NOMALY D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE OF A LL O BJECT C ATEGORIES ON THE C HALLENGING V IS A DATASET

TABLE IV
E VALUATION OF D ETECTION AND L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE OF A LL O BJECT C ATEGORIES ON THE C HALLENGING MVT EC 3D-RGB DATASETS

our method surpasses the current state-of-the-art approaches
significantly. Compared to the well-known method PatchCore
[2], our method takes advantage of the enhanced feature
encoder and robust knowledge distillation paradigm, leading to better performances. Compared to the synthesis-based
method SimpleNet [34], our approach achieves comparable
results on the MvTec dataset, while demonstrating significant improvements on the more challenging Visa and
Mvtec3D-RGB datasets. This observation indicates the robustness of our method in handling more complex industrial
datasets. Compared with our baseline RD, our proposed
method improves the image-level AUROC and pixel-level PRO
by 1.0%, 1.0% on MvTec AD, 1.9%, 1.4% on VisA, 2.1%,
0.8% on Mvtec3D-RGB.
Thanks to the enhanced discrimination capability of our
advanced teacher model, our method demonstrates the ability to effectively detect previously undetectable anomalies.
Table III and Table IV present the anomaly detection
and localization performance for each object in VisA and

MVTec3D-RGB datasets, respectively. These two datasets
contain difficult anomaly instances, such as candle, macaroni2, tire, and chewing-gum, that exhibit subtle variations in
appearance compared to normal instances, posing significant
challenges to anomaly detection. Remarkably, our method
achieves a 2.4% I-AUC improvement in the “candle” category,
a 4.6% I-AUC improvement in the “macarnoni2” category, a
5.0% I-AUC improvement in the “tire” category, and a 2.9%
PRO improvement in the chewing-gum category. These results
highlight the effectiveness of our approach in overcoming
the limited discrimination capacity of pre-trained models and
effectively identifying challenging anomalies.
D. Ablation Study
1) Ablation of Main Components: In this part, we conduct
an ablation study on the main components of our model:
RAA module proposed in the first stage and HKD loss
proposed in the second stage. In detail, RAA comprises a

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

4517

TABLE V

TABLE VII

A BLATION S TUDY OF M AIN M ODULES OF O UR F RAMEWORK . MRG AND
ARG A RE THE S UB -M ODULES OF RAA P ROPOSED IN THE F IRST
S TAGE . LHKD I S THE H ARD K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION L OSS
P ROPOSED IN THE S ECOND S TAGE

A BLATION OF O UR T WO -S TAGE T RAINING A PPROACH . T HE P ERFOR MANCES D ENOTE THE I-AUC ON THE M V T EC , V IS A, AND MVT EC
3D-RGB DATASETS

TABLE VIII
A NALYSIS OF THE R ESIDUAL P ROPERTIES IN THE ARG M ODULE
TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF A LTERNATIVE D ESIGNS FOR THE RAA M ODULE

Matching-based Residual Gate (MRG) and Attribute-scaling
Residual Generator (ARG). We utilize the RD [3] as the baseline and compare the following settings: (a) directly utilizing
the predicted anomaly weight from MRG as the anomaly
score, (b) blindly generating residuals using ARG without
considering the anomaly weight from MRG, (c) incorporating
both MRG and ARG, i.e., the RAA module, (d) solely introducing the HKD loss to the baseline, and (e) employing all the
components. As shown in Table V (a)-(d), the integration of
MRG and ARG is essential for the advancement of the vanilla
teacher model to achieve better performance. Solely relying
on MRG leads to overfitting to synthetic anomalies, while
replacing ARG with learnable residuals degrades performance.
These will be further discussed in the subsequent ablation
study (Tables VI and VIII). Besides, without MRG (Exp. (c)),
generating an equal proportion of residuals for both normal
and abnormal samples disrupts the discrimination ability of the
pre-trained model, resulting in an ambiguous representation
space. The results of (d) and (f) show the effectiveness of the
hard knowledge distillation loss, which enhances the student’s
ability to accurately reconstruct the features of certain finegrained normal textures and rare normal patterns. By using
all the components, our method can not only extend the pretrained teacher’s representation ability but also enhance the
student’s normal distillation ability, which satisfies the first
and second assumptions in the distillation-based methods.
2) Comparison of Different Alternative Methods: Our
framework augments the discrimination capacity of the pretrained teacher model by leveraging synthetic anomalies. We
compare our proposed method with alternative discriminationbased approaches. In experiments (1)-(4) of Table VI, we

fix the proposed synthetic anomaly generation method and
replace the RAA module with several alternative designs:
(1) a conventional contrastive learning module to refine the
pretrained features; (2) directly using MRG to predict the
anomaly score; and (3) replacing MRG with a U-Net as
a binary segmentation network. These alternatives all lead
to performance degradation. The main reason is that these
methods may overfit to the specific patterns of synthetic
anomalies and fail to generalize to diverse real-world anomalies. In contrast, our RAA module avoids this pitfall through
its adaptive residual learning mechanism, which suppresses
residuals on normal samples to maintain the feature integrity
of the pre-trained model. In experiments (5)-(6), we use
the anomaly synthesis method proposed by NSA, replace
its encoder-decoder reconstruction framework with ours, and
achieve improved performance, demonstrating the effectiveness and generalization of our method. In experiments (7)-(8),
we integrate the memory bank of PatchCore into our AAND.
Results show “PatchCore+Ours” also outperforms PatchCore
but underperforms our original version, as PatchCore’s nonlearnable nature prevents it from benefiting from synthetic
anomaly learning.
3) Ablation of the Two-Stage Framework: In this part, we
conduct an ablation study on our two-stage framework. As
shown in Table VII, using Stage I alone leads to subpar
performance as it cannot detect unforeseen anomalies, which
requires Stage II to remember normality. Instead, integrating
the two-stage training methodology fulfills the two underlying
assumptions of the KD framework, culminating in optimal
performance. We also explore the possibility of joint training for the two stages, simultaneously optimizing both the
advanced teacher and the student model. However, it yields
poorer performances, which can be attributed to the continuous
fluctuations in the teacher’s feature space during training.
These ongoing changes created significant challenges for the
training of the student model, making it difficult to learn a
stable normal feature distribution. All in all, our two-stage
training approach proves to be both reasonable and effective.

4518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF CNN-BASED AND T RANSFORMER BASED F RAMEWORKS . T HE P ERFORMANCES D ENOTE THE I-AUC ON
THE M V T EC , V IS A, AND M V T EC 3D-RGB DATASETS

Fig. 5. Quantitative Experiments for the verification of the second assumption.

4) Quantitative Verification of Assumption II: To verify the
second assumption in our paper, we analyze the student’s distillation loss, as shown in Fig. 5. Adding the HKD loss to the
baseline reduces the distillation loss of normal patches by 0.02
(10.5%), indicating that the student is better able to reconstruct
normal features. With our two-stage AAND method, normal
and abnormal features are more clearly separated due to the
fulfillment of the first assumption, making it harder for the
student to reconstruct abnormal features.
5) Analysis of Residual Properties: To understand the
impact of different residual characteristics in the ARG module,
we conduct ablation studies that are shown in Table VIII. It
involves (a) replacing the residuals in Eq. (7) with learnable
residuals, and (b) replacing the tanh function in Eq. (7) with a
sigmoid function. The utilization of learnable residuals without
explicit scale restrictions can potentially result in excessive
residuals and the disruption of the pre-trained model’s prior
knowledge. In contrast to scaling the residuals to the range
(0, 1) using the sigmoid function, we employ the tanh function
to project the residuals to the range of (−1, 1). This choice
leads to moderate perturbations to the original features, thus
improving the performance effectively.
6) Ablation of Backbone: To our knowledge, no prior
work has explored transformer-based architectures within the
reverse distillation [3] framework. As a pilot exploration,
we replace the original pre-trained Wide-Resnet50-2 encoder
with a pre-trained CLIP-ViT-B/16 encoder and transform
the decoder from convolutions to ViT blocks. Under the
same training setting, the experimental results are shown in
Tabel IX. Whether using CNN-based or Transformer-based
architectures, our method achieves significant improvements
over the Baseline RD, demonstrating the effectiveness of
our approach. However, the performance of the Transformerbased architecture currently lags behind that of the CNN-based
method within the KD-based framework. This may be because
the downsample-upsample structure of the CNN-based RD
framework aligns more closely with the concept of reverse
distillation. Addressing this issue may require a specialized
design for the transformer decoder, which could be explored
in future work.
7) Model Complexity Analysis: We compare the inference
speed and number of parameters between our approach and
existing distillation-based methods. The experiment is conducted on a Nvidia GeForce GTX 2080ti GPU with Intel(R)
Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 and the batch size is set to 1 during
testing. As shown in Table VII, our method introduces a
marginal increase in inference time compared to RD and
possesses fewer parameters than RD++. In comparison to

TABLE X
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF M ODEL E FFICIENCY (F L OP S ) AND C OMPU TATIONAL P ERFORMANCE (M V T EC / V IS A / M V T EC 3D-RGB)

the one-stage baseline RD, our two-stage framework solely
incorporates the lightweight RAA modules, resulting in a
slight computational overhead but a remarkable enhancement
in performance. We further evaluate computational efficiency
in terms of FLOPs, as shown in Table X. Compared to RD++,
our method introduces 1.3 GFLOPs overhead but achieves
performance improvements on challenging benchmarks (VisA:
+2.1%, MvTec3D-RGB: +2.4%). Additionally, we offer a
lightweight variant Ours* that uses 2-layer MLPs instead of
3-layer MLPs in the RAA module, reducing computational
cost by 4.83 GFLOPs while retaining gains (VisA: +1.8%,
MvTec3D-RGB: +2.1%). These results demonstrate that our
approach achieves a favorable efficiency-accuracy trade-off,
obtaining superior performance with lower computational cost.
8) Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity: There are two important
hyper-parameters in our method: the number of memory items
L in MRG module, and the number of the selected hard sample
Kh in the hard knowledge distillation loss. We evaluate the
sensitivity of our model to the two parameters on the MvTec
AD [47] and VisA [9] datasets. We first fix Kh at 10 to change
L, and then fix L to the best value to change Kh , where L = 0
means that we use MLP as a classifier instead of MRG. As
shown in Fig. 8, MRG demonstrates robustness concerning
the memory size L. Appropriately increasing the memory size
helps to capture the diversity of normality and anomaly, where
the best performance is achieved when the memory size is
set to 50. For the number of hard samples Kh , compared to
not selecting hard samples (i.e., Kh = 0), selecting different
numbers of hard samples can improve performance. The best
performance is achieved when Kh = 10. Insufficient hard
samples lack representativeness of challenging patterns, while
an excessive amount of hard samples hinders the model’s focus
on the most challenging patterns.
E. Visualization Analysis
1) Qualitative Results for Anomaly Localization: We
present qualitative anomaly localization results in Fig. 6.

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

4519

Fig. 6. Qualitative results for anomaly localization, where “A-score” denotes the maximum value in the anomaly score map. Compared to RD [3] and RD++
[7], our method can accurately localize anomalies even in some challenging cases where the abnormal region is extremely small or the appearance of the
anomaly is very similar to normal data.

Fig. 7. Comparison of feature distribution between the vanilla teacher model and our advanced teacher model, visualized using t-SNE [50].
Figure (a)-(f) represent specific industrial product categories from the benchmark datasets. Our method demonstrates an enhanced discrimination capacity
between real normal and abnormal inputs while preserving the integrity of pre-trained normal representation. The red circle marks out the optimized anomaly
features.

Compared to RD and RD++, our method can accurately
localize anomalies even in some challenging cases, where

the abnormal region is extremely small or the appearance of
the anomaly is very similar to normal data. When dealing

4520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

noise is kept minimal for normal samples, thereby preserving
the pre-trained model’s fidelity to normal instances. Conversely, the residuals on abnormal inputs exhibit an increasing
trend, amplifying the distinctions between anomalies and
normal instances.
V. C ONCLUSION
Fig. 8. Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis for the number of memory items
L and the number of hard samples Kh .

Fig. 9. The variation of the intensity of residuals with respect to training
epochs. The blue line indicates the residual variation on normal samples,
while the red line indicates the residual variation on anomaly samples.

with these cases, the vanilla teacher model in RD and RD++
maps abnormal inputs to a normal representation, in which
the student also constructs the normality. As a result, some
defective products cannot be successfully detected due to the
unreliable teacher-student feature discrepancy. Unlike these
methods, our advanced teacher model can generate more discriminative features, which better fulfills the first assumption
in distillation-based anomaly detection methods. In practice,
detecting these challenging anomalies helps manufacturers
identify problems promptly and ensures that consumers receive
satisfactory products.
2) Visualization of Feature Distribution: To demonstrate
the enhanced discrimination capacity of our anomaly amplification stage, we present the visualization of feature distribution
in Fig. 7. Without the introduced stage, the feature distribution
of the vanilla teacher exhibits ambiguity between normal
and abnormal features. In our advanced teacher space, the
feature distribution is significantly more separated than that
in the vanilla teacher, which proves the effectiveness of our
Stage I. Moreover, real anomalies can be well distinguished
from normal ones, demonstrating that synthetic anomalies can
approximate a majority of real anomalies. Additionally, the
shape of the normal distribution does not undergo significant
changes before and after Stage I training. This is because our
residual gate suppresses residuals on normal samples, preserving the generalizability towards diverse normal patterns.
3) Visualization of Residual Variation: Our proposed RAA
module suppresses the residuals on normal features while
encouraging residuals for abnormal features. To demonstrate this, we present visualizations of residual variations
during training in Fig. 9. We define the intensity of residual noises
for normal samples and
samples as
PN n P
PN a anomaly
PC
C
1
1
n 2
a 2
(∆
)
and
(∆
n
a
i=1
j=1
i=1
j=1
ij
i j ) , respecN ×C
N ×C
tively. During the training process, the intensity of residual

In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage industrial
anomaly detection framework, which sequentially performs
anomaly amplification and normality distillation to obtain
robust feature discrepancy. In the first anomaly amplification
stage, we propose a novel residual anomaly amplification
module to advance the teacher model with the exposure of
synthetic anomalies. It effectively amplifies anomalies via
residual generation while maintaining the integrity of the
pre-trained model. In the second normality distillation stage,
we design a novel hard knowledge distillation loss, which
enhances the reconstruction capability of the student decoder
in dealing with challenging normal patterns. Comprehensive
experiments on the MvTecAD, VisA, and MvTec3D-RGB
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Limitation and future work: Some hard anomalies are
still difficult to detect solely from RGB images. Combining
knowledge from other modalities, such as point clouds and
natural language, may lead to better detection results. Besides,
synthesizing anomaly data that closely resembles real-world
anomalies is crucial for better advancing pre-trained models.
In addition, decomposing pretrained teacher model into taskspecific factor networks [51] is also a promising direction.
These will be explored in our future work.
R EFERENCES
[1]

J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 248–255.
[2] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14318–14328.
[3] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[4] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 1819–1828.
[5] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student–teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
[6] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 14902–14912.
[7] T. D. Tien et al., “Revisiting reverse distillation for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 24511–24520.
[8] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[9] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022, pp. 392–408.
[10] X. Yang and X. Wang, “Kolmogorov–Arnold transformer,” 2024,
arXiv:2409.10594.

TANG et al.: ADVANCING PRE-TRAINED TEACHER: TOWARDS ROBUST FEATURE DISCREPANCY

[11] X. Yang and X. Wang, “Neural metamorphosis,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 1–19.
[12] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526,
2017.
[13] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta, and
A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An overview,” IEEE
signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2018.
[14] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Structuring autoencoders,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW),
Oct. 2019, pp. 615–623.
[15] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[16] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented
appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335.
[17] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou, “Divideand-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 8791–8800.
[18] S. Lu, W. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. Liu, N. Wang, and H. Li, “Anomaly
detection for medical images using heterogeneous auto-encoder,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2770–2782, 2024.
[19] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[20] J. Li, Q. Huang, Y. Du, X. Zhen, S. Chen, and L. Shao, “Variational
abnormal behavior detection with motion consistency,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 275–286, 2022.
[21] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[22] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
“High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 10684–10695.
[23] J. Ho, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2024, pp. 6840–6851.
[24] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM:
Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 649–655.
[25] Y. Teng, H. Li, F. Cai, M. Shao, and S. Xia, “Unsupervised
visual defect detection with score-based generative model,” 2022,
arXiv:2211.16092.
[26] F. Lu, X. Yao, C.-W. Fu, and J. Jia, “Removing anomalies as noises for
industrial defect localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 16166–16175.
[27] X. Zhang, N. Li, J. Li, T. Dai, Y. Jiang, and S.-T. Xia, “Unsupervised
surface anomaly detection with diffusion probabilistic model,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 6782–6791.
[28] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021,
pp. 8330–8339.
[29] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[30] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural
synthetic anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and
localization,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022,
pp. 474–489.
[31] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.I. Lee, “Stabilizing adversarially learned one-class novelty detection
using pseudo anomalies,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31,
pp. 5963–5975, 2022.
[32] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
“Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
[33] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985.
[34] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.

4521

[35] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DSR—A dual subspace reprojection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 539–554.
[36] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
arXiv:1605.07146.
[37] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci,
“Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536.
[38] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM:
A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
pp. 475–489.
[39] Y. Wang, J. Peng, J. Zhang, R. Yi, Y. Wang, and C. Wang,
“Multimodal industrial anomaly detection via hybrid fusion,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023,
pp. 8032–8041.
[40] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet: Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in
Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021,
pp. 1906–1915.
[41] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
pp. 1088–1097.
[42] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided
semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 24490–24499.
[43] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015,
pp. 1530–1538.
[44] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Asymmetric
student-teacher networks for industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
pp. 2592–2602.
[45] X. Yao, R. Li, Z. Qian, Y. Luo, and C. Zhang, “Focus the
discrepancy: Intra-and inter-correlation learning for image anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2023,
pp. 6803–6813.
[46] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[47] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
[48] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3D-AD
dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” 2021,
arXiv:2112.09045.
[49] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student–teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4183–4192.
[50] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using
t-SNE,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605,
2008.
[51] X. Yang, J. Ye, and X. Wang, “Factorizing knowledge in neural
networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022, pp. 73–91.

Canhui Tang received the B.S. degree in artificial
intelligence from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China, in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the
M.S. degree. His research interests include anomaly
detection, point cloud registration, and multimodal
large language model.

4522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Sanping Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China,
in 2020. From 2018 to 2019, he was a Visiting Ph.D.
Student with the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University. He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an
Jiaotong University. His research interests include
machine learning, computer vision, and embodied
intelligence, with a focus on meta learning, multitask learning, object detection, multi-target tracking,
trajectory prediction, medical image segmentation,
visual navigation, and visual grasping.

Yizhe Li received the B.S. degree in control science
and engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University,
Xi’an, China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in artificial intelligence. His research
interests include computer vision and multi-object
tracking.

Yonghao Dong received the B.S. degree in measurement control technology and instrument from
East China University of Science and Technology,
Shanghai, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree in
electrical and computer engineering from the University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, in
2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests
include computer vision, image/video processing,
analysis, and understanding.

Le Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in control science and engineering
from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
2008 and 2014, respectively. From 2013 to 2014, he
was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with Stevens Institute
of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA. From 2016 to
2017, he was a Visiting Scholar with Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. He is currently
a Professor with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University. His
research interests include computer vision, pattern
recognition, and machine learning.