3974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

An Autoencoder and Double Random Forest-Based
Intrusion Detection System for Unknown
Attack Defense
Chen Zhang , Lu Zheng , Huakun Huang , Member, IEEE, and Chunhua Su , Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the rapid advancement of technology and the
growing prevalence of connected vehicle architectures, security
concerns in vehicle networks have become increasingly critical,
the vehicles are high-value assets. Thus, unauthorized intrusions
can pose substantial financial and safety risks. Although many
researchers have employed deep learning techniques for vehicle
network intrusion detection, existing methods often struggle to
efficiently extract network traffic features and handle unknown
or evolving malicious attacks. In this paper, we propose a novel
Internet of Vehicles intrusion detection system (IDS) that combines an autoencoder (AE) with a double random forest (DRF).
Our two-layer architecture is designed to accurately distinguish
between unknown attacks, known attacks, and normal traffic. We
evaluated the performance of the proposed DRF algorithm against
six traditional machine learning and deep learning methods and
compared it with relevant state-of-the-art solutions. The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing
approaches.
Index Terms—Stratified K-fold, autoencoder, double random
forest, IDS, IoV.

I. INTRODUCATION
HE Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is an advanced network
architecture that integrates vehicles, pedestrians, transportation infrastructure, and cloud computing resources through
an Internet-based platform. It facilitates real-time information
exchange and intelligent decision-making by leveraging mobile
communications, sensing technology, data processing, and artificial intelligence [1], [2]. This integration enhances traffic management, road safety, and overall transportation efficiency. Modern telematics heavily relies on 5G and future 6G networks to

T

Received 10 February 2025; revised 9 May 2025, 25 June 2025, and 28
July 2025; accepted 19 September 2025. Date of publication 23 September
2025; date of current version 6 March 2026. This work was supported in part
by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (C) under Grant 23K11103, in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of Guangdong Province, China under Grant 2025A1515011755, in part by the
Key Laboratory of Cognitive Radio and Information Processing, Ministry of
Education under Grant CRKL240204, and in part by SCAT Foundation under
Grant for Researchers. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Jun
Cai. (Corresponding author: Chunhua Su.)
Chen Zhang and Chunhua Su are with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, The University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu 965-8580, Japan
(e-mail: chsu@u-aizu.ac.jp).
Lu Zheng is with the School of Computer and Communication, Lanzhou
University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China.
Huakun Huang is with the School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3613343

enable low-latency communication, which supports applications
such as autonomous driving, intelligent transportation systems
(ITS), and in-vehicle entertainment [3]. By combining human
driving behavior with machine intelligence, IoV contributes
significantly to the development of ITS [4], [5]. IoV relies on advanced networks such as 5G to achieve efficient communication
between vehicles and infrastructure, perceives the environment
through the fusion of multiple sensors, and combines artificial
intelligence and Big Data to optimize decision-making and
ensure data security and user privacy.
IoV has been deployed in various smart cities where vehicles
collect and transmit traffic data via onboard sensors and connected devices [6], cloud servers process these data and provide
real-time insights used to enhance smart city operations through
traffic data collection [7], [8], improve traffic management by
adjusting traffic lights and optimizing route planning [9], support
autonomous driving safety and decision-making with real-time
environmental data [3] and enable in-vehicle entertainment and
connectivity features [10], [11]. However, alongside these benefits, IoV faces critical security threats due to the open nature
of vehicle networks, which makes them vulnerable to malicious
attacks.
Despite advancements in the IoV domain, cybersecurity remains a paramount concern since vehicles, as high value mobile
nodes, expose a broad and shifting attack surface across V2V
(Vehicle-to-Vehicle) and V2I (Vehicle-to-Infrastructure) channels [12]. The heterogeneous mix of onboard sensors, ECUs
(Electronic Control Unit), and wireless links creates multiple
vulnerabilities from spoofing and man-in-the-middle to denialof-service that adversaries can exploit as vehicles traverse different network domains. In 2024, researchers exploited a Kia web
portal flaw to remotely unlock, track, and start millions of vehicles using only licenseplate scans; similarly, attackers leveraged
a Man-in-the-Middle vulnerability at Tesla charging stations to
capture owner credentials and added unauthorized phone keys,
granting remote access and ignition. Traditional IDSs, rooted
in static rule sets, struggle to keep pace with novel and rapidly
evolving attack vectors, rendering them ineffective against zeroday threats [13], [14]. Even IDS approaches leveraging deep
learning often falter when confronted with previously unseen
malicious patterns, generating high rates of false positives and
false negatives that undermine trust in their alerts [15], [16].
Compounding these challenges are the real-time processing

0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

Fig. 1.

Traffic composition in the IoV.

requirements and resource constraints of in-vehicle hardware,
which limit the deployment of more complex or computeintensive security mechanisms, leaving intelligent transportation
systems exposed to increasingly sophisticated cyber threats.
To address these challenges, we propose an adaptive IDS
for the IoV that continuously learns from network traffic, via
a dynamic unknown attack detection module to uncover novel
threats beyond the reach of traditional rule-based IDSs, refines
known-attack detection by deeply analyzing vehicle behavior
and employing a hierarchical classification mechanism and implements a multi-layer defense framework categorizing traffic
into normal, known malicious and unknown malicious, as shown
in Fig. 1, with specialized detection mechanisms at each layer
to overcome single-layer limitations and ensure robust real-time
security for intelligent transportation systems. The following is
our contribution:
r We propose CAIDS (CDDRF-AE—IDS), which consists
of an AE module for detecting unknown traffic and a
CDDRF model for detecting known traffic, which can
effectively identify all traffic in open scenarios with high
detection capability.
r We use AE that is actively updated to detect unknown traffic
and update the training set using the normal traffic finally
filtered by CAIDS to improve the detection accuracy, which
effectively avoids the impact of unknown traffic on IoV.
r We propose CDDRF (Confidence Driven Dual Random
Forest), which utilizes hierarchical k-folding to classify
the training set into a high-confidence dataset and a lowconfidence dataset based on the confidence threshold r. We
obtain two random forest models of ar , br , which are voted
on to get the best result. The actual ability of the model is
verified by several comparisons and far exceeds current
state-of-the-art algorithms.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
reviews related research on intrusion detection in IoV. Section III
presents the CAIDS framework and its operation. Section IV
explains the AE model for unknown attack detection. Section V
details the theoretical model of the CDDRF classifier. Section VI
provides experimental evaluations and performance analysis.
Section VII concludes the study.
II. RELATED WORK
This section discusses the research on IoV intrusion detection
in recent years, especially the detection of unknown and known

3975

attacks, and compares the differences between our research and
other algorithms.
In [17] proposed TLOC, which achieves efficient intrusion
detection by optimizing CNN (Convolutional Neural Network)
and transfer learning, but it is mainly aimed at static environments and lacks the ability to process and dynamically update
unknown traffic. Our research actively detects unknown traffic
and dynamically optimizes training data, significantly improving its adaptability to open scenarios. [18] proposed LIDS, an
LSTM-based IDS for detecting forged emergency messages
in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). The core approach
is to collect the time series of traffic parameters of vehicles,
use LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) classifiers to identify
traffic event patterns, and judge the authenticity of emergency
messages by time series features. However, their method mainly
relies on historical data training. At the same time, insufficient
data quality optimization may lead to performance degradation
under high noise or imbalanced data. [19] proposed NIDS, which
balanced the dataset through a hybrid sampling algorithm (combining ADASYN and RENN) and selected important features
using random forest and Pearson correlation analysis. The model
extracted spatial features through CNN and combined them with
BiGRU to capture long-distance dependency information and
achieve efficient classification of intrusion behaviors. However,
they only focused on the classification of known traffic and did
not perform hierarchical optimization on data quality.
In [20] proposed AUIDS, a deep learning automatic update
IDS based on cloud-edge-car collaboration, which can detect
known and unknown attacks in open scenarios. The system
extracts traffic features through 1D-CNN and multi-head attention mechanism, and processes unknown attack traffic through
two-layer filters and clustering algorithm, generating new data
sets to update attack identifiers, thereby improving detection
accuracy and adaptability. In contrast, their research relies on
cloud support for update efficiency, and the optimization of data
quality and system performance is relatively insufficient. [21]
proposed HDA-IDS, which is centered on an innovative anomaly
detection model CL-GAN, which combines CNN-LSTM with
GAN (Generative Adversarial Network) to establish a normal
behavior baseline. Experiments show that HDA-IDS improves
the performance of other methods by an average of 5% on
NSL-KDD, CICIDS2018, and Bot-IoT datasets. However, this
method has weak adaptability to unknown traffic in dynamic
scenarios and lacks a data quality optimization mechanism. In
addition, HDA-IDS relies more on baseline data generated by
GAN and may be insufficiently robust to large-scale complex
traffic in open scenarios.
In [22] proposed SupEnML, which integrates a supervised
learning framework with a feature selection method, with the
goal of optimizing detection performance by minimizing false
positives and improving accuracy. However, this method still
mainly focuses on static data analysis and lacks dynamic detection capabilities and active adaptability for unknown traffic. [23]
proposed IoT-PRIDS, which establishes a baseline of normal
device behavior through feature mapping of network packets to
detect anomalies and potential intrusions. The model uses packet
header fields to create “representations”, which effectively

3976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

reduces data complexity and can detect anomalies in IoT (Internet of Things) environments in real-time with low computational
overhead. However, IoT-PRIDS only models normal traffic and
lacks an update mechanism for unknown flows. Its lightweight
design also results in poor adaptability to complex attacks and
subpar performance.
In [24] proposed ENCSA-PSO, which combines the search
strategy advantages of CSA (Cuckoo Search Algorithm) and
the fast convergence ability of PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization), selects the global best features from a large search space,
and classifies these features using a random forest classifier,
while eliminating feature bias through weighted minimum mean
square processing. This approach focuses mainly on feature
selection and classification problems, but lacks adaptability
to handle dynamic traffic. [25] proposed HyperVision which
captures encrypted traffic interaction patterns using a memory
graph and unsupervised graph learning based on connectivity, sparsity and statistical features. This enables detection of
malicious flows without labeled datasets but the model cannot update dynamically to accommodate shifting traffic characteristics and often hits resource bottlenecks in large-scale
environments. CAIDS addresses these challenges by actively
refreshing its training set and introducing a layered data quality
optimization framework that balances processing efficiency with
robust detection accuracy across diverse and evolving traffic
scenarios. [26] proposed MLMCS, a framework that includes
four steps: data preprocessing, feature space partitioning to
reduce model complexity, hierarchical binary classification of
each feature subspace based on a multilayer classifier system
(MLCS) based on a GMDH neural network, and merging classification results based on the Dempster-Shafer theory to reduce
overfitting. However, the MLMCS model is complex, requires
the feature space to be divided into multiple subspaces, and relies
on multi-layer classifiers, and the computational cost may be
high.
Existing IDSs are generally designed for static environments,
lack the ability to adapt to dynamic changes and unknown traffic,
have insufficient data quality optimization, rely on historical
data for training, and possess complex models with high computational overhead. To address these challenges, we propose
CAIDS, an integrated adaptive IDS. CAIDS actively detects
unknown traffic through the AE module and efficiently identifies known traffic in combination with the CDDRF model.
Additionally, stratified k-fold cross-validation is employed to
optimize data quality, and the voting mechanism of the dual
random forest model is utilized to improve detection accuracy
and robustness. The system performs well in open and dynamic
network environments, significantly enhancing the adaptability,
accuracy, and efficiency of intrusion detection while overcoming
many shortcomings of existing methods.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
This section introduces in-depth how CAIDS solves the problem of unknown attacks, such as zero-day attacks, which are
highly harmful to the IoV, and the problem of adversaries using
various known attacks to invade the IoV architecture. We explain

the CAIDS framework, which includes the identification of normal traffic, known attacks, and unknown traffic. We describe the
process of using the AE algorithm [27], [28] used in CAIDS to
identify known and unknown traffic, and the use of the CDDRF
to identify normal and attack traffic in known traffic. The overall
framework is shown in Fig. 2.
A. Unknown Flow
In traffic filtering of IoV, we first use the AE to learn the
distribution of “normal traffic” within the feature space, which
serves as our sole known reference. We input a sample set of normal traffic into the AE network, extracting and reconstructing a
set of feature representations X t = {X1t , X2t , X3t , . . . } through
the encoding-decoding process. When the entire traffic set
X = {X1 , X2 , X3 , . . . } is reconstructed by the same network,
we obtain X r = {X1r , X2r , X3r , . . . }. For each traffic record,
we calculate the difference metric Φ = D(Xi , Xir ) between
the original and the reconstructed data, with commonly used
indicators including the mean squared error (MSE). If the error
Φ for a particular flow exceeds the threshold P , it is deemed
to deviate significantly from the distribution of normal samples
and may represent an unknown flow; otherwise, it is classified
as known flow. We have set aside a verification set of normal
flows that is independent of the training set. We first reconstruct
this batch of actual normal flows using the same AE to obtain
(val)
the corresponding error distribution {Φj }. Subsequently, we
apply statistical methods to determine the mean μ of the error
distribution, adding several times the standard deviation σ (for
example, μ + 3σ) to establish the upper limit. In this manner,
the threshold P is derived from the statistical analysis of the
normal flow error, allowing for a more reliable identification of
unknown flows. This process further aids in classifying known
flows to ensure that various disguised attacks do not infiltrate
the normal network.
To address threshold drift, we now maintain a rolling buffer of
the most recent normal-traffic reconstruction errors and, at fixed
intervals (for example, every hour or after collecting 500 new
normal samples), recompute P so that it marks the upper bound
of “normal” variation. As new errors arrive, we add them to the
buffer and drop the oldest ones, then set P to the point below
which 95% of these errors fall. This sliding-window update
allows P to track gradual shifts in vehicle behavior or network
conditions without overreacting to transient spikes.
B. Known Flow
In stage 2, CDDRF calls two classification sub-models ar and
b for each traffic sample, and each model outputs a category
probability ap and bp . We extract the maximum probability
value from each of these two category probability, recorded as
max(ap ) and max(bp ), and then compare them, marking the
larger one as M˙ax. The category label corresponding to M˙ax
is the final decision, and the traffic is judged as “normal” or
“known attack”. All traffic judged as abnormal will be discarded,
and only normal traffic is allowed to pass.
To reveal the generation mechanism of {ar , br }, Fig. 3 shows
the entire processing flow. Assume that the traffic set to be
r

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

Fig. 2.

CAIDS System Framework.

Fig. 3.

CDDRF Framework.

detected is X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn }. In stage a, the K-fold crossvalidation strategy is used to divide X into K subsets to ensure
the consistency of the feature distribution of each subset with the
overall data. In stage b, the random forest model is trained with
K–1 subsets, and the remaining subset is used as the validation
set. The trained model is used to classify it and calculate the
category probability of each sample. In stage c, the validation
set is switched cyclically until all subsets are predicted once,
thereby obtaining a complete category probability prediction set.
In stage d, these probability results are aggregated into a vector
y dn . And map them one by one with the corresponding samples
Xn . Then in stage e, sort the probability values in y dn from
large to small, and adjust the order of the mapped samples synchronously to form a sorted sample sequence. Finally, in stage f,
according to the preset threshold r, The samples with probability
values greater than r in y dn are divided into high-confidence
training subsets ar , and the samples with probability values
greater than r are divided into low-confidence training subsets
br . Then, the random forest algorithm is used to train ar and
br independently, and finally a hierarchical model {ar , br } is
obtained.
IV. CAIDS UNKNOWN MODEL
This section mainly establishes a mathematical model for the
CAIDS model to identify known traffic and unknown traffic.
This mechanism is called the unknown attack identification
mechanism of the CAIDS model. The algorithm 1 shows the
main framework of AE.

3977

A. Data Definition and Merging
We begin with two datasets: one containing only normal
(benign) samples, and one containing only abnormal samples.
We define the benign dataset as:

N0
(1)
Dnormal = xi , 0 i=1
where xi ∈ Rd is the i-th feature vector (for instance, a network flow record, system log embedding, etc.), and the label 0
indicates “normal”. We define the abnormal dataset as:

N1
(2)
Danomaly = xj , 1 j=1
where xj ∈ Rd is the j-th feature vector, and the label 1 indicates
“unknown abnormal”. Then, Combine these two datasets into a
single dataset:

N0 +N1
D = Dnormal ∪ Danomaly = (xk , yk ) k=1
(3)
With yk ∈ {0, 1}. Here, N = N0 + N1 is the total number of
samples.
B. Data Preprocessing
Before training the model, we typically conduct a series of
data preprocessing steps:
1) High-Cardinality Feature Removal: If certain categorical
features (e.g., IP addresses, host names, etc.) have extremely
large cardinality, directly one-hot encoding them may lead to an
enormous feature space. We remove or transform those features.
Denote the set of high-cardinality columns by Chigh . We drop

3978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

where μj and σj are the mean and standard deviation of the j-th

feature across the dataset. Finally, we obtain Xscaled ∈ RN ×d .

Algorithm 1: AE Unknown Attack Identification.
Require: Dnormal , Danomaly , d, η
Ensure: Predicted labels ŷ for Dtest
1: Combine datasets: D = Dnormal ∪ Danomaly
2: Remove high-cardinality features
3: One-hot encode categorical features
4: Impute missing values with means
5: Xscaled ← Standardize(X)

Xscaled
6: Compute Σ = N1 Xscaled
7: Eigen-decompose Σ = V ΛV 
8: Select k based on η
9: Xpca ← Xscaled Pk
10: Xtrain , Xval ← Split(Xpca , y, only normal)
11: Xtest , ytest ← PrepareTestSet(D)
12: Initialize θ
13: Optimize θ to minimize reconstruction loss on Xtrain
14: τmse , ← ComputePercentiles(Xtrain , θ, η)
15: for each xj ∈ Xtest do
16:
Compute ej , ej ← ReconstructionErrors(xj , θ)
17:
if ej > τmse then
18:
ŷj ← 1
19:
else
20:
ŷj ← 0
21:
end if
22: end for
return ŷ

D. PCA (Principal Component Analysis) Dimensionality
Reduction


Given the standardized data Xscaled ∈ RN ×d , compute via (9)
and Eigen-Decomposition via (10).
Σ =

1


X  Xscaled ∈ R d ×d
N scaled

(9)

Σ = V ΛV 

(10)

where Λ = diag(λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λd ) with λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ 0, and
V contains the corresponding eigenvectors. Then, choose the
smallest k such that
k
λi
≥ Desired Ratio
(11)
i=1
d
i=1 λi
Let Pk = [v1 , v2 , . . . , vk ]. Project the data onto these k principal components.
Xpca = Xscaled Pk ∈ RN ×k
E. Dataset Processing
Since we want the AE to learn only normal behavior, we
allocate only normal samples to training and validation.
Ω0 = { i : yi = 0}, Ω1 = { i : yi = 1}

them from D.
D ← D \ Chigh

(4)

2) One-Hot Encoding: Let Ccat be the remaining categorical
features. For each categorical feature c ∈ Ccat with m categories,
we map it to an m-dimensional 0/1 vector (one-hot encoding).
c → (0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ Rm

(5)

This results in an expanded feature dimension. After this step,
all remaining features are numerical.
3) Missing Value Imputation: Any missing values in the
numerical features can be imputed by their column mean. We
replace each missing entry with:

1
x
(6)
x̂ =
count of non-missing non-missing
4) Final Feature Matrix: Eventually, we form a numerical
matrix and label vector. Where d is the new dimensionality
after removing columns and performing one-hot encoding.


X ∈ RN ×d , y ∈ {0, 1}N

(12)

(7)

C. Feature Standardization
To help certain models converge more easily, we standardize
each feature to zero mean and unit variance.
xij − μj
(8)
xscaled,ij =
σj

(13)

We randomly split Ω0 into two disjoint sets for training and
validation, Both contain only normal data (14). For evaluation,
we use test set have Normal and Abnormal (15).
Xtrain = Xpca (Ω0,train ), Xval = Xpca (Ω0,val )

(14)

Xtest = Xpca (Ω0 ∪ Ω1 ), ytest = y(Ω0 ∪ Ω1 )

(15)

F. AE Construction Traing
An AE is a neural network aiming to learn an identity
mapping.
fθ : Rk → Rk with θ = (φ, ψ)

fθ (x) = Dψ Eφ (x)

(16)
(17)

r Eφ (x) : Encoder, transforms input x ∈ Rk to some hidden representation h.

r Dψ (h) : Decoder, maps h back to the same dimension as

x.
For example, one might have hidden layers of size 64, 32,
16 in the encoder, then mirror them (16, 32, 64) in the decoder,
culminating in a k-dimensional output. We train only on normal
data, aiming to minimize the discrepancy between xi and its
reconstruction fθ (xi ). A common choice is MSE:

2
xi − fθ (xi )
L(θ) =
(18)
i∈Ωtrain

where Ωtrain ⊂ Ω0 denotes the indices of normal samples in the
training set. We iteratively update θ (weights and biases) via

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

TABLE I
KEY SYMBOL AND DEFINITION

an optimizer like Adam or SGD until we reach a maximum
number of epochs, or the validation loss no longer improves after
a certain threshold. After the AE is trained on normal samples,
we derive an error threshold from the training set. Then, we
compute reconstruction errors on the training set. For each xi ∈
Xtrain .
ei =

xi − fθ (xi )

3979

2

(19)

Let τmse be the η percentile of {ei }. Any sample whose error
exceeds these thresholds can be flagged as abnormal. We then
use these thresholds on the test set (Xtest , ytest ). Testing with
MSE, For each test sample xj , compute ej = xj − fθ (xj ) 2 .
Then, make predictions. Here, ŷj = 1 indicates an abnormal.
(mse)

ŷj

=

1, ej > τmse
0, otherwise

(20)

V. CAIDS KNOWN MODELS
This section primarily establishes the mathematical model
for CAIDS, utilized to distinguish normal traffic from known
attack traffic. This approach is referred to as the Known Traffic
Identification Mechanism within CAIDS.
The stratified K-fold DRF method is built on the traditional
stratified K-fold cross-validation. For each validation set in each
fold, an initial random forest model is trained to calculate the
highest predicted probability of the known category for each
sample, denoted as αi . Subsequently, a confidence threshold r
is set to classify samples with αi ≥ r into the “high-confidence”
dataset and samples with αi < r into the “low-confidence”
dataset. Then, dedicated random forest classifiers are trained for
these high-confidence and low-confidence subsets respectively.
High-confidence datasets refer to samples whose predicted probability of the random forest in the known category of the sample
is higher than the threshold r, and high-confidence datasets refer
to samples whose predicted probability of the random forest in
the known category of the sample is lower than the threshold r. In
the test phase, each sub-model provides the predicted category
and its predicted probability for each test sample. Finally, the
sub-model with the highest predicted probability is selected to
generate the classification result. This method ensures high accuracy for easy-to-classify samples while enhancing robustness for
difficult-to-classify or noisy samples. Algorithm 2 illustrates the
primary framework of the CDDRF method. Table I summarizes
the variables and formula symbols.
We define the training set and test set. Each sample xi ∈ Rd
is a d-dimensional feature vector and yi is its class label (e.g. an
attack type):

Ntrain

Ntest
Dtrain = (xi , yi ) i=1
, Dtest = (xj , yj ) j=1
(21)
We arrange these into a feature matrix and label vector for each
set:
Xtrain ∈ RNtrain ×d , y train ∈ {Attack1 , . . . , AttackC }Ntrain

(22)

Xtest ∈ RNtest ×d , y test ∈ {Attack1 , . . . , AttackC }Ntest

(23)

To preserve class proportions in each fold, we apply
stratified K-fold cross-validation on the training set. Let
 (k) (k) K
(Itrain , Ival ) k=1 be a partition of the index set {1, . . . , Ntrain }
into K disjoint training/validation index pairs, satisfying
(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

Itrain ∪ Ival = {1, . . . , Ntrain }, Itrain ∩ Ival = ∅

(24)

And maintaining the overall label distribution in each fold. For
each fold k, we extract the corresponding training and validation
subsets by indexing into Xtrain and y train :
(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

Xtrain = Xtrain Itrain , : , y train = y train Itrain
(k)

(k)

(25)

(26)
Xval = Xtrain Ival , : , y val = y train Ival
 (k) (k) 
 (k) (k) 
This yields K pairs Xtrain , y train and Xval , y val , each
preserving the original class distribution for robust model evaluation. In fold k, we first train an “initial” random forest classifier,
where L represents the loss function for training a random forest.
 

(k)
(k)
(k) 
(27)
RFinitial = arg min L θ; Xtrain , ytrain
θ

For each fold k, let,
(k)

(k)

(k)

= RFinitial .predict_proba(xi ) ∈ RC , i ∈ Ival
(28)


(k)
(k)
(k)
Here pi = pi,1 , . . . , pi,C is the vector of predicted probabilities for the C classes. We then define the confidence score
for each sample as the maximum predicted probability:
pi

(k)

αi

= max

c=1,...,C

(k)

pi,c ∈ [0, 1]

(29)

According to the preset threshold r, samples with probability
values greater than r in α are divided into high-confidence
training subsets ar , and samples with probability values greater
than r are divided into low-confidence training subsets br .


(k)
(k)
(30)
Ia(k) = i ∈ Ival : αi ≥ r


(k)
(k)
(k)
(31)
Ib = i ∈ Ival : αi < r

3980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Algorithm 2: CDDRF Known Traffic Identification.
Require: Dtrain , Dtest , d, C, K, r
Ensure: Predicted labels ŷ for Dtest
1: Organize Dtrain and Dtest into X, y and Xtest , ytest
2: Perform stratified K-fold CV to obtain folds
3: for k = 1 to K do
(k)
(k)
(k)
4:
Train RFinitial ← TrainRF(Xtrain , ytrain )
(k)
5:
Compute αi ← max(RFinitial .predict_proba(xi )) for
(k)
all i ∈ Ival
(k)
6:
Split into Ia ← {i | αi ≥ r} and
(k)
Ib ← {i | αi < r}
(k)
7:
if Ia = ∅ then
(k)
(k)
8:
Train RF(k)
a ← TrainRF(X[Ia ], y[Ia ])
9:
end if
(k)
10:
if Ib = ∅ then
(k)
(k)
(k)
11:
Train RFb ← TrainRF(X[Ib ], y[Ib ])
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Train fallback RFfull ← TrainRF(X, y)
15: for each x∗ ∈ Xtest do
16:
Initialize αamax ← 0, ŷa ← None
17:
Initialize αbmax ← 0, ŷb ← None
18:
for k = 1 to K do
19:
if trained RF(k)
a then
20:
pa ← RF(k)
a .predict_proba(x∗ )
21:
Update αamax , ŷa ← max_prob(pa ) if higher
22:
end if
(k)
23:
if trained RFb then
(k)
24:
pb ← RFb .predict_proba(x∗ )
25:
Update αbmax , ŷb ← max_prob(pb ) if higher
26:
end if
27:
end for
28:
if αamax ≥ αbmax and αamax > 0 then
29:
ŷ∗ ← ŷa
30:
else if αbmax > αamax and αbmax > 0 then
31:
ŷ∗ ← ŷb
32:
else
33:
ŷ∗ ← RFfull .predict(x∗ )
34:
end if
35:
Save ŷ∗
36: end for
return ŷ
(k)

The set Ia contains all validation samples whose highest
predicted class probability meets or exceeds r (high-confidence),
(k)
while Ib contains those below the threshold (low-confidence).
We define:


(k) 
(k) 
Xa(k) = Xval Ia(k) , ya(k) = yval Ia(k)
(32)




(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
(33)
Xb = Xval Ib , yb = yval Ib
Here, subset a contains samples that the initial model predicts with high confidence (α ≥ r), while subset b contains
low-confidence samples. We train two additional random forest

classifiers if the subsets are non-empty:
 

(k)
(k)
L
θ;
X
=
arg
min
,
y
RF(k)
a
a
a
θ
 

(k)
(k)
(k) 
RFb = arg min L θ; Xb , yb
θ

(34)
(35)

These models specialize in classifying either high-confidence
(a) or low-confidence (b) samples from the validation set. This
can effectively solve the problem of low-confidence data affecting high-confidence data.
For each test sample x∗ in Dtest .
 
 (k) 
(k)
(k)
p̂∗, a = RF(k)
(36)
a .predict_proba x∗ , α̂∗, a = max p̂∗, a




(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
p̂∗, b = RFb .predict_proba x∗ , α̂∗, b = max p̂∗, b (37)
(k)

(k)

We get corresponding class predictions ŷ∗, a or ŷ∗, b by choosing the highest-probability class. If either model does not exist
(k)
(k)
(i.e., if Xa or Xb was empty), we set the respective probability to 0 or mark it as invalid.
After all K folds, for each test sample i, we collect:
(1)

(K)

(1)

(K)

α̂i,a , . . . , α̂i,a , α̂i,b , . . . , α̂i,b

(38)

One way to form the final prediction ŷi is:
(k)
max
max
= maxk : valid α̂i,a , and similarly αi,b
=
1) Let αi,a
(k)

maxk : valid α̂i,b .
2) Identify which model yields the higher maximum probability:
(best)

max
max
ŷi,a , if αi,a
≥ αi,b
,
(best)
ŷi,b , otherwise.

ŷi =

max
max
3) If both αi,a
and αi,b
are 0 (no valid model), fall back to
an initial random forest trained on the entire training set,
denoted RFinitial,full .
In each fold k, we compute metrics such as accuracy on the
validation subset. Similarly compute Precision, Recall, F1, etc.

  (k)
1
(39)
1 ŷi = yi
Accuracy(k) = (k)
|Ival | (k)
i∈Ival

Average the metrics over all folds:
1 
1  (k)
Accuracy(k) , F1 =
F1 , . . .
K
K
k=1
k=1
(40)
K

Accuracy =

K

VI. ANALYSIS
This section presents an analytical evaluation of CAIDS’s
ability to identify known, and unknown traffic.
A. Known Flow Analysis
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the CDDRF
model, we conducted comparative experiments on four benchmark datasets commonly used in IoV and edge environments:
EDGE-IIoT, TON-IoT, CICIDS2017, and UNSW-NB15. These
datasets can approximate real IoV scenarios well in terms of

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

3981

TABLE II
COMPARED ALGORITHMS’ PARAMETER SETTINGS

Fig. 4.

Threshold impact on CDDRF F1-score and a/b sample ratio.

protocol diversity (including TCP/UDP), high dynamics and
mobility of network topology, and a variety of attack types [17],
[20], [29]. We employed Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), XGBoost, LSTM, 1D CNN, and Transformer models
as comparative benchmarks.
To maximize the F1-score on the validation set, we utilized
the same validation set for both the CDDRF model and each
baseline model, to maximize the validation set F1-score, and
determine the optimal configuration through manual traversal.
Random seeds, layers, rounds, and learning rates were uniformly
applied during the training of deep models, with the parameter
configuration detailed in Table II. All datasets were divided
into training and test sets in a 70:30 ratio. Preprocessing steps
included the removal of high-cardinality features, imputation of
missing values using the mean, one-hot encoding of categorical
features, and PCA dimensionality reduction to improve feature
expression quality and reduce redundancy.
We first systematically scanned different candidate thresholds
(from 0.0 to 1.0, with a step size of 0.1) on another independent UNSW-NB15 validation set, recorded the F1-score at
each threshold, and selected the threshold r with the best or
most robust F1-score. For the convenience of comparison, we
merged the two sets of data and plotted them as shown in Fig. 4.
The experimental results show that as the threshold increases,
the F1-score shows a clear upward trend, especially when the
threshold reaches 0.8, the F1-score increases from 78.69% to
82.52%. This shows that the increase in the sample ratio of the
a/b subset will lead to a significant difference in the confidence
between the a/b subsets. However, when the threshold continues
to increase, the F1-score decreases instead, approaching the
performance of a single random forest. This phenomenon shows
that when the sample ratio of the a/b subset increases to a

Fig. 5. F1-scores comparison of CDDRF with other algorithms. (a) EDGEIIoT dataset. (b) UNSW-NB15 dataset. (c) CICIDS2017 dataset. (d) TON-IoT
dataset.

certain extent, appropriately dividing the datasets with different
confidence levels for training can help improve the model’s
robustness to easily distinguishable data, while increasing the
focus on difficult-to-distinguish data.
Fig. 5(a) presents the F1-score comparison between CDDRF
and six benchmark methods. CDDRF achieves an F1-score of
99.72%, outperforming Random Forest (96.44%) and XGBoost
(90.41%), which demonstrates its superior ability to capture
complex and nonlinear traffic patterns. Among the deep learning
baselines, LSTM attains 82.12%, 1D CNN 73.81%, and Transformer 72.98%. Their moderate performance under identical
optimization settings suggests that these architectures may be
less well matched to the specific feature distributions of our
datasets. Logistic regression reaches only 68.16%, underscoring
the significant nonlinear relationships present in the intrusion
detection task. Fig. 5(c) and (d) demonstrate that CDDRF consistently outperforms both traditional and deep learning baselines
in the CICIDS2017 and TON-IoT datasets. In CICIDS2017, the
CDDRF F1-score exceeds that of logistic regression by 3.25%
and that of LSTM by 6.85%; In TON-IoT, it outperforms logistic
regression by 9.18% and LSTM by 1.70%. In contrast, Fig. 5(b)

3982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

environments. In actual deployments, threshold re-evaluation
measures can be used to adapt to traffic changes and threshold
drift during deployment.
B. Unknown Flow Analysis

Fig. 6. Time comparison of CDDRF with other algorithms. (a) EDGE-IIoT
dataset. (b) UNSW-NB15 dataset. (c) CICIDS2017 dataset. (d) TON-IoT
dataset.

shows that in UNSW-NB15 the nearest competitor, random
forest, reaches only 60.91%, while deep models perform poorly,
likely due to feature redundancy and class imbalance that impairs
effective representation learning.
As shown in Fig. 6, the training time of CDDRF on the same
dataset is slightly longer than that of traditional machine learning
models (LR, RF, XGBoost), but their F1-score is significantly
better than these methods. At the same time, compared with
mainstream deep learning models (LSTM, 1D CNN, Transformer), CDDRF takes less time to train. CDDRF not only surpasses traditional algorithms in prediction performance but also
surpasses deep models in efficiency, achieving the best balance
between accuracy and time cost. In other datasets or network
conditions, the optimal range of r may need to be re-evaluated.
However, other experiments currently use a static threshold of r
= 0.9, which can achieve better detection performance on all
datasets under the current threshold, indicating that a single
static threshold is sufficient to cope with different network

To evaluate unknown traffic detection, we use the TONIoT network traffic dataset. Normal traffic is randomly split
70%/30% into training and test sets to prevent data leakage
and ensure fair evaluation. We train the AE solely on normal
traffic, then evaluate its generalization by treating selected attack types from TON-IoT as unknown traffic. Here, “unknown
traffic” refers to a typical network attack type and its diverse
combination that have never been seen in the training process,
which belongs to a new attack type.
For hyperparameter tuning, we form a validation set with DoS,
Backdoor, and Scanning attacks and optimize via grid search.
To simulate zero-day conditions, the remaining ten attacks:
DDoS, Injection, Password, XSS, Ransomware, MITM, Shellcode, Worms, Reconnaissance, Exploits, are treated as unknown
and only appear in the open-set evaluation.
We compare CAIDS against eight IDS baselines (AUIDS,
NIDS, LIDS, TLOC, SupEnML, IoT-PRIDS, ENCSA-PSO,
HyperVision, MLMCS); see Section “Related Work” for details. The AE reconstruction-error threshold is set to 95%, as
commonly adopted in prior studies [30], [31].
Fig. 7 shows how the training loss and validation loss of
the AE change with the number of iterations under different
unknown attack complexities. Here, we define “complexity”
as the number of unknown attack categories in the test set:
the more categories, the higher the complexity. Although all
experiments used the same training set for model training, due
to the different types of unknown attacks contained in different
test sets, the preprocessing steps (including PCA dimensionality
reduction and feature encoding) were performed independently,
resulting in slightly different feature dimensions and encodings
of the model input. It can be seen in the figure that as the
complexity of the unknown attack increases, the validation loss
rises and the gap between the training and validation curves
gradually widens, which shows that the AE’s ability to fit and
identify multi-category, high-complexity unknown attacks has
significantly decreased.
Fig. 8 illustrates the impact of unknown traffic with varying
complexity on the AE’s performance. Taking the xy-axis as an
example, the classification outcomes are defined as follows:
r 00 represents true positive.
r 01 represents false positive.
r 10 represents false negative.
r 11 represents true negative.
According to Fig. 8, when the unknown-attack complexity
was 1, the AE produced a false-positive rate of just 0.50% for
benign traffic and a false-negative rate of 0.58% for attack traffic,
demonstrating strong generalization to novel flows. Even at a
complexity level of 3, the false-positive rate rose only slightly
to 0.92%, while the false-negative rate remained at 0.58%,
indicating the model still performed robustly. Beyond this point,
the AE continued to detect unknown attacks accurately, but the

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

3983

Fig. 7. Training loss and validation loss when training with known traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six
class. (g) Seven class. (h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix for identifying unknown traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six class. (g) Seven
class. (h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

false-positive rate increased because higher-complexity attacks
share more features with benign traffic, narrowing the margin
that separates normal from malicious behavior and making
misclassifications more likely.
Next, we calculated the anomaly recognition accuracy under all complexities based on the confusion matrix data. As
shown in Fig. 10(a), when the complexity is single-class, its
accuracy reaches 97%, which is enough to deal with various
threats in the real environment. When the complexity does not
exceed 3, the AE has sufficient accuracy to identify unknown
traffic.
To find out the robustness of CAIDS in identifying unknown
traffic, we calculated the system robustness of AUC (Area Under
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) under unknown
attacks of all complexities. As shown in Fig. 9, when the

complexity of the unknown attack does not exceed 3, the ROC
(Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve generated by CAIDS
in the AE stage is always above the diagonal and close to the
upper left corner, and the corresponding AUC is more than 0.95,
up to 0.99. This shows that the system can achieve a high true
positive rate (TPR) at an extremely low false positive rate (FPR),
and the overall performance is excellent. As the number of
unknown attack types increases to more than 3 (complexity>3),
the distribution of reconstruction errors caused by the diversified
attack samples shifts, making it difficult for the original fixed
threshold strategy to simultaneously take into account low false
positives and high hits, which leads to a significant decrease
in the AUC value and the position of the ROC curve. The
above results verify the reliability of CAIDS in low-complexity
unknown attacks.

3984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 9. AUC for identifying unknown traffic. (a) Single class. (b) Double class. (c) Three class. (d) Four class. (e) Five class. (f) Six class. (g) Seven class.
(h) Eight class. (i) Nine class. (j) Ten class.

has made great improvements in both performance and actual
performance.
VII. CONCLUSION

Fig. 10. Average performance of CAIDS. (a) F1-scores. (b) Performance
analysis.

Fig. 11.

F1-score comparison of CAIDS with other methods.

Since similar studies in recent years are all set in lowcomplexity scenarios, we combined the F1-scores and AUCs
of CDDRF and AE under single-class complexity, as shown
in Fig. 10(b). CAIDS has two components. CDDRF has an
excellent F1-score of 99.72% and an AUC of 0.9997, while
AE has an F1-score of 97.00% and an AUC of 0.9891. To
compare the IDSs of the same single complexity, we calculated
the average F1-score of CAIDS. As shown in Fig. 11, we
combined the performance of CAIDS on known attacks and
unknown attacks. Compared with recent similar studies, the
comprehensive F1-score of CAIDS for known and unknown
attacks is much higher than other studies, reaching 98.36%.
Most similar studies only focus on a single aspect, while CAIDS

With the increasing sophistication and connectivity of modern
vehicular networks, the challenge of effectively detecting and
mitigating both known and unknown attacks remains a critical
research focus. IDSs must contend with diverse threats, ranging
from novel exploits that target previously unknown vulnerabilities to variations of established attack patterns. Addressing these
challenges, we have proposed CAIDS, an integrated IDS that
combines an AE module for detecting unknown traffic with
a novel CDDRF model for identifying known intrusions. By
actively updating the AE with filtered normal traffic, CAIDS
maintains adaptability against emerging threats, thereby enhancing the detection accuracy for unknown attacks. Additionally, our CDDRF model uses hierarchical k-folding to separate
high-confidence and low-confidence datasets, producing two
complementary random forest classifiers that work in tandem for
reliable, high-precision detection. Experimental comparisons
with current state-of-the-art approaches confirm that CAIDS
offers superior performance and flexibility under real-world conditions. Future research directions will focus on optimizing the
system’s real-time response, reducing resource overhead, and
further strengthening model robustness against sophisticated
adversarial strategies.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Ibañez, “Internet of
Vehicles: Architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, Oct. 2018.
[2] S. Sharma and B. Kaushik, “A survey on Internet of Vehicles: Applications,
security issues & solutions,” Veh. Commun., vol. 20, 2019, Art. no. 100182.
[3] W. Xu et al., “Internet of Vehicles in Big Data era,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19–35, Jan. 2018.

ZHANG et al.: AUTOENCODER AND DOUBLE RANDOM FOREST-BASED IDS FOR UNKNOWN ATTACK DEFENSE

[4] M. B. Mollah et al., “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles towards
intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4157–4185, Mar. 2021.
[5] O. Ghaffarpasand and F. D. Pope, “Telematics data for geospatial and
temporal mapping of urban mobility: New insights into travel characteristics and vehicle specific power,” J. Transport Geogr., vol. 115, 2024,
Art. no. 103815.
[6] X. Chen et al., “Vehicle as a service (VaaS): Leverage vehicles to build
service networks and capabilities for smart cities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 2048–2081, Third Quarter 2024.
[7] S. Djahel, R. Doolan, G.-M. Muntean, and J. Murphy, “A communicationsoriented perspective on traffic management systems for smart cities:
Challenges and innovative approaches,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 125–151, First Quarter 2015.
[8] J. Wang, C. Jiang, K. Zhang, T. Q. Quek, Y. Ren, and L. Hanzo,
“Vehicular sensing networks in a smart city: Principles, technologies
and applications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 122–132,
Feb. 2018.
[9] G. P. R. Filho et al., “Enhancing intelligence in traffic management systems
to aid in vehicle traffic congestion problems in smart cities,” Ad Hoc Netw.,
vol. 107, 2020, Art. no. 102265.
[10] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Event-triggered interval-based
anomaly detection and attack identification methods for an in-vehicle
network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2941–2956,
2021.
[11] T. Alladi, B. Gera, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu, “Deepadv: A
deep neural network framework for anomaly detection in vanets,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 12013–12023, Nov. 2021.
[12] J. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Sun, and Y. Shi, “In-vehicle network attacks and
countermeasures: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31,
no. 5, pp. 50–58, 2017.
[13] R. A. Bridges, T. R. Glass-Vanderlan, M. D. Iannacone, M. S. Vincent, and
Q. Chen, “A survey of intrusion detection systems leveraging host data,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2019.
[14] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day attack
detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 10,
pp. 10733–10811, 2023.
[15] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches
for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and
open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 105124.
[16] A. Nisioti, A. Mylonas, P. D. Yoo, and V. Katos, “From intrusion detection
to attacker attribution: A comprehensive survey of unsupervised methods,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3369–3388, Fourth
Quarter 2018.
[17] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based
intrusion detection system for internet of vehicles,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779.
[18] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[19] B. Cao, C. Li, Y. Song, and X. Fan, “Network intrusion detection technology based on convolutional neural network and BiGRU,” Comput. Intell.
Neurosci., vol. 2022, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 1942847.
[20] C. Fan, J. Cui, H. Jin, H. Zhong, I. Bolodurina, and D. He, “Auto-updating
intrusion detection system for vehicular network: A deep learning approach based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15372–15384, Oct. 2024.
[21] S. Li, Y. Cao, S. Liu, Y. Lai, Y. Zhu, and N. Ahmad, “HDA-IDS: A hybrid
dos attacks intrusion detection system for IoT by using semi-supervised
CL-GAN,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238, 2024, Art. no. 122198.
[22] S. Das et al., “Network intrusion detection and comparative analysis using
ensemble machine learning and feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4821–4833, Dec. 2022.
[23] A. Zohourian, S. Dadkhah, H. Molyneaux, E. C. P. Neto, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Iot-prids: Leveraging packet representations for intrusion detection
in IoT networks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 146, 2024, Art. no. 104034.
[24] G. Mohi-Ud-Din et al., “Intrusion detection using hybrid enhanced CSAPSO and multivariate WLS random-forest technique,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4937–4950, Dec. 2023.
[25] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” Jan. 2023.
[26] M. A. J. Jamali et al., “A deep neural network-based multi-layer classifier ensembles for intrusion detection in fog-based Internet of Things
environments,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 140, 2025, Art. no. 109727.

3985

[27] W. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, and L. Wang, “Generalized autoencoder: A
neural network framework for dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2014, pp. 490–497.
[28] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674.
[29] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023,
Art. no. 119771.
[30] A. Borghesi, A. Bartolini, M. Lombardi, M. Milano, and L. Benini,
“Anomaly detection using autoencoders in high performance computing
systems,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 9428–9433.
[31] S. Hore, Q. H. Nguyen, Y. Xu, A. Shah, N. D. Bastian, and T. Le, “Empirical
evaluation of autoencoder models for anomaly detection in packet-based
nids,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Conf. Dependable Secure Comput., 2023,
pp. 1–8.

Chen Zhang received the B.S. degree in inorganic
nonmetallic from the Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China, in 2021, and the master’s
degree in 2023 from the Computer Science and Engineering, University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests mainly include gateway
security, information security, and metaverse.

Lu Zheng received the master’s degree in 2022 from
the Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou,
China, where she is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer and Communication. Her research interests include security
analysis and design of communication protocols and
formal security evaluation for the Internet of Vehicles.

Huakun Huang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and engineering from
the University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan, in
2019. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering,
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include privacy preserving, machine
learning, federated learning, and continuous intelligent networks.

Chunhua Su (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from Beijing Electronic and Science Institute,
Beijing, China, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in computer science from the Faculty of Engineering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, in 2006
and 2009, respectively. From 2009 to 2011, he was
a Postdoctoral Fellow with Singapore Management
University, Singapore and Research Scientist with
Cryptography & Security Department, Institute for
Infocomm Research, Singapore, from 2011 to 2013.
From 2013 to 2016, he was an Assistant Professor
with the School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, Nomi, Japan. From 2016 to 2017, he was an Assistant Professor
with the Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, Japan. He is
currently a Senior Associate Professor with the Division of Computer Science,
University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu, Japan. He has authored or coauthored more
than 100 papers in international journals and conferences. His research interests
include cryptanalysis, cryptographic protocols, privacy-preserving technologies
in machine learning, and IoT security & privacy.