This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

An Intrusion Detection Scheme for Internet of
Vehicles Based on Non-IID Federated
Distillation and DQN-PBFT
Wenxian Jiang , Senior Member, IEEE, Zhenping Guo , and Naizhou Wang

Abstract—The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is rapidly evolving,
but it also faces significant security threats, including Denial of
Service (DoS) attacks and deceptive behaviors. The construction
of an intrusion detection framework for the IoV encounters the
following challenges: 1) the pervasive Non-IID (Non-Independent
and Identically Distributed) issue within datasets and 2) in
existing applications combining Federated Learning (FL) with
blockchain, node load issues are often overlooked. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel scheme that integrates
Federated Distillation (FD) with blockchain technology to safeguard the IoV from network attacks. First, the scheme combines
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and FD for intrusion
detection, which both preserves the privacy of vehicle users’ data
and effectively shares knowledge. Next, for each FD client, we
construct a selector based on density ratio estimation to filter out
accurate and reliable knowledge from local predictions, thereby
effectively mitigating the performance degradation caused by
the Non-IID data problem. Then, the DQN (Deep Q-Network)
integrated PBFT algorithm (DQN-PBFT) is proposed to reduce
the number of consensus nodes using the DQN algorithm,
enhancing load balancing and fairness during the FD and block
generation processes. Finally, experimental results show that, in
a Non-IID environment, the proposed scheme outperforms the
baseline scheme by approximately 30% in accuracy. Compared
to other consensus algorithms, DQN-PBFT demonstrates greater
advantages in FD environments, exhibiting higher consensus
efficiency.
Index Terms—Internet of Vehicles, federated distillation,
blockchain, DQN, intrusion detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid advancement of computing and communication technologies, the prevalence of connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) in the modern world is steadily
increasing. Internet of Vehicles (IoV) technology provides a
Received 1 January 2025; revised 1 June 2025; accepted 29 August 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Xiamen Science and Technology
Project under Grant 3502Z20251018, in part by the Excellent Teaching Case
Project of Graduate Degree of Fujian Province under Grant 00489054, and
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
of Huaqiao University’s Academic Project under Grant 2024HQYJ01. The
Associate Editor for this article was S. H. Islam. (Corresponding author:
Wenxian Jiang.)
Wenxian Jiang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361000, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
(e-mail: jwx@hqu.edu.cn).
Zhenping Guo and Naizhou Wang are with the College of Computer
Science and Technology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361000, China (e-mail:
1821630622@qq.com; wangnaizhou2000@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3682598

crucial communication framework for autonomous vehicles,
ensuring reliable communication with other IoT entities, such
as infrastructure, pedestrians, and smart devices. The fifthgeneration (5G) and upcoming sixth-generation (6G) networks
are expected to revolutionize the IoV by offering ultra-reliable
communication with ultra-low latency and high bandwidth.
As the connectivity and complexity of the IoV grow, cybersecurity risks have become a major concern. The emergence of
new technologies has provided attackers with more sophisticated tools, enabling them to launch novel attacks such as DoS,
data injection, and information theft [1]. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for efficient Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to
protect the IoV from DoS attacks and other intrusion threats.
Intrusion defense systems play a pivotal role in ensuring
network security and are considered the first line of defense
against cybersecurity threats. IDS are designed to detect these
security threats effectively and in a timely manner, while maintaining a low false positive rate. However, traditional intrusion
defense systems, which rely on pattern/signature detection
[2], struggle to identify zero-day attacks (i.e., unforeseen or
anomalous attacks). Moreover, substantial effort is required to
continuously improve these systems to detect zero-day attacks.
Recently, the advent of machine learning and deep learning
(ML/DL) technologies has transformed many fields, such as
visual and speech recognition, surpassing human performance
in some areas. By applying ML/DL techniques, IDS can
effectively detect intrusion activities and security threats in
network traffic [3]. These ML/DL-based IDS can identify both
existing and novel attacks without the need for constant rule
updates required by traditional IDS. However, due to the lack
of balanced and up-to-date labeled training datasets, these
ML/DL-based IDS perform poorly when facing emerging
security threats such as zero-day attacks [4]. The privacy
nature of datasets and the widespread presence of adversarial
attacks hinder vehicle organizations and the research community from sharing their sensitive datasets, preventing the
development of efficient and up-to-date ML/DL models to
address emerging security threats.
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a subfield of
ML, aimed at training a shared global model across multiple
distributed clients without the need to centrally store sensitive
data. In FL, each client trains a local model using local data
and then only sends local model updates instead of uploading
sensitive data to a central server. This significantly enhances

1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

the efficiency of traditional ML/DL-based IDS in dealing with
network attacks while protecting the privacy of collaborators.
However, FL typically relies on a centralized architecture with
a single central server, which exposes it to the risk of a
single point of failure. The application of blockchain can effectively mitigate the risk of single-point failures in FL, thereby
ensuring the security of the global model. Moreover, merely
detecting intrusion behaviors is insufficient; the analysis of
intrusion logs is crucial for intrusion response, vulnerability
analysis, and forensics. The security of intrusion logs should
not be overlooked, as they are at risk of tampering. As a result,
some studies have integrated FL with blockchain to establish
intrusion detection frameworks [5]. However, traditional FL
requires frequent uploads of DL model parameters, leading to
significant communication overheads that severely hinder its
practical deployment in the IoV. Worse still, various attacks
can recover clients’ original data from the uploaded model
parameters, posing an ongoing risk of information leakage [6].
Recently, a Federated Distillation (FD) scheme [7], [8], [9]
has been proposed to reduce the communication overhead and
security risks associated with model parameter exchanges. In
FD, the prediction results (local logits) from clients on a public
dataset are aggregated into global logits. By utilizing hard or
soft labels (i.e., predicted results) from public samples rather
than model parameters, FD significantly reduces communication overhead, enhances privacy protection, and supports
heterogeneous local models. However, since FD relies on the
aggregation of local predictions for distillation rather than on
trained local models, it is particularly sensitive to the training
state of local models and is vulnerable to issues arising from
insufficient or poor-quality training. Additionally, the Non-IID
(Non-Independent and Identically Distributed) data problem
between clients exacerbates this challenge, especially when
there is a large discrepancy between the distribution of public
data and local data, which may cause local models to make
inaccurate predictions.
To address the challenges faced by existing IDS in the
IoV environment, this paper proposes a novel framework.
The framework combines CNN and FD techniques, enabling
precise identification of network attacks while effectively
protecting vehicle privacy and reducing communication overhead. Additionally, a density ratio estimation-based selector is
designed for each FD client to filter out sample predictions
that might mislead other clients. To ensure the security and
distributed nature of the framework, blockchain technology
is introduced, and a DQN-integrated PBFT algorithm is proposed, which not only improves consensus efficiency but
also enhances load balancing during the FD and consensus
processes among nodes. The main contributions of this paper
are summarized as follows:
• To address the issues of network attacks and high communication overhead, we propose an intrusion detection
scheme for the IoV that combines CNN with FD. This
scheme utilizes an unlabeled public dataset and generates labels for the unlabeled data by exchanging model
outputs, enabling each local model to further train and
enhance its performance. Moreover, Federated Distillation
mitigates the communication overhead by exchanging

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

model outputs instead of directly exchanging model
parameters, effectively avoiding the communication burden associated with larger models.
• To tackle the decline in model performance caused by
the Non-IID issue in IoV data, we design a density ratio
estimation-based selector for each FD client to identify
out-of-distribution samples in the public dataset. This
method quantifies the density differences between indistribution and out-of-distribution samples, effectively
detecting anomalies. When the density ratio of a sample
falls below a predefined threshold, the client treats it
as an outlier (i.e., the sample is inconsistent with the
client’s data distribution) and avoids sharing its prediction, thereby preventing it from misleading other clients.
• To improve the efficiency and decentralization of FD,
we integrate blockchain technology into the framework. Specifically, we propose a DQN-integrated PBFT
algorithm (DQN-PBFT), which takes into account key
parameters such as the communication capacity and
computational resources of FD clients to intelligently
select suitable clients as consensus nodes. By reducing
the number of nodes involved in consensus, we can
significantly enhance consensus efficiency. Furthermore,
this mechanism also improves load balancing and fairness
in the FD and blockchain processes among clients.
• Through experiments, we compare the proposed FD
scheme with the baseline in terms of accuracy, precision,
and F1-Score. The experimental results show that the
FD scheme significantly outperforms the baseline, with
an accuracy improvement of approximately 30%. Additionally, we compare DQN-PBFT with existing consensus
schemes in terms of throughput, delay, and communication overhead. The experimental results demonstrate that
DQN-PBFT performs better in the FD environment and
achieves higher consensus efficiency compared to existing
schemes.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews the related work; Section III presents the network
model we propose; Section IV provides a detailed explanation
of the federated distillation scheme; Section V describes the
system framework; Section VI evaluates the performance of
the proposed scheme through experiments; and finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In recent years, the development of IDS in the IoV environment has gained significant attention, as it is crucial for
ensuring the security and privacy of these connected systems.
Many researchers have proposed various IDS schemes (as
shown in Table I). Yu et al. [10] proposed an IDS for detecting
intrusion attacks in the automotive CAN network using a
time interval conditional entropy fuzzy method. This approach
identifies and detects attacks by collecting and analyzing the
conditional entropy values of regular communication messages. Deng et al. [11] introduced a practical IDS based
on creating voltage fingerprints for each message ID. The
system can detect intrusions without prior knowledge of the
secret mapping between ECUs and IDs, and it is capable

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

3

TABLE I
E XISTING R ESEARCH S OLUTIONS

of detecting malicious frames with periodic or non-periodic
IDs. As a self-learning IDS, it adapts to different in-vehicle
networks without the need for customization for different
vehicle models. However, these traditional non-ML systems
struggle with detecting zero-day attacks, as they often rely
on predefined rules or signatures, which are prone to being
bypassed or misjudged.
ML models, on the other hand, can continuously improve
and adjust themselves by learning new data and attack patterns.
This means they can adapt to the ever-changing threat landscape. Du et al. [12] transformed CAN bus intrusion detection
into an open set recognition problem and proposed the CLUSTER method. By using the distance from known categories
to cluster centroids as the training loss, they ensure consistency with the open set recognition threshold. By learning
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability, CLUSTER
effectively classifies known attacks and identifies unknown
ones. Korium et al. [13] proposed an ML-based IDS that
identifies anomalous behavior by analyzing network traffic.
The system first uses Z-score normalization for data preprocessing, preserving data distribution and handling outliers.
Then, it employs machine learning algorithms such as Random
Forest (RF), Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), CatBoost,
and Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM) for model

training. The model achieves over 99.8% accuracy on three
merged datasets by optimizing hyperparameters to control the
training process and prevent overfitting. However, traditional
ML methods typically require expert manual feature engineering, which is time-consuming and may miss critical features.
Moreover, these methods may underperform when handling
large datasets and are susceptible to overfitting or underfitting.
Waghmode et al. [14] proposed a machine learning-based network intrusion detection method that combines an exhaustive
feature selection algorithm with a least squares support vector
machine (LS-SVM) classifier. The study focuses on addressing
key challenges faced by traditional intrusion detection systems
in big data environments, such as feature redundancy and
high false alarm rates. A supervised learning framework is
employed to build an efficient and secure model. This method
emphasizes balancing detection accuracy and computational
efficiency through feature selection and classifier optimization
to meet the demands of real-time threat detection in complex
network environments.
DL methods can automatically extract high-level features
from raw data, reducing the reliance on manual feature engineering. At the same time, when handling large-scale datasets
and complex tasks, DL models typically demonstrate higher
accuracy and better generalization capabilities. Lo et al. [15]

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

proposed a hybrid deep learning intrusion detection system
(HyDL-IDS) based on spatiotemporal representations. This
system sequentially uses CNN and LSTM networks to automatically extract spatial and temporal features from in-vehicle
network traffic. Compared to other approaches, HyDL-IDS
significantly improves detection accuracy and reduces false
positive rates in detecting intrusions in vehicular networks.
Agrawal et al. [16] proposed an intrusion detection system
based on deep learning (LSTM, CNN), combining thresholding and error reconstruction methods. The authors trained and
explored various neural network architectures and compared
their performance. In addition, they provided a reconstruction
error distribution graph to visually demonstrate the system’s
ability to distinguish between normal and abnormal sequences.
However, DL approaches also have some drawbacks, particularly due to the lack of balanced and up-to-date labeled
training datasets, leading to poor performance when facing
zero-day attacks. Li et al. [17] proposed two transfer learningbased intrusion detection model update schemes to address the
continuously evolving attack types in the IoV, each applicable
to different scenarios. When the IoV cloud can provide a
small amount of labeled data, a cloud-assisted update scheme
is adopted to improve detection accuracy through transfer
learning. When the IoV cloud cannot provide labeled data,
vehicles use pseudo-labels to perform multiple rounds of local
transfer learning and fuse the models to achieve local updates.
As a result, recent studies have applied FL to IDS in IoV. FL
not only leverages the latest dataset knowledge from clients
but also effectively protects clients’ privacy. Abou et al. [18]
proposed an edge-computing-based framework utilizing FL
and blockchain technology to protect intelligent transportation
systems (ITS) from zero-day attack threats. This framework
includes a distributed edge computing architecture and a
decentralized reputation system, ensuring system security and
privacy through collaboration and reputation management.
Experimental results demonstrate that this framework is efficient and accurate in threat detection. Boualouache et al. [20]
modeled the expected communication patterns of connected
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) using Deep Auto-Encoder (DAE)
and detected any deviations from this pattern as malicious
activity. They also employed open set recognition and FL
to train an attack classifier (AC) model, which is a deep
multi-class data descriptor (Deep-MCDD) designed to identify
spherical decision boundaries for each type of attack. Moreover, blockchain technology was incorporated to enhance FL,
improving the security and decentralization of the framework’s
training process. Beuran et al. [21] proposed a novel
FL-based IoT intrusion detection method by combining a
shrink autoencoder and a centroid one-class classifier to
build a semi-supervised learning model that effectively detects
network anomalies. To address the data privacy and computational resource issues of traditional centralized learning, a
FL framework is adopted, allowing each IoT gateway to train
models locally without sharing raw data.
After carefully reviewing the related research literature,
we identified several limitations. First, the solutions have
high communication overhead, which makes them unsuitable
for resource-constrained IoV environments. Second, model

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 1. Network model.

training performance is suboptimal when dealing with NonIID data. Finally, in FL and blockchain-integrated solutions,
the issue of node load is often overlooked. To address these
issues, we propose a secure IoV intrusion detection framework
that combines FD and blockchain technology to collaboratively tackle network attack problems, while also protecting
privacy and ensuring system reliability.
III. N ETWORK M ODEL
The IoV intrusion detection architecture in this paper consists of three entities: Connected and Automated Vehicles
(CAVs), Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) servers, and
Blockchain. The network model is shown in Fig 1.
CAVs: As FD clients, cavs train intrusion detection models
using their local private datasets and make predictions on the
unlabeled public dataset to generate local logits. They also
train a selector based on density ratio estimation. Furthermore,
cavs upload the local logits and the selector to the MEC
validator. When a cav approaches the MEC, it can download
and read the latest block of the blockchain to obtain the latest
global logits.
MECs: MECs play a crucial role in verifying and aggregating the local logits received from FD clients. Each MEC
participates in the FD process and calculates local logits and
selectors. After the DQN-based node selection, an MEC is
assigned one of three roles: worker, validator, or producer. As
a worker, it only participates in the FD process and does not
take part in the consensus process. Similar to cavs, workers
send the calculated local logits and selectors to validators.
As a validator, the MEC participates in both the FD and
consensus processes. In the FD process, the validator organizes
and forwards the local logits and selectors to the producer. In
the consensus process, the validator ensures the accuracy of
transactions and verifies the blocks proposed by the producer.
As a producer, the MEC is selected from the validators. In
the FD process, the producer computes the global logits, and
in the consensus process, it is responsible for creating new
blocks and performing the block chaining operation.
Blockchain: To ensure the security and transparency of
the FD process, the framework uses blockchain technology
to share and aggregate logits. By establishing a consortium
blockchain, a trustworthy and tamper-proof ledger is created

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

TABLE II
CNN M ODEL

to securely store and distribute global logits. The decentralized
nature of blockchain ensures that there is no single central
server controlling the entire network, thereby reducing the
risks of single points of failure and data tampering.
IV. I NTRUSION D ETECTION S CHEME BASED ON
F EDERATED D ISTILLATION
A. CNN-Based Intrusion Detection Model
The CNN model is widely employed due to its exceptional
capability in feature extraction, effectively facilitating the
interaction of information between adjacent time windows
and features. In our study, we utilize CNN to extract deep
features from traffic data packets. A detailed description of the
foundational CNN model is provided in Table II. Each model
consists of eight convolutional layers, designed to efficiently
extract feature maps from the traffic data packets, along with
two fully connected layers that output the prediction results.
The input channel count of the first convolutional layer is
23, corresponding to the number of rows in the input data.
The first four convolutional layers each contain 64 filters,
with a kernel size of 3, while the subsequent four layers are
equipped with 128 filters, maintaining the same kernel size.
The output of the final convolutional layer is flattened and
classified by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) consisting of three
fully connected layers. The final layer contains 11 neurons,
representing the total number of categories. As our research
focuses on establishing an efficient federated training framework, the description of the CNN-based model structure is kept
concise. It is worth noting that our federated training approach
does not rely on the aggregation of model parameters, allowing
the system to function seamlessly even when clients employ
varying model architectures.
B. Federated Distillation Scheme
A key challenge faced by federated distillation is the potential for misleading predictions due to the lack of adequately
trained teacher models. Local models are prone to overfitting
on their local datasets, resulting in poor performance on
public dataset samples that lie outside the local distribution,
especially when there is non-IID data across clients. To address
this, we draw upon the work of [22] and design a selector for
each client based on density ratio estimation. This selector
identifies out-of-distribution samples in the public dataset,
effectively filtering out misleading predictions and enhancing
detection accuracy for other clients.
We assume that the system consists of K vehicles and
MEC servers. For simplicity, in the following, we refer to

5

Algorithm 1 Federated Distillation Scheme
Input: Private datasets D p,k , Unlabeled public dataset Do ,
client number K
Output: model θ p,k
1: for each client k in parallel do
2:
Train the local model θ p,k via Eq. 1;
3:
for each xoj in Do do
4:
Compute ŷo,k
j via Eq. 2;
5:
end for
6:
The selector dk based on density ratio estimation is
obtained from Eq. 3 and Eq. 4;
7: end for
8: for xoj ∈ Do do
9:
Each client votes on the sample xoj based on the
selector dk ;
10:
The weights W j assigned by each client to the sample
xoj are determined according to Eq. 6;
11: end for
12: The global logits are obtained according to Eq. 7;
13: The client performs distillation training via Eq. 8 to obtain
θ p,k ;
14: return: θ p,k ;

both vehicles and MEC servers as FD clients. Each client
k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K} holds two datasets: 1) a private labeled dataset
D p,k = {(xip,k , yip,k )|i = 1, 2, . . . , I p } a shared unlabeled public
dataset Do = {xoj | j = 1, 2, . . . , I o } that is common to all clients.
For a classification task with C classes (where c ∈ C), yip,k is a
one-hot vector. Algorithm 1 illustrates the overall flow of the
proposed scheme, and the detailed description is as follows.
Step 1: Local model training. First, each client k trains a
local model θ p,k using the model and private dataset described
in Section IV-A. The update rule is given by:


θ p,k = θ p,k − η∇ψ b
Y p,k , Y p,k
(1)
In this step, Ψ(·, ·) represents the loss function to be minimized,
b
Y p,k represents
of the model function F, i.e., b
Y p,k =
 the output
p,k
p,k
p,k
F X | θ , and Y denotes the true labels of the samples.
The learning rate is denoted by η. For multi-class classification
tasks, the loss function is typically the cross-entropy loss.
Step 2: Prediction stage. Based on the locally trained model
from the previous step, each client predicts the local logits,
i.e., the labels for data samples in the shared unlabeled public
dataset. Specifically, given the model θ p,k and a sample xoj ∈
Do , the prediction is made as follows:

o
p,k
(2)
ŷo,k
xoj ∈ Do
j = F xj | θ
Step 3: Client selector construction. Assume that the input
space X is compact, and define U as a uniform distribution
over X with a probability density function u(x). The probability
density function for client k is denoted as pk (x). Our objective
is to estimate the density ratio based on the observed samples:
pk (x)
(3)
u(x)
Specifically, for samples x from the local distribution of
client k where pk (x) > 0, the density ratio dk∗ > 0, whereas for
dk∗ =

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

out-of-distribution samples x where pk (x) = 0, the density ratio
dk∗ = 0. Therefore, the client can identify out-of-distribution
samples in the public data set by constructing a density ratio
estimator.
To ensure statistical convergence, the kernelized Unconstrained Least Squares Importance Fitting (KuLSIF) algorithm
is used to estimate the density ratio. The KuLSIF estimation
model is defined in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) Dk equipped with a Gaussian kernel function. The
objective function for dk is given by:
1 X 0 2
d (x)
dk = argmindk0 ∈Dk
2nu x∼D k
u
1 X 0
β 0 2
d
(4)
dk (x) +
−
nk
2 k Dk
p,k

TABLE III
S YMBOL TABLE

x∼D

p,k

Here, D is the local dataset of client k with size nk , and
Du is the sample set from the uniform distribution with size
nu . β is the regularization parameter that controls the model
complexity, and Dk is the RKHS, which defines the sample
representation and function space within the space.
The KuLSIF algorithm minimizes the objective function to
find the density ratio dk . The optimal solution dk∗ corresponds
to the minimum value of this objective function. By using
kernel tricks, the algorithm optimizes in the RKHS, effectively
estimating the density ratio.
Step 4: Sample weight calculation. To determine whether a
sample from the public dataset is an out-of-distribution sample
o
for client k, we use the threshold
  τk . For each sample x j in

the public dataset Do , if dk xoj is less than τk , the sample
is considered to be out-of-distribution, and client k will not
upload its local prediction, as these predictions may mislead
the entire system. For sample xoj , each client has:
8
 
<1, dk xo > τk
 j
vkj =
(5)
:0, dk xo < τk
j

The vkj values from each client are aggregated to form V j ,
representing the collective vote of all clients regarding whether
sample xoj belongs to their distribution. The weight of client
k for sample xoj is then computed as follows, where K v is the
number of clients for which vkj = 1:
W j = V j /K v

(6)

Step 5: Aggregation phase. nBy gathering all local
o preo
o,k
b
b
dictions from the clients Y = Y | k = 1, 2, . . . , K , along
˚
with the weights W = W j | j = 1, 2, . . . , I o for the public
dataset samples, the global logits can be computed through
the following calculation:
bo
b
yo,g
j = Yj × Wj

(7)

where b
Y oj contains all client predictions for sample xoj , and W j
contains the corresponding weights assigned by all clients for
that sample.
Step 6: Distillation training. The global logits are distributed
back to the clients, and each client’s local model uses the

global logits from the public dataset for distillation training.
The process is as follows:


p,k
θ p,k = θ p,k − η∇ψ xoj , ŷo,g
(8)
j |θ
V. S YSTEM S TRUCTURE
To ensure the security and decentralization of the FD
model, we employ blockchain technology. The primary symbols used in this section are outlined in Table III. In our
framework, global logits are stored on a single blockchain.
The integration of blockchain with FD necessitates careful
selection of both the blockchain type and consensus protocol,
as these significantly impact scalability, latency, complexity,
and cost. Public blockchains face scalability limitations and
high latency issues, while private blockchains improve scalability and reduce latency but may compromise decentralization
and privacy. Consortium blockchains offer a balanced solution,
making them highly suitable for our system. In this consortium
blockchain, we enhance the classical PBFT protocol by using
the DQN algorithm to select consensus nodes, ensuring load
balancing and significantly improving consensus efficiency.
Our approach strategically prioritizes scalability, latency, and
security, with a slight compromise on decentralization. We
consider two types of nodes in the blockchain network:
Light Nodes: Serving as FD clients, cavs download and read
blocks but do not participate in the consensus process.
Full Nodes: Refers to MECs that actively participate in both
the FD and consensus processes. All MECs are involved in
the FD process, but only two types of roles participate in the
consensus process. In each round, each MEC is assigned one
of the following roles: Worker, Validator, or Producer.
• Worker: Participates only in the FD process and does not
engage in the consensus process.
• Validator: Participates in both FD and the consensus process. In the FD process, the validator first trains the local
model and predicts using the public dataset. The validator
also receives the local logits and selectors from light
nodes and workers, organizes them, and forwards them
to the producer. In the consensus process, the validator’s

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

primary task is to verify the correctness of transactions
and validate the blocks proposed by the producer.
• Producer: Participates in both FD and the consensus process and is selected from the validators. In the FD process,
the producer trains the model and makes predictions
on the dataset. Based on the local logits and selectors
received from the validators, the producer calculates the
global logits. In the consensus process, the producer is
responsible for packaging the global logits and other
data into a block, performing the consensus process, and
committing the block to the blockchain.
A. Smart Contracts
We will consider the traffic management department, which
aims to manage a privacy-preserving federated distillation process. First, the department creates and deploys a smart contract
on the blockchain. Then, through the smart contract, FD clients
(such as vehicles) are added to the FD system. The contract
includes the client addresses and other relevant information.
The smart contract provides the department (i.e., the contract
owner) with the flexibility to easily add or remove FD clients,
while managing the FD system in a fully decentralized, trusted,
and transparent manner. The smart contract in this paper is
written in Solidity. For brevity, only two important functions of
the smart contract are discussed below: adding and removing
FD clients, where Col represents an instance of an FD client;
now denotes the current time (in seconds); sender is the
address of the FD client sending the transaction to the smart
contract; and Externally Owned Account (EOA) refers to an
account controlled by a public-private key pair. col.isOnline
indicates whether the client is online, and if it is online with
a request to join the FD system, the client will be added; if it
is offline for a certain period, it will be removed.
AddFDCollaborator(Col.EOA, col.info): This function can
only be called by the traffic management department to add an
FD client. It takes the FD client’s EOA (Col.EOA) and client
information (col.info) as inputs, and adds the client to the federated distillation system. RemoveFDCollaborator(Col.EOA):
This function can also only be called by the traffic management department. If the client has been offline for a certain
period, this function removes the FD client from the federated
distillation system. It takes the FD client’s EOA as input and
removes the client from the system. After executing the smart
contract, col.info will be output as the result. Algorithm 2
presents the core details and main structure of the contract.
B. Consensus Node Selection Algorithm Based on DQN
To better integrate blockchain with FD, it is essential to
enhance the classical PBFT consensus algorithm. The primary improvement involves limiting the number of nodes
participating in the consensus process, thereby increasing
consensus efficiency. To make the algorithm more suitable
for the requirements of FD systems, we draw upon reference
[23] and introduce a DQN-based consensus node selection
algorithm. When blockchain networks are combined with federated distillation, the selection of consensus nodes becomes

7

Algorithm 2 FedDistSmartContract
Input: Col.EOA, col.info, col.isOnline, col.request action
Output: col.info
1: if msg.sender is not owner k isFDCollaborator(col.EOA)
== true then
2:
throw;
3: end if
4: if col.isOnline && col.request action == “add FD”
then
5:
length ← FDColsAdr.push(col.EOA)
6:
FDCols[col.EOA] ← FDCol(col.EOA, col.Info, now,
length-1)
7:
emit AddFDCollaborator(Col.EOA, col.info)
8:
numberOfFDCols++
9: else
10:
rowToDelete ← FDCols[col.EOA].index
11:
keyToMove ← FDColsAdr[length-1]
12:
FDColsAdr[rowToDelete] = keyToMove
13:
FDCols[keyToMove].index = rowToDelete
14:
FDColsAdr.length–
15:
emit RemoveFDCollaborator(Col.EOA)
16:
numberOfFDCols–
17: end if
18: return: col.info;

particularly crucial, as FD tasks demand significant computational resources from the nodes. Therefore, the selection
of consensus nodes must consider various factors, such as
the communication capabilities of nodes, their computational
resources, and the impact of block size on the time overhead
during the validation process. With this in mind, we employ
the DQN algorithm to dynamically select consensus nodes
within the blockchain network. The goal is to achieve load
balancing within the blockchain-based federated distillation
framework. This strategy not only helps alleviate the load on
the nodes participating in the FD process, but also minimizes
the time cost of the consensus procedure. The detailed process
of consensus node selection is as follows.
Step 1: Node modeling. Assume there are M full nodes
in the system. We model the time overhead of the consensus
process and use the DQN algorithm to select the consensus
set CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }. The total time overhead
consists of two parts: the time taken by the node to validate the
block, denoted as T valid , and the communication time between
the current node and the next node, denoted as T com . Thus,
the total time overhead can be represented as:
T = T valid + T com

(9)

The node validation time T valid and communication time T com
are expressed as follows:
B · Gi
Fi
B
T com =
Pi

T valid =

(10)
(11)

where B is the block size (in bytes), Gi is the number of
CPU cycles required by node i to validate each byte, Fi is

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the CPU cycle frequency of node i during consensus (in Hz),
Pi is the remaining throughput of node i during consensus (in
bits per second). Since in real-world environments, factors like
latency, packet loss, and protocol overhead prevent nodes from
reaching their theoretical maximum transmission capacity (i.e.,
bandwidth), the throughput is chosen to represent the actual
transmission capability of the node.
The variables in the above equations account for the residual
resources of the nodes after the federated distillation process.
Based on this, T can be further refined as:

B
B · Gi
pi < pi− tol , i ∈ M
+
(12)
T=
Fi
Pi
where pi− tol represents the total throughput of the node.
Step 2: Optimization objective. Since federated distillation
tasks and blockchain consensus processes occur simultaneously, and bandwidth is a limited resource, the optimization
objective is to minimize the time required for a node to execute
the consensus process. To achieve this, reinforcement learning
can be applied to select the most appropriate consensus nodes
in order to reduce the overall system time overhead. To
optimize the selection of consensus nodes, the problem is
modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), consisting of
the following components:
State space S : The state space of the system is represented
by the resource status of each node.
˚
(13)
S = F t , Pt , Bt
where F t represents the independent CPU cycle frequency of
each node at time t, Pt represents the throughput available for
consensus tasks at time t, Bt represents the data volume in the
block at time t.
Action space A: At time t, the action space consists of a set
of consensus node selection strategies.
A = {n1 , n2 , n3 , . . . , ni }

(14)

where the value of ni is either 0 or 1. If a node is selected
as a consensus node, the corresponding value is 1; otherwise,
the value is 0.
Reward function R(S , A): The reward function is used to
measure the effectiveness of selecting a particular combination
of consensus nodes. We define the reward as the inverse of the
time spent by the nodes in the consensus process:
R(S , A) =

1
T valid + T com

(15)

Here, the reward is the reciprocal of the time required for the
node to execute the consensus process. The shorter the time,
the higher the reward.
Leaming policy π∗ : The objective of policy optimization is
typically to maximize the expected cumulative reward, where
γt is the discount factor.
" ∞
#
X
∗
t t
π = argmaxE
γR
(16)
t=0

Step 3: Optimization algorithm. To solve this problem, we
use a Deep Q-Network (DQN) to learn the optimal node
selection strategy. DQN is a reinforcement learning algorithm

based on Q-leaming, which can estimate the Q-values through
deep neural networks and iteratively optimize the policy.
Q function: DQN estimates the expected return for taking a
specific action given a state using the Q -function. The formula
is:

Q = S t , At , θ
(17)
where θ represents
the parameters of the neural network, and

Q S t , At , θ is the Q-value of taking action At in state S t .
Target Q-value Qtarget : DQN uses the target Q-value to
compute the loss function. The target Q-value represents
the estimated retum based on the reward and the maximum
Q-value of the next state. The formula is:


Qtarget = R S t , At + γt · max Q S t+1 , At+1 , θ̂
(18)
Loss function: The DQN loss function minimizes the prediction error of the Q-values. The loss function is defined as:
h

2 i
L(θ) = E Q S t , At , θ − Qtarget
(19)
where θ and θ̂ represent the parameters of the evaluation
network and the target network, respectively. γt is the discount
factor, with a value between 0 and 1. The objective of this loss
function is to optimize the network parameters θ such that
the Q -value predictions are as close as possible to the target
Q-value.
Through the training process of the DQN algorithm, the
neural network learns an optimal strategy π∗ that selects the
best combination of consensus nodes for each state. Ultimately, the DQN network will determine the consensus set
CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }, where the nodes in this set are
selected as consensus nodes. With this, the consensus node
selection process is complete, and the next section will provide
a detailed description of the consensus execution process.
C. Intrusion Detection Framework Based on Federated
Distillation and DQN-PBFT
The proposed framework consists of three main steps: federated distillation, consensus node selection, and the execution
of the consensus process. Through these steps, vehicles will
obtain an intrusion detection model. It is important to note
that both vehicles and MEC entities are FD clients, and
both participate in the FD process. However, the term node
refers solely to MEC entities, as vehicles do not engage in
the consensus process. Fig 2 illustrates the overall system
framework, while Fig 3 provides the system’s operational
timeline. The following is a detailed description of each step.
Step 1.1: Determining FD clients. The traffic management authority creates and deploys a smart contract on the
blockchain, which facilitates the addition and removal of
clients. Initially, when a vehicle or MEC entity submits an
externally owned account (EOA) along with relevant details
(such as hardware configuration, bandwidth, latency, etc.) to
the traffic management authority, the smart contract is invoked
to incorporate them into the FD system. Subsequently, the
smart contract periodically checks the online status of the
system’s clients and removes those that have been offline for
an extended period. Finally, the participating FD clients are
confirmed.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

9

Fig. 2. System overall framework.

Step 1.2: Local training of clients. Vehiclek trains an
intrusion detection model θ p,k using its local private dataset
and performs predictions on the public dataset to obtain local
logits b
Y o,k . Simultaneously, Vehiclek trains a selector dk based
on density ratio estimation. The vehicle then packages b
Y o,k
and dk and sends them to the nearest MEC validator for the
current round.
Step 1.3: Global logits aggregation. After completing the
model training, the validators package the collected b
Y o,k and
dk , and send them to the MEC producer for the current
round. The producer
receives the local
n
o predictions from all FD
o
o,k
b
b
clients, Y = Y | k = 1, 2, . . . , K , along with the selectors
D = {dk | k = 1, 2, . . . , K}. Using the public dataset and selector
D, the producer calculates the weights W (where wk, j ∈ W
represents the weight of client k for sample j). The producer
then computes the global logits b
Y o,g based on b
Y o and W.
The detailed process of federated distillation is presented in
Section IV-B.
Step 2.1: Consensus node selection. This step aims to
determine the consensus nodes for the next round, rather than
the current one. Since MEC nodes participate in both the FD
process and the consensus process, it is necessary to ensure
load balancing while optimizing consensus efficiency. Based
on the previous step, we model the remaining resources of the
nodes (including communication and computational resources)
with the goal of minimizing consensus time. By applying the
DQN algorithm, we determine the set of consensus nodes

CON = {con1 , con2 , . . . , coni }. The specific steps are detailed
in Section V-B. In this process, the nodes participating in
consensus are treated as MEC validators, while those not
selected are considered MEC workers.
Step 2.2: Primary node selection strategy. In traditional
PBFT consensus algorithms, the primary node is elected
through a round-robin approach, with the primary node’s
number determined by the formula p = v mod n. However,
in the IoV environment, the presence of malicious nodes and
attackers makes the round-robin method predictable, thereby
reducing security. To address this issue, this scheme employs a
Verifiable Random Function (VRF) [24] to select the primary
node from the consensus nodes, with the chosen primary node
serving as the MEC producer.
Step 3.1: Request phase. After completing the FD process,
Vehiclek sends a message < REQUES T , o, t, c, sc > requesting the global logits to the nearest validator for the current round. The validator then forwards the message to the producer.
Step 3.2: Pre-prepare phase. Upon receiving the request
from Vehiclek , the producer packages the previously calculated
global logits b
Y o,g , the consensus set CON, and other relevant
data into a block B, and enters the pre-prepare phase. The producer broadcasts the message  PRE −PREPARE, v, n, d, B >
s p , m > to all validators. When a validator receives the preprepare message, it will validate the message. If the validation
is successful, it proceeds to the prepare phase. If the validation
fails, no further action is taken.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 3. System operation sequence diagram.

Step 3.3: Prepare phase. Upon entering the prepare
phase, the validator broadcasts the prepare message 
PREPARE, v, n, d, B, i > si >. While sending the prepare
message, the validator will also receive and validate prepare
messages broadcasted by other validators.
Step 3.4: Response phase. If a validator receives more than
2 f + 1 prepare messages, it enters the response phase, then
verifies the messages and provides the results to the producer.
Step 3.5: Reply phase. When the producer receives more
than 2 f + 1 identical confirmation messages, consensus is
considered to be reached. The producer then provides the
confirmation result to all MEC objects (including workers). At
this point, the consensus process is complete. After receiving
the confirmation result, all MEC objects add the block to the
blockchain.
Step 4: Block data download. The validator returns the
request result to Vehiclek . If the consensus is successful,
Vehiclek downloads the block containing the global logits from
the validator, which is then used for distillation training. If
the consensus fails, the system moves on to the next round of
training.
VI. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
The proposed scheme primarily relies on a federated
distillation-based intrusion detection model and an improved
DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm. To validate the performance
advantages of this approach, we first conduct experiments

on the federated distillation-based intrusion detection model,
followed by a detailed performance analysis and comparison.
Subsequently, for the DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm, a
simulation environment is set up and compared with the latest
research solutions. Through these two sets of experiments, the
feasibility of the proposed scheme is demonstrated.
A. Performance Analysis of Intrusion Detection Model
1) Dataset Description and Data Preprocessing: The
N-BaIoT [25] dataset is a publicly available benchmark
dataset, comprising nine sub-datasets from nine Internet of
Things (IoT) devices. Among these nine devices, seven support
11 types of traffic, including one normal traffic type and ten
attack traffic types. The remaining two devices handle six types
of traffic, including one normal traffic type and five attack traffic types. Each traffic packet contains 115 features, which are
extracted from five distinct time windows (100 milliseconds,
500 milliseconds, 1.5 seconds, 10 seconds, and 1 minute).
These features can be quickly computed, meeting the realtime detection requirements for malicious traffic packets. Due
to the dataset’s coverage of a wide range of traffic types and
its rich traffic records, the N-BaIoT dataset has been widely
used in the field of intrusion detection and has become a
benchmark dataset. The data preprocessing is performed in
the same way as described in [8], consisting of three main
steps: data partitioning, normalization, and two-dimensional
transformation.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

1)Data Partitioning: In practical applications, there are
numerous clients (e.g., vehicles) participating in FD, and the
data is typically non-IID. To accommodate this, we partition
the original dataset. Since directly using the original dataset
requires substantial resources, we constructed the mini-NBaIoT dataset, which includes 11 types of traffic data from
nine IoT devices. Specifically, the nine sub-datasets of the
original dataset are represented as D1 , D2 , . . . , D9 . Each Di
is divided into Ci subsets based on traffic type, where each
subset Di,c contains only the traffic data of type c. We selected
1,000 traffic records from each subset Di,c to form the Dmini
i,l
in the mini-N-BaIoT dataset. These new datasets are then split
into private datasets D p , public datasets Do , and test datasets
Dtest with a ratio of 70%, 10%, and 20%, respectively. It is
important to note that these datasets are mutually independent,
and Do does not contain labels. All data records in D p belong
to Di , and D p is assigned to K clients for experimentation.
Non-IID partitioning: D p is sorted according to its classification labels, with a total of 11 classes. These 11 classes are
randomly divided into three groups in the form of 4,4, and 3,
and distributed among three clients. The data distribution is
visualized in Fig 4 (red represents the public dataset, and
green represents the client’s private datasets). After the dataset
partitioning, the distribution of each dataset satisfies the following: different clients have significantly different categories,
exhibiting the non-IID characteristics that align with realworld IoV environments. There is no overlap between the
public dataset Do , private dataset D p , and test dataset Dtest .
2) Normalization: The feature dimensions of the traffic data
vary significantly, leading to large differences in values. To
enhance the training effectiveness of the model, we apply minmax normalization to scale the feature values between 0 and 1.
3) Dimensionalization: Each sample xi consists of 115
features, which are divided into five parts based on time
windows. We transform the sample features into a matrix of
five columns and 23 rows, making it suitable for input into
the subsequent CNN model, as follows:
2

3
xi,0 xi,23 xi,46 xi,69 xi,92
6 xi,1 xi,24 xi,47 xi,70 xi,93 7
6
7
7
xi = 6
6 xi,2 xi,25 xi,48 xi,71 xi,94 7
4 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· 5
xi,22 xi,45 xi,68 xi,91 xi,114

(20)

2) Experimental Setup: To ensure a clear evaluation of the
experiment, the following sections describe the experimental
environment, implementation details, and evaluation metrics:
1) Experimental environment: All evaluations are conducted
in Python 3.7, using the PyTorch framework version 1.9.0,
running on a machine equipped with an Intel Core i5-13600KF
@ 3.50 GHz, 32GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
A4000 GPU.
2) Implementation details: During the training phase, the
Adam optimizer is employed. The learming rate, batch size,
and the number of local training epochs per communication
round are set to 0.0001, 100, and 5, respectively. When
constructing the client selector, clients reserve a portion of
their local data as a validation set. The threshold τk for the

11

Fig. 4. Non-IID data visualization.

client selector is set as the first quartile of the estimated ratio
on the validation set.
3) Evaluation metrics: To assess the performance of
 the
method, we calculate the numbers of true positives T p , true
negatives (T n ), false positives F p , and false negatives (Fn ).
Based on these definitions, we derive the recall, precision, and
F1-score.
Tp
Recall =
(21)
T p + Fn
Tp
Precision =
(22)
Tp + Fp
Precision · Recall
F1 − score = 2 ·
(23)
Precision + Recall
3) Model Performance Evaluation: In this experiment,
we comprehensively compared the detection performance of
different approaches by evaluating their accuracy, precision,
and F1-score, with the specific results presented in Fig 5.
We compared the proposed method with two representative
federated distillation methods—DS-FL [7] and FedMd [26].
Similar to our approach, both of these methods rely on
the public dataset for knowledge transfer. According to the
experimental results, the highest accuracy achieved by the
DS-FL method was 51.33%, while FedMd reached 55.95%. In
contrast, the proposed method achieved a maximum accuracy
of 81.46%, with a precision of 82.72% and an F1-score of
79.42%. It is evident that our method demonstrates significant
performance improvements across all metrics, particularly in
terms of accuracy and precision, far surpassing the other two
approaches.
The significant improvement in performance can be
attributed to the fact that both the DS-FL and FedMd methods
employed a simple averaging-based weighted approach for
aggregating global logits. However, when facing the nonIID issue of client data, this simplistic weighting strategy
led to clients uploading misleading knowledge, which negatively impacted the global model’s training performance. In
particular, the DS-FL method further compounded this issue
by applying entropy-based reduction after simple weighting,
which intensified the inconsistency between data, rendering
the training process more inefficient and unstable. In contrast,
the proposed method designs a client selector based on density

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 5. Comparison of model performance. (a) Accuracy; (b) Precision; (c) F1-score.

ratio estimation, which effectively identifies out-of-distribution
samples in the public dataset. For these out-of-distribution
samples, we set their aggregation weight to zero, effectively
preventing the upload of misleading information from clients
and shielding the training process of other clients from such
negative influences. This strategy ensures that only reliable
knowledge from trustworthy data distributions is shared during
the federated distillation process, thus enhancing the accuracy
and robustness of the global logits, particularly in the face of
various types of data biases.
To further analyze the performance of the proposed method,
we plotted the confusion matrix on the test dataset (as shown
in Fig 6). The results clearly demonstrate that our federated
distillation approach performs exceptionally well in handling
network attacks, effectively identifying different types of network attack traffic. Notably, the G TCP and G UDP attack
types tend to be confused with each other, mainly due to
their classification as DoS attacks, and their high similarity in
certain features. This observation suggests that although these
attacks differ in behavioral patterns, shared network features
lead to difficulties in classification. Therefore, when designing
intrusion detection systems, it is crucial to further optimize
feature extraction and modeling strategies to address these
challenges.
B. DQN-PBFT Simulation and Analysis
We implemented the related algorithms based on PyTorch
1.9.0 and used NS-3 to simulate the network communication
environment. This setup simulated network parameters such
as latency, bandwidth, CPU rate, and reputation values, which
were fed back in real-time to the respective models. In the
simulation environment, we ran four consensus protocols:
PBFT [27], SG-PBFT [28], R-PBFT [29], and DQN-PBFT,
and evaluated their consensus latency, throughput, and communication times under varying numbers of MEC nodes.
Consensus latency refers to the time required for the system
to reach consensus after a node proposes a block. It is a
key metric for evaluating the responsiveness and efficiency
of a consensus algorithm. Throughput, on the other hand,
represents the number of transactions or blocks the system can
process in a given time period, often measured in transactions
per second (TPS), reflecting the efficiency of the consensus algorithm in handling transactions. Communication times

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix.

refers to the number of message exchanges between nodes during the consensus process, used to assess the communication
complexity of the consensus protocol.
During the experimental process, we considered various
parameters such as network delay, bandwidth, CPU speed,
and reputation values of MEC nodes. The SG-PBFT algorithm
selects N/2 (where N is the total number of nodes) consensus
nodes based on the nodes’ scores, while the R-PBFT algorithm
chooses N/3 consensus nodes based on reputation values. In
contrast, our approach uses parameters such as bandwidth
and CPU speed as inputs and employs the DQN algorithm
to dynamically select i nodes as consensus nodes.
As shown in Fig 7, as the number of MEC nodes increases,
the consensus delay of each consensus algorithm gradually
rises, throughput begins to decline, and the number of communication times increases. This is because all four consensus
algorithms rely on communication between nodes to reach
consensus. As the number of MEC nodes increases, the
communication overhead also grows, leading to longer times
for nodes to reach consensus, which results in a reduction in
the number of transactions processed per unit time. Compared
to the classical PBFT algorithm, both SG-PBFT and R-PBFT
improve the performance of the three metrics by limiting the
number of consensus nodes based on scores and reputation
values.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIANG et al.: INTRUSION DETECTION SCHEME FOR IoV BASED ON NON-IID FEDERATED DISTILLATION

13

Fig. 7. Comparison of consensus performance. (a) Consensus latency; (b) Throughput; (c) Communication times.

The DQN-PBFT algorithm proposed in this paper also
enhances consensus efficiency by limiting the number of
consensus nodes, but it is particularly designed for environments combining federated distillation with blockchain. In
such environments, MEC nodes are not only required to participate in consensus but also need to undertake the federated
distillation task. Therefore, the selection of consensus nodes is
crucial and must ensure load balancing across nodes. By using
parameters like bandwidth and CPU speed as inputs, DQNPBFT dynamically selects i MEC nodes as consensus nodes
using the DQN algorithm, effectively ensuring load balancing.
As a result, DQN-PBFT outperforms SG-PBFT and R-PBFT
in terms of consensus efficiency. In contrast, the SG-PBFT and
R-PBFT algorithms, which select consensus nodes based on
scores and reputation values, are not suitable for the federated
distillation environment. If the consensus nodes selected by
these algorithms cannot handle both tasks simultaneously, the
system’s consensus efficiency will significantly decrease.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an intrusion detection solution for
the IoV that combines federated distillation and blockchain
technology, leveraging a public dataset to facilitate knowledge transfer between clients. First, to address the non-IID
issue of IoV data, we design a density ratio-based selector
for each FD client to prevent the sharing of misleading
knowledge with other clients. Next, we introduce blockchain
technology into the federated distillation system, using smart
contracts to determine the clients participating in federated
distillation. To further optimize system performance, we propose the DQN-PBFT consensus algorithm, which intelligently
selects appropriate clients as consensus nodes. By reducing
the number of nodes involved in the consensus process, this
mechanism significantly improves consensus efficiency. Additionally, it enhances load balancing and fairness among clients
in both the federated distillation and blockchain processes.
Finally, through comparative experiments on federated distillation and consensus algorithms, we validate the effectiveness
and feasibility of the proposed method.
Although the proposed approach demonstrates strong performance in detecting known attacks, it still exhibits certain
limitations when dealing with unknown attacks. To enhance
the system’s generalization capability and overall security
defense, future research will focus more on the identification

of unknown threats. In addition, to improve the system’s
adaptability against emerging threats, we plan to incorporate
a dynamically updatable FD mechanism, enabling each client
to continuously learn and effectively recognize novel attack
patterns.
R EFERENCES
[1]

N. Hu, Y. Jia, M. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhao, and L. Luo, “Security
assessment of intelligent connected vehicles based on the cyber range,”
IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 57–62, May 2024.
[2] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain:
A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 2356–2426, 2023.
[3] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 11,
pp. 1–40, Nov. 2023.
[4] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day
attack detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 10733–10811, Oct. 2023.
[5] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “MiTFed: A privacy
preserving collaborative network attack mitigation framework based on
federated learning using SDN and blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1985–2001, Jul. 2023.
[6] N. Rodrı́guez-Barroso, D. Jiménez-López, M. V. Luzón, F. Herrera, and
E. Martı́nez-Cámara, “Survey on federated learning threats: Concepts,
taxonomy on attacks and defences, experimental study and challenges,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 148–173, Feb. 2023.
[7] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto,
“Distillation-based
semi-supervised
federated
learning
for
communication-efficient collaborative training with non-IID private
data,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 191–205, Jan.
2023.
[8] R. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. Xue, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and G. Gui,
“Semisupervised federated-learning-based intrusion detection method
for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
pp. 8645–8657, May 2023.
[9] T. Qi, F. Wu, C. Wu, L. He, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “Differentially private
knowledge transfer for federated learning,” Nature Commun., vol. 14,
no. 1, p. 3785, Jun. 2023.
[10] Z. Yu, Y. Liu, G. Xie, R. Li, S. Liu, and L. T. Yang, “TCE-IDS:
Time interval conditional entropy- based intrusion detection system
for automotive controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1185–1195, Feb. 2023.
[11] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltagebased intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024.
[12] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, and C. Gao, “Open world intrusion detection:
An open set recognition method for CAN bus in intelligent connected
vehicles,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 76–82, May 2024.
[13] M. S. Korium, M. Saber, A. Beattie, A. Narayanan, S. Sahoo, and
P. H. J. Nardelli, “Intrusion detection system for cyberattacks in the
Internet of Vehicles environment,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 153, Feb. 2024,
Art. no. 103330.
[14] P. Waghmode, M. Kanumuri, H. El-Ocla, and T. Boyle, “Intrusion
detection system based on machine learning using least square support
vector machine,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 12066, Apr. 2025.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

[15] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and
G. Kumar, “A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system
using spatial–temporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” Veh.
Commun., vol. 35, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100471.
[16] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane, “NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intravehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 22596–22606, Nov. 2022.
[17] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based
intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547,
pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021.
[18] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchainenabled federated learning for enhanced collaborative intrusion detection
in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
no. 7, pp. 7661–7672, Jan. 2024.
[19] (2022). PySyft. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OpenMined/
PySyft
[20] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Zero-X: A
blockchain-enabled open-set federated learning framework for zero-day
attack detection in IoV,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9,
pp. 12399–12414, Apr. 2024.
[21] V. T. Nguyen and R. Beuran, “FedMSE: Semi-supervised federated
learning approach for IoT network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 151, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 104337.
[22] J. Shao, F. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Selective knowledge sharing for
privacy-preserving federated distillation without a good teacher,” Nature
Commun., vol. 15, no. 1, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 349, doi: 10.1038/s41467023-44383-9.
[23] X. Zhou et al., “Federated distillation and blockchain empowered secure
knowledge sharing for Internet of Medical Things,” Inf. Sci., vol. 662,
Mar. 2024, Art. no. 120217.
[24] X. Zhang, R. Li, and H. Zhao, “A parallel consensus mechanism using
PBFT based on DAG-lattice structure in the Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 5418–5433, Mar. 2023.
[25] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jan. 2018.
[26] D. Li and J. Wang, “FedMD: Heterogenous federated learning via model
distillation,” 2019, arXiv:1910.03581.
[27] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in Proc.
OsDI, 1999, pp. 173–186.
[28] G. Xu et al., “SG-PBFT: A secure and highly efficient distributed
blockchain PBFT consensus algorithm for intelligent Internet of
Vehicles,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 164, pp. 1–11, Jun. 2022.
[29] A. Kumar, L. Vishwakarma, and D. Das, “R-PBFT: A secure and
intelligent consensus algorithm for Internet of Vehicles,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 41, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 100609.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Wenxian Jiang (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
an Associate Professor. His research interests include
blockchain security and the IoVs. He is an ACM
Member.

Zhenping Guo was born in 2000. He is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree in electronic information with Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China. His
research interests include network communications,
blockchain, and the IoVs.

Naizhou Wang was born in 2000. He received
the B.S. degree in computer science and technology from Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer technology with Huaqiao University, Xiamen,
China. His research interests include network security, blockchain, and the Internet of Things.