IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

6685

Ano2Rule: Rule-Based Global Interpretation for
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in Security
Ruoyu Li , Member, IEEE, Yu Zhang , Qing Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Nengwu Wu ,
Yong Jiang , Member, IEEE, Weizhi Meng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Laizhong Cui , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In the realm of cybersecurity, unsupervised anomaly
detection models have emerged as pivotal tools for identifying
novel threats in dynamic and evolving environments. However,
the opaque nature of these black-box models presents a significant
barrier to their adoption in high-stakes applications, where modelinterpretability is essential for trust and deployment. This paper
presents a rule-based approach called Ano2Rule that enhances the
interpretability of unsupervised anomaly detection. First, we propose the concept of distribution decomposition rules that decompose
the complex distribution of normal data into multiple compositional distributions. To find such rules, we design an unsupervised
Interior Clustering Tree that incorporates the model prediction
into the splitting criteria. Then, we propose the Compositional
Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm to obtain the boundary
inference rules that estimate the decision boundary of the original
model on each compositional distribution. By merging these two
types of rules into a rule set, we can present the inferential process
of the unsupervised black-box model in a human-understandable
way, and build a surrogate rule-based model for online deployment
at the same time. We validate Ano2Rule through extensive experiments on diverse real-world datasets, including network intrusion
detection and IoT security, demonstrating superior fidelity and
robustness compared to baseline methods. The results show that
Ano2Rule achieves high fidelity with the original model’s predictions while providing human-understandable insights.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, network security, explainable
AI, unsupervised learning, intrusion detection.

Received 20 July 2025; revised 8 January 2026; accepted 15 February 2026.
Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62502324, Grant U23B2026, and Grant 62372305, and in
part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant
2026A1515011368 and Grant 2024B1515040012. (Ruoyu Li and Yu Zhang
contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Laizhong Cui.)
Ruoyu Li and Laizhong Cui are with the College of Computer Science and
Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518061, China (e-mail:
liry@szu.edu.cn; cuilz@szu.edu.cn).
Yu Zhang is with Tsinghua University, Beijing 100190, China, and also with
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200232, China (e-mail:
yu-zhang23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Qing Li is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail:
liq@pcl.ac.cn).
Nengwu Wu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054,
China (e-mail: wnw2597@gmail.com).
Yong Jiang is with Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 100190, China, and also with the Department of Strategic
and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
518066, China (e-mail: jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Weizhi Meng is with the School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, LA1 4YW Lancaster, U.K. (e-mail: weizhi.meng@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3667688

I. INTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, with the rapid development of machine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) in the field of anomaly
detection, the capability to detect malicious behaviors in security applications has been significantly enhanced. This includes
applications such as intrusion detection [1], [2], [3], malware
identification [4], [5], system monitoring [6], [7], and Internet of
Things (IoT) network surveillance [8], [9], [10]. These technologies demonstrate superior performance in terms of accuracy and
generalization capabilities. Among these studies, unsupervised
anomaly detection exhibits greater potential because it detects
potential malicious activities by identifying deviations from
normal behavior. Compared to supervised anomaly detection
methods, this kind of approach is particularly suitable for detecting unknown attacks and novel threats, offering the following
advantages in network security applications:
1) During the training process, unsupervised anomaly detection requires minimal labeled attack or malicious data,
which are typically more sparse and difficult to obtain.
2) Unsupervised anomaly detection does not rely on any
known threat patterns, thereby performing exceptionally well when facing unknown attacks and novel
threats.
However, despite the excellent performance of these models,
many machine learning approaches, particularly deep learningbased unsupervised models, often exhibit a “black-box” nature,
leading to a lack of interpretability and raising widespread
trust issues. Many local explanation methods [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15] attempt to interpret the models by presenting feature
importance for individual decision points. While these local
explanations can provide valuable insights for specific instances,
they may not fully meet the needs of certain security applications. These fields typically require a more comprehensive understanding of how the model behaves across the entire decision
space to detect complex or unknown attacks in a timely manner.
In contrast, global explanations, particularly those utilizing rule
extraction to describe the overall decision boundaries, may be
more ideal in security systems. This is especially important as
they offer the following benefits (illustrated in Fig. 1):
Enhancing Trust in High-Risk Scenarios: In high-risk fields
such as network intrusion detection, security operators tend to
rely more on interpretable rules rather than the intuitive outputs
of black-box models. Compared to complex prediction scores,
interpretable rules are easier to understand and trust, which can

I

1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

6686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 1. Motivation of interpreting black-box anomaly detection models into
rules in security domains.

effectively reduce false positives and mitigate potential security
risks.
Improving Online Defense Capabilities: By converting the
outputs of black-box models into high-fidelity rules, it becomes
possible to seamlessly integrate with most rule-driven defense
tools (e.g., iptables [16] and Snort [17]), ensuring efficient
deployment of online defenses and efficiency in handling highvolume network traffic.
Most existing global ML/DL explanation approaches have
been developed for supervised models, with limited research
focused on explaining unsupervised anomaly detection. This
area presents several unique challenges:
Unlabeled One-class Data (CH1): Supervised explanation
methods [18], [19], [20] require labeled data from both positive
and negative classes to determine the decision boundaries of
black-box models. However, this requirement conflicts with the
nature of unsupervised anomaly detection, which does not rely
on labeled attack data—one of its primary advantages. This lack
of labeled abnormal data adds complexity to determining the
model’s decision boundaries.
Lack of Surrogate Models (CH2): Global explanation methods typically use interpretable models, such as decision
trees [19], [20] or linear models [21], to approximate the behavior of black-box models. However, there is a lack of suitable
surrogate models in the unsupervised domain that can provide
both interpretability and high performance, particularly in highstakes security applications.
Accuracy Loss (CH3): A common issue with global methods
is the loss of accuracy in the surrogate model due to simplifications made in replicating the original model [22]. While these
methods can offer interpretability, they may fail to meet the
high detection accuracy requirements necessary for real-time
deployment in security applications.
We observe that simple surrogate models often struggle to
effectively replicate the complexity of black-box models when
dealing with high-dimensional data. Such instances belonging to the same class may contain multiple underlying distributions, with the overall distribution composed of several
sub-distributions. For example, the normal activities of a host
may involve multiple services (such as web services, database
services), each exhibiting distinctly different characteristics in

feature space. This diversity makes it challenging for simple
surrogate models to fully capture the complex behaviors of
black-box models, thereby reducing the interpretability and
accuracy of the model.
Conclusion: To this end, this paper proposes a divide-andconquer method called Ano2Rule to extract global rules from
black-box unsupervised anomaly detection models, aiming to
provide interpretable, accurate, and robust explanations. The
implementation of Ano2Rule relies on two core components:
the Interior Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) and the Compositional
Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm. The IC-Tree is an unsupervised decision tree model that extends the traditional Classification And Regression Tree (CART) by incorporating the
predictions of black-box models to determine data splits. It partitions the high-dimensional data space into smaller, more manageable subspaces, capturing complex distributions and identifying normal behavior patterns, thereby laying the foundation for
explaining the black-box model. Within each IC-Tree subspace,
the CBE algorithm generates boundary inference rules. Starting
from initial hypercube-shaped rules, CBE gradually optimizes
the decision boundaries through an approximate gradient ascent
method, accurately capturing the black-box model’s complex
boundaries. By combining the rule sets generated by the IC-Tree
and CBE, Ano2Rule fully presents the global decision logic of
the black-box model, ensuring high fidelity of the explanatory
rules.
Beyond providing global explanations, Ano2Rule also exhibits strong extensibility to other types of model interpretation, such as local explanation and counterfactual explanation.
This flexibility is rooted in the explicit, human-understandable
characterization of normal boundaries from the perspective of
the black-box model. Specifically, for local explanation (i.e.,
assessing feature importance for individual predictions), the
significance of each feature can be quantified by measuring the
distance between a sample’s feature values and the boundaries
defined by its matched rule. For counterfactual explanation (i.e.,
determining how an anomalous sample could be modified to
be classified as normal), our method can project the anomaly
onto the closest region defined by the rules and optimize the
necessary feature changes accordingly, thereby generating informative counterfactuals. These extensions enable our approach
to support a versatile suite of explanation tasks with unified
technical foundations.
For evaluation, we used four unsupervised anomaly detection
models and trained them on five benchmark datasets. To comprehensively assess the effectiveness of our method, we compared it
with five baseline explanation methods. The experimental results
show that Ano2Rule not only can extract highly interpretable and
precise rules from black-box models but also outperforms existing methods in multiple metrics, including fidelity, robustness,
true positive rate (TPR), and true negative rate (TNR), meeting
the demand of improving human trust in black-box models and
maintaining high detection accuracy for online deployment. We
also validate the extensibility of Ano2Rule by demonstrating
its capability to provide local and counterfactual explanations.
Specifically, we show that our rule-based approach enables
quantifiable local feature importance and generates actionable

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

counterfactuals for anomalous samples, further illustrating the
versatility and practical value of the proposed method. Our
source code is available at https://github.com/Ruoyu-Li/UADRule-Extraction.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
reviews related work on anomaly detection and model interpretability. Section III outlines the objectives of the proposed
method. Sections IV detail the core algorithms of Ano2Rule.
Section V presents the theoretical analysis of the proposed
method. Section VI elaborates on the extensibility of AnoRule
to other types of explanation. Section VII describes the experimental setup and result analysis. Section VIII concludes the
paper and suggests future directions.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Anomaly Detection in Security
Anomaly detection is a cornerstone technique in the field of
cybersecurity, supporting a wide range of applications including
network intrusion detection [1], [2], [3], malware detection [4],
[5], [23], and IoT security [8], [9], [24], [25]. The primary
objective is to identify rare or previously unseen events—often
corresponding to malicious activities—that deviate from the established patterns of normal system behavior. This is especially
important in modern security environments, where the diversity
and sophistication of threats continue to evolve rapidly, making
it impractical to enumerate all possible attack types in advance.
Traditional signature-based detection systems rely on predefined patterns and can only recognize known threats. In contrast,
anomaly detection offers the ability to discover novel or zeroday attacks by flagging deviations as potential anomalies. In
practical settings, the abundance of benign data and the scarcity
of labeled attack samples further motivate the adoption of unsupervised anomaly detection models, which can learn normal
behavior from unlabeled data without requiring explicit attack
labels. Recent years have witnessed significant progress in unsupervised anomaly detection methods for security applications.
Representative approaches include one-class classifiers such as
One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [26], [27], [28], tree-based models
like Isolation Forest (iForest) [29], [30], and neural networkbased techniques such as autoencoders (AE) and variational
autoencoders (VAE) [31].
Despite these advances, the widespread adoption of anomaly
detection in high-stakes security contexts remains hindered by
the lack of interpretability and transparency in modern machine
learning models. Security operators must be able to understand
and trust the decisions made by automated systems, especially
when incorrect predictions could result in substantial operational
or financial losses [15]. As a result, enhancing the interpretability
of anomaly detection models has become a research priority in
both academia and industry.
B. Model Interpretation
To address this issue, explainable artificial intelligence (XAI)
has gradually been introduced into the anomaly detection [32],
[33], [34], [35]. In this section, we review representative works
along four lines: model-specific explanation, model-agnostic

6687

local attribution, counterfactual approaches, and global surrogate/rule extraction. Table I summarizes their capabilities along
dimensions that are especially relevant to unsupervised security
deployments, where reliable attack labels are scarce and explanations must be both faithful and operationally useful.
1) Model-Specific Explanation: Some studies attempt to integrate explainability directly into model architectures to enhance interpretability. For example, Kauffmann et al. proposed
a decomposition method for explaining one-class support vector
machine (SVM) anomaly detection [32], breaking down the
model’s decision-making process into comprehensible components. Aguilar et al. proposed an interpretable autoencoder
based on decision trees, which provides a natural explanation
for experts in the application area [35]. Feng et al. utilized a
k-dimensional (KD) tree to classify DDoS sources at an IP-level
fine granularity, outputting explanatory information that enables
easy inspection of detection results [36].
Discussion: Model-specific methods often yield strong, faithful explanations within their targeted architectures; however,
they are tightly coupled with particular model families and thus
offer limited portability to arbitrary black-box detectors. In security practice, anomaly detectors are frequently selected based
on operational constraints and may vary across deployments,
which motivates model-agnostic explanation mechanisms that
generalize across detectors.
2) Local Explanation: Unlike model-specific methods that
require internal access to model structures or parameters, modelagnostic techniques treat the target model as a closed box and
seek to explain its predictions solely based on input-output
behavior. Local explanation, as a representative approach, aims
to interpret a model’s prediction for a specific input by quantifying the importance of each feature in the decision-making
process. Among the most prominent local explanation frameworks are LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) [11] and SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) [12].
These methods operate by constructing simple, interpretable
surrogate models—such as sparse linear regressors or decision
trees—in the vicinity of the input instance under consideration.
For example, LIME perturbs the features of a sample to generate
synthetic neighbors and fits a local model to approximate the
original black-box model’s behavior around that point. These
methods have been applied to explain various unsupervised
models [37], [38], [39].
In the security domain, local explanations have proved valuable for investigating individual alerts or suspicious activities
detected by anomaly detection systems. For instance, Guo
et al. leveraged local interpretable models to analyze malware
classification results, offering actionable insights for analysts
to prioritize incident response [14]. Similarly, Sipple applied
integrated gradients [40], a local explanation technique, to trace
root causes in IoT device failures [41].
Discussion: While local attribution provides instance-level
evidence, it can be sensitive to neighborhood definition and
perturbation strategies, leading to unstable attributions in highdimensional feature spaces. More importantly, local explanations alone do not summarize the detector’s system-level decision logic, which is crucial for auditing and proactive defense

6688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF EXPLANATION METHODS FOR ANOMALY DETECTION; ∗ LOCAL METHODS MAY PROVIDE LIMITED COUNTERFACTUAL SAMPLES VIA SAMPLING
OR PERTURBATION, BUT ARE NOT DESIGNED FOR MINIMAL CHANGES; (  ) INDICATES PARTIAL OR LIMITED SUPPORT

in security operations. This motivates approaches that produce
global, human-auditable rules while retaining the ability to
derive instance-level evidence.
3) Counterfactual Explanation: The central idea of counterfactual explanation is to answer “what if” questions by identifying the minimal changes needed to an input instance in
order to alter the model’s prediction. For instance, in anomaly
detection, a counterfactual explanation provides insight into how
an anomalous instance could be transformed into a normal one,
offering clear and actionable guidance to analysts.
The general methodology for generating counterfactuals involves solving an optimization problem to find the closest data
point whose predicted class is different from the original. This
paradigm was formalized by Wachter et al. who proposed counterfactual explanations as a means to interpret automated decisions while treating the underlying model as a black box [42].
Extensions to this idea have focused on generating diverse counterfactuals for greater coverage and robustness, as demonstrated
by DiCE [43]. Counterfactual methods are also developed for
complex data structures, such as graphs [44] and recommender
systems [45].
In the field of security and anomaly detection, counterfactual
explanations are emerging as a valuable tool for operational
transparency and actionable insight. For example, Guzman et al.
explored counterfactual explanations for detecting SQL injection attacks, helping analysts understand how an attack instance
might be altered to avoid detection or be classified as benign [46].
Similarly, counterfactuals can provide interpretable recommendations for revising loan applications in a security-critical financial context [47].
Discussion: Despite their promise, counterfactual methods
are often developed for supervised classification and implicitly
assume well-defined class boundaries and access to labeled outcomes. In unsupervised anomaly detection, decision boundaries
are induced by normal-only training and can be difficult to
query with label-guided objectives, making validity and realism
constraints harder to satisfy.
4) Global Explanation: Global methods are designed to provide a comprehensive, human-understandable summary of a
model’s overall decision-making process across the entire input
space. Global interpretability is particularly important for security operators, who must not only investigate individual alerts
but also understand and audit system-wide detection logic to
ensure reliable deployment, compliance, and risk mitigation.
A common strategy for global explanation is to approximate
the black-box model with an inherently interpretable surrogate,
such as decision trees [19], [20], [49], symbolic rules [18], sparse

linear models [21], and decision lists [50], to approximate and
explain the predictions of any well-trained model. In related research, authors have constructed global explanations in the form
of decision trees to provide insight into black-box models [19].
The framework proposed by Jacobs et al. generates tree models
using existing machine learning models and training datasets to
explain security-related decisions [20].
However, most of these global explanation approaches have
been developed in supervised learning settings, where labeled
examples of both normal and anomalous data are available. This
limits their direct applicability to the unsupervised anomaly
detection scenarios, where only normal data is typically used for
training. Additionally, while some works can extract rules from
unsupervised anomaly detection models [48], they still assume
that the training dataset contains sufficient outliers to determine
decision boundaries, which may not hold true in practice due to
the model’s generalization capabilities.
Recent studies have also attempted to aggregate multiple local
explanation models to provide nearly global explanations [51],
[52], [53]. However, these approaches incur high computational
costs when processing large-scale data and require a trade-off
between fidelity and coverage. Although techniques such as
knowledge distillation can reduce complexity and enhance explainability through model transformation [54], [55], their primary goal remains model compression and accuracy assurance,
rather than providing high-fidelity explanations of the original
models. Consequently, achieving comprehensive interpretability for unsupervised anomaly detection while maintaining high
detection performance remains a challenge.
Summary and gap: Overall, existing methods address complementary facets of interpretability—instance-level attribution,
actionable recourse, or global decision summaries—but often
rely on assumptions that are misaligned with unsupervised
anomaly detection in security (e.g., access to high-quality labels
or abundant outliers). This leaves an important gap: producing
faithful global rules for normal-only trained detectors while
still enabling instance-level evidence and actionable guidance
in a unified manner. As summarized in Table I, Ano2Rule is
designed to fill this gap by extracting high-fidelity global rules
from black-box unsupervised detectors and supporting local
and counterfactual explanations derived from the same rule
representation.
III. OVERVIEW
To tackle the interpretability challenges in unsupervised
anomaly detection within security contexts, we introduce a novel

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

6689

Definition 2. (Global Explanation by Rule Extraction):
Given a trained model f with its anomaly threshold ϕ and
the training set X, we obtain an in-distribution rule set C =
{C1 , C2 , . . .} that explains how the model f profiles the distribution of normal data. A rule C = . . . ∧ (xi  υi ) ∧ . . . ∧
(xj  υj ) is a conjunction of several axis-aligned constraints
on a subset of the feature space, where υi is the bound for the
i-th dimension and  ∈ {≤, >}.
Let x ∈ C indicate that a data sample satisfies a rule. From
C, we can build a surrogate model hC (x), whose inference is to
regard a data sample that cannot match any of the extracted rules
as anomalous:
hC (x) = ¬(x ∈ C1 ) ∧ ¬(x ∈ C2 ) ∧ . . ., Ci ∈ C.

(1)

Design Goal: We expect the extracted rules to have a high
fidelity to the original model, that is, a similar coverage of normal
data (i.e., true negative rate), and a similar detection rate of
anomalies (i.e., true positive rate). We formulate our objective
as follows:
arg min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ).
C

(2)

B. Methodology Overview

Fig. 2. A high-level illustration of Ano2Rule; small circles are unlabeled
normal data; dashed curves are the decision boundary of the black-box model;
vertical/horizontal lines are extracted rules at each step.

framework called Ano2Rule, which is designed to extract interpretable, rule-based explanations that align closely with the
original anomaly detection model, enhancing transparency and
operational efficacy. As shown in Fig. 2, it leverages an Interior
Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) for feature space partitioning and
a Compositional Boundary Exploration (CBE) algorithm for
precise decision boundary inference.
A. Problem Definition
Let X ⊆ Rd be the variable space of d-dimensional features;
x and xi denote a data sample and its i-th dimension of features.
We give the following definitions for the rest of the paper:
Definition 1. (Unsupervised Anomaly Detection): Given unlabeled negative (normal) data X sampled from a stationary
distribution D for training, an unsupervised model estimates
the probability density function f (x) ≈ PX ∼D (x), and detects
an anomaly via a low probability f (x) < ϕ, where ϕ > 0 is a
threshold determined by the model itself or by humans.
It is noted that the threshold ϕ is a non-zero value, meaning
that the model inevitably generates false positives, which is a
common setting in most of the works [1], [2], [3] even though
the false positive rate can be very low. Besides, the normal data
may occasionally be contaminated or handled with errors. We
consider the anomaly detection tolerant of noisy data, but their
proportion in the training dataset is small and we do not have
deterministic labels of the training data.

To minimize the first item in (2), suppose the training data X
can well represent the distribution D, a straightforward approach
is to find the bound of X as rules, such as using a hypercube
to enclose the data samples which can easily achieve the minimization of the partial loss Lx∈X (C, f, ϕ) = 0. However, as D
is not a prior distribution and we do not have labeled abnormal
samples, the second item LX D (C, f, ϕ) is neither deterministic
nor estimable unless we create sufficient random samples and
query f , which is challenging given the high-dimensional space
of X .
As prior studies [25], [41] suggest, normal data are typically
multimodal, i.e., the overall distribution is formed by multiple
compositional distributions. For example, a server supports
multiple services such as web, email and database. The representations of these services can be disparate and located in
different regions in feature space with little transition between
the regions, making it infeasible to find a uniform rule set to
accurately estimate the original model.
Based on this intuition, Ano2Rule adopts a divide-andconquer approach, as shown in Fig. 2. First, we propose an
Interior Clustering Tree (IC-Tree) to find the distribution decomposition rules, which cut the feature space into subspaces
so that each subspace contains data belonging to the same
compositional distribution. Then, we design a Compositional
Boundary Exploration algorithm (CBE) to explore the decision
boundary on each compositional distribution. Particularly, the
algorithm starts from the minimal hypercube that encloses all
data of the distribution, and finds the boundary by recursively extending the boundary following the optimal direction guided by
a gradient approximation. Upon obtaining the decision boundary
of a distribution, the corresponding boundary inference rule can
be extracted. Last, the final rule set can be obtained by merging
the distribution decomposition rule and the boundary inference

6690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

rule of each compositional distribution. We formally define the
distribution decomposition rule and the boundary inference rule
as follows:
Definition 3. (Distribution Decomposition Rule): Denoted
by CkI that decomposes the overall distribution of normal
data D into K compositional distributions, i.e., PX ∼D (x) =
K
I
k=1 φk · PX ∼Dk (x|x ∈ Ck ) where φk denotes the weight of
each compositional distribution, so that a data sample x ∼ Dk
has significantly small probability of belonging to other distributions.
Definition 4. (Boundary Inference Rule): Denoted by CkE
that estimates the decision boundary of the original model
for each distribution Dk , i.e., arg minCkE LX ∼Dk (CkE , f, ϕ) +
LX Dk (CkE , f, ϕ).
With the definition of these two types of rules, we translate
the objective in (2) to the following objective as our intuition
indicates.
Proposition 1: The original objective can be estimated by
finding the union of the conjunction of distribution decomposition rules and boundary inference rules for each compositional
distribution:
K

k=1

arg min LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ),

splitting criteria, enabling it to work in a completely unsupervised manner. This decomposition approach provides a clearer
understanding of how different regions of the feature space
correspond to the model’s decision-making logic, enhancing
both transparency and interpretability.
Node Splitting: Given the data N at a tree node, we first obtain
the output of the anomaly detection model f (x) for x ∈ N .
Similar to decision trees, the node of an IC-Tree finds a splitting
point s = (i, bi ) that maximizes the gain:
s = arg max I(N ) −
s

|N l |
|N r |
I(N l ) −
I(N r ),
|N |
|N |

where bi is the splitting value for the i-th dimension, N l and N r
are the data split to the left and right child nodes, |N | denotes
the number of data samples, and I is a criterion function such
as Gini index I = 2p(1 − p) for binary classification with the
probability of p. Specifically, we let p be the average output of
the anomaly detection model, which can be interpreted as the
expectation of the probability that the data belong to the same
distribution:
1 
f (x).
(5)
p = Ex∈N [PX ∼D (x)] =
|N |
x∈N

(3)

Ck

where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE .
IV. DESIGN DETAILS
A. Interior Clustering Tree
To derive the distribution decomposition rules and partition
the feature space into distinct subspaces, it is essential to first define the compositional distribution Dk . In unsupervised anomaly
detection, the lack of labeled data makes it challenging to directly
infer decision boundaries. By defining Dk , we can decompose the complex overall distribution D into interpretable subdistributions, enabling a rule-based description of the model’s
decision-making process. Although labeled data is unavailable,
the estimation of the overall distribution D from the outputs of
the black-box model can serve as a basis for this decomposition.
Suppose two data samples x(i) and x(j) belong to the same
distribution Dk . In that case, the difference in their probabilities
of belonging to the overall distribution D will be less than a
small constant . Based on the definition of the distribution
decomposition rules and compositional distributions, if these
two data samples belong to the same distribution Dk , their
probability of belonging to any other distribution PX∼Dl (x)
(where l = k) is nearly zero. Consequently, the probability of
these samples belonging to the overall distribution PX∼D (x),
which is a weighted sum of the probabilities across all compositional distributions, is approximately equal to their probability
of belonging to PX∼Dk (x).
Based on this, we propose a tree-based model dubbed Interior
Clustering Tree (IC-Tree), which extends the CART decision
tree [56]. The main difference between IC-Tree and CART is
that, rather than splitting data based on ground truth labels,
IC-Tree uses the probability output by the original model as

(4)

An IC-Tree continues to split nodes until it satisfies one of
the following conditions: i) the number of data samples at
the node |N | = 1; ii) for any two of the data samples at the
node ∀x(i) , x(j) ∈ N , |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| < ; iii) it reaches
a maximum depth τ , which is a hyperparameter. The IC-Tree
focuses on the subset of features that contribute the most to the
variability of anomaly scores at each split, thereby ensuring a
more accurate separation of data distribution.
Distribution Decomposition Rule Extraction: A trained ICTree that has K leaf nodes (K ≤ 2τ ) represents K distributions
separated from the overall distribution D. Suppose the k-th leaf
node has a depth of τ . A distribution decomposition rule that
describes the k-th compositional distribution can be extracted
by the conjunction of the splitting constraints from the root to
the leaf node:
CkI = (xi 1 bi |s1 = (i, bi )) ∧ . . . ∧ (xj τ bj |sτ = (j, bj )),
(6)
where  is “≤” if the decision path goes left or “>” if the decision path goes right. Each rule set CkI describes the conditions
of the k-th sub-distribution in the feature space. These rules
enable the accurate classification of new data points into their
corresponding sub-distributions.
B. Compositional Boundary Exploration
Following the generation of distinct subspaces by the IC-Tree,
we propose the Compositional Boundary Exploration (CBE)
algorithm (described in Algorithm 1) to precisely define and
refine the decision boundaries within each subspace. The CBE
algorithm uses the minimal hypercube that encloses the normal
data of each compositional distribution as a starting point.
Further, we refer to adversarial attacks [57] and propose a
method to approximate the optimal direction to explore the

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

decision boundary, which makes the algorithm more efficient
and accurate to estimate the decision boundary.
Starting from Hypercube (line 1): Let X k denote the training
data falling into the k-th leaf node of an IC-Tree that represents a compositional distribution. Recall the definition of
boundary inference rules that target min LX ∼Dk (CkE , f, ϕ) +
LX Dk (CkE , f, ϕ). We use the minimal hypercube Hk as a starting point of boundary inference rules to bound every dimension
of the data samples in X k judged by the original model as
normal, which obviously achieves Lx∈X k (Hk , f, ϕ) = 0. The
minimal hypercube is enclosed by 2 × d axis-aligned hyperplanes, which can be characterized by the following rule:
Hk = (υ1− ≤ x1 ≤ υ1+ ) ∧ . . . ∧ (υd− ≤ xd ≤ υd+ ),

(7)

where υi− = min(xi |f (x) > ϕ, x ∈ X k ) and υi+ = max(xi |f
(x) > ϕ, x ∈ X k ).
Explorer Sampling (line 4∼6): The CBE algorithm explores
the decision boundary of the original model by estimating the
bound of one feature dimension at a time. For i-th dimension, we uniformly sample Ne data points on each hyperplane
of the hypercube, i.e., e(1) , . . ., e(Ne ) ∈ Hk ∧ (xi = υi ), υi ∈
{υi− , υi+ }, which are called the initial explorers for this hyperplane. For an initial explorer e, we further sample Ns auxiliary
explorers near it from a truncated multivariant Gaussian distribution denoted by N (e, Σ, i). Particularly, the center of sampling
is the explorer e and the radius of sampling is constrained by
the sampling matrix Σ = diag(ρ|υ1+ − υ1− |, . . ., ρ|υd+ − υd− |),
where ρ is a hyperparameter, and the sampling on i-th dimension is half-truncated to only keep the distribution outside the
hypercube as we desire to extend the boundary. With Ne × Ns
auxiliary explorers in total, we query the original model and use
Beam Search to select Ne samples with the minimal probability
of being normal as the candidate explorers for the next iteration.
Gradient Approximation (line 7∼9): Though we have obtained Ne candidate explorers in the previous step, using them
directly for the next iteration does not guarantee the optimal direction of movement towards the decision boundary. To find the
optimal direction, we utilize the Fast Gradient Sign Method [57]
that employs gradient ascent to find the direction of feature
perturbation. However, we do not know the loss function of
the original model in black-box scenarios. To deal with it, given
a selected auxiliary explorer ê that is sampled around an initial
explorer e on the i-th dimension hyperplane, we approximate the
i-th dimension of the model gradient (i.e., the partial derivative)
by the slope of a linear model across the two data points, and use
the midpoint with its i-th dimension minus the approximation
as the new explorer for the next iteration:
ei + êi
− η · sign(∇i ),
2
∂f (x)
f (e) − f (ê)
∇i =
≈
,
∂xi
ei − êi

ei, next =

6691

TABLE II
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF ANO2RULE

Rule Acquisition (line 12): Once the iteration stops, boundary
constraints are generated for each dimension.If the iteration
stops due to the first condition, we produce a boundary constraint
for each dimension using the coordinate of êext that extends
the boundary of the hypercube, i.e., ci = (xi  êext,i ), where
 is “≤” if êext,i is greater than υi+ , or “>” if êext,i is less
than υi− . If the iteration stops due to the second condition, it
means the algorithm encounters difficulties in moving towards
the decision boundary by perturbing this feature dimension. We
calculate the difference between the model prediction of the
last auxiliary explorer and that of the initial explorers on the
hyperplane. If the difference is smaller than a threshold δ, we
decide that this feature dimension is a contour line, i.e., it has no
significant correlation with the model prediction. In this case,
we do not produce any constraints for this dimension. If the
difference is greater than the threshold, we produce constraints
in the same way as those produced under the first condition. The
final boundary inference rule is the disjunction of the hypercube
and the constraints on each dimension.
C. Merging Final Rule Set
When the stopping condition is met, we merge the distribution
decomposition rules and boundary inference rules on each compositional distribution by their conjunction, and the final rule set
is the union of the extracted rules:
C=

K


Ck , where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE .

(10)

k=1

We present the complete process of Ano2Rule in Algorithm 2.
Generally, the extracted rules serve as an “allowlist”, describing
the range of multiple features that can be considered normal and
judging others as anomalies, such as:
If xj1 < θ1 and xj2 ≥ θ2 , then normal

V. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
A. Design Rationale and Theoretical Insights

(8)
(9)

where sign(·) is the sign function, and η is a hyperparameter to
control the stride of one iteration. The iteration stops when i) an
auxiliary explorer êext that satisfies f (êext ) < ϕ is found, or ii)
it reaches the maximum number of iterations.

1) Divide-and-Conquer Validity: One of the key claims that
lay the theoretical foundation for our method is Proposition 1,
which employs a divide-and-conquer approach by translating
the objective in (2) to (3). We will prove that such an approach
is feasible: the extracted rules will have a high fidelity to the original model, that is, a similar coverage of normal data (i.e., true
negative rate, TNR), and a similar detection rate of anomalies
(i.e., true positive rate, TPR).

6692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Proof: The sum of the minimum losses on each of the compositional distributions is calculated by an iteratively cumulative
process. Let Lj be the sum of the minimum losses on each of
the compositional distributions at the j-th iteration:

Algorithm 1: Compositional Boundary Exploration.

Lj =

j


min(LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ)). (12)

k=1


Let X ∼ jk=1 Dk represent a variable belonging to any of the
compositional distributions D1 , . . ., Dj , which is the same as the
overall distribution X ∼ D. We prove the Loop Invariant of Lj
during the iteration, which always satisfies:
Lj = min(LjT N R + LjT P R ) − ψ,
 j

where LjT N R = LX ∼j Dk
Ck , f, ϕ ,
k=1
k=1
 j

j
Ck , f, ϕ
LT P R = L X   j D k
k=1

k=1

(13)

1) For the first iteration,
L1 = min LX ∼D1 (C1 , f, ϕ) + LX D1 (C1 , f, ϕ)
= min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ) − ψ

(14)

obviously holds where ψ = 0.
2) Suppose the (13) holds at the j-th iteration. For the (j + 1)th iteration, we have the following derivations:
Algorithm 2: Rule Extraction Process of Ano2Rule.

Lj+1 = min(LjT N R + LjT P R ) − ψ
+ min(LX ∼Dj+1 (Cj+1 , f, ϕ)+LX Dj+1 (Cj+1 , f, ϕ))
j+1
= min(Lj+1
T N R + LT P R ) − ψ
j+1

+ LX ∼j Dk ∩Dj+1
Ck , f, ϕ
k=1
k=1
j+1

Ck , f, ϕ ,
+ LX j Dk ∩Dj+1
k=1

k=1

We prove the following lemma equivalent to Proposition 1:
Lemma 1: If the distribution decomposition rules and the
inference boundary rules that minimize the loss on each of the
compositional distributions are found, the sum of the minimum
losses on each of the compositional distributions can estimate
the minimum loss on the overall distribution with a significantly
small error ψ, i.e.,

=

k=1

k=1

j+1
Lj+1 = min(Lj+1
T N R + LT P R ) − ψ,

min(LX ∼Dk (Ck , f, ϕ) + LX Dk (Ck , f, ϕ)) + ψ,

k=1

where Ck = CkI ∧ CkE , ψ ≥ 0.


where j+1
between
k=1 Dk ∩ Dj+1 represents the overlap area
the conjunction of the compositional distributions j+1
k=1 Dk
and the (j + 1)-th compositional distribution Dj+1 . Recall the
definition of the compositional distributions that a data sample
belonging to one compositional distribution has a significantly
small probability of belonging to other compositional distributions, meaning that the overlap area between the compositional
distributions is significantly small. Therefore, the loss with
respect to the overlap area is also significantly small, given the
data samples belonging to the area are significantly rare. Let

j+1
Ck , f, ϕ
ψ = ψ + LX ∼j Dk ∩Dj+1
k=1
k=1

j+1
+ LX j Dk ∩Dj+1
Ck , f, ϕ ,
(16)
and we can get the final result of Lj+1 :

min LX ∼D (C, f, ϕ) + LX D (C, f, ϕ)
K


(15)

(11)

(17)

which proves the loop invariant in (13). When j = K, as the
overall distribution is equal to 
the conjunction of the compositional distributions, i.e., D = K
k=1 Dk , we prove (11) holds
and Lemma 1 is correct.

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

2) Why IC-Tree Enables Unsupervised Decomposition: Although the black-box detector operates in a high-dimensional
feature space, its scalar output f (x) can be viewed as a compressed statistic of the semantic evidence used by the detector
to assess normality. We formalize this by treating f (x) as an
approximate sufficient summary for partitioning normal behavior: there exists an (unknown) partition {Dk }K
k=1 of the overall
distribution D such that samples from the same component
induce similar normality scores, i.e.,
∀x(i) , x(j) ∼ Dk , |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| ≤ ,

(18)

for a small . Under this score-compactness assumption, a desirable decomposition is one that minimizes the within-node score


1
¯ 2 denote
dispersion. Let Varf (N ) = |N
x∈N f (x) − fN
|
the empirical variance of scores in node N . Then a split s that
reduces Varf yields a partition closer to the latent components in
(18). In IC-Tree, maximizing the gain based on I(·) is a surrogate
objective that favors separating nodes with heterogeneous score
distributions, which empirically reduces Varf in child nodes and
thus produces subspaces where f (x) is approximately constant.
Consequently, the stopping criterion |f (x(i) ) − f (x(j) )| < 
naturally identifies subspaces that are close to score-compact
components, making subsequent rule inference feasible without
labels.
3) Why CBE Improves Subspace Fidelity: Fix a leaf k produced by IC-Tree and consider the black-box decision restricted
to this subspace. CBE starts from the minimal hypercube Hk ,
which encloses all normal samples in X k judged by the blackbox model. Therefore, Hk is a feasible initialization that satisfies
[f (x) > ϕ] = 1 for all x ∈ X k while x |= Hk , implying zero
empirical loss on observed normal data. CBE then refines the
boundary by probing the black box near the current axis-aligned
faces and updating one dimension at a time toward the decision
boundary. Importantly, the update always moves the corresponding face outwards until a boundary-crossing is detected (or the
dimension is identified as a contour line), which makes the
covered normal region monotonically non-decreasing across
iterations. As a result, CBE progressively reduces false negatives
caused by an overly conservative enclosure, and the final rule
CkE tends to lie close to the true decision boundary within the
leaf, leading to improved leaf-level fidelity of CkE .
B. Computational Complexity
Table II summarizes the computational complexity of
Ano2Rule in both the rule-extraction phase and the execution
phase. We further break down the dominant terms to clarify
the dependence on the feature dimension, tree structure, and
black-box query budget.
IC-Tree: The IC-Tree construction follows the standard
CART-style procedure: at each internal node, candidate split
thresholds for each feature are evaluated based on an impurity criterion computed from the black-box outputs. With presorting per feature, the split search at a node can be done
in O(d · |N | log |N |), and summing over all nodes yields an
overall complexity of O(d · n log n) in the typical setting, where
d is the feature size and n is the sample number. The tree depth

6693

is bounded by the hyperparameter τ , so the number of leaves
is upper bounded by the number of leaf nodes K ≤ 2τ , and in
practice the stopping criterion based on score consistency further
limits the number of splits.
CBE: For each leaf node k, CBE refines an axis-aligned
boundary rule by exploring one feature dimension at a time. On
the i-th dimension, each iteration samples Ne initial explorers
on the current hyperplane and Ns auxiliary explorers around
each initial explorer, resulting in Ne · Ns candidate queries to
the black-box model per iteration. Let T denote the maximum
number of iterations used for one dimension (bounded by the
algorithm’s stopping criterion). Then the total number of blackbox queries for one leaf is O(d · T · Ne · Ns ), and the total
CBE complexity over all leaves is O(K · d · T · Ne · Ns ). In
addition to black-box queries, beam search introduces an extra
sorting/selection cost of O(Ne · Ns log(Ne · Ns )) per iteration;
however, since model queries dominate the runtime in our setting, we report the query-dominated complexity in Table II and
observe that it matches empirical runtimes.
Execution: At inference time, Ano2Rule first routes a sample
down the IC-Tree to identify its leaf (cost O(τ )), and then
evaluates the corresponding boundary rule. If each rule contains
on average m̄ effective predicates (i.e., dimensions with finite
constraints), rule evaluation takes O(m̄). Therefore, the overall
execution complexity is O(τ + m̄) when using the matched leaf
rule, and is upper bounded by O(|C| · m̄) if one evaluates all
extracted rules. Overall, both training and execution scale linearly with the feature dimension d, consistent with the empirical
efficiency that will be reported in the experiments.
VI. FRAMEWORK EXTENSIBILITY
The proposed rule extraction approach is not only effective for
global explanation, but also exhibits remarkable extensibility to
other forms of interpretability that are vital in practical security
applications. By providing explicit and human-understandable
characterizations of normal data boundaries, Ano2Rule offers a
flexible foundation for supporting multiple interpretability tasks
within a unified paradigm. This versatility enables the same set of
extracted rules to serve as the basis for local explanations—such
as feature attribution for individual predictions—as well as counterfactual reasoning, wherein actionable recourse or remediation
steps can be systematically generated for anomalous samples.
A. Local Explanation Via Rule-Based Feature Attribution
Given an input sample x ∈ Rd , our framework provides
instance-level interpretability by leveraging the explicit, axisaligned boundaries of the rule C in the rule set C that
covers x. Suppose the matched rule C is defined as C =
li ≤ xi ≤ ui , , ∀i = 1, . . . , d, where li and ui denote the lower
and upper bounds for the i-th feature. For each feature i, we
define the attribution score wi for x as
⎧
if xi ∈ [li , ui ]
⎨0,
wi = xi − ui , if xi > ui
(19)
⎩
li − xi , if xi < li

6694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

This formulation quantifies the extent to which each feature
of x deviates from the corresponding boundary of C. If xi lies
within the bounds [li , ui ], it is considered to contribute nothing to
the anomaly for this rule. If xi exceeds the upper or lower bound,
the distance to the closest boundary is taken as its contribution
to the model’s decision.
For samples classified as normal (i.e., xi ∈ [li , ui ] for all i),
we further characterize the feature-wise “tightness” of C by
considering the interval width: a smaller width ui − li implies
greater sensitivity of the model’s decision to changes in xi . One
may define a potential importance score for such features as
wi = 1/(ui − li ).
In summary, this rule-based attribution provides a local explanation of how each feature of x influences the model’s
prediction, allowing analysts to clearly identify which feature
deviations are most responsible for the detection result.

verify the advantages of this method in terms of rule extraction
accuracy, robustness, and interpretability.
A. Experimental Setup

VII. EVALUATION

In this study, we employ four widely used unsupervised
anomaly detection models as black-box models, including Autoencoders (AE) [1], Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [58],
One-Class Support Vector Machines (OCSVM) [59], and Isolation Forests (iForest) [8]. The experiments are conducted
using five benchmark network traffic datasets: CIC-IDS2017,
CSE-CIC-IDS20181 [60], TON-IoT [61], CIC-IoT [62], and
RT-IoT2022 [63]. These datasets cover different feature dimensions and attack-to-normal traffic ratios, facilitating a comprehensive evaluation of the framework across multiple scenarios.
Each dataset is represented in tabular format, with each row
corresponding to a network traffic record and each column representing a statistical feature, such as the mean packet size and
inter-arrival time intervals. Additionally, each dataset includes
multiple attack types; for instance, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset
contains attacks such as DDoS, DoS, and others.
The datasets are randomly divided into training, validation,
and testing sets with a 6:2:2 ratio. Only normal traffic data is
used to train the anomaly detection models and calibrate their
hyperparameters. The dataset statistics (including #Attack and
#Benign) and the performance of the trained anomaly detectors
are summarized in Table III, where we report AUC as well as
the TPR/TNR metrics for each black-box model.
Baselines: We employ five prior explanation methods as
baselines: 1) We use [48] that extracts rules from unsupervised
anomaly detection (UAD); 2) For other global methods, we use
the estimated greedy decision tree (EGDT) proposed by [19],
and Trustee [20] that specifically explains security applications;
3) We also consider one method LIME [11] that can use a
Submodular Pick algorithm to aggregate local explanations
into global explanations, and a knowledge distillation (KD)
method [55] that globally converts a black-box model to a
self-explained decision tree.
For a fair and reproducible comparison, we follow the hyperparameter recommendations in the original papers (or their
official implementations) for all baseline methods. Specifically,
for EGDT, we follow the evaluation protocol in their paper by
using a decision tree of size 31 and a query budget of n = 1000
for estimating split criteria on tabular data. For TRUSTEE, we
adopt the recommended starting-point configuration with S =
10 outer iterations, N = 50 inner iterations, the training subset
size M = 0.3|D|, and the branch-pruning parameter k = 10.
For LIME, we generate N = 15000 perturbed samples to fit the
local surrogate and report the top-K = 10 important features;
the kernel width is selected following the standard practice suggested in the original work. For REDT, we use the default mixing
coefficient α = 0.2 suggested as a generally effective choice in
their paper, with the remaining tree-related settings following the
authors’ implementation. Note that all baselines are restricted to

This section evaluates the performance and effectiveness of
the rule extraction method proposed for unsupervised anomaly
detection models. Through experiments on five datasets, we

1 We use the corrected versions of these two datasets as released by recent
studies [60] to address known labeling issues.

B. Counterfactual Explanation Via Rule-Based Projection
Given an anomalous sample x ∈ Rd not covered by any rule in
the set C, our framework constructs counterfactual explanations
by minimally modifying x so that the altered sample xcf falls
strictly inside the boundary of at least one rule C ∈ C. To ensure
that the counterfactual sample is robustly accepted as normal
(i.e., not exactly on the boundary), we introduce a small margin
δ for each feature, proportional to the width of the rule’s interval.
Formally, for a given rule C = li ≤ xi ≤ ui , ∀i = 1, . . . , d,
we define δi = γ · (ui − li ) where γ > 0 is a margin factor, e.g.,
γ = 0.05. The counterfactual for each feature is then computed
as:
⎧
⎨li + δi , if xi < li
ui − δi , if xi > ui
(20)
xcf
=
i
⎩
xi ,
if xi ∈ [li , ui ]
To select the most plausible counterfactual, we evaluate candidates for all C ∈ C and minimize the following cost function:
L(x, xcf ) = α · |x − xcf |1 + (1 − α) · S(x, xcf )

(21)

where | · |1 denotes the 1 distance, and S(x, xcf ) is the sparsity
term defined as the number of features for which xi = xcf
i . Here,
α is a weighting coefficient balancing proximity and sparsity and
we set α = 0.5.
The optimal counterfactual explanation is then given by
xcf∗ = arg cf min

x ∈P(C,x)

L(x, xcf )

(22)

where P(C, x) is the set of all margin-adjusted projections of x
into rules C ∈ C that yield a normal prediction. This approach
ensures that the generated counterfactuals are both actionable
(few and small changes) and robust (strictly inside the rule),
providing clear, operational guidance for remediation in security
applications.

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

6695

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF DATASETS AND PERFORMANCE OF TRAINED ANOMALY DETECTION MODELS (AUC, TPR, AND TNR)

the same training manners as ours, i.e., they can only access
the predominantly normal training data for rule extraction. In
particular, for methods that are originally designed to leverage
labeled data (e.g., TRUSTEE), we still follow this constraint and
train their surrogate procedure using the training set with only
benign labels, without introducing additional anomaly labels.
Metrics: We refer to the metrics outlined in [22] to evaluate
rule extraction methods. The following key evaluation metrics
are presented in this section: Fidelity (FD) refers to the proportion of samples where the predictions of the original model
and the surrogate model are consistent. This metric reflects the
trustworthiness of the explanation. Robustness (RB) measures
the ability of the surrogate model to maintain the same prediction
as the original model when the input undergoes small perturbations, indicating the method’s stability. True Positive Rate (TPR)
and True Negative Rate (TNR) evaluate the method’s ability to
detect positive and negative class samples, respectively. These
metrics indicate whether a method meets the requirements for
global interpretation and helps avoid alarm fatigue caused by
false positives in highly imbalanced security applications [64].
B. Quantitative Analysis of Interpretability
In our comprehensive performance evaluation (as shown in
Table IV), Ano2Rule demonstrates superior performance across
various anomaly detection models and datasets. First, it consistently achieves high levels of True Positive Rate (TPR) and True
Negative Rate (TNR). For example, on the TON-IoT dataset, all
detection models reach a TPR of 1.00, while the lowest TNR
is as high as 0.9715. This highlights that our method not only
accurately detects anomalous data but also effectively identifies
normal data, significantly reducing false positives and false negatives. Moreover, Ano2Rule exhibits outstanding performance
in terms of Fidelity (FD) and Robustness (RB). The Fidelity
scores across all datasets exceed 0.95, with more than half of
them surpassing 0.99. This indicates that our method can accurately replicate the predictions of the black-box models, ensuring
the correctness of global explanations. The RB scores range
between 0.9890 and 1.00 across all datasets, demonstrating
that the method maintains stable performance even under data
noise and variations, thereby ensuring its reliability in real-world
deployments.
The baseline methods typically exhibit considerable variability in metrics across different datasets. In contrast, on the
CIC-IDS2017 dataset, Ano2Rule improves Fidelity by approximately 0.45 (from 0.533 to 0.9835) and TNR by about 0.16
(from 0.9947 to 0.9915) compared to EGDT. On the TON-IoT

dataset, Ano2Rule achieves perfect TPR and TNR values of
1.00, substantially outperforming LIME and KD. These results
demonstrate that our method not only excels across different
datasets but also offers highly reliable explanations for security
applications. We note that this behavior is expected for labeldependent extraction methods such as Trustee, whose fidelity
optimization typically assumes access to high-quality labeled
data (including representative samples from different classes);
under the unsupervised anomaly detection setting where only
benign training data is available, such methods are inherently
limited in learning a faithful surrogate and thus may yield
lower-fidelity rules.
Notably, although Ano2Rule may not be the top performer
on every individual metric, it delivers highly consistent and
robust results: for example, Ano2Rule achieves a score above
0.95 on 50 out of 64 (78.1%) evaluation settings, covering all
datasets, black-box models, and metrics. In contrast, some baseline methods exhibit larger fluctuations, with high scores only
on certain datasets but significant drops elsewhere. This level
of stability and balanced performance underlines the practical
value of Ano2Rule in real-world applications, where dependable
interpretability across a variety of conditions is often more
important than isolated peak results.
Considering that obtaining a “clean” training set requires
huge manual effort in reality [65], we also assess the efficacy
of Ano2Rule under varying percentages of “noisy” data. We
evaluate the fidelity of extracted rules using two approaches for
the injection of noisy data: 1) random noise; 2) mislabeled data
from other classes, i.e., attack data. The results are shown in
Fig. 3. We find that the impact of the noisy data proportion is
not significant: 36 of 40 fidelity scores in the table preserve over
0.95, and the variation of fidelity scores is not obvious with
the increase of noisy data for most of the models. This shows
that our rule extraction method can retain similar performance
to the black-box model that it extracts from. Nonetheless, the
results of iForest also reveal that a sufficiently large proportion
of noisy data may cause a certain negative impact on the rule
extraction for certain models. Overall, our method achieves
high-quality rule extraction for anomaly detection models by
balancing sensitivity and specificity. This capability makes it a
highly reliable solution in noisy environments.
To assess the usability of the rules, we evaluated three metrics:
Number of Rules, Average Rule Length (effective constraints
per rule), and Top-10 Coverage (benign samples covered by the
top-10 rules). As shown in Table V, the framework consistently
extracts compact rule sets. For instance, on the TON-IoT dataset,
the rule counts remain low (21–28) across all black-box models.

6696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF RULE EXTRACTION ON DIFFERENT DATASETS

While generative models (AE/VAE) generally require moderate complexity to approximate non-linear manifolds, OCSVM
demonstrates significant adaptability, yielding the most concise
set (12 rules) on the RT-IoT2022 dataset despite its higher
count on TON-IoT. Crucially, the average rule length (≈ 12) is
significantly lower than the total feature dimension (e.g., nearly
80 for CIC-IDS2017), indicating that Ano2Rule effectively
identifies critical feature subsets. This manageable complexity
(≤ 35 rules) falls well within human cognitive limits, facilitating
rapid manual auditing. Furthermore, even on the complex RTIoT2022 dataset, the Top-10 Coverage remains consistently high
(> 87%). This confirms that a small, interpretability-friendly

core of rules effectively encapsulates the vast majority of normal
behaviors, ensuring efficiency for rule-based filtering systems.
C. Understanding Model Decisions: Case Study
To demonstrate that the rules obtained by our method are in
line with human understanding, we use OCSVM as an example
of black-box models to provide several explanations. We extract
rules from a well-trained model and use these rules to predict
four typical types of attack data, including Distributed Denialof-Service (DDoS) attacks, XSS attacks, password attacks, and
ransomware attacks. Table VI presents the features of the rules

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

Fig. 3.
data.

Fidelity of extracted rules under varying percentages of noisy training

TABLE V
QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF INTERPRETABILITY METRICS ACROSS
DATASETS AND BLACK-BOX MODELS

extracted from normal data that cannot be matched by the
attack data and explains how humans can interpret the model’s
decisions. Such explanation results are obtained by the following
steps:
1) For a reported anomaly x, we use the IC-Tree to pinpoint
the rule of normality that judges x as anomalous. It is
realized by inputting x into the tree and recursively finding
the leaf node. The rule is denoted by Cx .

6697

2) For each constraint of features in Cx , we compare the
corresponding feature value of x with the constraint.
3) For the feature values outside the range of the constraints,
the Rules of Normality, Feature Values, and Feature Meaning (i.e., the three columns in Table VI) along with the raw
data sample will be sent as the explanation to the security
expert for further analysis.
4) The security expert will analyze the data sample to determine the type of attack (i.e., the Attack column in Table VI)
and give her/his understanding of the important attributes
that make her/him identify the attack (i.e., the Human
Understanding column in Table VI).
5) If there is a huge gap between the provided explanation
and expert understanding, it indicates that the anomaly
detector may not be trustworthy.
For instance, the data of DDoS attacks fails to match the
rules in three feature dimensions: the mean of packet sizes,
the mean of packet inter-arrival time, and the duration of a
connection. Specifically, the rule “psmean > 101.68” is unmet,
as the mean packet size in attack data is only 57.33, indicating
that the packet size in DDoS attacks is significantly smaller.
Similarly, the rule “iatmean > 0.063” is unmet, with the attack
value being merely 0.00063, demonstrating extremely short
inter-arrival times between packets. The rule “dur > 12.61” is
also unmet, as the attack value is only 0.00126, reflecting the
short connection durations characteristic of DDoS attacks. Such
results are easy to interpret: the purpose of DDoS attacks is to
overwhelm the victim’s resources, and attackers achieve this by
consuming resources asymmetrically (i.e., using small packets),
sending packets at an extremely high rate (i.e., low inter-arrival
time), and establishing as many useless connections as possible
(i.e., short connection durations). These explanations align with
how humans recognize DDoS attack behaviors.
These results clearly demonstrate that our extracted rules
align with human understanding of attack patterns, showing that
our method can provide precise, human-readable insights into
black-box anomaly detection models. Besides, we note that the
gap between the provided explanation and human understanding
may not only occur when the anomaly detector makes erroneous decisions but also when the anomaly detector correctly
detects an attack sample by unreasonable features, which is
called “spurious correlation” or “shortcut learning” [66]. For
example, the most obvious attribute of a DoS attack is typically
its high rate of forwarding packets in order to overwhelm the
victim, while the provided explanation might suggest that IP
address is an important feature. Specifically, unreliable decisions
could be made due to inappropriate testbed settings during the
collection of training data, such as the DoS attack being launched
from one separate host address while all other normal traffic is
from other host addresses. Therefore, our explanation can also
verify whether the detectors are correctly trained before they are
deployed.
D. Ablation Study
To evaluate the contributions of each component in Ano2Rule,
including the IC-Tree and the CBE algorithm, we conducted

6698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE VI
EXAMPLES OF EXPLANATION ON FOUR TYPES OF ATTACKS

are difficult to express through axis-aligned rules, leading to poor
interpretability and deployability. In contrast, our method (ICTree + CBE) not only achieves higher fidelity but also enhances
the model’s interpretability and deployment potential through
clear rule representation. In summary, these experimental results
validate the contributions of each component and demonstrate
the advantages of Ano2Rule.
E. Computational Cost

Fig. 4. (a) Ablation study evaluating the contribution of each component to
overall performance; (b) Average training and prediction time per sample for
different feature sizes.

ablation experiments with the following configurations: 1) replacing the IC-Tree with the K-Means clustering algorithm;
2) using only the CBE algorithm; and 3) replacing the CBE
algorithm with directly using hypercubes as rules. As shown in
Fig. 4(a), our method (IC-Tree + CBE) outperforms the other
methods in terms of fidelity (FD) on both datasets.
For instance, in the comparison between using only CBE and
the combination of IC-Tree + CBE, the fidelity on the CICIDS2017 dataset increased from 0.9735 to 0.9856, an improvement of 1.24%. On the TON-IoT dataset, the fidelity improved
from 0.9784 to 0.9840, an increase of 0.57%. These results
indicate that incorporating IC-Tree significantly enhances the
model’s fidelity across different datasets. Furthermore, in the
ablation experiments, although using K-Means (e.g., k = 10 or
k = 5) achieved comparable fidelity results, its clustering results

We also evaluate the computational cost of Ano2Rule with respect to training and prediction. Since the CIC-IDS2017 dataset
has 80 features in total, we train the model using the first 20,
40, 60, and 80 features of 4000 samples to investigate the
influence of feature sizes. The results are shown in Fig. 4(b),
which demonstrates the average training and prediction time of
our method. The experimental results indicate that training time
increases linearly with the number of features. This is because
Ano2Rule adopts a feature-by-feature strategy to explore the
decision boundary of the model. As data complexity increases,
each additional feature expands the data space, forcing the model
to learn a higher-dimensional representation, thus extending the
training time. Nevertheless, the training time is around 1 minute,
which is acceptable and practical for large-scale training.
Regarding prediction time, Ano2Rule is highly efficient, with
each inference taking only microseconds. This demonstrates that
our method, as a rule-based approach, can achieve real-time
execution for online applications. Furthermore, since the prediction phase relies on a set of predefined rules derived from
the tree’s decision paths and boundary delineations, the computational process remains lightweight, making it well-suited
for real-time scenarios. It is worth noting that the runtime was
measured entirely based on Python implementation. In practice,
the prediction time could be further reduced with more efficient
code implementations.
F. Hyperparameter
We perform a sensitivity analysis of several hyperparameters
on their influence on the rule extraction. We present four major
hyperparameters in Fig. 5, including the maximum depth τ of an
IC-Tree, Ne number of explorers, the coefficient ρ of sampling,
and the factor η that controls the stride of an iteration.

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

Fig. 5.

Sensitivity experiments of hyperparameters.

Fig. 6.

Comparing Ano2Rule as a local explanation method to LIME.

Fig. 7.

Comparing Ano2Rule as a counterfactual explanation method to DiCE.

Maximum tree depth: A deeper IC-Tree creates more leaf
nodes, which allows for finer decomposition of distributions,
easing the difficulty of rule extraction. However, excessive depth
can lead to overfitting, reducing generalization capability. As
shown in Fig. 5(a), τ = 15 provides the best balance between
performance and complexity. This result underscores the importance of selecting an appropriate tree depth to avoid redundancy
while ensuring sufficient resolution in feature space.
Number of Explorers: The number of explorers Ne in Beam
Search determines the number of nodes evaluated per iteration.
This parameter significantly affects algorithmic efficiency and
accuracy. While a higher Ne helps explore multiple local optima,
it can also introduce redundancy, as shown in Fig. 5(b). An optimal range of 6 to 8 explorers is recommended, ensuring robust
performance without unnecessary computational overhead.
Coefficient of sampling: The sampling coefficient ρ determines the radius of sampling within a multivariate Gaussian
distribution. Larger values of ρ enhance the CBE algorithm’s
ability to identify the decision boundary effectively by enabling

6699

a broader search radius, as illustrated in Fig. 5(c). This capability is crucial for ensuring accurate rule extraction, particularly in high-dimensional spaces where decision boundaries are
complex.
Factor of iteration stride: The iteration stride factor η controls
the step size in boundary exploration. Larger values of η improve
convergence speed and rule quality by facilitating more significant adjustments during each iteration. Fig. 5(d) demonstrates
that higher values lead to better performance, suggesting that a
balance between stride length and convergence stability is key
for optimizing exploration.

G. Extensibility
To further demonstrate the versatility of Ano2Rule, we evaluate its effectiveness as a local and counterfactual explanation method, in comparison with specialized state-of-the-art
approaches.

6700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Local Explanation: To assess the effectiveness of Ano2Rule
as a local explanation method, we compare its feature attribution capability with the widely used model-agnostic framework
LIME [11]. We use the Negative Flipping Rate (NFR) as the
evaluation metric, which quantifies the proportion of originally
normal samples that are reclassified as anomalous by the blackbox model after the top-K most important features—identified
by the explanation method—are set to zero. A higher NFR at
smaller K values indicates that the explanation method is more
accurate in pinpointing the features most critical to the model’s
decision.
The comparative results are shown in Fig. 6. Across most
benchmark datasets, Ano2Rule achieves a higher or comparable
NFR with fewer features flipped, and the NFR curve rises more
rapidly as K increases. For example, on the TON-IoT dataset,
Ano2Rule achieves a 100% flipping rate with fewer than five
features altered, whereas LIME requires more features to reach
the same flipping ratio. On some datasets, the two methods
perform similarly, reflecting that our global rule extraction can
match the local interpretability provided by LIME.
Counterfactual Explanation: We further evaluate the counterfactual explanation capability of Ano2Rule by comparing it
against DiCE [43], a widely adopted model-agnostic counterfactual generation approach. For each detected anomaly, both
methods are used to generate multiple candidate counterfactual
samples. We assess their performance using three metrics: Validity (the proportion of generated counterfactuals classified as
normal by the original model), Proximity (the average featurewise distance between each counterfactual and the original
anomalous sample, indicating the extent of modification), and
Success Rate (the proportion of anomalous samples for which
at least one valid counterfactual is found).
The comparative results are presented in Fig. 7. Across all
evaluated datasets, Ano2Rule consistently achieves higher validity and success rates than DiCE, indicating that our rule-based
approach is more effective at generating actionable recourse that
leads to a change in model prediction. Notably, the proximity
scores of Ano2Rule counterfactuals are lower on average, meaning that the modifications suggested by our method are not only
more likely to succeed, but also require less perturbation to the
original sample.
Overall, these results demonstrate that Ano2Rule, though
originally designed for global explanation, can be readily extended to other types of explanation while preserving similar
effectiveness to the specialized methods of these types. In addition, as it requires no iterative sampling or surrogate model
training, our rule-based approach achieves higher explanation
efficiency, making it more practical for large-scale or real-time
applications.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a novel method called Ano2Rule for providing global explanations of black-box unsupervised anomaly
detection models. The method combines the Internal Clustering
Tree (IC-Tree) with a Boundary Exploration Algorithm (CBE)
to efficiently extract rules and offer transparent explanations

for anomaly detection. IC-Tree recursively partitions the feature
space to capture the hierarchical structure of data distributions,
while CBE further explores decision boundaries within each
subspace to enhance detection accuracy. Ano2Rule not only
ensures global interpretability but also provides fine-grained
local detection capabilities, offering comprehensive and intuitive explanations of the anomaly detection model’s reasoning process. Experimental results demonstrated that Ano2Rule
outperforms existing approaches across multiple key metrics,
including fidelity, robustness, true positive rate, and true negative
rate, providing robust support for security applications.
Although Ano2Rule exhibits excellent global interpretability
and high fidelity, there are still some limitations, which provide
multiple avenues for future research. First, we are curious if it is
possible to extend the method to other data modalities, such as
raw image data. This may require integrating deep models with
spatial awareness capabilities, such as Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs), to extract
high-level semantic features, thereby enhancing the method’s
adaptability for cross-domain applications. Second, to better
balance interpretability and fitting capacity, we will explore
alternative models and algorithms, such as more complex surrogate models, to accommodate the intricate shapes of decision
boundaries in high-dimensional feature spaces. Lastly, given
the method’s generalizability, we will explore its application in
other domains requiring interpretable anomaly detection, such
as medical diagnostics, manufacturing monitoring, and criminal
investigation analysis. These research directions will further
enhance the applicability and practicality of Ano2Rule, providing robust support for its widespread use in various high-risk
multi-domain scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Netw.
Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2018.
[2] R. Tang et al., “ZeroWall: Detecting zero-day web attacks through encoderdecoder recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 2479–2488.
[3] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[4] R. Perdisci, W. Lee, and N. Feamster, “Behavioral clustering of HTTPbased malware and signature generation using malicious network traces,”
in Proc. USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Implementation, 2010, pp. 391–
404.
[5] E. C. R. Shin, D. Song, and R. Moazzezi, “Recognizing functions in
binaries with neural networks,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2015,
pp. 611–626.
[6] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, G. Modelo-Howard, S. Dube, and B. Bhargava,
“Hunting for insider threats using LSTM-based anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 451–462,
Jan./Feb. 2023.
[7] W. Fan et al., “Lightweight and identifier-oblivious engine for cryptocurrency networking anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1302–1318, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[8] Y. Dong et al., “Horuseye: Realtime IoT malicious traffic detection framework with programmable switches,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
pp. 571–588.
[9] L. Xi, D. Miao, M. Li, R. Wang, H. Liu, and X. Huang, “Adaptivecorrelation-aware unsupervised deep learning for anomaly detection
in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2888–2899, Jul./Aug. 2024.

LI et al.: ANO2RULE: RULE-BASED GLOBAL INTERPRETATION FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION IN SECURITY

[10] A. Alsaedi, Z. Tari, R. Mahmud, N. Moustafa, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“USMD: Unsupervised misbehaviour detection for multi-sensor data,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 724–739,
Jan./Feb. 2023.
[11] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust you?’:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[12] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4765–
4774.
[13] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Anchors: High-precision modelagnostic explanations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 1527–
1535.
[14] W. Guo et al., “LEMNA: Explaining deep learning based security applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018,
pp. 364–379.
[15] D. Han et al., “DeepAID: Interpreting and improving deep learning-based
anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3197–3217.
[16] netfilter project, “iptables,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.
netfilter.org/projects/iptables/index.html
[17] snort, “Snort ids,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.snort.org/
[18] M. W. Craven and J. W. Shavlik, “Using sampling and queries to extract
rules from trained neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
1994, pp. 37–45.
[19] O. Bastani, C. Kim, and H. Bastani, “Interpreting blackbox models via
model extraction,” 2017, arXiv:1705.08504.
[20] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Ferreira, A. Gupta, and L.
Z. Granville, “AI/ML for network security: The emperor has no clothes,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2022, pp. 1537–1551.
[21] J. H. Friedman and B. E. Popescu, “Predictive learning via rule ensembles,”
Ann. Appl. Statist., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 916–954, 2008.
[22] G. Vilone, L. Rizzo, and L. Longo, “A comparative analysis of rule-based,
model-agnostic methods for explainable artificial intelligence,” in Proc.
Ir. Conf. Artif. Intell. Cogn. Sci., 2020.
[23] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[24] R. Li, Q. Li, J. Zhou, and Y. Jiang, “ADRIoT: An edge-assisted anomaly
detection framework against IoT-based network attacks,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 13, pp. 10576–10587, Jul. 2022.
[25] R. Li, Q. Li, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, P. Zhu, and Y. Jiang, “IoTEnsemble:
Detection of botnet attacks on Internet of Things,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res.
Comput. Secur., 2022, pp. 569–588.
[26] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and R. C.
Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,”
Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, 2001.
[27] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[28] S. Itani, F. Lecron, and P. Fortemps, “A one-class classification decision
tree based on kernel density estimation,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 91, 2020,
Art. no. 106250.
[29] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[30] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12591–
12604, Dec. 2023.
[31] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014.
[32] J. Kauffmann, K.-R. Müller, and G. Montavon, “Towards explaining
anomalies: A deep taylor decomposition of one-class models,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 101, 2020, Art. no. 107198.
[33] D. Kazhdan, B. Dimanov, M. Jamnik, and P. Liò, “MEME: Generating
RNN model explanations via model extraction,” 2020, arXiv:2012.06954.
[34] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, M. Kloft, and
K. Müller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2021.
[35] D. L. Aguilar, M. A. Medina-Pérez, O. Loyola-González, K.-K. R.
Choo, and E. Bucheli-Susarrey, “Towards an interpretable autoencoder: A
decision-tree-based autoencoder and its application in anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1048–1059,
Mar./Apr. 2023.
[36] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and adaptable
detection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226, Jul./Aug. 2024.

6701

[37] Z. Kong and K. Chaudhuri, “Understanding instance-based interpretability
of variational auto-encoders,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2021, pp. 2400–2412.
[38] J. Crabbé and M. V. D. Schaar, “Label-free explainability for unsupervised
models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 4391–4420.
[39] O. Eberle, J. Büttner, F. Kräutli, K. Müller, M. Valleriani, and G. Montavon,
“Building and interpreting deep similarity models,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 1149–1161, Mar. 2022.
[40] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep
networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017. pp. 3319–3328.
[41] J. Sipple, “Interpretable, multidimensional, multimodal anomaly detection
with negative sampling for detection of device failure,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9016–9025.
[42] S. Wachter, B. D. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Counterfactual explanations
without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the GDPR,”
Harvard J. Law & Technol., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 841–887, 2018.
[43] R. K. Mothilal, A. Sharma, and C. Tan, “Explaining machine
learning classifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations,” in
Proc. Conf. Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, Barcelona, 2020,
pp. 607–617.
[44] M. Bajaj et al., “Robust counterfactual explanations on graph neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
pp. 5644–5655.
[45] K. H. Tran, A. Ghazimatin, and R. S. Roy, “Counterfactual explanations
for neural recommenders,” in Proc. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
Retrieval, 2021, pp. 1627–1631.
[46] B. A. Cumi-Guzman, A. D. Espinosa-Chim, M. G. Orozco-del-Castillo,
and J. A. Recio-Garcıá, “Counterfactual explanation of a classification
model for detecting SQL injection attacks,” in Proc. Workshops at 32nd
Int. Conf. Case-Based Reasoning, 2024, pp. 49–64.
[47] R. McGrath et al., “Interpretable credit application predictions with counterfactual explanations,” 2018, arXiv:1811.05245.
[48] A. Barbado, O. Corcho, and R. Benjamins, “Rule extraction in unsupervised anomaly detection for model explainability: Application to oneclass
SVM,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 189, 2022, Art. no. 116100.
[49] D. Han et al., “Rules refine the riddle: Global explanation for deep learningbased anomaly detection in security applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2024, pp. 4509–4523.
[50] B. Letham, C. Rudin, T. H. McCormick, and D. Madigan, “Interpretable
classifiers using rules and Bayesian analysis: Building a better stroke
prediction model,” Ann. Appl. Statist., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1350–1371,
2015.
[51] I. V. D. Linden, H. Haned, and E. Kanoulas, “Global aggregations of local
explanations for black box models,” 2019, arXiv:1907.03039.
[52] M. Setzu, R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, F. Turini, D. Pedreschi, and F.
Giannotti, “Glocalx - from local to global explanations of black box AI
models,” Artif. Intell., vol. 294, 2021, Art. no. 103457.
[53] Q. Li, R. Cummings, and Y. Mintz, “Optimal local explainer aggregation
for interpretable prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022,
pp. 12000–12007.
[54] N. Frosst and G. E. Hinton, “Distilling a neural network into a soft decision
tree,” 2017, arXiv:1711.09784.
[55] Y. Li, J. Bai, J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Jiang, and S. Xia, “Rectified decision trees:
Exploring the landscape of interpretable and effective machine learning,”
2020, arXiv:2008.09413.
[56] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone, Classification
and Regression Trees. London, U.K.: Chapman and Hall, 1984.
[57] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2015.
[58] X. Xu, J. Li, Y. Yang, and F. Shen, “Toward effective intrusion detection
using log-cosh conditional variational autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6187–6196, Apr. 2021.
[59] A. Binbusayyis and T. Vaiyapuri, “Unsupervised deep learning approach
for network intrusion detection combining convolutional autoencoder
and one-class SVM,” Appl. Intell., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 7094–7108,
2021.
[60] L. Liu, G. Engelen, T. M. Lynar, D. Essam, and W. Joosen, “Error
prevalence in NIDS datasets: A case study on CIC-IDS-2017 and CSECIC-IDS-2018,” in Proc. 10th IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2022,
pp. 254–262.
[61] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. H. D.
Hartog, “Ton_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022.

6702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

[62] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional
IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust,
2022, pp. 1–11.
[63] B. S. Sharmila and R. Nagapadma, “Quantized autoencoder (QaE) intrusion detection system for anomaly detection in resource-constrained
IoT devices using RT-IoT2022 dataset,” Cybersecurity, vol. 6, 2023,
Art. no. 41.
[64] B. A. AlAhmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
[65] G. Apruzzese, P. Laskov, and A. Tastemirova, “SoK: The impact of
unlabelled data in cyberthreat detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur.
Privacy, 2022, pp. 20–42.
[66] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.

Ruoyu Li (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in
information security from the Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, China, in 2017, the MS
degree in computer science from Columbia University, USA, in 2019, and the PhD degree in computer
science and technology from Tsinghua University,
China, in 2024. He is currently an assistant professor
with the College of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Shenzhen University, China. His research interests include data-driven network security,
IoT security, programmable networking, trustworthy
AI, and agentic system security.

Yu Zhang is currently working toward the graduation
degree with Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His
research interests include large model reasoning and
AI security, with an emphasis on exploring reliable
reasoning mechanisms of large language models and
developing effective defense strategies against AIrelated security threats.

Qing Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in computer science and technology from Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2008, and
the PhD degree in computer science and technology
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2013.
He is currently a research fellow with the Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research interests
include reliable and scalable routing of the Internet, software-defined networking, network function
virtualization, in-network caching/computing, edge
computing, traffic transmission control, and video
delivery.

Nengwu Wu is currently working toward the graduation degree in computer technology with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
His research interests include federated learning,
incentive-aware federated learning, interpretable machine learning, and mixture-of-experts models, particularly interested in efficient and trustworthy learning mechanisms for distributed intelligent systems.

Yong Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the BS and
PhD degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 1998 and 2002, respectively. He is currently a full professor with the Division of Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua Shenzhen
International Graduate School, Shenzhen, China, and
the Department of Mathematics and Theories, Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research interests
include future internet architecture, the Internet of
Things, edge computing, and AI for networks.
Weizhi Meng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
PhD degree in computer science from the City University of Hong Kong. He is currently a full professor
with the School of Computing and Communications,
Lancaster University, U.K. His primary research interests include blockchain technology, cyber security
and artificial intelligence in security including intrusion detection, blockchain applications, smartphone
security, biometric authentication, and IoT security.
He was the recipient of the Hong Kong Institution
of Engineers (HKIE) Outstanding Paper Award for
Young Engineers/Researchers in 2014 and 2017 and IEEE ComSoc Best Young
Researcher Award for Europe, Middle East, & Africa Region (EMEA) in 2020.
He is the general chair for various international conferences such as ACM CCS
2023 and ESORICS 2022.
Laizhong Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
BS degree from Jilin University, Changchun, China,
in 2007 and the PhD degree in computer science
and technology from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 2012. He is currently a professor with the
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China. He led more than 10
scientific research projects, including National Key
Research and Development Plan of China, National
Natural Science Foundation of China, Guangdong
Natural Science Foundation of China, and Shenzhen
Basic Research Plan. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 papers,
including IEEE Transactions on Networking, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions
on Computers, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE INFOCOM, ACM MM, AAAI, IEEE
ICNP, and IEEE ICDCS. His research interests include future internet architecture and protocols, edge computing, multimedia systems and applications,
blockchain, internet of things, cloud computing, and federated learning. He is
an associate editor or a member of the Editorial Board for several international
journals, including IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Transactions on
Cloud Computing, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
and International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics. He is a
Distinguished Member of the CCF.