This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

1

Anomaly Subgraph Detection on Multiple
Associated Attributed Networks
Nannan Wu , Ying Sun , Yazheng Zhao , Wenjun Wang , Xueli Liu, and Jianxin Li

Abstract—With the rapid development of artificial intelligence
(AI) technology and large-scale dataset applications, anomaly
subgraph detection is becoming an essential and widespread
application. Most existing methods detect anomaly subgraphs
depending on the observable anomalous attributes in target
data. However, they may face challenges when the target data
lacks such anomalous attributes. E.g., identifying suspicious
gangs in the target transportation graph solely based on road
traffic information, or detecting burst events in nonpublic data
without explicit anomalous attributes. To address the detection
of implicit anomaly subgraphs (IASs) in such target graphs,
this article proposes a novel approach IAS detection (IASD)
with multidimensional feature transfer. First, our approach is
built upon transfer learning techniques and involves fusing
features from multiple graphs. Second, we explore a feature
extraction procedure based on a graph attention (GAT) network
model to generate representations of anomaly features for large
multidimensional attribute graphs. Third, we construct a twolayer graph by introducing an attributed graph referred to as
a “source graph,” where anomalies can be easily detected, and
nodes of the source graph are partially aligned with the target
graph. We validate the effectiveness and robustness of IASD
through experiments on five real-world datasets, and implement
four anomaly subgraph detection tasks in practical applications.
Index Terms—Anomaly alignment, anomaly subgraph detection, complex network, feature transfer learning.

N = (G1 , G2 , M)
G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 )
G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 )
M ⊆ V1 × V2
V1 , V2 and E1 , E2

N OMENCLATURE
Two-layer graph.
Source graph layer.
Target graph layer.
Alignment edge sets.
Node sets and edge sets.

Received 20 May 2024; revised 9 October 2024, 1 May 2025,
and 24 September 2025; accepted 15 December 2025. This work was
supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin under Grant
25JCZDJC01300, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant U2468204, and in part by the Innovative Research Group Project
of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272311.
(Corresponding author: Ying Sun.)
Nannan Wu is with the School of Cybersecurity, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300350, China (e-mail: nannan.wu@tju.edu.cn).
Ying Sun is with the School of International Business, Zhejiang Yuexiu
University, Shaoxing 312000, China (e-mail: yingsun@tju.edu.cn).
Yazheng Zhao and Xueli Liu are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail:
yazhengzhao@tju.edu.cn; xueli@tju.edu.cn).
Wenjun Wang is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: wjwang@tju.edu.cn).
Jianxin Li is with the State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data
and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
lijx@act.buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647831

XG1 ∈ Rn×d1
XG2 ∈ Rm×d2
n = |V1 |, m = |V2 |
d1 ∈ N, d2 ∈ N
S 1 = (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 )
S 2 = (VS 2 , ES 2 , XS 2 )
H ⊆ V1 × V2
xG1 (v) ∈ Rd1 , v ∈ V1
xG2 (v) ∈ Rd2 , v ∈ V2
x1 ∈ Rn , x2 ∈ Rm

Anomaly attribute matrix of G1 .
Nonanomaly attribute matrix of G2 .
Number of nodes of G1 and G2 .
Dimensionality of node attributes.
Anomaly subgraph of G1 .
Anomaly subgraph of G2 .
Prior alignment edge sets.
Anomaly attribute of G1 nodes.
Non-anomaly attribute of G2 nodes.
Feature vectors of G1 , G2 .

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection refers to the discovery of entities, events, and observations that deviate from the
majority, while anomaly subgraph detection identifies unusual
or anomaly subgraphs within a larger graph or network.1
Anomaly subgraph detection is a vital task in various public
safety applications, such as hot spot detection, fraud detection,
and intrusion detection.
In general, anomaly subgraph detection specifically focuses
on revealing anomalous patterns and facilitating informed
decision-making. Most existing approaches achieve this by
directly extracting anomaly-related features based on observable anomalous attributes within the target dataset [1], [2].
Nonetheless, they face significant challenges when such
anomalous attributes are absent. In practical applications,
detecting urban crime hotspots remains a crucial anomaly
subgraph detection task for ensuring urban security. Typically,
identifying criminal activity in urban street networks (USNs)
or urban transport networks (UTNs) is often impossible or
limited by insufficient road surveillance, e.g., in a city’s
commercial district, traffic monitoring may report normal flow
while social media simultaneously reveals abnormal events
such as robberies or sudden crowd gatherings. As shown in
Fig. 1, emotional words (e.g., nasty, hate, and complaint) frequently appear in social networks (SNs), and this particularly
anomalous attribute is difficult to observe in USN. Similar situations also arise in public SNs and private forums. The private
nature of some SNs conceals certain information, making it
challenging to directly capture the anomalous attributes. In
addition to the absence of anomalous attributes in the dataset,
the lack of anomaly features may also result from anomalous
attributes being obscured within the vast volume of big data
and its high-dimensional nature. How can we achieve effective
detection performance when anomaly features are lacking due
to the absence of observable anomalous attributes?
1 In this article, we use the terms “network” and “graph” interchangeably
for the structure denoted as G = (V, E), where V and E denote the node and
the edge sets, respectively.

2162-237X © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

Fig. 1. Illustration of crime hotspot detection using the IASD framework.
Crime hotspots in the urban street graph are identified by leveraging a
social graph enriched with negative emotional attributes. The proposed IASD
approach integrates anomaly subgraph detection with network alignment.

Fig. 2. Illustration of anomaly alignment: red circles vi and v j denote anomaly
nodes, orange circles v0i and v0j denote implicit anomaly nodes, solid lines
(vi , v j ) and (v0i , v0j ) are edges in graphs, and dash lines (vi , v0i ) and (v j , v0j ) are
the alignment edges between two graphs.

In this article, we refer to the anomaly subgraph hidden
within the target data that lacks anomaly features as the
implicit anomaly subgraph (IAS). Hence, detecting anomaly
subgraphs will face challenges due to the lack of anomaly features within the target datasets. Another challenge encountered
by many existing anomaly subgraph detection algorithms is the
lack of interpretability. Especially, single-attribute networks
hinder anomaly cause identification without sufficient features,
as seen in UTN data where sparse accident metadata impedes
accurate congestion analysis. Such discrepancies motivate
the development of anomaly feature transfer learning algorithms that leverage social signals to complement traffic/street
monitoring data and enable early detection of potential
risks.
To address the two aforementioned challenges, our approach
incorporates associated auxiliary data to enable the identification of IASs and underlying anomaly causal chains
within the target data. An anomalous event often exhibits
correlations across multiple domain-specific datasets. This
correlation is termed as “Anomaly Alignment” in this article.
Another instance is that unusual opinions about traffic congestion reported on SNs and congestion patterns recorded by
UTNs often coincide at specific street locations or geographic
coordinates, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Consequently, we construct
the causal chain underlying a traffic congestion event by

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

analyzing both opinion diffusion subgraphs and congested
subgraphs. Inspired by transfer learning to address the challenge of data sparsity and sample limitations across domains
and tasks, this article proposes an innovative anomaly feature
transfer learning approach for detecting IAS through Anomaly
Alignment across multidimensional attributed networks.
Our approach works on a multilayer graph structure N =
(G1 , G2 , M) to tackle the aforementioned challenges. G1 is the
source graph associated with the target graph G2 . G1 contains
certain observable anomalous attributes, which make it easier
to capture anomaly features and detect the anomaly subgraph
S 1 within it. In contrast, the target graph G2 lacks explicit
anomalous attributes and includes the IAS, referred to as S 2 .
Let M denote the association relationships between G1 and G2 .
These association relationships are modeled within a two-layer
graph N, subject to specific alignment constraints. Although
this article focuses on two-layer graphs, the proposed method
can be extended to multilayer graphs. A multilayer graph
is an effective model for representing multiple interrelated
source graphs originating from diverse domains. Each layer
represents a unique type of interaction between nodes, and
different layers consist of distinct sets of nodes and types of
links. Additionally, alignment links exist between layers to
represent the association relationships across different graphs
[3]. Our approach postulates that the anomaly features present
in the source graph G1 affect the target graph G2 through
alignment links M between G1 and G2 . Hence, the IAS S 2 in
G2 is possibly detected by correlating this affection from G1 .
Fig. 1 demonstrates our approach for detecting urban crime
hotspots in social and USNs. Our main contributions can be
summarized as follows.
1) This article proposes a pioneering approach (IASD),
designed for the specific challenge of detecting IASs S 2
under “Anomaly Alignment” within multidimensional
attribute networks.
2) IASD novelty interprets the anomaly subgraph S 2 by
fusing aligned attributes from the explicit anomaly subgraph S 1 in G1 , facilitating the detection of causal chains
within anomalies.
3) Extensive experiments are conducted on five real-world
datasets, showcasing IASD’s significant performance
and robustness. Additionally, IASD is applied to address
four practical application tasks.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
Section II provides an overview of relevant existing methods,
while Sections III–IV define the “anomaly alignment” problem
and introduce IASD in detail. Sections V-A–V encompass five
real datasets and offer a comprehensive evaluation of IASD.
Four case studies are presented in Section V-E, and finally,
Section VI summarizes the primary findings of this research.

II. R ELATED W ORKS
Table I summarizes representative graph anomaly detection
(GAD) methods from recent years and compares them with
our approach across six aspects. These methods were comprehensively compared in terms of anomaly types, consideration
of structural anomalies, capability to handle few-attribute
anomalies, suitability for multiple graphs, interpretability, and
reliance on graph neural networks (GNNs).

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

3

TABLE I
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR M ETHOD AND S OME E XISTING R EPRESENTATIVE GAD M ODELS

A. Anomaly Subgraph Detection
Traditional anomaly subgraph detection methods typically extract features from graph-structured data and identify
anomalies via statistical and graph search techniques [1], [15].
These nondeep learning approaches handle static and dynamic
graphs, including single, multiple, and multilayered graphs [7],
[8], [9], [16], [17], but face challenges with large-scale graphs
and high-dimensional node or edge attributes.
To address these challenges, recent approaches leverage
deep learning [2], [18], [19]. However, due to inefficient
subgraph representation learning, most focus on detecting
anomalous nodes rather than subgraphs [4], [5], [20], [21],
[22], [23]. For instance, Hu et al. [4] propose subgraph-aligned
contrastive learning using multiview augmented subgraphs to
detect anomalous nodes. Liu et al. [23] detect anomalies by
evaluating data similarity through representative neighbors.
Zhou et al. [5] propose a lightweight IoT anomaly detection model combining GNN and knowledge distillation with
global-local feature learning for secure, efficient, and lowoverhead communication.
Some deep learning methods target anomaly subgraphs by
learning distinctive features. Huang et al. [6] propose a hybridorder graph attention (GAT) network to detect abnormal nodes
and motif instances. Zhang and Zhao [11] evaluate subgraph
anomaly scores in a residual graph built from reconstructed
and original graphs using a location-aware graph autoencoder. Sun et al. [10] introduce ASD-HC, which combines
GCN-based contrastive learning with Nonparametric Graph
Scan statistics to assess anomalous subgraphs.
In summary, while these methods learn anomaly features
from data, most do not target IASs.
B. Anomaly Detection on Multiple Networks
Recently, some works study anomaly detection across multiple networks. Bindu et al. [9] detect anomalous users by
comparing topological similarities across layers. Sun et al. [14]
propose AAAN, using ADMM to find maximum connected
anomaly subgraphs across networks. Wu et al. [12] apply deep
learning and network alignment to detect shared anomalies
in traffic networks. However, there are also works that can
be easily confused with anomaly subgraph detection research,
such as anomaly or object detection across multiple views [24]
and domains [25]. These approaches do not take into account
the network structure of the data.
Other GNN-based GAD methods, like SAMCL [4], focus
on rich anomaly features and complex topologies, while
multilayer methods such as A3MAN [12] emphasize interpretability. Our approach is more general, detecting IASs
in two-layer, multidimensional networks, handling missing

features, leveraging GNNs for topological anomalies, enabling
anomaly feature transfer across domains like pandemic and
traffic networks, and providing good interpretability.
C. Transfer Learning
Existing transfer learning methods address challenges such
as data scarcity, domain shift, task differences, computational
constraints, negative transfer, and heterogeneous transfer. By
leveraging knowledge from a source domain—e.g., model
parameters or feature representations—they mitigate limited
labeled data, distribution discrepancies, and task mismatches in
the target domain, improving performance and generalization
[26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34].
Transfer learning can be categorized into four subsettings:
Instance-transfer, Feature-representation-transfer, Parametertransfer, and Relational-knowledge-transfer [35]. In instancetransfer, Askarizadeh et al. [26] propose an optimization
framework to improve learning under resource constraints
while reducing negative transfer, and Liang et al. [36] extend
instance-transfer to large-scale SNs. In feature-representation
transfer, Li et al. [27] introduce a cross-channel specificmutual feature transfer network for EEG decoding, Gao et al.
[29] propose a multitask model to extract shared features
across tasks, Lu et al. [30] tackle cross-modality person reidentification by learning both common and modality-specific
features, and Liang et al. [36] proposed an instance-transfer
method for large-scale SNs.
In relational-knowledge transfer, Tang et al. [28] leverage
social theories for transfer across heterogeneous networks,
while Bi et al. [32] develop Bridged-GNN, enhancing transfer
via a Bridged-Graph structure. Cui et al. [31] apply knowledge
transfer in human–machine dialog systems to improve generalization. Beyond traditional transfer learning, Li et al. [33], [34]
explore domain adaptation for robust object detection across
domains and unseen categories.
In summary, these studies highlight the diverse methods and
applications of transfer learning, providing a foundation for
further research in anomaly detection and knowledge transfer
in complex structured domains.
III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Consider a two-layer graph N = (G1 , G2 , M), where G1 =
(V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the source graph (layer), G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 )
is the target graph (layer), and M ⊆ V1 × V2 represents the
set of association relationships (i.e., alignment edges) between
nodes in G1 and G2 . Specifically, V1 = {v11 , v12 , . . . , v1n } and
V2 = {v21 , v22 , . . . , v2m } are the node sets, with E1 ⊆ V1 ×V1 and
E2 ⊆ V2 × V2 as their corresponding edge sets. The attribute
matrices are given by XG1 = {xG1 (vi )|vi ∈ V1 } ∈ Rn×d1 and

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

XG2 = {xG2 (v j )|v j ∈ V2 } ∈ Rm×d2 , where xG1 (vi ) ∈ Rd1 and
xG2 (v j ) ∈ Rd2 denote the multidimensional attribute vectors
of nodes in G1 and G2 , respectively. The alignment edges in
M model cross-layer associations, enabling anomaly feature
transfer from G1 to G2 . Accordingly, we formalize the following foundational definitions.
Definition 1 (Anomalous Node): Given a graph G =
(V, E, X), let p(X) denote the probability distribution of the
node features in G. For a node v ∈ V, if the probability of
its feature vector satisfies p(xG (v)) ≤ α, where α ∈ R ≥ 0
is a predefined significant anomaly threshold, then node v is
considered an anomalous node of G.
Definition 2 (Anomaly Subgraph): Given a subgraph
S = (VS , ES , XS ), if an anomalous node v ∈ V exists or
XS comprises the anomaly features, then the subgraph S is
considered an anomaly subgraph.
We denote S 1 = (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) and S 2 = (VS 2 , ES 2 , XS 2 ) as
the anomaly subgraphs of G1 and G2 , respectively. When XG1
contains anomaly attributes while XG2 lacks such attributes,
S 1 can be readily detected from the source graph G1 through
the anomaly attributes in XG1 . However, detecting S 2 directly
from graph G2 proves challenging. If G1 aligns with G2
under certain association relationship constraints, then the
node anomaly attributes of G1 can be projected onto the
corresponding aligned nodes in G2 . This naturally raises a
critical question: Can the IAS S 2 be effectively detected from
G2 through the joint utilization of attributes XG1 and XG2 ?
Definition 3 (Feature Transfer Learning): Given G1 =
(V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the
target graph, with alignment edges M ⊆ V1 × V2 . the general
feature transfer learning model ftran : XG1 → XG2 is given as
follows:


XG2 ← XG2 + ftran XG1 , M = XG2 + Φ MXG1
(1)
where Mm×n is the matrix form of the alignment edge set M,
Φ is a feature projection function.
Proposition 1 (Anomaly Alignment): Given a two-layer
graph N = (G1 , G2 , M). where G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the
source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the target graph, with
alignment edges M ⊆ V1 ×V2 . A connected anomaly subgraph
S 1 (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) in G1 contains an anomalous node vi . If
(vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 and (v0i , v0j ) ∈ E2 exist with (vi , v0i ) ∈ M and
(v j , v0j ) ∈ M, then according to our feature transfer learning
model ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , a nonempty aligned anomaly
subgraph S 2 exists in G2 .
Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix.



Definition 4 (IASD): IAS detection (IASD) refers to detecting the maximum anomaly subgraph within the target network,
which is devoid of anomalous attributes.
Under the constraint of the Anomaly Alignment, the objective function of IASD is defined as the following constrained
optimization problem:

Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M̂
= arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M)
S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 2 ⊆G2 ,M
ˇ ˇ
s.t. S 1 is connected, M ∈ {0, 1}m×n , ˇVS 2 ˇ ≤ c, α ∈ P (2)
where α is a hyperparameter which represents the anomalous
significant level, the set P = {p(xG1 (vi )) | p(xG1 (vi )) ≤
αmax , vi ∈ V1 } ∪ {αmax } comprises the probabilities of the
significant anomalies of G1 , with αmax = 0.15 in this article.

Here, c ≤ m is a constant representing the maximum number of
nodes in S 2 . The function Fα (S 1 ) evaluates the anomaly score
for the subgraph S 1 . Let Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) be the feature transfer
learning model based on network alignment principles [37],
which scales the anomalous significance of S 1 transferred to
S 2 . In our article, the similarity of S 1 and S 2 is represented
by the alignment matrix M ∈ Rm×n . Let M( j, i) = 1 if node
vi ∈ VS 1 aligns with the node v j ∈ VS 2 , otherwise M( j, i) = 0.
Intuitively, IASD problem (2) has the following three
properties.
1) P1: Function Fα (S 1 ) increases monotonically with
Nα (S 1 ), i.e., the number of anomaly nodes of S 1 .
2) P2: Function Fα (S 1 ) decreases monotonically with
N α (S 1 ), i.e., the number of normal nodes in S 1 .
3) P3: Function Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) increases monotonically with
the number of alignment edges between S 1 and S 2 .
P1 and P2 guarantee that the optimal anomaly subgraph Sˆ1
detected by maximizing the value of function Fα (S 1 ) [7], and
P3 guarantees that the optimal anomaly subgraph Sˆ1 contains
more nodes of Sˆ2 that are aligned with the anomaly nodes of
Sˆ1 . These three properties guarantee that the induced anomaly
subgraph Sˆ2 is the optimal result. The corresponding formal
proof is provided in Section IV, and additional detailed proofs
are included in Appendix. Note that in this article, we do not
impose any connectivity constraints on S 2 .
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Feature Extraction Preprocessing
With the widespread utilization of large-scale data, highdimensional attributes are widely adopted to characterize
nodes and edges in large-scale graphs. Consequently, anomaly
subgraph detection algorithms will face the challenge of the
curse of dimensionality in high-dimension datasets, making
it difficult to observe anomalous attributes. In the process
of extracting anomalous features for each node in graphs,
our approach incorporates the GNN model (e.g., GCN, GAT,
etc.) to convert nodes’ high-dimensional attributes into a
low-dimensional representation of anomalous features. In this
article, we investigate the GAT network model to extract node
features for both the source graph G1 and the target graph
G2 . Now, let us delve into the detailed procedure using G1
as an example. First, the initial nodes’ attributes of G1 are
represented as XG1 = {xG1 (vi )|vi ∈ V1 }, where xG1 (vi ) ∈ R1×d1 .
The normalized attention coefficient from node v j to node vi
is calculated by the following equation:


exp LeakyReLU aT W xG1 (vi ) k W xG1 v j


ai j = P
T W x (v ) k W x (v )
G1 i
G1 k
k∈Ni exp LeakyReLU a
(3)
where Ni0 denotes the neighbor set of node vi in graph G1 ,
W ∈ Rd1 ×d1 represents the weight matrix used for linear
transformation applied to each node, d10 is the dimension of
0
the output feature for each node. a ∈ R2d1 is the weight
vector, aT denotes the transposition of vector a. k denotes the
concatenation operation. LeakyReLU is a nonlinear activation
function characterized by a negative input slope of 0.2. Then,
the final output feature of node vi is computed through a linear
combination of the features as follows:
0
1
X

h1 (vi ) = σ @
ai j W xG1 v j A .
(4)
v j ∈Ni

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

To obtain stable learning features, we employ the aggregation of a multihead GAT mechanism, which utilizes
K-independent attention mechanisms and applies averaging
computation to the final output features of each node, as shown
in the following equation:
0
1
K X
X

1
h1 (vi ) = σ @
akij W k xG1 v j A
(5)
K
v ∈N
k=1

j

x1 (i) = kh1 (vi )k2 ,
x2 (i) = kh2 (vi )k2 ,

s.t. vi ∈ G1
s.t. vi ∈ G2 .

(6)

B. Anomaly Alignment Model
Fig. 2 depicts the Anomaly Alignment proposition. Now, let
us elaborate on our proposed approach. Anomaly alignment
comprises two main stages.
1) Detecting Anomaly Subgraph S 1 in G1 : In this stage, we
introduce a NPGS-based method (TSPSP [7]) to detect the
optimal anomaly subgraph. Specifically, NPGS-based methods calculate the anomaly score function Fα (S 1 ) for each
subgraph S 1 in G1 through NPGS statistics to detect the
optimal anomaly subgraph S 1 of G1 . Therefore, the general
formulation of the anomaly score function Fα (S 1 ) in our
problem (2) is defined as follows:
Fα (S 1 ) = ϕ (α, Nα (S 1 ) , N (S 1 ))

(7)

where α is the anomalous significant level, Nα (S 1 ) is the
number of anomaly nodes in S 1 , and N(S 1 ) is the total number
of nodes in S 1 . The function ϕ : VS 1 → R is the NPGS
function used to evaluate the anomalous extent for subgraph
S 1 . In this article, We explore two NPGS statistics within
TSPSD: Berk-Jones (BJs) [38], as defined in (8), and higher
criticism (HC) [39]


Nα (S )
,α
ϕBJ (α, Nα (S ) , N (S )) = N (S ) × KL
(8)
N (S )
where KL is Kullback–Liebler divergence between the
observed and expected proportions, with values less than α


8
 
<a log a + (1 − a) log 1 − a , if a ≥ b
KL (a, b) =
b
1−b
:
0,
if a < b
(9)
where a, b > 0.
Lemma 1 [7]: Given N α (S 1 ) = N(S 1 )− Nα (S 1 ), the optimal
subgraph of NPGS problem with the K-budget node-weighted
prize-collection Steiner tree is defined as
S 1α,K

=

arg max

S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected

Lemma 2 [7]: Given S 1α,K , (K = 0, . . . , n) is the optimal solution of the K-budget node-weighted prize-collection
Steiner Tree from (10), the NPGS problem
Sˆ1

Nα (S 1 ),

s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K

(10)

where α is the anomaly significance level, typically set as
α ≤ 0.15 in this article. K ≤ n is the number of normal nodes
in S 1 .

=

arg max

S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected

Fα (S 1 )

is equivalent to the following optimal problem:
Sˆ1

i

where K is the number of independent attention mechanisms,
and σ represents the nonlinear activation function.
Similarly, the feature XG2 in G2 can also be generated
following the aforementioned process. Thus, x1 ∈ Rn×1 and
x2 ∈ Rm×1 are feature vectors of G1 and G2 , calculated as
shown in the following equation:

5

=

argn max oFα (S 1 ).
α∈P,S 1 ∈ S 1α,0 ,...,S 1α,n

(11)

In summary, TSPSD decomposes the NPGS-based anomaly
subgraph detection problem into a series of K-budget subgraph
detection subproblems. With the constraints of lemma 5 and 6,
we guarantee that the optimal solution Sˆ1 in (11) is the optimal
anomaly subgraph detected from G1 .
2) Anomaly Transferring From G1 to G2 : Inspired by
transfer learning the biological knowledge among protein
interaction networks based on the network alignment [40],
[41], [42], our algorithm calculates the S 2 ’s anomaly features
by transferring the S 1 ’s anomaly features through the network
alignment. Our algorithm transfers the anomaly features of
S 1 to infer the anomaly features of S 2 , while simultaneously
ensuring optimal structural alignment between the associated
graphs G1 and G2 . Our anomaly transferring model is formalized as the following convex combination form:
Q (S 1 , S 2 , M) = ICS (S 1 , S 2 , M) + FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) .

(12)

Here, ICS(S 1 , S 2 , M) denotes the topological similarity
function based on the conserved aligned edges [37], [43]
ICS (S 1 , S 2 , M)


 
 
P
M v0i , vi M v0j , v j A1 vi , v j A2 v0i , v0j


=
P
0 0
A
v
,
v
0
0
2
vi ,v j
i
j

(13)

where A1 and A2 are the adjacency matrices of G1 and G2 ,
vi , v j ∈ VS 1 , v0i , v0j ∈ VS 2 . I(·) is the indicator function.
FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) represents the induced subgraph features that
combine the inherent features of S 2 and the multidimensional
features transferred from S 1 . To enhance significant anomaly
features, we modify our feature transfer learning model (1)
into the following general function:

FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) = XS 2 + Φ M 1 − XS 1 .
(14)
Therefore, the objective function of our anomaly transfer
model is defined below
arg max Q (S 1 , S 2 , M),

α∈P,S 1 ,S 2 ,M

s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K, |S 2 | ≤ c

(15)

where K ≤ n and c ≤ m are both hyperparameters.
Given the constraint of hyperparameters, achieving the optimal value of Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) requires simultaneously maximizing
both the ICS and FT functions, as shown in (12). Function
Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) maximizes the alignment quality between S 1
and S 2 , while highlighting the significant induced anomaly
features. Furthermore, Fα (S 1 ) in (7) increases monotonically
with the number of anomaly nodes Nα (S 1 ) and decreases with
the number of normal nodes N α (S 1 ). Based on Lemma 6, the
optimal anomaly subgraph S 1 exists in the limited graph G1 .
Hence, the significant anomaly subgraph Sˆ1 can be directly
identified from G1 using the method in [7]. Subsequently, ICS
function facilitates the identification of the most structurally
similar subgraph alignment pairs, while FT function ensures

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Algorithm 1 IASD With Multidimensional Feature Transfer
Input: N = (G1 , G2 , H), G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ), G2 =
(V2 , E2 , XG2 ), Number of S 2 ’ nodes c, αmax
Output: The optimal implicit anomaly subgraph Sˆ2
1 Initialization: M 0 ← H, S 10 ← φ, S 20 ← φ;
2 Extracting anomaly feature vectors in graph G 1 via GAT:
x1 ← G 1 ;
3 Extracting normal feature vectors in graph G 2 via GAT:
x2 ← G 2 ;
4 Calculating the probability of features for nodes in G 1 :
{p(vi )} ← x1
5 for α ∈ P = {p(vi )|p(vi ) ≤ αmax } ∪ {αmax } do
6 for K ≤ n do
7
S 1K ← maxS 1 Nα (S 1 ), s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K, S 1 is connected;
8
S 2K ← maxS 2 Q(S 1K , S 2 , M K−1 ), s.t. |VS 2 | ≤ c;
9
M K ← arg max Q(S 1K , S 2K , M K−1 );
10 end for
11 (S 1α , S 2α , M α ) ← maxK (F α (S 1K ) + Q(S 1K , S 2K , M K ));
12 end for
13 (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M̂) ← maxα (F α (S 1α ) + Q(S 1α , S 2α , M α ));
14 return Sˆ2 ;
the effective transfer of significant anomaly features from the
source graph to the target graph, resulting in strongly induced
anomaly patterns. Therefore, Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) is monotonically
increasing with the number of alignment edges (|M|) and
the number of anomaly nodes in S 1 , i.e., Nα (S 1 ). Our algorithm IASD satisfies properties P1, P2, and P3 described in
Section III. The validity of these conclusions is confirmed
by parameter-sensitivity experiments, the details of which are
provided in the appendix.
C. IASD With Multidimensional Feature Transfer Algorithm
IASD is summarized below, as shown in Algorithm 1.
1) Fusing the multidimensional attributes into the feature
vector x1 .
2) Optimizing the IASD problem (2) via dynamic programming procedure, and deriving the optimal anomaly
subgraph Sˆ2 .
a) Detecting the maximum anomaly subgraph S 1 by
calculating Function Fα (S 1 ), based on the anomaly
feature x1 .
b) Calculating the optimal subgraph S 2 by maximizing Function Q.
c) Updating the alignment matrix Mm×n based on the
new S 1 and S 2 .
Lemma 3: Optimal anomaly S 2 with S 1 and M fixed. Under
the condition that the anomaly subgraph S 1 and the alignment
matrix M are fixed, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy Anomaly Alignment
(Proposition 1), then the maximum solution Sˆ2 of Function Q
is defined as follows:

sˆ2 = λM [s1 (1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1
(16)
where λ is a regularization parameter.
Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix. 
Lemma 4: Optimal alignment matrix M with S 1 and S 2
fixed. Given two input subgraphs S 1 and S 2 , then Function Q
in (15) w.r.t. M is equivalent to the optimal problem
M̂ = arg max η [Q (M)] − (1 − η) kM − Hk2F
M∈[0,1]m×n

(17)

where η is a regularization parameter, H is the prior alignment
matrix, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm.
Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix. 
Theorem 1: Optimal anomaly subgraphs S 1 , S 2 in Graphs
G1 , G2 . If subgraphs S 1 and S 2 satisfy the anomaly alignment
condition, then in the IASD problem [(2)], an optimal solution
exists and is defined as follows:

Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 = arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M).
(18)
α∈P

Proof: The detailed proof is provided in the appendix. 
a) Complexity analysis: The time complexity of IASD
primarily relies on the iterations involving S 1K , S 2K , and M K .
Detecting the anomaly subgraph S 1K involves solving a 0-1
multiple-choice knapsack (MCK) Problem, which can be
addressed using dynamic programming. Its worst case time
complexity is O(|P| · n3 ) for a graph with n nodes [7]. To
optimize M efficiently, we exploit the Kronecker product
property, yielding a time complexity of O(|P| · mn2 ) for
this step. Additionally, the time complexity of S 2K is also
O(|P| · mn2 ). Hence, the time complexity of our algorithm is
O(|P| · (n3 + mn2 )). When m = O(n), this reduces to O(|P| · n3 ),
which is consistent with our empirical observation that the
running time is dominated by the n3 term. The evaluation
results are presented in the appendix.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Dataset Description
Fig. 3 shows four multilayer graphs from five real datasets
(details in the appendix).
1) Weibo Dataset contains 17.26 million geo-tagged Weibo
users from Tianjin (December 1, 2011–December 31,
2012), collected from www.weibo.com. Applying SentiCircle [44], 99 872 negative tweets are filtered to build
the source graph G1 (Negative Friendship Graph) with
11 225 users and 13 405 links. The target graph G2
(Neighborhood Graph) has 137 919 nodes and 6 396 462
edges, where nodes are neighborhoods (areas with a
diameter of 300 m) and edges indicate a user tweeting
across them.
2) TYC Dataset comprises 1.67 million corporations,
1.0 million investors, and 2.66 million investment
relationships from www.tianyancha.com (January 1,
2000–December 31, 2018). The source graph G1
contains 864 microcredit loan companies and 1814
relationships, while the target graph G2 has 4785 shareholders and 35 892 co-investment links. Companies
labeled as risky on the website were collected as ground
truth.
3) B&C Datasets: B dataset comprises 4.8 million population movement records among 441 Chinese cities from
www.Baidu.com (January 1–February 29, 2020), where
edges represent the top 100 movements between cities,
forming G1 of B&C. C dataset includes 24 787 daily
confirmed COVID-19 cases and 7686 patient trajectories
(December 1, 2019–March 10, 2020) across 313 Chinese
cities. G2 of B&C is constructed as a plain graph with
313 nodes and 7686 edges, using only the topology and
treating COVID-19 data as ground truth.
4) Water Pollution (WP) Dataset was collected from a real
Water Sensor Network across six time slices, comprising
12 527 sensors (nodes) and 14 831 edges monitoring

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

7

Fig. 3. Description of multilayer graphs in our case study experiments. In each subillustration, the source graph G1 exhibits intrinsic anomalous characteristics,
where explicitly annotated observable anomalies are encoded in red, while anomaly alignment between G1 and target graph G2 are delineated through gray
directional arrows symbolizing cross-domain alignment mechanisms. G2 obtain induced anomalous features from G1 through transfer learning, enabling G2
to detect the IAS (depicted in blue in the subillustration). (a) Urban and rural area crime hotspots detection. (b) Anomaly event detection: epidemic breakout.
(c) Risky investors detection. (d) Water Pollution Prediction.

Fig. 4. ROC curves for evaluations of the IASD on the Weibo and TYC
datasets.

chemical pollutants in rivers. Sensors output 1’ when
contamination is detected, otherwise 0’. The source
graph G1 is built from the structure and attributes at
time t, and the target graph G2 from the structure at
time t + 1.
B. Experiment Setup
All performance evaluations explore the BJ and HC statistics on four multilayer graphs, labeling algorithms with
suffixes “(BJ)” or “(HC)”, e.g., IASD(BJ) and IASD(HC). As
IASD(HC) results closely match IASD(BJ), they are provided
in the appendix for brevity. For GAT layers, 2 heads are
used for WP and 4 heads for TYC and Weibo, with attention
weights initialized uniformly.
1) Baselines: We adopt five algorithms as our baselines.
1) TF is our designed baseline, which directly integrates the
network alignment algorithm FINAL [40] with TSPSD
and serves to detect an IAS.
2) A3MAN is a deep learning-based anomaly detection
approach across multiple graphs [12].
3) ASDHC [10] employs GNNs and contrastive learning to
detect anomaly subgraphs in an attributed network.
4) BG-ASDHC is our constructed baseline for detecting IASs, which consists of a GNN-based knowledge
transfer learning algorithm Bridged-GNN [32] and
a GNN-based anomaly subgraph detection algorithm
ASDHC.
5) BG-ASGAE is our constructed baseline for detecting
IASs, which integrates the Bridged-GNN [32] algorithm
with a GNN-based anomaly subgraph detection algorithm AS-GAE [11].
2) Evaluation Metrics: Performance is evaluated by precision, recall, accuracy, false positive rate (FPR), and F1,

Fig. 5. Precision-Recall Curves for evaluations of the IASD on the Weibo
and TYC datasets.

corresponding to true positives among detected positives,
true detected positives among actual positives, correct detections overall, false detections, and combined precision-recall,
respectively.
C. Experimental Result Analysis
1) Performance Measures Analysis: As shown in Table II,
IASD achieves the highest scores across all metrics on the
Weibo dataset, with improvements of 9% ∼ 29% over competitive baselines. On the WP dataset, it outperforms four
baselines in most metrics, except Recall, where it is 6% lower
than TF(BJ). In the TYC dataset, IASD leads in Accuracy,
Recall, and F1, while TSPSD(BJ) is 3% better in Precision
and 8% lower in FPRs (including FPR, FPR-P and FPR-D).
However, TSPSD(BJ) shows a 33% ∼ 47% decrease in other
metrics compared to IASD. Moreover, we demonstrate its
superior performance by analyzing the correlation between
TPR and FPR, as well as the correlation between precision and
recall, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. In summary, our approach
outperforms nearly all the baseline methods.
2) Robustness Evaluation: To evaluate the robustness of
our algorithm, we randomly selected a percentage of vertices
and flipped their binary feature values. In addition, we make
the noise ratio take values in the range [0%, 30%]. Compared to the baselines, IASD(BJ) has stable performance and
achieves the best Precision and FPR under different noise
rates, as shown in Fig. 6. It is worth noting that when
the noise ratio is greater than 15, the precision shows an
upward trend. Our analysis suggests this is because multiple
abnormal subgraphs are adjacent to each other and are detected
as one optimal abnormal subgraph. When the noise ratio
exceeds a certain level, multiple original abnormal subgraphs
connect with several “false anomaly nodes.” These false nodes
are distributed in the adjacent areas of the smaller original

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 6. Robustness evaluation on the TYC dataset under different noise ratios. (a) Precision. (b) Recall. (c) False positive rate.
TABLE II
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN IASD AND OTHER M ETHODS ON WP, W EIBO , AND TYC DATASET

abnormal subgraphs. This results in the detection of more “true
anomaly nodes.” Fig. 6 shows the experimental results with
the BJ statistic on the TYC dataset and similar results are
derived with the HC statistic.

D. Ablation Study
1) GAT Module Analysis: In our approach, the GAT module embeds node attributes by sampling neighbor features.
To assess its impact, we compare IASD with IASD-GAT
(without GAT) using ROC (Fig. 4) and Precision-Recall curves
(Fig. 5), where IASD achieves the highest AUC and the best
Precision–Recall value. An additional ablation study (Fig. 6)
evaluates robustness under varying noise levels: IASD attains
higher Precision and lower FPR than IASD-GAT across noise
settings, with better Recall when noise is below 10. However,
as noise increases, GAT aggregation reduces Recall by making
anomalous nodes harder to distinguish.
2) Transferability Analysis: The transferability of IASD
depends primarily on the functions Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) and
FT (S 1 , S 2 , M). To validate this, we compare IASD with
ASDHC (Table II), which detects anomaly subgraphs directly
on the feature-deficient G2 . The poor performance of the
ASDHC method proves the transferability of our method.
We also applied TSPSD directly to G2 , but it did not detect
anomaly subgraphs, further demonstrating the effectiveness of
our framework.

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY ON TYC

In summary, as shown in Table III, removing the GAT or
Transferability components leads to suboptimal performance,
demonstrating the importance of each component.
E. Case Study
1) Urban Crime Hotspot Detection: We hypothesize
that the aggregation of negative emotions among residents
increases the likelihood of abnormal events in their neighborhoods. To test this, we detected urban crime hotspots
by aligning the “Negative Friend Graph” G1 with the
“Neighborhood Graph” G2 and transferring auxiliary anomaly
features. Daily empirical p-values for user attributes (December 1, 2011–December 1, 2012) yielded 397 anomaly
subgraphs corresponding to neighborhoods. These hotspots
were evaluated against the Urban Area Security Incident
Report issued by a third-party authority. Fig. 7 showed the
optimal subgraph S 2 on August 25, 2012, which contained
eight crime hotspots, all confirmed by ground truth.
2) Risky Investors Detection: This case is to identify
potentially risky investors by observing unusual behaviors of
specific companies. G1 with 864 microcredit loan companies

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

Fig. 7. Illustration of urban crime hotspot detection, G1 consists of negative
friends, G2 represents the neighborhood graph. On August 25, 2012, IASD
identified the optimal anomaly subgraph in G1 with 21 anomaly users (dark
blue circles) and detected 8 crime hotspots in G2 (red areas). The pink solid
lines denote prior preference links, while the dashed lines indicate alignment
links. All hotspots are confirmed by the urban area security incident report
from a third-party authority.

9

Fig. 9. Intuitive interpretation of the cause of the anomaly event: epidemic
breakout. (a) Cities with significant population movements on January 13,
2020. (b) Anomalous COVID-19 outbreak cities detected by IASD from
January 19, 2020 to February 20, 2020.

Fig. 10. Water pollution prediction Case Study. Blue circles indicate sensors
that will issue water pollution warnings in the upcoming time slice, and red
circles show the current warning sensors detected at the 3th time slice.

Fig. 8. Risky investor detection in Nov 2017. (a) Connected anomalous
company subgraph S 1 includes 3 anomalous microcredit loan companies with
observed anomalous business activities (red dots) and 1 normal company
(a blue dot). (b) Disconnected alignment anomaly subgraph S 2 consists of
44 detected risky investors (violet dots). (c) 11 companies with unobserved
abnormal business behaviors (green dots) related to risky investors, discovered
from the ground truth.

and 1814 relationships, and G2 with 4785 shareholders and
35 892 coinvestment links. Twenty four months of business
data (January 2017–December 2018) are used to compute
anomaly features for each company. In November 2017, four
interconnected companies (three anomalous, one normal) are
detected [Fig. 8(a)], and 44 risky investors are identified [Fig.
8(b)]. To validate our approach’s accuracy, we identified 11
additional companies where 43 of these investors had made
investments, as shown in Fig. 8(c). This proves that these
investors have a certain degree of business risk.
3) Anomaly Event Detection-Epidemic Breakout: In this
scenario, our objective is to illustrate the strong association
between migration patterns and the COVID-19 outbreak. To
comprehend the causal chain behind the COVID-19 epidemic
breakout, we analyze several Chinese cities characterized
by significant population movements and a high number of
COVID-19 cases. We utilize the Baidu migration graph as our
source graph G1 , and consider COVID-19 as the target graph
G2 . This setup is designed to simulate the inherently unpredictable nature of COVID-19 transmission. During the initial
23 days of January 2020, we identified significant anomalous
migration subgraphs over a span of 14 days. These subgraphs
revealed a similar regional distribution pattern among the cities
involved, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a). For instance, when Wuhan
initially reported confirmed COVID-19 cases on January 13,
2020, a substantial increase in population movements occurred
between 367 cities in Mainland China. After 6 days, our

approach identifies the first anomaly subgraph S 2 within
the epidemic graph G2 , leveraging the transferred migration
attributes. This discovery underscores our approach’s capability in epidemic detection. Subsequently, IASD proceeds to
detect an additional 32 anomaly subgraphs over the following
33 days, covering a total of 157 cities that were officially
confirmed to have experienced new case outbreaks according
to Chinese government news websites. These cities are marked
on the map according to their geographic coordinates, as
shown in Fig. 9(b). This experiment offers persuasive evidence
of a congruent distribution between migration patterns and the
COVID-19 outbreak. It offers an intuitive explanation for the
rapid spread of the COVID-19 epidemic, largely attributed to
population migration.
4) WP Prediction: IASD can be applied to a set of graphs
with time series, e.g., WSN across different time slices. We
use two time-slice graphs G(t) with historical sensors’ data
and G(t+1) without any sensors’ warning data, to construct
the IASD’s two-layer graph. i.e., G(t) is G1 , and G(t+1) is
G2 . In Fig. 10, IASD identified 76 sensors emitting warning
signals during the third time slot and determined that 29
sensors would predict warnings of chemical contaminants in
the fourth time slot. These 29 sensors had not previously
emitted a warning signal; however, 27 of them generated
actual warnings in the fourth time slice, and in the fifth time
slice, two additional sensors also issued warning signals. This
experiment demonstrates that IASD is capable of effectively
addressing the practical task of predicting WP.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose the anomaly alignment problem and a novel anomaly detection algorithm IASD for the
multilayer multidimensional attributed graph. IASD employs
network alignment and a multilayer graph model to integrate a
feature-rich source graph with the target graph, facilitating the
detection of IASs. Various evaluation across five real datasets
demonstrates IASD’s effective performance and robustness.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

In future work, under the Anomaly Alignment framework,
we aim to extend IASD to more complex multilayer graphs
by aligning multiple source graphs and transferring features
across layers, using iterative or joint alignment strategies, and
validating the method on diverse multilayer datasets, such as
SNs and multiomics networks.
A PPENDIX A
DATASETS
We provide detailed information about the six real datasets
used in our experiments. The raw data used to construct our
multilayer graphs are processed in the following steps.
A. Weibo Dataset
The Weibo dataset includes 5.76 million tweets and 1.81
billion retweets collected from the Weibo Website from
December 1, 2011 to December 31, 2012. All these tweets are
assigned a geo-tag attribute which is a longitude and latitude
within the urban area of Tianjin (The latitudes are in the
range of 37◦ 89700 to 40◦ 77200 , and the longitudes are in the
range of 114◦ 13100 to 120◦ 64100 ). We extracted 17.26 million
users and their relationships from these tweets, analyzed the
semantics of these tweets based on the SentiCircle algorithm
[44], and classified the tweets into three categories: negative,
positive, and neutral sentiment tweets. 99, 872 negative sentiment tweets containing negative emotional words (e.g., “hate,”
“complain,” etc.) are filtered to construct the source graph G1
(Negative Friendship Graph). G1 includes 11 225 Weibo users
and 13 405 friend (or follower) relationships.
The target graph G2 is the Neighborhood Graph which
includes 462 591 geo-coordinates extracted from the tweets.
These geo-coordinates are clustered into 137 919 vertices.
Each vertex represents a neighborhood (a circular area with
a diameter of 300 m), and the 6 396 462 edges are extracted
from all those negative tweets. Each edge represents that there
exists a user who posted tweets with the geo-coordinates of
two neighborhoods.
Ground Truth Data: The authority department’s urban security database provides 3.21 million security records of urban
and rural areas, which constitute the ground truth for Urban
Crime Hotspot Detection. All security alarm events occurring
within the same time and region as the Weibo data are
extracted. The data items include the time, location, and alarm
information. Its location is labeled by longitude and latitude
coordinates. Thus, our detection result is deemed correct if
there is an alarm record within the hotspot area (i.e., a node
of S 2 ) identified by the algorithm; otherwise, it is deemed
incorrect.
B. TYC Dataset
This
dataset
is
extracted
from
the
website
www.tianyancha.com. It includes 1 668 797 corporations,
1 000 938 investors, and 2 657 470 of their investmentrelationships during the period from January 1, 2000 to
December 31, 2018. We collect 332 009 corporations and
their obvious abnormal commercial-related behaviors. For
example, their assets are auctioned off by the court, or they
announce being unable to repay their bank loans, or they
(or their legal persons) are accused, and so on. In this case
study, we focus on 3005 microcredit loan companies and
8146 related shareholders (including persons and companies)
from January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2018.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Therefore, G1 has 864 microcredit loan companies as
vertices and 1814 associated relationships between these companies as edges. G2 has 4785 related shareholders as vertices
and 35 892 co-investment relationships between these shareholders as edges.
Ground Truth Data: As the website designates companies
as high-risk by compiling records of warnings, penalties, and
actions issued by courts or regulatory authorities throughout
their operations, we employed this labeled information as the
ground truth, which encompasses both the identified companies and their corresponding shareholders.
C. Baidu Migration (B) Dataset Versus Covid-19 Pandemic
(C) Dataset
The Baidu migration dataset includes 4.8 million population
movement records among 441 Chinese cities collected from
the Baidu.com website during the period from January 1, 2020
to February 29, 2020. The population movement records are
the immigration and emigration rates of each city. Therefore,
G1 is constructed with 441 cities and the edges which represent
the top 100 population movement relationships between a city
and its neighboring cities.
The COVID-19 pandemic dataset is collected from GitHub
(December 1, 2019–January 27, 2020) and the Chinese News
Websites (January 27, 2020–March 10, 2020). It includes
24, 787 confirmed cases of COVID-19 reported daily and
7, 686 known patient trajectories announced as of March 10,
2020. Those cases were distributed in 313 cities in Mainland
China. We construct G2 as a plain graph2 . G2 consists of 313
cities as vertices and 7686 known patient trajectories as edges.
Here, our approach only adopts the topology of G2 without
using any Covid-19 outbreak information as the attributes.
Ground Truth Data: All COVID-19 confirmed case data
collected from the Chinese News Websites are merely used as
ground truth to evaluate our algorithm.
D. WP Dataset
This WP warning data was collected from a real water
sensor network3 across six time slices. The dataset comprises
12 527 sensors (nodes) and 14 831 edges. These sensors are
responsible for monitoring chemical pollutants distributed in
river areas. A sensor produces the signal ‘1’ when there is the
presence of water contamination; otherwise, it reports ‘0’. In
our experiment, the graphs G1 and G2 are the largest connected
subgraphs within this dataset. The source graph G1 is built
based on the structure and attributes of the network at the t
time slice, while the target graph G2 is constructed from the
structure of the network at the t + 1 time slice.
Ground Truth Data: In our article, the sensor alarm signals
from the corresponding time slices in the WP dataset are used
as the ground truth for our detection time slices.
E. Synthetic Dataset
Synthetic dataset is constructed with reference to the basic
characteristics of the Weibo dataset, such as the proportion
of nodes and the proportion of aligned edges, as detailed
in Table V. For constructing individual graphs, we adopted
the Barabasi-Albert model [45], and the feature data were
simulated based on the basic information from the Weibo
dataset.
2 The plain graph refers to the graph without any attribute feature.
3 “The Battle of the Water Sensor Networks (BWSN)”.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

11

TABLE IV
S TATISTICS OF OUR M ULTILAYER G RAPHS

A PPENDIX B
T HEORY
A. Proposition
Proposition 2 (Anomaly Alignment): Given a two-layer
graph N = (G1 , G2 , M). where G1 = (V1 , E1 , XG1 ) is the
source graph and G2 = (V2 , E2 , XG2 ) is the target graph, with
alignment edges M ⊆ V1 ×V2 . A connected anomaly subgraph
S 1 (VS 1 , ES 1 , XS 1 ) in G1 contains an anomalous node vi . If
(vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 and (v0i , v0j ) ∈ E2 exist with (vi , v0i ) ∈ M and
(v j , v0j ) ∈ M, then according to our feature transfer learning
model ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , a nonempty aligned anomaly
subgraph S 2 exists in G2 .
Proof: Let s1 n×1 be the indicator vector of subgraph S 1 ,
s2
the indicator vector of S 2 , and Mm×n the alignment
matrix. The attribute matrices of subgraph S 1 and S 2 are
defined as
m×1

XS 1 = diag (s1 ) XG1 ,

XS 2 = diag (s2 ) XG2

(19)

where diag(s1 ) ∈ Rn×n denotes the diagonal matrix with the
diagonal entries from s1 . Similarly, diag(s2 ) ∈ Rm×m is the
diagonal matrix with the diagonal entries from s2 .
If (vi , v j ) ∈ ES 1 , the attribute matrices of subgraphs S 1 and
S 2 are
#
"


xS 2 v0i 
xS 1 (vi )
XS 1 =
, XS 2 =
(20)
xS 1 v j
xS 2 v0j
where XS 1 includes the anomalous attribute xS 1 (vi ), while XS 2
contains only normal attributes.
Since vi aligns with v0i and v j aligns with v0j , we have
M(i0 , i) = 1 and M( j0 , j) = 1. Based on the definition of
our feature transfer learning model: ftran : XS 1 → XS 2 , the
projection of the transferred features onto XS 2 are represented
using the following equation:

#
"
xS 2 v0i + Φ xS 1 (vi )
 .
XS 2 =
(21)
xS 2 v0j + Φ xS 1 v j
Thus, XS 2 includes the transferred anomaly features, and the
aligned subgraph S 2 = {v0i , v0j } is an anomaly subgraph. The
proposition is thereby proven.

B. Lemma
Lemma 5 [7]: Given N α (S 1 ) = N(S 1 ) − Nα (S 1 ), the optimal
subgraph of NPGS problem with the K-budget node-weighted
prize-collection Steiner Tree is defined as
S 1α,K

=

arg max

S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected

Nα (S 1 ),

s.t. N α (S 1 ) ≤ K

(22)

where α is the anomaly significance level, typically set as
α ≤ 0.15 in this article. K ≤ n is the number of normal nodes
in S 1 .
Lemma 6 [7]: Given S 1α,K , (K = 0, . . . , n) is the optimal solution of the K-budget node-weighted prize-collection
Steiner Tree from (22), the NPGS problem
Sˆ1

=

arg max

S 1 ⊆G1 ,S 1 is connected

Fα (S 1 )

is equivalent to the following optimal problem:
Sˆ1

=

argn max oFα (S 1 ).
α∈P,S 1 ∈ S 1α,0 ,...,S 1α,n

(23)

Lemma 7: Optimal anomaly S 2 with S 1 and M fixed. Under
the condition that the anomaly subgraph S 1 and the alignment
matrix M are fixed, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy anomaly alignment
(Proposition 2), then the maximum solution Sˆ2 of function Q
is defined as follows:

sˆ2 = λM [s1 (1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1
(24)
where λ is a regularization parameter.
Proof: Because the anomaly alignment property holds, s1 ,
0 and M , 0. If s1 and M are fixed, then our feature transfer
learning function is defined as follows:

s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )] + s2 T x2 T Ms1
FT (S 1 , S 2 , M) =
.
k1 − x1 k1 · kx2 k1
(25)
To enhance the stability of the model and improve its generalization ability, (26) reformulates the above equation by
introducing an additional regularization term

s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )] + s2 T x2 T Ms1
FT (s2 ) =
k(1 − x1 )k1 · kx2 k1
− ρ ks2 − Ms1 k2F
(26)
where ρ is a regularization parameter. Let the derivative be
equal to zero. Since the denominator of (26) is a constant
value, then
∂FT (s2 )
∂
=
s2 T M [s1 (1 − x1 )]
∂s2
∂s2


+ s2 T x2 T Ms1 − ρks2 − Ms1 k2F = 0.

(27)

The maximum solution of the induced subgraph feature scoring function is obtained as follows:
sˆ2 =

1 ˚
M [s1
2ρ

(1 − x1 )] + x2 T Ms1 + Ms1 .

(28)

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Let λ = 1/2ρ, then
sˆ2 = λM [s1

TABLE V


(1 − x1 )] + λx2 T + 1 Ms1 .

RUNNING T IME A NALYSIS ON S YNTHETIC DATASET

(29)

Therefore, the lemma is proved.

Lemma 8: Optimal alignment matrix M with S 1 and S 2
fixed. Given two input subgraphs S 1 and S 2 , then Function Q
in (16) w.r.t. M is equivalent to the optimal problem.
M̂ = arg max η [Q (M)] − (1 − η) kM − Hk2F

(30)

M∈[0,1]m×n

where η is a regularization parameter, H is the prior alignment
matrix, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm.
Proof: Given the input graphs S 1 and S 2 , function
Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) is equivalent to the function w.r.t. M in (31). To
simplify the derivation of formulas, we introduce the vector
m = vec(M) ∈ Rmn×1 , where vec(·) denotes the vectorization
operator that stacks the columns of a matrix sequentially
Q (M) = η [ICS (M) + FT (M)] + (1 − η) kM − Hk2F . (31)
The maximum solution of it is deduced by setting its
derivative to be zero
∂Q (m)
∂mh
T i
= η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 + AS 1 ⊗ AS 2
m − 2 (1 − η) m



T
T
(1 − x1 ) + x2 s1 T − 2 (1 − η) h = 0
+ η s2 s1
then the alignment matrix M is calculated as follows:
h
T i
m̂ = η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 + AS 1 ⊗ AS 2
m



T
T
(1 − x1 ) + x2 s1 T − h
+ η s2 s1



= η AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 m + ATS 1 ⊗ ATS 2 m



+ η s2 s1 T (1 − x1 )T + x2 s1 T − h.
Then, we apply the nature of the Kronecker product: (BT ⊗
A)vec(X) = vec(AXB) [46] to make our algorithm more
efficient



m̂ = η vec AS 2 MATS 1 + vec ATS 2 MAS 1



+ η s2 s1 T (1 − x1 )T + x2 s1 T − h.
(32)
Consequently, the maximum solution of the function Q(M)
exists, and m̂ in (32) is the fixed-point iterative method. The
lemma is proved.

In a given real-world scenario, G1 and G2 represent a pair of
associated graphs. If an associated link (vi , v j ) exists between
G1 and G2 , where vi ∈ V1 and v j ∈ V2 , then H(i, j) = 1;
otherwise, H(i, j) = 0. In the iterative optimal procedure, when
S 1 and S 2 are provided, Q(·) is solely dependent on M. The
regularization term kM − Hk2F in (30) would help prevent a
trivial solution of (30), while M is equal to the zero matrix.
Additionally, the time and space complexities of computing the Kronecker products AS 1 ⊗ AS 2 and ATS 1 ⊗ ATS 2 are
both O(n2 m2 ), whereas the vectorized forms vec(AS 2 MATS 1 )
and vec(ATS 2 MAS 1 ) only required O(mn2 ). By exploiting this
property of the Kronecker product, we optimize this Iterative
process and reduce its overall complexity to O(mn2 ).

C. Theorem
Theorem 2: Optimal anomaly subgraphs S 1 , S 2 in Graphs
G1 , G2 . If subgraphs S 1 and S 2 satisfy the anomaly alignment
condition, then in the IASD problem [(5)], an optimal solution
exists and is defined as follows:

Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 = arg max Fα (S 1 ) + Q (S 1 , S 2 , M).
(33)
α∈P

Proof: Based on the definition of our IASD problem and
Lemma 5, S 1 contains at most K normal nodes, while S 2
consists of at most c nodes. Both S 1 and S 2 are therefore
restricted subgraphs. If α is assigned a specific value, then
the functions Fα (S 1 ) and Q(S 1 , S 2 , M) are guaranteed to be
monotonically increasing, as ensured by properties P1, P2, and
P3. Consequently, if S 1 and S 2 satisfy the Anomaly alignment
condition, then the optimal solution to the IASD problem, (2),
exists.
The uniqueness of Theorem 1 is proved by means of contradiction. Suppose (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 ) is not the unique optimal solution
of problem [(2)]. We assume that there exists at least one pair
of nodes (vt , v0t ) aligned, where vt < Sˆ1 but is connected to
Sˆ1 , v0t < Sˆ2 , the P-value of the node vt ’s feature is less than a
significant level p(x1 (t)) ≤ α, and the edge (v0t , vt ) exists, i.e.,
M(t0 , t) > 0. Let S 1 0 = Sˆ1 ∪{vt } and S 2 0 = Sˆ2 ∪{v0t }. Since Nα (·)
denotes the number of anomaly nodes, then Nα (S 10 ) > Nα (Sˆ1 )
holds. By properties (P1), (P2), it follows that F(S 10 ) ≥ F(Sˆ1 ).
0
0
Moreover, by properties P
(P1),
P (P3), Q(S 1 , S0 2 , M) increases
0
monotonically with both
vi ∈VS0 ,v0i ∈VS0 M(i , i) and Nα (S 1 ).
1
2
Let Q0 = Q(S 10 , S 20 , M) and Q̂ = Q(Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 , M). Then Q0 > Q̂,
which implies Fα (S 10 ) + Q0 > Fα (Sˆ1 ) + Q̂.
This assumption contradicts that Fα (Sˆ1 )+ Q̂ is the maximum
value of the IASD problem [(2)]. Therefore, the pair of
nodes (vt , v0t ) cannot exist, and it follows that (Sˆ1 , Sˆ2 ) is the
optimal solution to the IASD problem. Hence, the theorem is
proven.

A PPENDIX C
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
A. Evaluation on the HC Statistic
As shown in Table VI, the results of IASD(HC) and
IASD(BJ) are highly similar. In conjunction with the comparison against TF(HC) and A3MAN(HC), these findings further
substantiate the effectiveness of the proposed IASD approach.
B. Parameter Sensitivity Study
1) Influence of the Anomaly Ratio of G1 : The anomaly
ratio refers to the proportion of anomalous vertices in

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

Fig. 11. Influence of the anomalous ratio of G1 . When the ratio of anomalous
nodes in source graph G1 increases from 0.5% ∼ 7%. (a) Anomalous scores
of S 2 (i.e., the induced anomaly features) increase with the growing anomaly
ratio in S 1 . (b) Number of alignment links between S 1 and S 2 follows a
rising trend, reaching a peak before declining.

G1 . We evaluate the influence of the anomaly ratio
by detecting the anomaly features of every vertex in
G1 . As the anomaly ratio increases from 0.5% to 5%,
the anomaly feature score of S 2 , induced by transfer learning, increases from 0 to 15. Additionally, the
number of alignment links calculated by our approach
increases monotonically with the anomaly ratio in G1 ,
as shown in Fig. 11. However, when the anomaly
ratio of G1 exceeds 5%, the anomalous scores of S 2
remain stable, while the number of alignment links
begins to decrease. Hence, this experiment demonstrates that, within an anomaly alignment structure, the
anomaly features of the source graph can effectively
amplify those in the target graph, thereby facilitating
the detection of implicit anomalous subgraphs. Furthermore, this experiment validates the reasonableness of
the properties (P1, P2, and P3) proposed in our problem
definition and demonstrates the effectiveness of our
approach.
2) Influence of the Parameter c: As defined in (2), |VS 2 | ≤ c,
the number of S 2 ’s nodes is constrained by a constant c,
where c ≤ |V2 |. For ease of visualization, we represent
the parameter c as |VS 2 |/|V2 |, that is the ratio of the
number of nodes in S 2 to the total number of nodes
in G2 . In Fig. 12, we investigate c within the range of
(0, 11.2%] in the WP dataset to assess our algorithm’s
performance. For c ≤ 3.2%, Precision, Recall, F1,
Accuracy, TPR-P, and TPR-D are all equal to 1, and
FPR, FPR-P, and FPR-D are all 0. As c falls within
[3.2%, 11.2%], Precision remains 1, and FPR, FPR-P,
and FPR-D are 0; however, Recall, F1, Accuracy, and
TPR-P (similar to TPR-D) exhibit a declining trend, as
illustrated in Fig. 12.
3) Influence of the Parameter K: According to [7] and
[8], function Fα (S 1 ) increases with the number of
anomaly nodes of S 1 , and tends to stabilize once the
number of normal nodes K in S 1 exceeds 20. That
is, Fα (S 1 ) achieves the highest statistic score when
K ≥ 20. Since our algorithm employs TSPSD [7] to
detect anomaly subgraph S 1 , the parameter K in TSPSD
similarly affects the detection performance of our IASD.
As shown in Fig. 13, IASD generally exhibits superior
detection performance when K = 20 in our experiments.
Therefore, we typically tune the parameter K to be
equal 20.
4) Influence of the Parameter αmax : In the method proposed
in this article, the setting of the parameter αmax is
of critical importance to the model’s performance. As
depicted in Fig. 14, we conducted a systematic analysis
of the model’s performance on the TYC dataset with

13

Fig. 12. Influence of the parameter c: (Ratio of the number of nodes in S 2
to the total nodes in WP Graph G2 ).

Fig. 13. Effect of parameter K on the detection performance of IASD.
(a) F1 Score. (b) Accuracy. (c) FPR.

Fig. 14. Influence of the parameter αmax on the TYC dataset.

respect to four key metrics: Recall, F1-score, Accuracy,
and Precision, across various values of αmax . The experimental results indicate that optimal model performance
is achieved when the value of αmax falls within a
specific range. Specifically, when αmax is within the
range [0.10, 0.35], the model’s Recall, Accuracy, and
Precision metrics are maintained at a high level. Notably,
both Accuracy and Precision metrics peak around αmax =
0.25. This suggests that within this parameter interval,
the model can effectively balance the comprehensiveness
and accuracy of its identification. However, when the
value of αmax exceeds 0.35, the model’s performance
metrics begin to decline sharply. Particularly for αmax ≥
0.45, both Recall and the F1-score decrease significantly, indicating that an excessively large αmax value
substantially weakens the model’s ability to identify positive samples, thereby severely compromising its overall
performance.
5) Influence of the GAT Head h: As depicted in Fig. 15,
the number of GAT heads h significantly influences
performance. We investigate the impact of the number
of attention heads on the performance of a Transformerbased model. Our analysis reveals a nonmonotonic
relationship between the number of heads (h) and
model performance. Specifically, a single attention
head (h = 1) yields suboptimal performance, sug-

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE VI
IASD (HC),TF (HC), AND A3MAN (HC) ON WP, W EIBO , AND TYC DATASET

[4]

Fig. 15. Influence of GAT Head h on the WP dataset.

gesting limitations in capturing the diverse feature
representations necessary for robust modeling. Increasing the number of heads to h = 2 results in a
substantial performance improvement, which validates
the efficacy of the multihead attention mechanism in
learning distinct, complementary representations. However, a critical observation is the sharp performance
degradation when the number of heads becomes excessively large. Our findings underscore the importance
of judiciously selecting the number of attention heads
to balance representational power with the risk of
overfitting.
C. Running Time Analysis
To evaluate the time complexity, a synthetic dataset was
constructed with reference to the basic characteristics of the
Weibo dataset, including the proportion of nodes and aligned
edges, as summarized in Table V. For the generation of
individual graphs, we employed the Barabási–Albert model
[45], while the feature data were simulated using the basic
information from the Weibo dataset. Ten sets of simulation
graphs were generated for empirical evaluation, as reported in
Table V, which demonstrate that the algorithm’s running time
grows proportionally with the cube of the number of graph
nodes, i.e., O(n3 ).
[1]
[2]
[3]

R EFERENCES
L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection and
description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 626–688, May 2015.
G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp.
38:1–38:38, 2021.
R. Kanawati, “Multiplex network mining: A brief survey,” IEEE Intell.
Informat. Bull., vol. 16, pp. 24–27, 2015.

J. Hu et al., “SAMCL: Subgraph-aligned multiview contrastive learning
for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1664–1676, Jan. 2025.
[5] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
[6] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed
networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12249–12263, Dec. 2023.
[7] N. Wu et al., “A nonparametric approach to uncovering connected
anomalies by tree shaped priors,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 1849–1862, Oct. 2019.
[8] F. Chen and D. B. Neill, “Non-parametric scan statistics for event
detection and forecasting in heterogeneous social media graphs,” in
Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2014, pp. 1166–1175.
[9] P. V. Bindu, P. S. Thilagam, and D. Ahuja, “Discovering suspicious
behavior in multilayer social networks,” Comput. Hum. Behav., vol. 73,
pp. 568–582, Aug. 2017.
[10] Y. Sun, W. Wang, N. Wu, and C. Bao, “Anomaly subgraph detection
through high-order sampling contrastive learning,” in Proc. 23rd Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2362–2369.
[11] Z. Zhang and L. Zhao, “Unsupervised deep subgraph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
pp. 753–762.
[12] N. Wu et al., “Multiple anomaly alignments on network traffics,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Knowl. Graph (ICKG), Nov. 2022,
pp. 313–320.
[13] Y. Sun, W. Wang, N. Wu, W. Yu, and X. Chen, “Anomaly subgraph
detection with feature transfer,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 1415–1424.
[14] Y. Sun et al., “AAAN: Anomaly alignment in attributed networks,”
Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 249, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 108944.
[15] H. Xu et al., “AFSC: Adaptive Fourier space compression for
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 11,
pp. 12586–12596, Nov. 2024.
[16] J. Sharpnack, A. Krishnamurthy, and A. Singh, “Near-optimal anomaly
detection in graphs using Lovasz extended scan statistic,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26, 2013, pp. 1959–1967.
[17] M. Salehi and L. Rashidi, “A survey on anomaly detection in evolving
data: [With application to forest fire risk prediction],” ACM SIGKDD
Explor. Newslett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 13–23, May 2018.
[18] Z. Ding, Q. Dong, H. Xu, C. Li, X. Ding, and Y. Huang, “Unsupervised
anomaly segmentation for brain lesions using dual semantic-manifold
reconstruction,” in Proc. ICONIP, vol. 13625. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022, pp. 133–144.
[19] C. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Huang, and X. Ding, “Unsupervised
anomaly segmentation using image-semantic cycle translation,” 2021,
arXiv:2103.09094.
[20] K. Xiao, J. Cao, Z. Zeng, and W.-K. Ling, “Graph-based
active learning with uncertainty and representativeness for industrial
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14,
2023.
[21] H. Zenati, C.-S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and V. Chandrasekhar,
“Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” 2018, arXiv:1802.06222.
[22] L. Qi, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, W. Rafique, and J. Ma, “Fast anomaly
identification based on multiaspect data streams for intelligent intrusion
detection toward secure Industry 4.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6503–6511, Sep. 2022.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: ANOMALY SUBGRAPH DETECTION ON MULTIPLE ASSOCIATED ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS

[23] H. Liu, X. Xu, E. Li, S. Zhang, and X. Li, “Anomaly detection
with representative neighbors,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2831–2841, Jun. 2023.
[24] S. Wang et al., “Multiview deep anomaly detection: A systematic
exploration,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 1651–1665, Feb. 2024.
[25] C. Li et al., “Domain generalization on medical imaging classification
using episodic training with task augmentation,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 141, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 105144.
[26] M. Askarizadeh, A. Morsali, and K. K. Nguyen, “Resource-constrained
multisource instance-based transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1029–1043, Jan. 2025.
[27] D. Li, J. Wang, J. Xu, X. Fang, and Y. Ji, “Cross-channel specificmutual feature transfer learning for motor imagery EEG signals
decoding,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 13472–13482, Oct. 2024.
[28] J. Tang, T. Lou, J. Kleinberg, and S. Wu, “Transfer learning to infer
social ties across heterogeneous networks,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1–43, Apr. 2016.
[29] F. Gao, H. Yoon, T. Wu, and X. Chu, “A feature transfer enabled
multi-task deep learning model on medical imaging,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 143, Apr. 2020, Art. no. 112957.
[30] Y. Lu et al., “Cross-modality person re-identification with sharedspecific feature transfer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 13376–13386.
[31] F. Cui, Q. Cui, and Y. Song, “A survey on learning-based approaches for
modeling and classification of human–machine dialog systems,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1418–1432, Apr.
2021.
[32] W. Bi, X. Cheng, B. Xu, X. Sun, L. Xu, and H. Shen, “Bridged-GNN:
Knowledge bridge learning for effective knowledge transfer,” in Proc.
32nd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2023, pp. 99–109.

15

Nannan Wu received the B.S. degree from
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2009,
the M.S. degree from Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer software and theory from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2018.
He is a Professor with Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China. His current research interests include artificial
intelligence and graph anomaly detection in largescale graphs.

Ying Sun received the B.S. degree in computer
science and engineering from Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China, in 1990, the M.S. degree in control
science and engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree
from Tianjin University in 2025.
She is currently a Professor with the School
of International Business, Zhejiang Yuexiu University, Shaoxing, China. Her research interests include
anomaly detection, human behavior dynamics analysis by complex networks, and large-scale data
mining.

Yazheng Zhao received the B.S. degree from
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics,
Shanghai, China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the School of Computer
Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China.
His current research interests include graph mining and graph anomaly detection.

[33] W. Li, X. Guo, and Y. Yuan, “Novel scenes & classes: Towards adaptive
open-set object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 15734–15744.
[34] W. Li, X. Liu, and Y. Yuan, “SIGMA++: Improved semantic-complete
graph matching for domain adaptive object detection,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 9022–9040, Jan. 2023.
[35] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2009.
[36] Z. Liang et al., “Unsupervised large-scale social network alignment via
cross network embedding,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 1008–1017.
[37] C. Döpmann, “Survey on the graph alignment problem and a benchmark
of suitable algorithms,” Institut für Informatik, 2013.
[38] R. H. Berk and D. H. Jones, “Goodness-of-fit test statistics that dominate
the Kolmogorov statistics,” Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie
und Verwandte Gebiete, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 47–59, 1979.
[39] D. Donoho and J. Jin, “Higher criticism for detecting sparse heterogeneous mixtures,” Ann. Statist., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 962–994, Jun. 2004.
[40] S. Zhang and H. Tong, “FINAL: Fast attributed network alignment,” in
Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
San Francisco, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 1345–1354.
[41] B. Du and H. Tong, “FASTEN: Fast Sylvester equation solver for graph
mining,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 1339–1347.
[42] S. Zhang et al., “HiDDen: Hierarchical dense subgraph detection with
application to financial fraud detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data
Mining, 2017, pp. 570–578.
[43] R. Patro and C. Kingsford, “Global network alignment using multiscale
spectral signatures,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 23, pp. 3105–3114,
Dec. 2012.
[44] H. Saif, M. Fernández, Y. He, and H. Alani, “SentiCircles for contextual
and conceptual semantic sentiment analysis of Twitter,” in Proc. ESWC.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 83–98.
[45] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in random
networks,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, pp. 509–512, 1999.
[46] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Topics in Matrix Analysis. Cambridge
Univ. Press, Jun. 1994.

Wenjun Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
Peking University, Beijing, China, in 2006.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China, the Chief Expert of major projects
of the National Social Science Foundation, Beijing,
the Big Data Specially Invited Expert with Tianjin
Public Security Bureau, Tianjin, and the Director of
Tianjin Engineering Research Center of Big Data
on Public Security, Tianjin. His research interests
include computational social science, large-scale
data mining, intelligence analysis, and multilayer complex network modeling.

Xueli Liu received the Ph.D. degree from Harbin
Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2018.
She is an Associate Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. Her research interests include
big data computing, graph association analysis, and
deep learning interpretation.

Jianxin Li is currently a Professor with the State
Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment and Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China. He has published 30 refereed
articles in major data mining venues, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND
DATA E NGINEERING, ACM-KDD, ACM-WWW,
AAAI and IJCAI. His current research interests
include machine learning, distributed system, trust
management and network security.
Mr. Li won the best paper award at AAAI2021.