2368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Auto-EAD: An Automated Ensemble Anomaly
Detection Framework for the CEN-IoT
Lei Ding, Wenli Shang , Shuang Wang , Member, IEEE, Haoran Gao, and Lianhai Wang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— The Internet of Things (IoT) based on consumer
electronic networks (CEN-IoT) is confronting diverse, stealthy,
and large-scale network attacks. The targets of attackers are
no longer limited to individual devices or data, but also extend
to multiple domains, including device hijacking, data exfiltration, and service disruption. Anomaly detection based on
machine learning, as an effective defensive measure, is gradually being applied to IoT systems to enhance cybersecurity.
Although anomaly detection algorithms based on artificial intelligence/machine learning are widely employed in constructing
cybersecurity mechanisms, such technologies not only require
substantial support from human experts but also suffer from
model drift, posing considerable challenges to the development
of autonomous cybersecurity measures. This paper proposes
an Automated Ensemble Anomaly Detection Framework (AutoEAD) for the automatic identification of abnormal behaviors
in dynamic consumer electronics network environments. The
proposed model consists of automated data preprocessing, automated feature engineering, automated base model learning with
hyperparameter optimization, automated model selection, and
automated model integration modules. Specifically, the primary automated data preprocessing techniques employed include
automatic data transformation, inverse transformation, feature
standardization, and data balancing. The Covariance Matrix
Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) is utilized for hyperparameter optimization (HPO) of tree-based machine learning
(ML) models, while a novel stair ensemble method is proposed
for automated model ensemble.This model was developed to minimize human intervention and achieve full-lifecycle automation of
anomaly detection. The Auto-EAD framework was evaluated on
three public datasets (SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network Intrusion
Dataset), with results showing superior performance of the proposed model compared to state-of-the-art methods, and thereby
highlighting its effectiveness in handling and detecting abnormal
behaviors in dynamically complex network environments. The
Received 16 September 2025; revised 12 November 2025 and 15 December
2025; accepted 1 January 2026. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date
of current version 25 March 2026. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62173101; in
part by the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information
Security, Ministry of Education under Grant 2024ZD018; and in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
3122025054. (Corresponding author: Wenli Shang.)
Lei Ding and Haoran Gao are with the School of Cyber Science and
Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
1112206007@e.gzhu.edu.cn; ghr36369@e.gzhu.edu.cn).
Wenli Shang is with the School of Electronics and Communication
Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
shangwl@gzhu.edu.cn).
Shuang Wang is with the Institute of Science, Technology and Innovation, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin 300300, China (e-mail:
s-wang@cauc.edu.cn).
Lianhai Wang is with the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network
and Information Security, Ministry of Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250353, China (e-mail:
wanglh@sdas.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2026.3651524

present paper offers a novel approach to the construction of
cybersecurity ecosystems with autonomous decision-making and
response capabilities.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, automated machine learning, ensemble model, consumer electronics network.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE Internet of Things (IoT) based on consumer electronic
networks (CEN-IoT) [1]takes smartphones, smart home
appliances, and remote-control devices as core terminals,
achieves interconnection via network technologies including
Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and NB-IoT, enables data processing and
intelligent control with the support of cloud platforms and edge
computing, and adopts standardized protocols such as MQTT
to ensure cross-device compatibility and secure data transmission [2]. Its applications span service scenarios including smart
home linkage, remote health monitoring, smart manufacturing
facilities, and intelligent transportation [3]. For instance, in a
smart home scenario, when users enable the ‘away-from-home
mode’ via a mobile application, all indoor lighting, power
sockets, and air conditioning systems will automatically shut
down, smart door locks will engage, and security cameras will
switch to an armed state [4].
In intelligent manufacturin scenarios, the CEN-IoT system adopts a four-layer architecture (terminal layer, network
layer, platform layer, and application layer). The terminal
layer incorporates production equipment and intelligent handheld terminals, while the network layer leverages 5G and
industrial Ethernet to achieve reliable data transmission. The
platform layer conducts data processing through an industrial cloud platform, and the application layer offers services
such as equipment health management. Embedded sensors
gather real-time operational data, which is transmitted to
the cloud platform. Advanced algorithms are then employed
for fault analysis and prediction, thereby facilitating early
warnings. Furthermore, multi-device collaborative operation
is achieved. In practical applications, this model remarkably
reduces equipment failure rates, improves core production
efficiency, strengthens quality traceability capabilities, and
comprehensively upgrades the overall production efficiency
and quality control standards [5], [6], [7], [8].
With the in-depth integration of the CEN-IoT and the Internet, CEN-IoT is increasingly vulnerable to network attacks [9],
[10]. The primary causes are threefold: (1) Most CEN-IoT
devices inherently suffer from vulnerabilities including the
absence of hardware security modules, inadequate firmware
update mechanisms, and default weak passwords [11];
(2) Within network and communication links, design flaws

T

1558-4127 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

Fig. 1. Workflow of network anomaly detection for consumer electronic
devices.

exist in plaintext data transmission, weakly encrypted protocols (e.g., HTTP, Telnet), and IoT-specific protocols (e.g.,
MQTT, Zigbee)—these vulnerabilities render CEN-IoT systems susceptible to network attacks, including eavesdropping,
data tampering, and lateral movement [12], [13]; (3) Cloud
platforms supporting CEN-IoT systems exhibit vulnerabilities
such as SQL injection and unauthorized access, coupled
with the absence of API authentication mechanisms and
inadequate protection of user privacy data—these issues
expose CEN-IoT devices to risks of batch hijacking or
sensitive data leakage. In summary, the current network
attacks targeting CEN-IoT systems exhibit three key characteristics: diversity, concealment, and large scale [14].
Attackers’ targets are no longer limited to individual
devices or isolated data, but extend to multiple dimensions, including device hijacking, data theft, and service
disruption.
In CEN-IoT scenarios, smart home devices face various
attacks: exploiting smart camera vulnerabilities for unauthorized monitoring, hijacking smart socket control to cause
malicious power outages, tampering with smart refrigerator
energy consumption data, or deploying automated scripts
through universal smart camera vulnerabilities to compromise
hundreds of thousands or even millions of devices within
hours. These compromised devices form large-scale botnets,
used to launch distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks or
engage in illegal activities such as cryptocurrency mining [15].
Traditional passive defense mechanisms can no longer tackle
such sophisticated attack vectors. Therefore, active defense
mechanisms centered on anomaly detection have emerged as
a critical enabler for safeguarding CEN-IoT system security
[16]. Fig. 1 showsthe workflow of network anomaly detection
for CEN-IoT.
However, three persistent challenges hinder CEN-IoT broad
application [10]. (1) Traditional anomaly detection methods
primarily involve processes such as manual data annotation
and the setting of detection thresholds. However, these processes demand extensive manual intervention, heavily depend

2369

on the professional expertise of personnel, exhibit low learning efficiency, and fail to adequately meet the real-time
requirements of CEN-IoT systems. (2) The number of hyperparameters in anomaly detection models typically ranges
from 10 to 20. The optimization space formed by these
hyperparameters is extremely high-dimensional, and complex
nonlinear correlations exist between hyperparameters—this
renders hyperparameter optimization a challenging global
optimization problem. Existing hyperparameter optimization
methods impose a heavy computational burden and are frequently prone to trapping in local optima. (3) Traditional
anomaly detection approaches are incapable of addressing
the dynamic variations in CEN-IoT systems. Traditional
single-model approaches or static integration strategies often
exhibit significant performance disparities across different
operating conditions, leading to substantial fluctuations in
detection outcomes.
Automated ML (AutoML) autonomously derives optimal
strategies by automating model selection, feature engineering,
HPO, and model ensembling [17]. This approach has been
widely applied across diverse domains [18]. For example,
Li et al. [19] proposed an automated framework for constructing statistical learning-based anomaly detection models, which
streamlines parameter optimization for non-neural network
algorithms. AutoML-driven autonomous anomaly detection
enables the real-time monitoring of system activities, the
precise identification of abnormal patterns, and the swift
localization of potential attack vectors. However, most existing
AutoML-based anomaly detection methods are designed for
general application scenarios. At the same time, anomaly
detection of consumer electronics system is a complex
task characterized by high real-time performance requirements, high stability requirements, and multiple operating
conditions—factors that constrain the broad application of
AutoML-driven methods.
Inspired by AutoML, we propose an automated ensemble anomaly detection model (Auto-EAD) for the CEN-IoT.
Unlike traditional models that depend on human expertise,
Auto-EAD integrates automated data mining and learning
mechanisms, with an emphasis on efficient data stream processing, multi-model integration, and HPO to enhance the
accuracy of anomaly detection.
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
(1) We developed an AutoML framework to enhance the
tracking efficiency of model learning. It incorporates metalearning, ensemble construction, and HPO. This enables the
comprehensive automation of data processing, feature engineering, model selection, and parameter optimization in IoT
anomaly detection. This framework notably boosts the tracking
efficiency of model learning and minimizes reliance on manual
expertise.
(2) We propose a method for optimizing the hyperparameters of the detection model using adaptive evolution. The
covariance matrix is dynamically adjusted based on the
population distribution and historical information to capture
the correlations among the model hyperparameters. The search
direction of the hyperparameters is then updated without any
gradient calculation. The sampling of multiple hyperparameter

2370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

combinations and comprehensive evaluations smooth out the
fluctuations in the objective function, accelerating convergence
to the global optimum.
(3) The proposed Stair ensemble approach gradually adds
models to enhance learning performance and mitigate overfitting. Through a multilevel fusion mechanism, the meta-models
mutually correct their learning errors, improving the stability
of the integrated model. Through the dynamic adjustment of
the meta-model weights, the integrated model maintains high
performance and improved interoperability.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II reviews anomaly detection methods. Section III
details the proposed Auto-EAD framework. Section IV outlines the experimental design, and Section V presents and
discusses the results. Finally, Section VI summarizes the paper
and suggests future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Anomaly Detection Technique
Anomaly detection techniques can be broadly classified
into three categories: signature-based, statistics-based, and
ML–based techniques.
Signature-based anomaly detection techniques accurately
identify known attacks by extracting and matching characteristic patterns from network traffic or system behaviors.
Bahri et al. [20] proposed an anomaly detection system
(ADS) tailored to industrial protocols, improving detection
accuracy by refining the signature rule-base through detailed
analysis of Modbus RTU/ASCII vulnerabilities. Zheng et al.
[21] proposed a hybrid Transformer-Convolutional Signature
Network (T-CSN) architecture, which innovatively integrates
the Transformer and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
frameworks. This architecture can effectively capture subtle deformation features between genuine signatures and
skilled forged signatures, thereby playing a critical role in
enhancing the anomaly detection accuracy of offline signature
authentication systems. He et al. [22] combined Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs)—a type of generative model—with
Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) structures, and incorporated
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to learn topological information. This approach provides an innovative spatiotemporal
deep learning solution for signature-based anomaly detection
in cloud systems, with network traffic signatures as a typical application scenari. Signature-based anomaly detection
techniques enable the precise identification of known attacks
through the extraction and matching of distinctive feature patterns. Furthermore, these methods exhibit robust adaptability
to domain-specific scenarios—such as industrial communication protocols and cloud computing environments—with
detection performance further enhanced via the integration of
multi-neural network frameworks, refinement of signature rule
bases, and other advanced optimization strategies. Nevertheless, a critical limitation persists in their inadequate capability
to effectively detect unknown or zero-day attacks.
Statistics-based anomaly detection techniques exhibit robust
performance on relatively stable time series or normally
distributed data. However, they often falter in accurately

identifying anomalies in data with substantial variations in
statistical characteristics or in cases requiring joint assessment of multiple variables, necessitating the use of more
sophisticated approaches for achieving reliable anomaly detection in such scenarios. Xiong et al. [23] proposed a spatial
information-enhanced Transformer (SI-Transformer) model,
which integrates Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) into the
original Anomaly Transformer (A-Transformer) framework.
This model generates high-dimensional correlated difference
features to more effectively capture spatiotemporal dependencies in multivariate time series (MTS) data, thereby
enabling more robust anomaly detection. Sukhostat et al.
[24] introduced an anomaly detection technique relying on
statistical features and applied it to anomaly detection in
in-vehicle CAN networks. Statistics-based anomaly detection
techniques conduct anomaly identification exclusively relying
on a priori knowledge of data or their inherent statistical
characteristics. While demonstrating efficacy for relatively
stable time series or data sequences adhering to a normal
distribution, these approaches fail to achieve precise anomaly
detection for data with significant fluctuations in statistical
properties or those that necessitate the joint assessment of
multiple variables. Consequently, there is an imperative need
for more robust detection paradigms to address such complex
scenarios.
ML-based anomaly detection techniques identify abnormal
behaviors by constructing data-driven models to learn normal
behavioral patterns from historical data and then recognizing
deviations from these patterns. Bai et al. [25] proposed an
anomaly detection method based on the Parallel Attention
Transformer (PA-Transformer), which leverages the Transformer architecture to capture complex temporal dependencies
in time series data, thereby enabling effective anomaly detection. Gu et al. [26] proposed a novel industrial anomaly
detection method based on Large Visual Language Models
(LVLMs)—a class of advanced multimodal models—which
eliminates the need for manual threshold tuning and can
directly assess both the existence and location of anomalies in
industrial scenarios. Wu et al. [27] proposed an interpretable
and efficient deep-learning framework for anomaly detection,
reporting higher training speed and effectiveness compared
with current methods. Recurrent neural networks, such as long
short-term memory (LSTM) [28] and gated recurrent unit [29],
along with attention-based models [30], capture contextual
relationships in time-series data. These models learn normal
patterns by capturing temporal dependencies, thus identifying
anomalies in time series. ML-based anomaly detection techniques can learn inherent normal behavioral patterns through
data-driven paradigms, capture intricate dependencies and
contextual correlations within time series data, and exhibit
prominent advantages including the elimination of manual
parameter tuning, high training efficiency, favorable interpretability, and robust adaptability to industrial application
scenarios. Nevertheless, these approaches inherently suffer
from non-negligible limitations: strong reliance on data quality and quantity, considerable challenges in hyperparameter
optimization (HPO), inadequate scenario adaptability, and a
trade-off between real-time responsiveness and interpretability.

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

B. Automated Machine Learning
AutoML has emerged as a promising research field in recent
years, offering a solution to the challenges associated with
traditional ML methods [31], [32]. Conventional approaches
heavily rely on the quality of algorithms and parameter settings, which can be challenging to optimize. AutoML enables
researchers and practitioners to streamline the ML workflow
by automating algorithm selection and hyperparameter tuning.
This automation not only circumvents the complex task of
manual hyperparameter adjustment but also enhances work
efficiency for both ML experts and non-experts.
HPO [33], a key component of AutoML, automates the
tuning of model hyperparameters. Its goal is to find an effective
set of hyperparameters that allows the considered ML model to
achieve near-optimal performance on a given dataset, thereby
relieving domain experts from the laborious and error-prone
task of manual tuning.
HPO methods are primarily divided into four categories:
grid search, random search, sequential model-based optimization, and multiarmed bandit approaches. Grid search
exhaustively evaluates every combination in the Cartesian
product of hyperparameter values to identify the optimal
model. Although effective, it is computationally intensive.
Random search randomly samples combinations from a predefined search space, trains models with these combinations, and
evaluates their performance on a validation set [34]. Although
more computationally efficient than grid search, it may fail
to achieve global optimality, settling on suboptimal solutions.
Sequential model-based optimization uses a surrogate model
(such as Gaussian processes, Tree Parzen Estimator, or random
forests) along with an acquisition function. The Tree Parzen
Estimator and random forest are particularly effective for
handling both discrete and continuous hyperparameters [35].
Multi-armed bandit methods adaptively select hyperparameter
combinations, efficiently exploring the search space and reducing computational costs compared to grid or random search
[36]. These algorithms utilize prior knowledge to focus on
promising regions of the hyperparameter space. Representative
examples such as Auto-Sklearn [37] and Auto-WEKA [38]
automate the ML pipeline—including algorithm selection and
HPO—thereby enhancing the AutoML workflow.

2371

attacks, thereby enhancing the security of 5G and future 6G
networks. Vasan et al. [41] proposed ICS Defender, a defense
mechanism that enhances the security of industrial control
systems (ICS) through automated machine learning (AutoML)
technology. This method employs sophisticated feature engineering and AutoML to automate model selection, training,
aggregation, and optimization, thereby reducing reliance on
specialized expertise. Experimental results on diverse datasets
from power systems and electric vehicle charging stations
demonstrate that ICS Defender outperforms existing frameworks in terms of accuracy and robustness. Ma et al. [42]
proposed a few-shot IoT attack detection method based on
the SSDSAE and an adaptive loss-weighted meta-residual
network, which exhibits strong detection performance for
scenarios with limited samples in IoT intrusion detection.
Kotlar et al. [43] advanced automated anomaly detection by
establishing novel meta-features for model selection, which
include traditional dataset statistics and additional temporal, distributional, and domain-specific characteristics. This
approach considerably improved model selection accuracy
and adaptability, outperforming traditional AutoML frameworks on various public datasets—especially in managing
high-dimensional sparse data and concept drift. Singh et al.
[44] introduced a meta-learning-based unsupervised anomaly
detection framework that creates a “data distribution–optimal
detection method” by examining the distribution features
of historical datasets. Experimental results indicate that this
framework outperforms mainstream AutoML tools on multidomain datasets, particularly in the detection of network
traffic anomalies and industrial sensor faults in scenarios with
complex and varying data distributions.
The present paper demonstrates that AutoML-based ADSs
offer considerable advantages in cybersecurity. These frameworks enhance performance by swiftly adapting to evolving
attack environments through automated feature engineering,
intelligent model selection, and HPO. This increases detection
accuracy and recall rates owing to fewer false positives and
false negatives. Additionally, through the automation of tasks
such as manual model design and parameter tuning, AutoML
systems reduce the reliance on human experts, streamline
workflows, and reduce human error and labor costs—thereby
strengthening cybersecurity defenses.

C. AutoML-Based Anomaly Detection
AutoML-based anomaly detection techniques constitutes an
intelligent detection paradigm that deeply embeds AutoML
technology into the full workflow of anomaly detection.
It eliminates key manual intervention procedures in traditional
anomaly detection via automated methodologies, enabling the
precise identification of abnormal behaviors or data features
that diverge from normal patterns within target application scenarios. Simultaneously, this paradigm minimizes dependence
on specialized algorithmic expertise and manual operational
efforts. Chen et al. [39] developed an automated anomaly
detection model utilizing statistical learning for the automatic
optimization of model parameters. Yang et al. [40] proposed an
AutoML-based autonomous intrusion detection system (IDS)
framework designed to automatically detect malicious network

III. M ETHOD
A. Problem Definition
The problem was defined as the selection of multiple
algorithms with relatively optimal performance from a set of
algorithms, followed by the construction of multiple models
using the selected algorithms. Ultimately, the goal was to
optimize the detection capabilities of the detection model.
The formalized problem definition is as
 follows: given a set
of anomaly detection algorithms A = A1 , A2 , . . . , An and
dataset D, select algorithms A∗ ∈ A with the optimal detection
capabilities from the algorithm set A. Divide the dataset into
training dataset Dtrain and test dataset Dtest . Apply algorithm
A∗ to obtain model M ∗ and then evaluate the model M∗ based

2372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

on the dataset Dtest , as shown in Eq. (1).
1 Xn
L (A, Dtrain , Dtest )
(1)
A∗ ∈ arg min
i=1
A∗ ∈A n
where, L (A, Dtrain , Dtest ) is the loss of the model. It can
be obtained by training algorithm A on dataset Dtrain and
evaluating the trained algorithm on dataset Dtest . Problem
of HPO. Suppose algorithm A contains n hyperparameters,
λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λn , with corresponding value sets 31 , 32 , . . . , 3n .
Then, the hyperparameter search space 3 of algorithm A is
the set formed by the Cartesian product of the value sets of
these n hyperparameters: 3 ⊂ 31 × 32 × . . . , ×3n . The main
purpose of HPO is to search within the search space 3 for a
set of configurations λ∗ that result in the optimal predictive
performance of trained algorithm A, as shown in Eq. (2).
1 Xn
L (Aλ , Dtrain , Dtest )
(2)
λ∗ ∈ arg min
i=1
λ∈3 n
This work mainly addresses the problem of combining
algorithm selection and HPO. The problem
 can be defined
as follows: given a set of algorithms A = A1 , A2 , . . . , An ,
where the hyperparameter space corresponding to each
algorithm is 31 , 32 , . . . , 3n , find algorithm A∗ with configuration λ∗ , such that the model trained using algorithm A∗λ∗
has the optimal detection performance. Accuracy, Precision,
Recall, and F1-score were used as performance metrics for
the anomaly detection model, as shown in Eq. (3).


1 Xn
j
A∗λ∗ = arg min
L Aλ , Dtrain , Dtest
(3)
i=1
A j ∈A,λ∈3 j n
B. Basic Framework of the Auto-EAD
The aim of the present work was to develop an autonomous
ADS for the CEN-IoT to ensure its secure operation. Fig 2
outlines the comprehensive framework of the tree-based
automated ensemble anomaly detection model for the IoT
(Auto-EAD). It comprises five stages: automated data preprocessing (AutoDP), automated feature engineering (AutoFE),
automated base model learning and HPO, automated model
selection, and automated model ensemble. In the AutoDP
phase, network traffic data undergoes preprocessing steps such
as transformation, imputation, normalization, and balancing to
enhance the quality of training data. In the AutoFE phase,
feature importance for classification tasks and the strength of
the linear relationship between feature variables are computed
to reduce data complexity. In the automated base model learning and HPO phase, five tree-based ML models are utilized,
with HPO performed using adaptive evolution. After HPO,
three detection models are selected in the automated model
selection stage based on their F1-scores. The proposed Stair
ensemble model is then employed in the automated model
ensemble stage to stack and iteratively optimize the three base
models, culminating in the final integrated ADS for the IoT.
Further details on the Auto-EAD framework are presented in
Algorithm 1.
C. Automated Data Pre-Processing
Data preprocessing is essential for automated ML, playing
a crucial role in optimizing input data quality and improving

Algorithm 1 Overall Tree-based Auto-EAD Framework
Input: IoT based on consumer electronics network traffic data
D, feature importance threshold τ = 0.9, correlation threshold
δ = 0.9, imbalance threshold imbalance ratio = 0.3
Output: Final Auto-EAD model
1: // AutoDP
2: Dclean ← AutoD P (D) Auto data transformation:
encode non-numeric features, auto imputation: fill missing values with 0, auto normalization: Z-score if normal
(Shapiro–Wilk test), else min–max, auto balancing: SMOTE
if imbalance ratio < 0.3 //imbalance ratio denotes the
proportion of the minority class in the dataset.
3: // AutoFE
4: Dr educed ←AutoD P (Dclean )
Step 1: Remove irrelevant features via GBDT feature importance (keep those with f eatur e impor tance > τ )
Step 2: Remove redundant features via Pearson correlation
r pq > δ
5: // Automated base model learning & HPO
6: base_models ← {Random Forest, XGBoost, Gradient
Boosting, Decision Tree, LightGBM}
7: For each model in base_models do
8: optimized_model ← CMA-ES(model, Dr educed )
9: end for
10: // Automated model selection
11:
top_models ← select top 3 models by F1-score:

Model T O P_1 , Model T O P_2 , Model T O P_3
12: // Automated model ensemble (Stair ensemble)
13: final_model ← StairStacking(top_models)
14: return final_model

the efficacy of anomaly detection models. This phase is
resource-intensive, time-consuming, and requires specialized
knowledge. Herein, AutoDP was employed to facilitate the
learning of valuable patterns by anomaly detection models.
Within the framework outlined in the present study, the
AutoDP phase encompasses automatic data transformation,
imputation, standardization, and balancing procedures [18].
The detailed operations are as follows:
(1) Automatic Data Transformation: Non-numeric attributes
are converted into numeric ones using automated encoding
techniques.
(2) Automatic Data Imputation: Missing values in the
dataset are identified and replaced with zeros.
(3) Automatic Standardization: Data normality is evaluated
using the Shapiro–Wilk test. If the data conforms to a normal
distribution, Z-score normalization is employed; otherwise,
min–max normalization is utilized.
Sample data X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n becomes X (1)
≤
X (2) , . . . , X (n) after sorting. The Shapiro–Wilk test statistic
W is defined as:
P
2
Pn−k
k
a
X
i
(i)
i=1 ai X (n−i+1) −
i=k+1
(4)
W =
2
Pn 
P
n
1
i=1 X i − n
i=1 X i
  
where k = n 2 denotes the sample half-length after floor
division; ai are coefficients determined by sample size n,

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

Fig. 2.

2373

Flowchart of the proposed Basic Framework of the Auto-EAD.

generated via lookup tables or algorithmic computation to
reflect the covariance structure of order statistics under the
normal distribution.
After computing the Shapiro–Wilk test statistic W , the critical value Wα is obtained using the Shapiro–Wilk distribution
table with a significance level α (α = 0.05) and sample size
n.
In Z-score normalization, the normalized value of each data
point, xn , is denoted by
x −µ
xn =
(5)
σ
where x is the original value, µ and σ are the mean and
standard deviation of the data points, respectively.
In min–max normalization, the normalized value of each
data point, xn is denoted by
x − min
xn =
(6)
max − min
where x is the original feature value, and min and max are
the minimum and maximum values of each original feature,
respectively.
(4) Automatic Data Balancing: The class sample sizes
are assessed to gauge dataset imbalance. If the dataset is
imbalanced, SMOTE oversampling is applied to address such
imbalance.
For each minority class sample x j , its k-nearest neighbors
in the minority class sample are calculated.
r
Xd

2
dist x j , xl =
x j,t − xl,t
(7)
t=1

where x j,t is the t-th dimensional feature of x j .

=
 Thus, the set of neighboring samples Nk x j
x j1 , x j2 , .., x jk is obtained.
Sample x jr (r ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}) is randomly selected from
the neighbor set Nk x j , after which a new sample xnew is
generated through linear interpolation.

xnew = x j + λ x jr − x j
(8)

Among them, λ ∈ (0, 1) is a randomly generated interpolation coefficient. This way, by leveraging the distribution
information on the existing samples from the minority class,
new minority class samples are synthesized. Consequently, the
number of minority class samples is increased to alleviate the
dataset imbalance.
D. AutoFE
AutoFE is another essential component of the Auto-EAD
framework. Feature engineering is integral to the extraction
and selection of the most pertinent features from a dataset,
thereby enhancing the efficacy of ML models. AutoFE aims
to streamline the conventional feature engineering workflow,
reducing human involvement in such tasks. Within this framework, AutoFE focuses on feature selection, aiming to identify
and select the most crucial features to construct accurate and
efficient ML models.
1. Information Gain-based Irrelevant Feature Removal
Method
The dataset comprises n samples, each consisting of m
features and a label variable. The dataset can be represented
as a feature matrix x, x ∈ Rn×m , and a label vector y, y ∈ Rn ,
where xi j denotes the j-th feature value of the i-th sample,
and yi denotes the label value of the i-th sample.
Herein, feature importance was assessed using the Gradient
Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) algorithm [45]. In GBDT,
each decision tree is designed to model the residuals of
the preceding tree. Throughout the construction of a decision tree, features are iteratively partitioned to minimize a
specified loss function (e.g., mean squared error). At each
decision tree node, a feature and a split point are chosen
to maximize the impurity reduction of the resulting subnodes. Feature importance is quantified by either the frequency
of a feature being utilized for splitting across all decision
trees or the cumulative impurity reductions achieved by these
splits.

2374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Consider a set of decision trees T . The importance score of
the j-th feature in the t-th decision tree can be represented as
It j . The cumulative importance score of the j-th feature across
the entire model is calculated by summing the importance
scores across all decision trees:
XT
Ij =
It j
(9)
t=1

The features are arranged in descending order based on
their importance scores I j to derive a prioritized sequence
of features. These feature importance scores are normalized
such that the total sum across all features is 1. The normalized
importance score I˜j for the j-th feature can be mathematically
defined as:
Ij
(10)
I˜j = Pm
k=1 Ik
Cumulative importance score C j are calculated for each
feature, which is the sum of the normalized importance scores
for the top j features:
Xj
Cj =
I˜k
(11)
k=1

An importance threshold τ (τ = 0.9 in this paper) is defined.
Features with cumulative importance scores less than or equal
to the threshold τ are identified, and features with scores
exceeding it are eliminated.
2. Pearson Correlation Coefficient-based Redundant Feature
Removal Method
Pearson correlation coefficient ρXY assesses the strength
of linear correlation between two variables. For two random
variables X and Y , it is computed as follows [46]:
ρX Y =

cov (X, Y )
E [(X − µ X ) (Y − µY )]
=q 
 

ρ X ρY
E (X − µ )2 E (Y − µ )2
X

Y

(12)
where cov (X, Y ) is the covariance of X and Y ; ρ X and ρY
are the standard deviations of X and Y , respectively; µ X and
µY are the means of X and Y , respectively; and E [·] is the
mathematical expectation.
For two feature vectors x p and xq in the feature matrix x,
Pearson correlation coefficient r pq can be computed using the
following formula:


Pn
k=1 x kp − x̄ p x kq − x̄ q
r pq = q
(13)
2 Pn
2
Pn
x
−
x̄
x
−
x̄
p
q
k=1 kp
k=1 kq
where xkp and xkq are the values of the k-th sample for the
p-th and q-th features, and x̄ p and x̄q are the sample means
of the p-th and q-th features, respectively.
 
Correlation coefficient matrix R = r pq can be derived
by calculating Pearson correlation coefficients between all
feature pairs. Notably, r pp = 1 (as a feature is perfectly
correlated with itself), and r pq = rq p (because the correlation
coefficient is symmetrical). To streamline computations and
analyses, herein, we focused on the upper triangle of the
matrix, excluding diagonal elements.
This upper triangular segment can be isolated by creating an
upper triangular matrix U . A correlation coefficient threshold δ

is defined (set to 0.9 in the present work). For each element r pq
in the upper triangle, r pq > δ indicates high linear correlation
between the p-th and q-th features, meaning that one of these
features is redundant and needs to be removed.
E. Automated Model Learning
After processing the data with AutoDP and AutoFE, supervised ML algorithms were trained to detect attack behaviors.
Herein, five tree-based ML models were considered: random
forest [47], XGBoost [48], gradient boosting [49], decision
trees [50], and LightGBM [51]. The rationale for selecting
these models is fourfold: (1) random forest, XGBoost, LightGBM, and gradient boosting are ensemble models built on
decision trees, enabling them to effectively handle non-linear
and high-dimensional industrial data; (2) tree-based ML algorithms support parallel computing, thereby enhancing training
efficiency on IIoT datasets; (3) the stochastic nature of
tree-based ML models enhances the generalization and robustness of ensemble models.
F. Hyperparameter Optimization Based on Adaptive
Evolution
HPO plays a pivotal role in the effective deployment of ML
models tailored to specific IoT systems or datasets. Herein,
an adaptive evolution approach was employed to automate the
tuning of hyperparameter combinations, thereby considerably
enhancing the detection performance of the proposed model.
We used the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES), a robust gradient-free optimization algorithm
known for its efficacy [52]. Drawing inspiration from evolutionary strategies, CMA-ES emulates the process of biological
evolution to iteratively approach the optimal solution.
The primary rationale for selecting CMA-ES in this paper
is fourfold: (1) As a gradient-free optimization algorithm,
CMA-ES does not require assumptions regarding the continuity or differentiability of the hyperparameter space,
and thus perfectly adapts to the optimization requirements
of mixed-type hyperparameters in tree-based ML models.
(2) The task of IoT-based network attack detection confronts
challenges including dynamic variations in data distribution
and high-dimensional feature spaces. By adaptively adjusting
the covariance matrix, CMA-ES can dynamically balance
global and local search capabilities, and rapidly converge
to a robust hyperparameter configuration under constrained
computing resources. Compared with alternative methods such
as grid search and random search, CMA-ES offers distinct efficiency advantages, making it particularly suitable for
addressing the optimization requirements of large-scale IoT
datasets. (3) The inherent robustness of CMA-ES enables it to
effectively mitigate noise interference during the optimization
process, reduce the impact of local optimal traps via its
population-based evolutionary mechanism, and ensure that the
optimized hyperparameter combinations can maintain stable
detection performance across diverse scenarios. This attribute
is critical for anomaly detection systems requiring long-term
deployment in IoT environments. (4) CMA-ES enables automatic iteration and optimization without manual intervention,

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

Algorithm 2 CMA-ES Algorithm for HPO
Input: Initial hyperparameter vector θ0 , mean vector m 0 , step
size σ0 , covariance matrix C0 , max iterations T, λ, µ, weights
Wi , learning rates cσ , dσ , cc , c1 , cµ
Output: Optimized hyperparameter vector θ ∗
1: g ← 0
2: while g < T do


3: Sample λ hyperparameter vectors from N m g , σg2 , C g :

θg,1 , θg,2,.., θg,λ

4: for each θg,i in θg,1 , θg,2,.., θg,λ do
5: Train
 tree-based model θg,i and compute validation loss
f θg,i
6: end for
n
o
∗ , θ∗ , . . . , θ∗
7: Select top µ vectors θg,1
based on f (θ)
g,µ
g,2,
Pµ
∗
8: Update mean vector: m g+1 ← i=1 Wi θg,i
9: Update evolution path pσ,g+1 ← (1 − cc ) pc,g +
√
m
−m
cσ (2−cσ ) g+1σg g
 

∥p
∥
10: Update step size: σg+1 ← σg exp dcσσ E∥Nσ,g+1
−
1
(0,I )∥
11: Update cumulative evolution path: pc,g+1 ←
√
m
−m
(1 − cc ) pc,g + cc (2−cc ) g+1σg g

12: Update covariance matrix: C g+1 = 1 − c1 − cµ C g +
 ∗
T
Pµ
θg,i −m g
θ ∗ −m g
T
c1 pc,g+1 pc,g+1
+ cµ i=1 Wi g,iσg
σg
13: g ← g + 1
14: end while
15: return θ ∗ ← best θ from all iterations

thereby reducing the reliance on expert experience for hyperparameter tuning. This characteristic is particularly practical
for the customized deployment of ML models across diverse
devices and datasets in IoT scenarios, and enables rapid
adaptation to the characteristics and attack patterns of different
IoT systems.
In summary, CMA-ES has been widely applied in HPO
and various other domains, with its implementation details
provided in Algorithm 2.
Parameter Initialization: The CMA-ES algorithm samples
hyperparameter vectors
 from a multivariate Gaussian distribution N m, σ 2 , C , where m 0 ∈ Rd is the mean vector
initialized at the center of the search space or at a randomly
selected initial point. Step size σ0 regulates the range of
distribution for sampling points within the search space, with
its initial value determined through experience or based on the
dimensions of the search space. C0 ∈ Rd×d is the covariance
matrix, which is typically initialized as the identity matrix I ,
signifying the independence of hyperparameters at the outset.
 Sampling: In every generation g, λ hyperparameter vectors
θg,1 , θg,2 , . . . , θg,λ are sampled
 from the current multivariate Gaussian distribution N m g , σg2 , C g . Each sample is
obtained using
θg,i = m g + σg z g,i
(14)

where z g,i ∼ N 0, C g is sampled from a multivariate
Gaussian distribution with a mean of 0 and covariance
matrix C g .

2375

Assessment: Each sampled hyperparameter vector θg,i is
used to train the considered tree-based ML model, and the
resulting value of the loss function, f (θg,i ), which is computed
on the validation set.
Selection: The sampled hyperparameter vectors are then
arranged in ascending order based on their corresponding
loss function
vectors µ (µ < λ),
o
n values. The top-performing
∗ , θ∗ , . . . , θ∗
,
are
selected.
denoted as θg,1
g,µ
g,2
Parameter Update:
(1) Mean Vector Update
The updated mean vector m g+1 is calculated as the weighted
average of the optimal samples:
Xµ
∗
(15)
m g+1 =
Wi θg,i
i=1

where Wi P
is the weight assigned to each sample, typically
µ
satisfying i=1 Wi = 1, with weights directly proportional
to the performance (loss function value) of the samples; thus,
better-performing samples are assigned higher weights.
(2) Step Size Update
The step size is adjusted based on the evolution path,
decreasing when approaching the optimal solution and increasing otherwise. The update is performed as follows:
p
m g+1 − m g
(16)
pσ,g+1 = (1 − cσ ) pc,g + cσ (2 − cσ )
σ
!! g
pσ,g+1
cσ
σg+1 = σg ex p
−1
(17)
dσ E ∥N (0, I )∥
where cσ is the learning rate for step-size adaptation, dσ is
the step-size damping parameter, and pσ,g is the cumulative
evolution path.
(3) Covariance Matrix Update
Cumulative evolution path pc is updated as follows:
p
m g+1 − m g
pc,g+1 = (1 − cc ) pc,g + cc (2 − cc )
(18)
σg
The covariance matrix is updated as

T
C g+1 = 1 − c1 − cµ C g + c1 pc,g+1 pc,g+1
+ cµ

Xµ
i=1

Wi

∗ −m
θg,i
g

∗ −m
θg,i
g

σg

σg

!T
(19)

where c1 and cµ are the learning rates for updating the
covariance matrix.
Iteration: The iterative process proceeds until meeting termination conditions, such as reaching the maximum number of
iterations (T ), the step-size σ falling below a specified threshold (ϕ), or the change in the loss function value decreasing
below a certain threshold.
G. Automated Model Selection
HPO using CMA-ES is applied to all tree-based
ML models. Three models (Model_TOP_1, Model_TOP_2,
Model_TOP_3) with the highest F1-scores. These models are
subsequently incorporated into an ensemble framework to
develop the ultimate ADS, aiming to improve the classification accuracy for both normal and abnormal data patterns.
The reason for selecting these models is that (1) the F1

2376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 3 Stair Ensemble Algorithm
Input: Trained base models {ModelT O P_1 , ModelT O P_2 ,
ModelT O P_3 }, layers L, scoring functions
f 1 (x) ,
f 2 (x) , . . . , f L (x)
Output: Ensemble model predictions ŷ
1: Initialize O0 ←original data x
2: for l = 1 to L do
3: if l = 1 then
4: inputs←O0
5: else
6: inputs←Ol−1
7: end if
8: for each base model h l,k in layer l do
9: yl,k ←h l,k (inputs)
10: end if


11: Ol = 8l
yl,1 , yl,2 , . . . , yl,kl
12: end for
13: for each layer l do
14: ωl (x) ← P Lexp( fl (x))

TABLE I
E NVIRONMENT OF E XPERIMENTAL O PERATION

TABLE II
D ETAILS OF DATASETS

i−1 exp( f i (x))

15: end for
PL
16: ŷ = l=1
ωl (x) · Ol
17: return ŷ

the input is the original data x). The output of each base model
within the l-th layer is as follows:
ŷl,k = h l,k (Ol−1 ) k = 1, 2, . . . , K l

score combines both precision and recall, which can balance
the classification performance of the model on normal and
abnormal samples. This is particularly important for attack
detection tasks, as it requires reducing false positives (improving accuracy) and reducing false negatives (improving recall).
(2) After CMA-ES hyperparameter optimization, these three
models showed the best comprehensive classification ability on
the test set, indicating that they have stronger adaptability and
stability in feature utilization, noise suppression, and pattern
recognition. (3) Selecting multiple optimal models instead of a
single optimal model can integrate the advantages of different
models through integrated learning, increase the coverage
of diversified attack modes, reduce the generalization error
and overfitting risk of a single model, and thus improve the
robustness and accuracy of the overall system.
H. Automated Model Ensemble
A novel ensemble learning approach termed “Stair Ensemble” was used in the Auto-EAD framework. This approach
leverages adaptive weight reallocation by integrating multiple
base models in a hierarchical iterative manner to construct a
robust classifier with a staircase configuration. The technique
emphasizes hierarchical parameter tuning and adaptive weight
reallocation to augment both the detection efficacy and robustness of the model. The operational details of the proposed
automated ensemble model are delineated in Algorithm 3.
Stair ensemble restructures conventional stacking into a
staircase configuration comprising multiple layers L, with
each layer housing numerous base models. The outputs from
preceding layers is combined using adjustable weights.
The l-th
 layer (1 ≤ l ≤ L) accommodates a set of base
models h l,1 , h l,2 , . . . , h l,K l , with the input for this layer
being the output Ol−1 from the previous layer l − 1 (initially,

(20)

The interlayer connection function integrates the outputs of
all base models in this layer as the input for the next layer:


Ol = 8l ŷl,1 , ŷl,2 , . . . , ŷl,kl
(21)
An adaptive weight-reallocation mechanism is utilized to
dynamically adjust the weights of layers based on varying
data characteristics. The contribution of the output of the l-th
layer (Ol ), to the final prediction is determined by the weight
function ωl (x):
ex p ( fl (x))
ωl (x) = P L
i=1 ex p ( f i (x))

(22)

where fl (x) is a learnable scoring function, usually implemented as a neural network.
The final detection result is obtained by integrating the
outputs of all layers:
XL
ŷ =
ωl (x) · Ol
(23)
l=1

IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Experimental Environment
We employed Python 3.7 with PyTorch 1.12. as the primary
deep learning framework on high-performance computing
nodes. Essential libraries comprised Scikit-Learn for ML tools
and Hyperopt for HPO. The detailed experimental environment
is presented in Table I.
B. Datasets
Auto-EAD was evaluated on three public datasets:
SWaT [53], WADI [54] and IoT Network Intrusion [55]. The
detailed information on the datasets is provided in Table II.

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

2377

TABLE III
D ETAILS OF AUTO FE

C. Evaluation Metrics
We used Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score as
performance metrics, with computation formulas given in
Eq. (24)- Eq. (27).
Accuracy is the proportion of the number of correctly
classified samples to the total number of samples [56]:
Accuracy =

TP +TN
T P + T N + FP + FN

V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

(25)

Recall is the proportion of successfully identified positives
among all actual positives [58]:
Recall =

TP
T P + FN

(26)

The F1-score is a harmonic mean of precision and recall.
It provides a balanced assessment of a model by considering both precision and recall. The calculation formula is as
follows [59]:
F1 − scor e = 2 ×

Pr ecision × Recall
Pr ecision + Recall

After AutoFE, Tree-based ML models (Random Forest,
XGBoost, Gradient Boosting, Decision Tree, LightGBM) were
subjected to HPO using CMA-ES. Table IV presents the
optimized hyperparameters, their corresponding search spaces,
and the optimal values achieved across the three datasets.

(24)

Precision is the proportion of correctly classified samples
among the samples classified as positives [57]:
TP
Pr ecision =
T P + FP

E. HPO Configuration of the Best-Performing Learning
Models

(27)

All the above indicators range from 0 to 1, with higher
values indicating better model performance. In the formulas,
TP, FP, TN, and FN correspond to true positives, false
positives, true negatives, and false negatives.
D. Details on AutoFE
We evaluated the efficiency of the Auto-EAD framework
outlined in Section III on the SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network
Intrusion datasets. Key features essential for the training of the
Auto-EAD framework were identified through AutoDP and
AutoFE, with feature importance and correlation coefficient
thresholds set to 0.9. The outcomes of the final feature
selection process are detailed in Table III.

A. Results for the Base Model
Fig 3–5 present the results of a comprehensive evaluation
of various ML models and their optimized versions on multiple datasets. The results on the SWaT dataset indicate the
robust performance of the models, with accuracy and recall
approaching or exceeding 90% before and after optimization.
Notably, optimization led to a modest increase in these key
indicators, suggesting a limited enhancement in the detection
capabilities of the models and their ability to accurately
classify data samples. Importantly, the precision and F1-score
are stable, indicating that the overall comprehensive performance of the models did not considerably fluctuate despite
the improvements in certain metrics. The primary reason for
this observation lies in the inherent characteristics of the SWaT
dataset, specifically low noise levels, low dimensionality, and
a simple data distribution. The initial hyperparameters of
the evaluated models are close to the optimal values, which
leads to a narrow hyperparameter search space and challenges
in achieving significant performance improvements at the
sampling points. On the WADI dataset, model optimization
markedly enhanced both accuracy and precision. Additionally,
some models exhibit improved recall and F1-scores after
optimization, indicating that the optimization strategy effectively improved classification performance on this dataset.
On the IoT Network Intrusion dataset, optimization markedly
improved all performance metrics. Notably, the decision tree
classifier maintains a high level of accuracy, suggesting
that optimization substantially enhanced the overall efficacy
of the models in network anomaly detection. To address
the characteristics of high dimensionality, strong noise, and

2378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IV
HPO C ONFIGURATION OF THE B EST-P ERFORMING L EARNING M ODELS

complex distributions exhibited by the WADI dataset and the
IoT network intrusion dataset, the capability of the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) to
integrate global and local hyperparameter search was fully
leveraged. This enabled the algorithm to rapidly identify superior hyperparameter combinations and substantially enhance
model performance.
The experimental results from the three datasets (i.e., SWaT,
WADI, and IoT network intrusion datasets) indicate that the
CMA-ES optimization algorithm exerts a positive impact on
the proposed detection models. The primary reasons for this
positive impact are twofold: (1) The hyperparameters of the
tree-based anomaly detection models include both continuous
and discrete types, and CMA-ES can fulfill the optimization requirements of mixed-type hyperparameters; (2) When
confronted with dynamic variations in data distribution and
high-dimensional feature spaces within IoT environments,

CMA-ES can rapidly identify the optimal hyperparameter
configuration by adaptively adjusting the covariance matrix.
B. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
Ranked by F1-score, the top three optimized models—
LightGBM_Optimized, Random Forest_Optimized, and Gradient Boosting_Optimized were selected and integrated using
Traditional Stacking [60], Confidence-based Stacking [40],
Hybrid Stacking [61], and the proposed Stair ensemble methods. These resulted in the Auto-TS, Auto-CS, Auto-HS, and
Auto-EAD (Ours) frameworks, respectively. The rationale for
selecting traditional stacking, confidence-based stacking, and
hybrid stacking as comparative methods is to comprehensively
validate the advantages of the proposed staircase ensemble method in feature utilization, confidence calibration, and
complex boundary processing. These comparative methods
cover ensemble strategies ranging from classical to improved

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

2379

TABLE V
M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE SWaT DATASET

Fig. 3.

Performance of the base models on the SWaT dataset.

Fig. 4.

Performance of the base models on the WADI dataset.

Fig. 5. Performance of the base models on the IoT network intrusion dataset.

variants, leveraging meta-learner fusion, confidence-weighted
selection, and the integration of voting and stacking, respectively. This design ensures the comprehensiveness and fairness
of the comparative experiments.

The performance of the proposed Auto-EAD model and several state-of-the-art methods from the literature is summarized
in Table V for the SWaT dataset, Table VI for the WADI
dataset, and Table VII for the IoT Network Intrusion dataset.
First, as shown in Table V, Auto-EAD outperforms state-ofthe-art ensemble methods and all other compared methods on
the SWaT dataset, achieving 99% accuracy, 98.933% precision, 95.683% recall, and 97.236% F1-score. The Auto-EAD
model exhibits exceptional performance on the WADI dataset,
achieving an accuracy of 97.977%, a precision of 96.308%,
a recall of 86.802%, and an F1-score of 90.926%, outperforming numerous other detection models, as presented in
Table VI. At the same time, the GCN, GAT, TAGCN, FT-GCN,
and OCSVM models show generally poor performance on
the WADI dataset, suggesting their limited suitability for this
dataset or the need for further parameter optimization. Additionally, the Auto-EAD model exhibits robust performance
on the IoT Network Intrusion dataset, achieving an accuracy
of 84.345%, a precision of 85.313%, a recall of 84.998%,
and an F1-score of 84.651%, with a particular strength in
precision. The Auto-CS model shows a maximum accuracy
of 84.585%, whereas the Auto-TS and Auto-HS models
exhibit comparable performance, with accuracies ranging from
84.105% to 84.185%, suggesting the stability of the integrated
models. In contrast, the CNN3D model shows lower values
across all indicators, with an accuracy of 82.80% and an
F1-score of 81.90%, indicating the need for further performance improvement.
The proposed Auto-EAD framework outperforms the base
tree-ML models and state-of-the-art models on the SWaT,
WADI, and IoT Network Intrusion datasets. Such performance
was primarily attributed to the synergy between AutoDP,
AutoFE, HPO, and automated model ensemble modules, they
collectively enhance performance by simultaneously improving data quality, optimizing ML model architectures, and
reducing the complexity of features and models. In the context
of model ensemble, this approach leverages adaptive weight
reallocation by integrating multiple base models in a hierarchical iterative manner to construct a robust classifier with a
staircase configuration. In practical IoT environments, network
traffic datasets substantially surpass public benchmark datasets
in complexity and variability because of the complex and

2380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE VI
M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE WADI DATASET

exhibit correlations, and data streams often show concept drift.
The Auto-EAD framework, which includes components such
as AutoDP, AutoFE, Automated Base Model Learning and
HPO, Automated Model Selection, and Automated Model
Ensemble, is likely to exhibit good performance in such scenarios. These automated components contribute to enhancing
the overall anomaly detection performance, addressing the
challenges faced by traditional anomaly detection models.
When using traditional ML models, researchers often need
to manually adjust parameters based on personal experience
or changes in data streams to improve performance, which
may result in suboptimal states. In contrast, the proposed
ADS based on AutoML can automatically screen, optimize,
and integrate the best-performing ML models, making it a
promising approach with better performance than traditional
network security measures, offering an autonomous solution
for network security.
VI. C ONCLUSION

TABLE VII
M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ON THE IoT N ETWORK I NTRUSION DATASET

changeable processes, the surge in the number and types of
consumer electronics devices, and the deep integration with the
Internet. This indicates that Auto-EAD can still be optimized
and refined.
In anomaly detection, recall is of particular importance
because it directly reflects the capability of a model to
identify abnormal samples. A high recall rate means that the
model can recognize as many actual abnormal samples as
possible, which is crucial for scenarios where minimizing
false negatives (missed detections) is a top priority. The
proposed Auto-EAD framework achieved a remarkable 5.53%
improvement in recall rate on the IoT Network Intrusion
dataset. At the same time, Auto-EAD showed the highest
recall rate on the WADI dataset. Furthermore, the general
reliance on random selection or subjective experience in the
selection of ML models often leads to suboptimal anomaly
detection performance, which further highlights the advantages
of the AutoML approach. This approach systematically optimizes detection models through standardized processes such
as AutoDP, AutoFE, HPO, and automated model ensemble,
thereby effectively enhancing detection efficiency. Therefore,
the proposed AutoML-based anomaly detection framework
outperforms traditional network security solutions in detection
efficiency because of its autonomous design.
Overall, Auto-EAD showed superior performance in most
cases, primarily because of the simplicity of the benchmark
datasets and the robust performance of tree-based ML models.
In real-world IoT environments, network traffic data often

The implementation of CEN-IoT has expanded network
attack surfaces, posing notable challenges for autonomous
system security. This paper introduces an Auto-EAD framework for the CEN-IoT, incorporating modules such as AutoDP,
AutoFE, automated base model learning and HPO, automated model selection, and automated model ensemble. This
framework aims to provide an autonomous cybersecurity
solution for next-generation CEN-IoT systems. Auto-EAD
exhibited superior performance on three prominent cybersecurity benchmark datasets—SWaT, WADI, and IoT Network
Intrusion—achieving F1-scores of 97.236%, 90.926%, and
84.651%, respectively, and outperforming state-of-the-art
anomaly detection models. This indicates the effectiveness
of the proposed framework in providing autonomous network
security for CEN-IoT systems or consumer electronic devices.
In future studies, we plan to further optimize each module,
with particular emphasis on refining the HPO algorithm. This
will enhance the detection accuracy and precision, maintain
computational efficiency, and address the ever-evolving nature
of unknown network attack behaviors.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Qin et al., “A partially labeled anomaly data detection approach based
on prioritized deep reinforcement learning for consumer electronics
security,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 6452–6462,
Nov. 2024.
[2] X. Li et al., “Physical-layer authentication for ambient backscatter-aided
NOMA symbiotic systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 4,
pp. 2288–2303, Apr. 2023.
[3] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series
anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric consumer applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3,
pp. 5419–5431, Aug. 2024.
[4] M. Wen et al., “A survey on spatial modulation in emerging wireless
systems: Research progresses and applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1949–1972, Sep. 2019.
[5] J. Li et al., “Composite multiple-mode orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing with index modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3748–3761, Jun. 2023.
[6] W. Shang, L. Ding, X. Yang, Z. Gu, and H. Sui, “Complicated
imbalanced and overlapped data oversampling approach via hypersphere
coverage and adaptive differential evolution for anomaly detection of
industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 10,
pp. 14002–14015, May 2025.

DING et al.: Auto-EAD: AN AUTOMATED ENSEMBLE ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR THE CEN-IoT

[7] X. Li et al., “Hardware impaired ambient backscatter NOMA systems: Reliability and security,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 2723–2736, Apr. 2021.
[8] M. Rodríguez, D. P. Tobón, and D. Múnera, “A framework for anomaly
classification in industrial Internet of Things systems,” Internet Things,
vol. 29, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 101446.
[9] L. Xiangyu, L. Tianliang, D. Yanhui, and W. Jingxiang, “Lightweight
IoT intrusion detection method based on feature selection,” Netinfo
Secur., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 66–72, 2023.
[10] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
Nov. 2023.
[11] V. Chang et al., “A survey on intrusion detection systems for fog and
cloud computing,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 3, p. 89, Mar. 2022.
[12] X. Li et al., “Covert communication of STAR-RIS aided NOMA
networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 9055–9060,
Jun. 2024.
[13] M. Wen, E. Basar, Q. Li, B. Zheng, and M. Zhang, “Multiple-mode
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing with index modulation,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 3892–3906, Sep. 2017.
[14] W. Kehe, C. Rui, J. Xiaochen, and Z. Jiyu, “Security protection scheme
of power IoT based on SDP,” Netinfo Secur., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 32–38,
2022.
[15] Y. Abudurexiti, G. Han, F. Zhang, and L. Liu, “An explainable unsupervised anomaly detection framework for industrial Internet of Things,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 148, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 104130.
[16] M. Raeiszadeh, A. Ebrahimzadeh, R. H. Glitho, J. Eker, and
R. A. F. Mini, “Real-time adaptive anomaly detection in industrial IoT
environments,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 6,
pp. 6839–6856, Dec. 2024.
[17] B. Ahmad, Z. Wu, Y. Huang, and S. U. Rehman, “Enhancing the
security in IoT and IIoT networks: An intrusion detection scheme leveraging deep transfer learning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 305, Dec. 2024,
Art. no. 112614.
[18] A. Liuliakov, L. Hermes, and B. Hammer, “AutoML technologies for
the identification of sparse classification and outlier detection models,”
Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 133, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109942.
[19] Y. Li, D. Zha, P. Venugopal, N. Zou, and X. Hu, “PyODDS: An end-toend outlier detection system with automated machine learning,” in Proc.
Companion Web Conf., 2020, pp. 153–157.
[20] M. Bahri, F. Salutari, A. Putina, and M. Sozio, “AutoML: State of the art
with a focus on anomaly detection, challenges, and research directions,”
Int. J. Data Sci. Anal., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 113–126, Aug. 2022.
[21] L. Zheng, D. Wu, S. Xu, and Y. Zheng, “HTCSigNet: A hybrid
transformer and convolution signature network for offline signature
verification,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 159, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 111146.
[22] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised
anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023.
[23] W. Xiong, P. Wang, X. Sun, and J. Wang, “SiET: Spatial information
enhanced transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection,”
Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 296, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111928.
[24] L. Sukhostat, “Anomaly detection in industrial control system based on
the hierarchical hidden Markov model,” in Cybersecurity for Critical
Infrastructure Protection via Reflection of Industrial Control Systems;.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2022, pp. 48–55.
[25] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly
detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025.
[26] Z. Gu et al., “AnomalyGPT: Detecting industrial anomalies using large
vision-language models,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38,
no. 3, pp. 1932–1940.
[27] C. Wu, S. Shao, C. Tunc, P. Satam, and S. Hariri, “An explainable
and efficient deep learning framework for video anomaly detection,”
Cluster Comput., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2715–2737, Aug. 2022, doi:
10.1007/s10586-021-03439-5.
[28] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection
system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[29] M. S. Ansari, V. Bartoš, and B. Lee, “GRU-based deep learning approach
for network intrusion alert prediction,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 128, pp. 235–247, Mar. 2022.

2381

[30] R. Sharma et al., “X hacking: The threat of misguided AutoML,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.08513.
[31] Z. Li, C. Huang, and W. Qiu, “An intrusion detection method combining
variational auto-encoder and generative adversarial networks,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 253, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 110724.
[32] K. Swathi and G. H. Bindu, “An automated intrusion detection system in
IoT system using attention based deep bidirectional sparse auto encoder
model,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 305, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 112633.
[33] M. Baratchi et al., “Automated machine learning: Past, present and
future,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 57, no. 5, p. 122, Apr. 2024.
[34] C. Xue, M. Hu, X. Huang, and C.-G. Li, “Automated search space
and search strategy selection for AutoML,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 124,
Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108474.
[35] M. Wever, A. Tornede, F. Mohr, and E. Hüllermeier, “AutoML for multilabel classification: Overview and empirical evaluation,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 3037–3054, Sep. 2021.
[36] L. Zimmer, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter, “Auto-pytorch: Multi-fidelity
metalearning for efficient and robust AutoDL,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 3079–3090, Sep. 2021.
[37] G. Baudart et al., “Pipeline combinators for gradual automl,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 19705–19718.
[38] M. Feurer et al., “Auto-Sklearn 2.0: Hands-free automl via metalearning,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 23, no. 261, pp. 1–61, 2022.
[39] X. Chen and B. Wujek, “A unified framework for automatic distributed
active learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 9774–9786, Dec. 2022.
[40] L. Yang and A. Shami, “Towards autonomous cybersecurity: An intelligent AutoML framework for autonomous intrusion detection,” in Proc.
Workshop Auto. Cybersecurity, Nov. 2023, pp. 68–78.
[41] D. Vasan, E. J. S. Alqahtani, M. Hammoudeh, and A. F. Ahmed, “An
AutoML-based security defender for industrial control systems,” Int. J.
Crit. Infrastruct. Protection, vol. 47, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 100718.
[42] W. Ma, L. Ma, K. Li, and J. Guo, “Few-shot IoT attack detection based
on SSDSAE and adaptive loss weighted meta residual network,” Inf.
Fusion, vol. 98, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 101853.
[43] M. Kotlar, M. Punt, Z. Radivojevic, M. Cvetanovic, and V. Milutinovic,
“Novel meta-features for automated machine learning model selection in
anomaly detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 89675–89687, 2021, doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3090936.
[44] P. Singh and J. Vanschoren, “Meta-learning for unsupervised outlier
detection with optimal transport,” 2022, arXiv:2211.00372.
[45] H. Rao et al., “Feature selection based on artificial bee colony and gradient boosting decision tree,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 74, pp. 634–642,
Jan. 2019.
[46] P. Jia et al., “Erase: Benchmarking feature selection methods for deep
recommender systems,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Apr. 2024, pp. 5194–5205.
[47] L. Yang, “Towards zero touch networks: Cross-layer automated security
solutions for 6G wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73,
no. 9, pp. 7650–7679, Sep. 2025.
[48] C. Zhang, D. Jia, L. Wang, W. Wang, F. Liu, and A. Yang, “Comparative
research on network intrusion detection methods based on machine
learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102861.
[49] G. Mohiuddin et al., “Intrusion detection using hybridized meta-heuristic
techniques with weighted XGBoost classifier,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 232, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 120596.
[50] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDS: A bagging-based gradient
boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 119030.
[51] J. Liu, Y. Gao, and F. Hu, “A fast network intrusion detection system
using adaptive synthetic oversampling and LightGBM,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102289.
[52] M. Nomura et al., “Warm starting CMA-ES for hyperparameter optimization,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 9188–9196.
[53] D. Zhang, “PdGAT-ID: An intrusion detection method for industrial
control systems based on periodic extraction and spatiotemporal graph
attention,” Comput. Secur., vol. 149, May 2025, Art. no. 104210.
[54] K. Wolsing et al., “Deployment challenges of industrial intrusion
detection systems,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. Comput. Secur. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 453–473.
[55] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.

2382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

[56] K. Albulayhi, A. A. Smadi, F. T. Sheldon, and R. K. Abercrombie,
“IoT intrusion detection taxonomy, reference architecture, and analyses,”
Sensors, vol. 21, no. 19, p. 6432, Sep. 2021.
[57] W. Aljabri, M. A. Hamid, and R. Mosli, “Lightweight and adaptive
data-driven intrusion detection system for autonomous vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 2282–2292, Feb. 2025.
[58] S. Oh, S. Oh, T.-W. Um, J. Kim, and Y.-A. Jung, “Methods of preclustering and generating time series images for detecting anomalies
in electric power usage data,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 20, p. 3315,
Oct. 2022.
[59] A. Gorshenin, A. Kozlovskaya, S. Gorbunov, and I. Kochetkova,
“Mobile network traffic analysis based on probability-informed
machine learning approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 247, Jun. 2024,
Art. no. 110433.
[60] Z. Wang, M. Zheng, and P. X. Liu, “A novel classification method based
on stacking ensemble for imbalanced problems,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[61] J. Yao, Z. Wang, L. Wang, M. Liu, H. Jiang, and Y. Chen, “Novel
hybrid ensemble credit scoring model with stacking-based noise detection and weight assignment,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 198, Jul. 2022,
Art. no. 116913.
[62] D. Nedeljkovic and Z. Jakovljevic, “CNN based method for the development of cyber-attacks detection algorithms in industrial control systems,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 114, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102585.
[63] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in
industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
Jul. 2022.
[64] S. P. Priyanga, K. Krithivasan, S. Pravinraj, and V. S. S. Sriram,
“Detection of cyberattacks in industrial control systems using enhanced
principal component analysis and hypergraph-based convolution neural
network (EPCA-HG-CNN),” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 4394–4404, Jul. 2020.
[65] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[66] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–
temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, Jan. 2023.
[67] J. Du, S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. M. F. Moura, and S. Kar, “Topology adaptive
graph convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10370.
[68] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection
in label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
[69] S. Lyu, K. Wang, L. Zhang, and B. Wang, “Process-oriented heterogeneous graph learning in GNN-based ICS anomalous pattern recognition,”
Pattern Recognit., vol. 141, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 109661.
[70] I. Ullah and Q. H. Mahmoud, “Design and development of a deep
learning-based model for anomaly detection in IoT networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 103906–103926, 2021.

Lei Ding was born in Tianjin, China, in 1995. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
security with the School of Cyberspace Security, Guangzhou University, Guangdong, China. His
research focuses on include industrial control system
information security, computational intelligence, and
machine learning.

Wenli Shang was born in Heilongjiang, China,
in 1974. He received the M.S. degree from the
School of Mechanical and Automation Engineering,
Northeastern University, in 2002, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Laboratory of Industrial Control Network and System, Shenyang Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2005.
He is a Professor at Guangzhou University. His
research interests include computational intelligence
and machine learning, edge computing, and industrial control system information security.

Shuang Wang (Member, IEEE) was born in Heilongjiang, China, in 1986. She received the M.S.
degree from the School of Computer Application Specialty, Civil Aviation University of China,
in 2013, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree. She is an Assistant Researcher with the
Institute of Science, Technology and Innovation,
Civil Aviation University of China. Her research
interests include privacy, information security, and
machine learning.

Haoran Gao was born in Shaanxi, China, in 1996.
He received the M.S. degree from the School of
Electronic Information, Xijing University, in 2024.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Cyber Security, Guangzhou University,
Guangdong, China. His research focuses on deep
learning, computer vision, and backdoor attacks.

Lianhai Wang (Member, IEEE) received the M.E.
degree in computer software and theory and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2003 and
2014, respectively. He is currently a Research Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center
(National Supercomputer Center in Jinan) and the
School of Cyber Security, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Science), Jinan. His
current research interests include the areas of information security, digital forensics, and blockchain.