960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

BAPTISM: A Robust Framework for Encrypted
Malicious Traffic Identification With
Low-Quality Training Data
Xiang Luo , Chang Liu , Gang Xiong , Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li, Junzheng Shi, Li Guo, and Binxing Fang

Abstract—Machine learning (ML) is highly effective for
accurate encrypted malicious traffic identification by using highquality training data. In fact, obtaining such data is costly and
challenging. As a result, many ML-based models are inevitably
trained on low-quality data and perform poorly. To enhance
performance, some methods utilize various sample selection techniques to choose confident samples for model training. However,
they often rely on a single metric for this selection, which restricts
their adaptability across diverse datasets and noise conditions.
In this paper, we propose a robust framework BAPTISM for
identifying encrypted malicious traffic with low-quality training
data. Particularly, BAPTISM selects a suitable base model for
each task, and trains it with early stopping to generate traffic
representation before overfitting occurs. Then, we devise an
adaptive metric selection strategy to select confident samples. By
employing two metrics (JSD and CSD) to assess the characteristic
of traffic representation from distinct perspectives, we find the
more proper metric for each class and apply it for confident
sample selection. According to the confident samples and selected
metric for each class, we develop a label correction tactic which
adapts to class nature to improve the quality of training data.
Finally, we employ parallel training strategy to train the base
model with the corrected data, further mitigating the impact of
low-quality data. We conduct experiments across three real-world
malicious traffic datasets with various noise settings. The results
demonstrate that BAPTISM is compatible with different base
models and outperforms across noise ratios ranging from 20%
to 90%. Meanwhile, BAPTISM consistently selects the confident
samples with the highest purity and volume under each setting.
Index Terms—Encrypted malicious traffic, noisy label, low
quality data, intrusion detection, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ALICIOUS network traffic has been implicated in
numerous security incidents [1], such as data breaches
and extortion, underscoring the critical need for effective identification methods. Moreover, Zscaler indicates that

M

Received 23 March 2025; revised 19 September 2025; accepted
16 December 2025. Date of publication 24 December 2025; date of current
version 14 January 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62402492. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Li Lu. (Corresponding author: Chang Liu.)
Xiang Luo, Chang Liu, Gang Xiong, Gaopeng Gou, Zhen Li, Junzheng
Shi, and Li Guo are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China (e-mail: luoxiang@iie.ac.cn; liuchang@iie.ac.cn; xionggang@iie.ac.cn;
gougaopeng@iie.ac.cn; lizhen@iie.ac.cn; shijunzheng@iie.ac.cn; guoli@iie.
ac.cn).
Binxing Fang is with Hainan Province Fang Binxing Academician
Workstation, Hainan 571924, China (e-mail: fangbx@cae.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3648170

approximately 87% of cyber threats are now delivered over
encrypted channels in 2024 [2], seriously challenging the
conventional methods based on plaintext payload analysis
[3]. To address this issue, contemporary research has pivoted
toward machine learning (ML) techniques that leverage behavioral characteristics and side-channel information to develop
effective identification models by supervised-learning [4], [5],
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
However, all the mentioned ML-based methods rely on
high-quality training data. For clarity, in this paper, datasets
with fully accurate labels are termed high-quality data, and
samples with correct labels are termed clean samples. Conversely, datasets containing mislabeled samples (also referred
to as noisy samples) are considered low-quality data. In
practice, ensuring label correctness in malicious traffic datasets
presents significant challenges. Active annotation methods,
which rely on expert knowledge, not only incur high manual costs but also heavily depend on the experts’ personal
interpretation of the data. Moreover, attackers continuously
employ techniques such as encryption and obfuscation to
conceal network traffic characteristics, further complicating
accurate dataset annotation. On the other hand, passive
annotation methods, which leverage host-based forensic logs
and external threat intelligence feeds (e.g., IP blacklists),
become less reliable over time due to the constantly evolving
nature of cyber-attacks. Therefore, regardless of the annotation
method employed, noisy samples inevitably arise. As a result,
ML-based methods are inevitably trained on low-quality data,
leading to performance degradation.
To tackle the issue of low-quality training data, various
approaches have been proposed. The core idea behind these
methods is to first select a subset of samples with highly
reliable labels (referred to as confident samples) based on
their designed separation metric, or subsequently leverage
these samples to improve the overall label quality of the
dataset before model training. Therefore, these methods can be
divided into confidence-based methods [16], [17], [18], [19]
and feature-based methods [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]
based on their separation metrics. Confidence-based methods
focus on the local patterns, whereas feature-based methods
consider the global patterns of latent features. Nevertheless,
existing methods still face several common issues: (1) These
methods are dependent on specific model architectures and
cannot be easily adjusted for different identification tasks. (2)
These methods typically rely solely on a fixed metric for

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

confident sample selection without evaluating its suitability.
(3) These methods results in a limited number of confident
samples being available for model training, which adversely
affects the efficiency.
In this paper, we introduce a novel framework BAPTISM
for encrypted malicious traffic identification with low-quality
training data. BAPTISM operates independently of specific
model architectures, allowing for choosing an appropriate base
model for each task. It consists of four coupled components.
First, we implement early representation by using the base
model trained with early stopping, generating traffic representation before overfitting on noisy samples. Second, we
propose an adaptive metric selection strategy for confident
sample selection in each class instead of using single metric.
In particular, we utilize both Jensen-Shannon Divergence
(JSD) and Confidence Sample Distance (CSD) to evaluate
traffic representation nature jointly. We assess the separation
performance of these two metrics by analyzing the mean and
variance of JSD values between sample clusters for each class,
then select the more suitable one and apply for confident
sample selection. Third, we conduct label correction tailored to
the confident samples and the selected metric for each class,
thereby improving the label quality of the training data. In
addition to utilizing a centroid-based correction approach, we
develop a KNN-based correction method specifically designed
for traffic classes where JSD is used for selecting confident
samples, better accommodating their loose distribution in
latent space. Fourth, we apply parallel training to train a
the base model with the corrected data, further reducing the
impact of noisy samples. We initialize two base models with
different parameters and train them simultaneously. During
each training epoch, we dynamically select low-loss samples
and mutually update each other’s parameters. We finally select
the better-performing one for identification.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a novel framework BAPTISM for identifying encrypted malicious traffic using low-quality training
datasets. BAPTISM is independent of specific model
architectures and adapts to different base models for each
task. Moreover, it integrates early stopping and parallel
training strategies to mitigate the impact of noisy samples.
• We propose an adaptive metric selection strategy for
confident sample selection instead of using only one
metric. We assess the separation performance of JSD and
the CSD by analyzing the characteristics of the divided
clusters, which enables us to select the more proper metric
for each class and effectively filter confident samples.
• We introduce a label correction tactic tailored to the
selected metrics and confident samples to improve dataset
quality. We establish varying label correction strategies
based on the reliability of the centroids of the confident
samples, including directly using the nearest centroid’s
class or seeking additional nearby confident samples.
• We evaluate BAPTISM against various comparison methods on different datasets with various noise ratios.
The results show that BAPTISM adapts to different
base models and outperforms across all experimental settings. Additionally, it effectively selects confident

961

samples with optimal purity and volume across various
settings.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the related work on encrypted malicious traffic
identification. Section III clarifies the problem description.
Section V presents our proposed BAPTISM framework. Section VI reports experimental results and analysis. Section IX
discusses the false positives. Section X gives the conclusion.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Traditional Encrypted Malicious Traffic Identification
Encrypted malicious traffic hides the plaintext payload,
preventing identification via traditional methods like Deep
Packet Inspection (DPI) [3]. To solve this problem, a series of
methods have been developed, most of them share a similar
design that profiles the behavior of encrypted traffic via manual
feature engineering or automatic feature extraction and builds
a ML-based classifier. For example, Rong et al. [9] propose an
ensemble learning-based framework MalFinder for malicious
traffic detection. They utilize statistical features and sequence
features to describe the traffic while expanding the dimensions
of these two types of features to enhance their capability
for representing traffic data. Fu et al. [11] propose Whisper
that utilizes the sequential information of network traffic
represented by the frequency domain features to achieves high
detection accuracy.
With the development of deep learning technology,
Wang et al. [12] propose a novel intrusion detection system
HAST-IDS, which first learns the low-level spatial features
of network traffic using deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and then learns high-level temporal features using
long short-term memory networks (LSTM). Cai et al. [14]
propose BiTCN MHSA, which utilizes the multi-head selfattention mechanism to assign different weights to different
subsequence of network traffic. This makes the model more
focus on the characteristics of malicious network traffic. Hong
et al. [15] propose MalDiscovery which constructs an attribute
KNN graph according to the similarity of network traffic features to identify malicious traffic. To improve model stability
and generalization across different network environments and
time periods, Han et al. [26] propose an encrypted malicious
traffic detection approach that combines reconstructive domain
adaptation with adversarial hybrid neural networks, achieving
effective cross-domain detection in 5G environments.
The effectiveness of these methods relies on the correctness
of the labels. Thus, the performance of these methods will be
seriously affected by the low-quality training data.
B. Encrypted Malicious Traffic Identification Under
Low-Quality Training Data
Inaccurate labels undermines the training of encrypted
malicious traffic identification models, resulting in biased
distribution learning. Consequently, numerous research efforts
are directed towards addressing low-quality data by selecting
a subset of confident samples for model training. Based on the
way to select confident samples, they can be categorized into
two types: confidence-based and feature-based methods.

962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON E NCRYPTED M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION

Confidence-based methods address the noisy label problem
by analyzing the confidence scores of model predictions to
identify confident samples. For example, Wang et al. [16]
propose a consensus algorithm combined with a set of classifiers to filter noisy labeled traffic data. Furthermore, they
improve the performance of noise elimination by estimating
the reliability of the remaining training data before it builds
a robust traffic classifier [17]. On the other hand, MMCo
[18] and CMC [19] leverage multi modal information in
heterogeneous networks to detect malicious traffic with noisy
labels. During training, they identify samples on which the
two networks make divergent predictions, as these samples
are considered more informative. Only these high-information
samples are used for updating model parameters, thereby
enhancing the model’s robustness to noisy samples.
Feature-based methods comprehensively analyze the distribution of latent features to select confident samples. For
instance, ULDC [20] uses unsupervised neural networks to
map samples to a low-dimensional space and the difference of
these low-dimensional embeddings to evaluate the confidence
of each sample. Yuan et al. propose BoAu [21], which alleviates the effect of noisy samples by encouraging the projections
of hard samples to move closer to the decision center while
increasing the inter-cluster distance during training. Building on this idea, they further introduce MCRe [22], which
incorporates three different levels of constraints to achieve
robust feature representation and enhance resilience to noisy
samples. In addition, Yao et al. propose Gedss [23], which
employs a JSD-based sample selection strategy combined with
a semi-supervised learning approach to improve model performance in the presence of noisy labels. They further develop
a novel two-stage framework for malicious traffic detection
[24], which introduces a double-constrained similarity rule to
provide a more comprehensive measure of similarity between
small-loss samples. Additionally, their method constructs a
topological graph to refine low-quality training data, further
improving detection robustness. Meanwhile, RAPIER [25] is
developed to fully utilize the different distribution of normal
and malicious traffic data in the feature space to augment new
data for model training in the case that the amount of training
data is limited and non-negligible noisy samples exist.
We compare the aforementioned methods with BAPTISM
across different functional aspects, including Noise Handling
(whether the method can address noisy samples), Sample

Selection (whether the method can filter confident samples),
Label Correction (whether the method can correct sample
labels), Fine-grained Identification (whether the method can
perform fine-grained identification of malicious traffic), and
Model Agnostic (whether the method is independent of specific model architectures). The summary results are shown
in Table I. For methods that do not address noisy samples
[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], their performance is
significantly impacted by low-quality training data. While
other comparative methods [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25] do address noisy samples, they fail to
comprehensively cover sample selection, label correction, and
fine-grained identification. Moreover, they are dependent on
specific model architectures, which limits their applicability.
III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION
In this section, we formalize the problem of identifying
malicious traffic using low-quality training data. Consider a
Ntrain
malicious traffic dataset Dtrain = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1
used for training,
D
where xi ∈ R represents the i-th malicious network flow, and
ŷi ∈ {1, · · · , C} is the observed label associated with xi . For
each xi , there exists a single latent true label, denoted as yi ,
which may or may not be consistent with the observed label ŷi .
To clarify, we define network flows with correct labels (yi = ŷi )
as clean samples, while those with incorrect labels (yi , ŷi )
are referred to as noisy samples.
Our goal is to train a model for the identification of
encrypted malicious traffic using Dtrain that contain noisy
samples. The model will then be evaluated on a test dataset
Ntest
Dtest = {xi }i=1
to assess its ability to accurately detect
malicious traffic.
IV. P RELIMINARY A NALYSIS
To motivate our proposed method, we first conduct a
preliminary study to examine whether confident-based metric and distribution-based metrics, which are two types of
common metric have been used to select confident samples
introduced in Section II. Confident-based metrics (such as
Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) and Cross Entropy Loss
(CE Loss)) capture local differences, while feature-based
metric (such as distance to class centroid) reflect global
relationships.
We compare two representative baselines: CMC [19], which
selects confident samples solely based on CE loss, and MCRe

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

963

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF CMC AND MCR E ON S ELECTING C ONFIDENT S AMPLES U NDER N OISE R ATIO OF 40%

Fig. 1. The overall workflow of BAPTISM. In this figure, Confidence represents the confidence-based metrics, Feature metric represents the feature-based
metric, and GMM represents Gaussian Mixture Model.

[22], which relies exclusively on the distance to the class
centroid. To evaluate their effectiveness in confident sample
selection, we report three metrics: Precision, the proportion of
clean samples among the selected ones; Recall, the proportion
of clean samples correctly selected within each class; and
F1, the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall. Experiments
are conducted on the Malicious TLS, CICIDS-2017, and
DoHBrw2020 datasets with a noise ratio of 40%. The results,
summarized in Table II, demonstrate the sample selection
performance of CMC and MCRe for representative malicious
traffic classes across different datasets.
The results reveal that the effectiveness of the two methods varies by class. From the perspective of the overall
F1 score, CMC achieves clearly better results on certain
classes such as Caphaw.A None TLS CC and DoS Hulk,
whereas MCRe performs notably better on classes such as
Panda.BZA!tr None TLS CC and Bot. This observation
highlights the complementarity of the two metrics. Looking at
the individual metrics, CMC generally yields higher Precision,
indicating that the samples it selects tend to have higher purity.
In contrast, MCRe achieves higher Recall in several cases,
suggesting that it is able to retain a larger fraction of clean
samples within each class.
In summary, these results demonstrate that confidence-based
and feature-based selection strategies emphasize different
aspects of the data, providing complementary strengths.

V. M ETHODOLOGY
In this paper, we propose a robust framework BAPTISM to
address the problem of low-quality training data in encrypted
malicious traffic identification. It consists of four components
as shown in Figure 1. The early representation component
uses the appropriate base model trained with early stopping
to generate traffic representation. Next, the confident sample
selection component evaluates the characteristic of traffic
representation based on bi-metrics and selects the more proper
one to filter confident samples. Then, the label correction component improves the label quality of training data by applying
correction tactic tailored to the confident samples and selected
metric of each class. Finally, the parallel training component
trains the base model with the corrected data. We introduce
each component in detail in the following subsections.
A. Early Representation
Early representation component aims at selecting the appropriate base model F for each identification task and use
it to generate the traffic representation for each sample in
Dtrain before overfitting occurs with noisy samples. Guided by
empirical evidence suggesting that neural networks prioritize
learning clean patterns before memorizing noisy samples [27],
we implement early stopping during training the base model
with cross-entropy (CE) loss to prevent overfitting on noisy

964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

JSD produced by base model F on sample xi is defined as:




1
pi + ŷi
1
pi + ŷi
+ KL ŷi k
(1)
JSD(xi ) = KL pi k
2
2
2
2
where KL(·k·) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and ŷi
represents the one-hot encoded observed label.
CSD quantifies the similarity between a sample and its
observed class centroid. For each class c, we establish its
confident feature centroid oc by averaging feature vectors of
confident samples:
Fig. 2. Cross-Entropy (CE) loss distribution for noisy and clean samples
when training the base model for different epochs on Malicious TLS dataset
with a noise ratio of 0.4. (a) Stop at epoch 10; (b) Stop at epoch 50; (c) Stop
at epoch 100.

samples. Using the Malicious TLS dataset as an example,
Figure 2 illustrates how early stopping prevents overfitting to
noisy samples at a noise ratio of 0.4. At epoch 10, there is a
clear difference in CE loss between noisy and clean samples.
As training progresses to epoch 50, the model increasingly
adapts to the noisy samples, and the density of clean samples
with low loss decreases. By epoch 100, some noisy samples
have a lower CE loss than clean samples, indicating that the
model has learned incorrect patterns.
To this end, we restrict the training to a minimal number of
initial epochs, typically ranging from 10 to 20 epochs. This
ensures that F preliminarily extracts traffic representation from
each sample with correct patterns.
B. Confident Sample Selection
Based on traffic representation, we select confident samples
from each class in this component. This process is conducted
in two stages. In the first stage, we evaluate the characteristics
of traffic representations from two perspectives: the confidence
of the model predictions and the feature distribution of the
samples, and divide samples per class into two clusters based
on these evaluations. In the second stage, we individually
assess the effectiveness of each perspective in separating clean
and noisy samples, and select the most suitable one to filter
confident samples.
Stage 1: bi-metric evaluation. We utilize JSD and CSD
metrics to evaluate the traffic representation as they are
complementary [28]: JSD is calculated based on prediction
scores, which represent local characteristics, whereas CSD
considers the distribution of traffic representation, reflecting
global properties. By jointly utilizing both metrics, we are
able to address the limitation of relying on only one metric,
ensuring a more effective evaluation of traffic representation
from distinct perspective.
To compute these two metrics, we first partition the training
dataset Dtrain into class-specific subsets Dc = {(x, ŷ)|ŷc = c}
for each class c, where c = 1, · · · , C, based on the observed
labels. For each instance (xi , ŷi ) within Dc , we utilize our
trained base model F to obtain both the traffic representation
vector f i and the corresponding probability distribution pi =
[p1i , p2i , · · · , pCi ]. Here, pij denotes the predicted probability
that the instance belongs to class j.

|DcH |
1 X
ˇ
ˇ
f i,
oc =
ˇD H ˇ
c

˚
DcH = xi |xi ∈ Dc , pci > τc

(2)

i=1

where τc serves as the adaptive threshold computed through:
|Dc |
1 X
wi × pci , wi = max(1, pci /pcc )
(3)
|Dc | i=1
P
Here, pcc = |D1c | x∈Dc pci represents the mean confidence
for class c. The weighting scheme wi prioritizes samples with
above-average confidence to enhance cluster purity. During
training, both centroids oc and confident sample set DcH are
dynamically updated alongside model parameters.
Finally, the CSD metric for xi is computed as

τc =

CSD(xi ) = cos( f i , oŷi ) =

fi T oŷi
f i oŷi

(4)

This metric measures the cosine similarity between f i and oŷi .
After calculating JSD and CSD for all samples, we employ
a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to divide the samples in
Dc into two clusters based on these two metrics, respectively,
for each class c in the training data. For example, based on
1
JSD, the samples in Dc can be divided into two clusters: C JS
Dc
2
and C JS Dc . Similarly, based on CSD, the samples in Dc can
1
2
be divided into CCS
Dc and CCS Dc . For both C JS D and CCS D , we
assume that cluster 1 corresponds to the cluster with the larger
mean value, while cluster 2 corresponds to the cluster with the
smaller mean value.
Stage 2: metric and sample selection. Based on the separation results of JSD and CSD, we evaluate their performance
and select the more suitable metric to filter confident samples.
We can simplify this problem by determining whether JSD
is the proper metric to separate clean samples from noisy
samples. To achieve this, we compute the mean and variance
1
2
of the JSD values within the two clusters CCS
Dc and CCS Dc .
Specifically, µ1 and σ1 represent the mean and variance of JSD
1
values for samples in CCS
Dc , while µ2 and σ2 represent those
2
1
for samples in CCS Dc . Generally, the cluster CCS
Dc consists of
samples with high similarity of feature centroids oc , which
contains a higher proportion of clean samples, leading to a
2
lower mean JSD µ1 . Conversely, CCS
Dc may include more
noisy samples, resulting in a higher mean JSD µ2 . We present
different conditions of proper metric selection in Figure 3 and
provide a detailed illustration:
(1) Condition 1: JSD is the proper metric. If σ1 < σ2 and
µ1 < d < µ2 where d is the separation threshold between
1
2
C JS
Dc and C JS Dc , this indicates the presence of potential clean
2
samples in CCS
Dc , which increases the standard deviation of

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

965

Fig. 3. Conditions of proper metric selection correspond to sample distribution.

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Metric Selection Strategy
Require: Sample set Dc , initial model F
1: Obtain pi and f i for each sample xi in Dc .
2: Compute JSD and CSD value for each sample xi in Dc .
1
2
3: Obtain C JS
Dc , C JS Dc and separation threshold d by applying GMM with values of JSD to all samples in Dc .
1
2
4: Obtain CCS
Dc , CCS Dc by applying GMM with values of
CSD to all samples in Dc .
5: Calculate the mean µ1 , µ2 , and standard variance σ1 , σ2
1
2
of JSD for CCS
Dc and CCS Dc .
6: if σ1 < σ2 and µ1 ≤ d ≤ µ2 then
2
1
2
7:
Cc1 ← C JS
Dc , Cc ← C JS Dc
8: else if µ1 ≥ d and µ2 ≥ d then
1
2
2
9:
Cc1 ← C JS
Dc , Cc ← C JS Dc
10: else
1
2
2
11:
Cc1 ← CCS
Dc , Cc ← CCS Dc
12: end if
13: return Cc1 , Cc2

JSD within this cluster. In this case, JSD should be used for
sample partitioning. In addition, if both µ1 > d and µ2 >
d, it suggests that both clusters contain relatively few clean
samples, further supporting the use of JSD.‘
(2) Condition 2: CSD is the proper metric. Conversely,
1
if σ1 ≥ σ2 and µ1 < d < µ2 , this suggests that CCS
Dc
contains a significant proportion of potential clean samples,
and partitioning should be based on CSD. Lastly, if µ1 < d
and µ2 < d, JSD-based partitioning may result in the loss of
clean samples, making CSD the preferred criterion.
The overall decision process for confident sample selection
is summarized in Algorithm 1. After determining the metric,
we obtain two sample clusters, Cc1 and Cc2 . If class c is
separated by JSD, Cc2 is selected as the cleaner cluster, denoted
as Dcconf . Otherwise, Cc1 is selected as Dcconf instead.
C. Label Correction
After obtaining the confident sample set Dcconf for each
traffic class c, we utilize them to relabel the entire dataset
to improve label quality. For the remaining samples x in

Fig. 4. Motivation for label correction adapted to confident samples and
selected metrics for each class.

Dtrain , we first compute their distances to the confident feature
centroids oc of each class and identify the closest class c x .
We show the motivation of our label correction tactic in
Figure 4. In case 1 of Figure 4, Class 1 and Class 2 utilize the
CSD metric to select confident samples, resulting in compact
distributions in latent space. Consequently, the centroids of
these samples effectively represent the data distributions of
their respective classes. In contrast, Class 3 employs the JSD
metric for selecting confident samples, leading to a more
dispersed sample distribution and thus, a less reliable centroid.
For instance, as shown in case 2 of Figure 4, although
Sample 1 is closest to the centroid of Class 3, there are few
actual confident samples from Class 3 in its vicinity. Instead,
it is surrounded by numerous confident samples from Class 1,
prompting us to correct its label to Class 1. On the other hand,
Sample 2 is closest to the centroid of Class 3 and is indeed
surrounded by a significant number of confident samples from
Class 3, validating the use of Class 3 for its label correction.
Based on the above motivation, we present a detailed
label correction process as follows. As depicted in case 1 of
Figure 4, if the confident samples of class c x are selected
based on metric CSD, it indicates that the feature centroid

966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Algorithm 2 Parallel Training
Require: Two base neural networks F1 , F2 with parameters
N
θ1 , θ2 ; training data Dtrain = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1
; learning rate η;
batch size Bs ; remember rate function λ(e)
1: for e in (1, . . ., epochs) do
2:
Shuffle Dtrain and divide into mini-batches
3:
for n in (1, . . ., t) do
Bs
4:
Fetch n-th mini-batch B = {(xi , ŷi )}i=1
5:
Compute per-sample losses:
6:
`1 = Lce (B; F1 )
7:
`2 = Lce (B; F2 )
8:
Select small-loss samples:
9:
B1 ← top bλ(e)Bs c samples with smallest `1
10:
B2 ← top bλ(e)Bs c samples with smallest `2
11:
Update parameters using opposite model’s selection:
12:
θ1 ← θ1 − η∇θ1 Lce (B2 ; F1 )
13:
θ2 ← θ2 − η∇θ2 Lce (B1 ; F2 )
14:
end for
15: end for
16: return θ1 , θ2

of c x effectively represents the distribution of network flows.
Consequently, the centroid is reliable and we directly reassign
the label of x to c x . Conversely, if the confident samples of
class c are selected based on metric JSD, the feature centroid
of this class may not be sufficiently reliable. As shown in
case 2 of Figure 4, we instead search for the top-k confident
samples in the entire confident samples that are closest to x in
feature space. We then assign x the most frequently occurring
class among these top-k samples. If two classes appear with
equal frequency, we calculate the average distance from x to
the confident samples of these two classes and assign x to the
class with the smaller average distance.

D. Parallel Training
Using the corrected dataset, we employ parallel training
to further mitigate the impact of noisy labels by utilizing a
dual-model architecture. This means two distinct base models,
which are initialized with the same architecture but different
parameters, are trained simultaneously. In the training phase,
both models receive the same input samples and generates
corresponding predictions. This setup enables the models to
learn from the same data from different perspectives. Each
network updates its peer using a subset of small-loss samples
(i.e., those with the lowest prediction losses), which effectively
prioritizes clean samples early in training and mitigates the
influence of noisy labels.
The parallel training process is formally described in
Algorithm 2. Let the two base models be denoted as F1
and F2 . During training, both models make predictions on
all samples in each mini-batch B s and select those with
low prediction loss for model updates. Parameter λ is used
to control the ratio of samples for model updates, and this
parameter is decreased monotonically with epoch in the range
of [0.5, 0.9]. We utilize the cross-entropy loss Lce to evaluate

prediction loss which is defined as
|B|

Lce (B; F) = −

C


1 XX
ŷi,c log F(xi ; θ)c
|B|

(5)

i=1 c=1

where F(xi ; θ)c is the predicted probability of class c from
network F for the input sample xi , and ŷi,c is the corresponding
observed label yi on class c. Finally, we evaluate the identification performance of both models on the corrected data and
select the better one as the final model.
VI. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: We use the following datasets for evaluation:
• CICIDS-2017 [29] is a widely-used intrusion detection
dataset that records the network traffic generated by
hundreds of hosts in an internal network and includes the
most common attacks such as Web based, Brute force,
DoS, DDoS, Infiltration, Bot and Scan.
• Malicious TLS [21] is a encrypted malicious traffic
dataset which contains traffic generated by 22 families
of malicious code active between 2018 and 2021. In
addition, benign TLS traffic is also contained in this
dataset. All of this traffic was collected from a real
network and was encrypted by TLS.
• DoHBrw2020 [30] includes normal and malicious DNSover-HTTPS (DoH) encrypted traffic. The normal traffic
is generated by querying benign DNS servers using the
DoH protocol, including Cloudflare and Google. The
malicious DoH traffic is generated by three different DNS
tunneling tools including dns2tcp, DNSCat2, and Iodine.
2) Noise Settings: We adopt symmetrical noise settings
to create different experimental scenarios, where malicious
traffic can be mislabeled as benign while benign traffic can be
mislabeled as malicious as well. The quality of labels depends
entirely on the capacity of entities and results in different ratios
of noise labels. In short, in symmetric noise scenarios, all
traffic labels have a certain probability of flipping.
3) Implementation: We implement our identification system and all baseline methods using Python 3.8.13. The
libraries used include NumPy 1.22.3, PyTorch 1.12.0, scikitlearn 1.1.1, and CUDA 11.8. The models are executed on a
R XeonO
R Silver 4110
Linux server equipped with an IntelO
CPU (2.10GHz) and a Tesla V100-PCIE-32GB GPU. We
provide a detailed description of the choice of the base model
and its parameters in Appendix A. For base model training,
the training duration are set at 10 epochs for Malicious TLS
and CICIDS-2017 to avoid overfitting, while the DoHBrw2020
dataset undergoes a longer, 20 epochs training to accommodate
its complex features. d is set to 0.5 in confident sample
selection. k is set as 10 during label correction. Following
the experimental setup in [22], each testing dataset is split in
a 7:3 ratio. Labels of certain samples in the training set are
intentionally flipped and used as input for BAPTISM during
training. Meanwhile, the test set is strictly held out from
training and does not contain noisy labels, serving exclusively
for model evaluation. To ensure robustness, all experiments are
conducted five times with independently randomized training

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

and testing splits, and the final results are reported as the
average over these five runs. During the parallel training phase,
the number of training epochs is set to 200.
4) Comparison Methods: We compare the performance of
BAPTISMs with the following relevant methods.
• Co-Teaching [27] utilizes dual neural networks to address
low quality training data. Each network selects what it
considers the most reliable data samples from each batch
and shares them with its peer during training.
• Co-Learning [31] uses multiple learners to handle noisy
samples. Each model trains on a subset of the data and
shares high confidence predictions with others, which
helps improve accuracy and resistance to noisy samples
by leveraging diverse learner strengths.
• Co-teaching+ [32] extends the Co-Teaching method by
introducing a disagreement-based sample selection mechanism, allowing two networks to collaboratively learn
from clean samples while reducing the negative impact
of noisy samples, thereby improving model robustness.
• DivideMix [33] models the per-sample loss distribution
with a Gaussian Mixture Model to distinguish clean
and noisy labels, and leverages semi-supervised learning
with MixMatch-based label refinement and augmentation,
achieving strong robustness against high noise ratios
while enhancing model generalization.
• BoAu [21] is a boundary-augmentation based approach
for malicious traffic identification. It uses all samples
involved in decision space construction and decision
boundary calculation, enabling the model to maintain a
high noise tolerance.
• MMCo [18] is a multi-modal co-training approach for
malicious traffic detection with noisy labels. It exploits
multiple modalities of traffic data and employs parallel,
heterogeneous networks to leverage complementary information. By maintaining sufficient disagreement between
the networks during training, MMCo mitigates the risk of
self-confirmation on noisy samples.
• CMC [19] is a noisy malicious traffic detection method
based on cross-modal representation consistency. It introduces a consistency constraint between different modal
representations to guide confident sample selection.
By enforcing agreement across modalities, the method
reduces the risk of overfitting to noisy labels and improves
the purity of selected samples.
• MCRe [22] unifies data cleaning and robust training into
an ideal representation function approximation. It defines
three constraints to let model avoids irrational domain
knowledge extraction and ensures strong noisy samples
robustness of the representation network.
• RAPIER [25] leverage the difference in distribution
between benign and malicious traffic data to find the
potential clean samples and estimate the possible location
of each type of data. To enable a more comprehensive
comparison with existing methods, we have extended
this approach to support multi-class classification. This
extension involves performing density analysis and sample selection separately for each class of malicious
traffic. The confident samples obtained from each class

967

are then aggregated for label correction and model
training.
B. Evaluation Metrics
We employ precision (PRE), recall (RE), F1 score (F1), and
Macro Accuracy to evaluate the performance of each method.
Suppose the training dataset contains C classes of traffic. Let
T Pi , T Ni , FPi , and FNi respectively denote the true positives,
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives for the ith
traffic class (i ∈ {1, · · · , C}). For each class i, precision, recall,
and F1 score are calculated as
T Pi
T Pi
, REi =
PREi =
T Pi + FPi
T Pi + FNi
2 × Precisioni × Recalli
F1i =
Precisioni + Recalli
To mitigate the effects of class imbalance, we employ weighted
averages for precision, recall, and F1 score for evaluation
by weighting each per-class metric according to the class’s
support and normalizing by the total sample size.
Macro Accuracy is obtained by averaging the accuracy of
each class, where the per-class accuracy is calculated by
T Pi + T Ni
T Pi + T Ni + FPi + FNi
This metric ensures that equal importance is allocated to each
class of malicious traffic, facilitating a balanced evaluation of
model performance.
Accuracyi =

C. Comparison Experiment
We systematically present the precision and recall of all
comparison methods under varying noise ratio conditions,
spanning from 20% to 90%, in Table III. Additionally, we
illustrate the F1-score and macro-accuracy respectively in
Figures 5 and Figure 6. Here, noise ratio is defined as the
proportion of mislabeled samples in all training samples. This
comprehensive evaluation yields several key observations:
(1) BAPTISM exhibits superior performance across
all evaluation datasets and noise ratios, demonstrating
adaptability to different tasks and experimental settings.
In Table III, BAPTISM achieves the best precision and recall
across various datasets and noise ratio settings. Additionally,
the method that performs second best varies under different
settings, indicating that BAPTISM is robust to various settings.
This sustained performance advantage can be attributed to the
well-conceived overall design of BAPTISM, where each component contributes to mitigating the impact of noisy samples.
(2) The model-agnostic property of BAPTISM enhances
its scalability and adaptability across various identification
scenarios. The three datasets we employ represent different
scenarios: the Malicious TLS dataset primarily focuses on
the communication behaviors of malware; the CICIDS-2017
dataset concentrates on flood attacks; and the DoHBrw dataset
represents a more challenging tunnel communication scenario.
To accommodate these varied contexts, we adopt different
base models for each scenario as mentioned in Appendix A,
and achieves the best results across all three datasets. This
demonstrates the generalizability of BAPTISM in diverse

968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE III
T HE P RECISION (PRE) AND R ECALL (RE) OF A LL M ETHODS ON T HREE E VALUATION DATASETS U NDER VARIOUS N OISE R ATIOS (NR)

Fig. 5. The F1 Score of all methods under different noise ratios on three evaluation datasets.

identification scenarios. Moreover, as evidenced in Table III
and Figure 5, the performance of comparative methods across
different identification scenarios is impacted by their dependence on specific model architectures. For instance, BoAu and
MCRe utilize the MLP-based networks, they perform well on
the Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. However, they
falter on the more complex DoHBrw dataset, where the MMCo
and CMC surpasses them as they employ more sophisticated
CNN and LSTM network to represent traffic.
(3) The label correction strategy of BAPTISM significantly enhances the quality of training data, thereby
improving the model’s performance. Although methods
such as Co-teaching, Co-learning, MMCo, and CMC also
employ similar parallel training approaches, they struggle to
effectively mitigate the impact of noisy samples when the noise
ratio exceeds 40%, as shown in Figure 5. Furthermore, the
Co-teaching and Co-learning methods even totally lose their
identification ability as the noise ratio increases. In contrast,
BAPTISM conducts label correction before parallel training,
which significantly enhances the quality of the dataset. Consequently, this results in a model with superior identification
performance following parallel training across all settings.

(4) BAPTISM exhibits exceptional performance in identifying each class of malicious traffic by employing adaptive
metric selection strategy for confident sample selection.
As depicted in Figure 5, across three datasets, BAPTISM
experiences a minimal F1 score degradation of only 0.05 as the
noise ratio increases from 20% to 90%, demonstrating greater
stability compared to other methods. Moreover, it consistently
outperforms in terms of macro accuracy under various noise
conditions as shown in Figure 6. Other methods, such as
MCRe, MMCo, and CMC, rely on a single metric to select
confident samples and maintain relatively stable F1 scores;
however, their macro accuracy experiences a notable decline as
noise ratios increase. Such a limitation highlights their reduced
adaptability to class-specific characteristics.
(5) Compared to RAPIER, BAPTISM effectively utilizes
the limited label information available in low-quality data
to achieve superior performance. RAPIER trains an unsupervised model on packet length sequences labeled as benign
within the training dataset to explore the differences between
benign and malicious traffic in latent space and to identify
confident samples. However, this unsupervised approach not
only overlooks the residual effective label information in

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

969

TABLE IV
T HE A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS ON M ACRO ACCURACY ON T HREE E VAL UATION DATASETS U NDER VARIOUS N OISE R ATIOS (NR)

D. Ablation Study

Fig. 6. The Macro Accuracy of all methods under different noise ratios on
three evaluation datasets.

the training data but is also inherently limited to binary
classification, necessitating further extension to accommodate
multi-class scenarios. Moreover, the unsupervised mechanism struggles to capture complex encrypted communication
patterns, as malware often mimics normal encrypted communication behaviors. Consequently, it becomes increasingly
ineffective in our experimental setup, particularly under elevated noise conditions, and has difficulty obtaining relatively
pure confident samples. As a result, since the label correction
module of RAPIER relies on the quality of confident samples,
its performance is significantly affected when the quality of
these samples is subpar, as shown in Table III and Figure 5.

To demonstrate the effectiveness of each component in
BAPTISM, we perform three separate ablation analysis experiments. The comparison models are used as follows: (1) Full
component of BAPTISM (Full); (2) without parallel training
(w/o PT); (3) without label correction (w/o LC); (4) without
metric selection and only use CSD to filter clean samples (w/o
JSD); (5) without metric selection and only use JSD to filter
clean samples (w/o CSD). Figure 7 shows the F1 score of
ablation study on three evaluation datasets under each noise
ratio settings, while Table IV shows the corresponding macro
accuracy results. We can draw the following conclusions:
(1) BAPTISM with the full components outperforms other
comparison models under all experimental settings, showing
the soundness of our proposed framework. When we remove
any other component of BAPTISM, the F1 decreases range
from 0.05 to 0.25 and the macro accuracy decreases range
from 0.014 to 0.058. This indicates the synergy of adaptive
metric selection, label correction, and parallel training, which
collectively enhance the model’s ability to accurately identify
malicious traffic despite the presence of noisy samples.
(2) From the results of BAPTISM without Parallel Training,
we observe that this training strategy further mitigate the
impact of noise samples. When the parallel training component
is removed, the F1 score experiences a decrease ranging from
0.1 to 0.5, while macro accuracy decreases from 0.02 to
0.25. This performance degradation can be attributed to the
effectiveness of using low-loss samples for model updates, as
the corrected dataset still contains a certain number of noisy
samples which will be discussed in section VI-E.
(3) Excluding Label Correction component results in a performance degradation, highlighting a performance bottleneck
when relying solely on the parallel training to address noisy
samples. This underscores the importance of the volume of
confident samples. Although utilizing parallel training can

970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 7. The F1 scores of all methods for ablation study under different noise ratios on three evaluation datasets.

partially mitigate the impact of low-quality data, there remains
a macro accuracy gap ranging from 0.037 to 0.152 compared
to the full model, as shown in Table IV. Moreover, this
performance gap widens as the noise ratio increases, further
emphasizing the importance of this component.
(4) The adaptive metric selection strategy is crucial for
enhancing the model’s robustness. As shown in Table IV,
whether using JSD alone or CSD alone, the model’s macro
accuracy decreases, as each metric has varying effectiveness
in selecting confident samples for different classes of malicious
traffic. This demonstrates the need for metric selection, which
allows for more suitable metric to be chosen for filtering
confident samples, thereby improving the overall performance
of the model. Furthermore, the results in Figure 7 illustrates
that the model performance fluctuates and lacks stability.
E. Performance on Confident Sample Selection
To further analyze the performance advantages of BAPTISM, we also evaluate its effectiveness in confident sample
selection and label correction. Among the comparison methods considered, MMCo, CMC, and RAPIER incorporate a
confident sample selection mechanism. Specifically, MMCo
and CMC utilize these selected samples to update the model,
whereas RAPIER and our proposed method leverage confident
samples to refine the labels of the entire dataset.
We first demonstrate the advantages of BAPTISM in confident sample selection. As shown in Figure 8, BAPTISM
consistently outperforms all compared methods by selecting
a greater number of clean samples while containing fewer
noisy samples. This results in a significant advantage in both
the quantity and purity of the selected confident samples.
Specifically, when the noise ratio ranges from 20% to 70%,
over 90% of the samples selected by BAPTISM are truly clean.
Even when the noise ratio exceeds 70%, although the number
of noisy samples within the selected confident set increases,
the number of clean samples remains substantially higher than
that of all comparison methods.
In contrast, the RAPIER method achieves moderate confident sample purity when the noise ratio is below 40%,
but it selects fewer clean samples compared to BAPTISM.
Moreover, across different datasets and noise settings, RAPIER
consistently includes a considerable number of noisy samples
in its selected samples, and this issue becomes more severe
as the noise ratio increases. Meanwhile, MMCo and CMC
achieve relatively high overall purity in confident sample selection. Compared to RAPIER, these two methods include fewer

Fig. 8. The purity of confident samples obtained by all comparison methods
under different noise ratio settings.

noisy samples in their selected confident samples, thereby
reducing their negative impact on model training. However,
they select far fewer confident samples than BAPTISM,
leading to insufficient training and suboptimal performance.
This performance gap is particularly pronounced in macro
accuracy, as certain malicious traffic classes inherently have
fewer samples, and excessive filtering further reduces their
representation.
Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 8, the sample purity of
both MMCo and CMC decreases significantly when the noise
ratio exceeds 70%. This demonstrates that in high noise ratio
settings, the performance of sample selection strategies based
on low loss is limited, which substantially impacts the model
update stage due to the influence of noisy labels, thereby
degrading overall model performance. Conversely, BAPTISM
utilizes an adaptive metric selection strategy that still manages
to obtain a sufficient number of confident samples with higher
purity even in scenarios with high noise ratios. This capability
underpins the superior performance of our framework. Regarding the RAPIER method, it employs a density-based sample
selection strategy, which is particularly suitable for flood attack

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

971

Fig. 9. The correct label ratios after label correction under different noise ratio settings.

scenarios. As evidenced in the CICIDS-2017 dataset, it performs best in sample selection, aligning with its characteristics.
However, RAPIER’s performance deteriorates when dealing with more complex encrypted communication behavior
data. This decline is notably apparent in the Malicious TLS
dataset, where it almost fails at a noise ratio of 90%.
F. Performance on Label Correction
We further evaluate the model’s performance in label
correction to demonstrate each model’s capability to refine
low-quality training data. We conduct a comparative evaluation
of BAPTISM and RAPIER, as other comparison methods do
not include this process. Given a low-quality training dataset,
we apply each method to correct the labels and compute the
proportion of correctly labeled samples in the refined dataset.
The label noise correction results are shown in Figure 9.
BAPTISM significantly reduces the original noise ratio to
lower levels. Across all noise settings, BAPTISM consistently increases the ratio of correct labels to over 80% on
Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. On DoHBrw2020
dataset, BAPTISM improves the ratio of correct labels by 2%
to 34%. These experimental results demonstrate the robust
adaptability of our proposed labeling strategy across diverse
datasets and varying noise settings. In contrast, RAPIER
exhibit a significant decline in label correction performance as
the noise ratio increase. On Malicious TLS dataset, RAPIER
almost lose their ability to correct training dataset.
The factors leading to performance differences between
these methods can be attributed to two main aspects: On the
one hand, both BAPTISM and RAPIER rely on the quality
of confident samples. As observed from the results in the
previous chapter, when the noise ratio exceeds 60%, the
confident samples selected by RAPIER contain a significant
amount of noisy samples as shown in Figure 8, which greatly
impacts their purity. This is the fundamental reason for the
notable performance gap between RAPIER and BAPTISM
after subsequent label correction phases. On the other hand,
regarding label correction strategies, RAPIER trains a series of
ML models on the selected confident samples and employs a
voting mechanism for data label correction. The effectiveness
of this step depends on the purity of the confident samples
obtained in the previous step. Since the ML models they
used do not specifically address noisy samples, their decisionmaking results are biased against the actual data distribution,
leading directly to poor outcomes in label correction.
We further elucidate the limitations of using machine
learning methods to correct labels. As depicted in Figure 8,
RAPIER selects confident samples with relatively high purity

when the noise ratio is below 60%. However, as shown
across various datasets in Figure 9, there is a noticeable
discrepancy between the purity of the confident samples and
their purity after label correction. This indicates that even a
lower proportion of noisy labels can be detrimental to the performance of machine learning algorithms. With higher noise
ratios, the accuracy of RAPIER’s label correction sharply
declines, nearly rendering the label correction capability ineffective. Moreover, RAPIER almost fails in the case of the
Malicious TLS dataset when the noise ratio exceeds 80%,
due to the challenging nature of extracting encrypted communication characteristics. While RAPIER’s design primarily
relies on analyzing network flow density to detect malicious
activity, which is suitable for flood attacks, it lacks sufficient
capability to mine communication characteristics, resulting in
sub-optimal performance.
VII. H YPER -PARAMETER S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS
A. Sensitivity to the Threshold d in Confident Sample
Selection
We investigated the sensitivity of our framework to the
threshold parameter d used in confident sample selection.
Intuitively, a larger value of d corresponds to selecting more
samples as confident, while a smaller value enforces a stricter
criterion and results in fewer selected samples. To analyze
its effect, we evaluated three representative settings, d =
0.25, 0.5, 0.75, across multiple datasets and noise ratios, with
adopted as the default configuration in our framework.
The results are summarized in Fig. 10. Across the three
settings of d, the overall performance differences remain small,
with the maximum variation in F1 not exceeding 0.15. This
observation shows that the framework is reasonably robust
to the choice of d within the range of [0.25, 0.75]. A closer
inspection reveals several trends. When the noise ratio is below
50%, setting d = 0.75 sometimes achieves higher performance,
as a larger threshold allows more clean samples to be utilized
for training. However, as the noise ratio increases, the performance of d = 0.75 degrades more rapidly, reflecting the
higher risk of including noisy samples. On the other hand,
d = 0.25 enforces stricter purity by reducing the number of
confident samples, but this conservative strategy often leads to
suboptimal results, highlighting that the quantity of confident
samples is also crucial for robust training.
B. Sensitivity to the Number of Neighbors k in Label
Correction
we further evaluated k in [1, 5, 10, 15, 20] on all evaluation
datasets. As summarized in Fig 11, the overall performance

972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 10. The F1 score of different d in confident sample selection.

Fig. 11. The F1 score of different k in label correction.

of our method remains stable across the range k = 5 ∼ 20,
suggesting that the framework is not highly sensitive to the
exact value of k.
The only consistent degradation appears when k = 1. In this
case, the model relies on a single neighbor as the reference,
which makes the estimation unstable and more vulnerable to
noisy samples. By contrast, when more neighbors are considered (e.g., k ≥ 5), the reference distribution becomes smoother
and more representative, leading to reliable label correction.
Beyond k = 10, no persistent significant improvements were
observed, indicating that moderately small values of k are
sufficient in practice. This analysis demonstrates that our
approach is robust to a wide range of k, and practitioners can
select k within a reasonable interval (e.g., 5 ∼ 20) without
significant performance variation.
VIII. T HE C OMPLEXITY OF BAPTISM
In this section, we analyze the complexity of BAPTISM.
Let N be the total number of training samples, C the number
of classes, D the feature dimension of each sample, |θF | the
parameter count of the base modelPF, nc the number of
confident samples in class c, Mconf = Cc=1 nc the total number
of confident samples, R the number of samples to be relabeled
(worst-case R = N), α ∈ [0, 1] the fraction of samples that
trigger the fallback, E the number of training epochs, and
Bs the mini-batch size. The computational cost of BAPTISM
mainly arises from three components.
A. Confident Sample Selection
First, computing the feature vectors fi and predicted probabilities pi for all N samples via F requires O(N |θF |). Next,
evaluating the JSD against one-hot labels over C classes costs
O(NC). Constructing class centroids and computing the CSD
over D-dimensional features costs O(ND). For each class,
fitting a 2-component Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) on the

JSD and CSD scores using T EM EM iterations costs O(T EM N)
in total. Finally, computing means and variances of JSD within
the two CSD clusters and applying the selection rules is
linear in the class size, O(N). Summing all contributions,
the overall time complexity of confident
sample selection

is O N(|θF | + max{C, D} + T EM ) . The peak memory is
dominated by storing features (N × D), predicted probabilities
(N×C), and class centroids (C×D):S peak = O(ND+NC+CD).
B. Label Correction
Given the features and centroids already computed, assigning each sample to its nearest class centroid costs O(RCD). For
the αR samples whose predicted class relies on the fallback
mechanism, performing top-k voting over the confident sample
pool via naive search costs O(αRMconf D). Therefore, the
overall time complexity is O(RD(C + αMconf )), which in the
worst case becomes O(N 2 D). The peak memory is dominated
by storing the feature matrix (O(ND)), centroids (O(CD)), and
the confident sample pool (O(Mconf D)).
C. Parallel Training
The time complexity of Parallel Training is dominated
by the forward and backward passes of both base models,
giving O(E · N · |θF |), where E is the number of epochs.
Operations such as mini-batch shuffling and top-k sample
selection are negligible compared to gradient computations.
The peak memory usage is O(|θF | + Bs · D), accounting for the
model parameters and a single mini-batch of feature vectors.
In summary, the total
 time complexity of BAPTISM can
be approximated as O N(|θF | + max{C, D} + T EM ) + RD(C +

αMconf ) + EN |θF | , with peak memory usage of O(ND +
NC + CD + Mconf D + Bs D + |θF |). In practice, the dominant
runtime cost comes from the forward and backward passes
during Parallel Training, which scales linearly with the number
of training samples and model parameters.

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

973

TABLE V
T HE PARAMETERS OF THE BASE M ODEL FOR D IFFERENT I DENTIFICATION TASK

Fig. 12. Confusion matrix of BAPTISM on the Malicious TLS dataset
with a noise ratio of 40%. In this figure, the numbers 2 and 3 correspond
to Caphaw.AH and Caphaw.A, while 8 and 9 represent Panda.BZA!tr and
PandaZeusCC. We have marked the severe cases of misclassification with red
boxes.

Fig. 13. Full confusion matrix of BAPTISM on Malicious TLS Dataset with
noise ratio of 0.4, where the numbers 2 and 3 correspond to Caphaw.AH and
Caphaw.A, while 8 and 9 represent Panda.BZA!tr and PandaZeusCC.

IX. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we further discuss the limitations of our
method. First, we conduct a more detailed analysis of the
identification performance of each method. We find that all
methods trained on low-quality training datasets struggle to
accurately identify malicious traffic classes that belong to the
same family. We illustrate this issue by examining the identification performance of each method on the Malicious TLS
dataset, which comprises 22 classes of malicious traffic,
under the noise ratio of 40%. Among these, Caphaw.AH and
Caphaw.A belong to the Caphaw family, while Panda.BZA!tr
and PandaZeusCC are part of the Panda family. Figure 12
displays the confusion matrices for these four classes of
malicious traffic for each compared method. Additionally, we
present the performance of BAPTISM across all classes in
Appendix B to better highlight the difficulty of distinguishing
between malicious traffic from the same family.
As demonstrated in Figure 12, although BAPTISM generates a relatively high number of false positives between
these classes, it remains the optimal choice compared to
other methods. This is because the alternative approaches
consistently misclassify entire class as other classes. For
instance, methods such as BoAu and RAPIER predominantly
misclassify both Panda.BZA!tr and PandaZeusCC, erroneously
categorizing them as other classes. Similarly, MCRe tends to
completely misclassify the classes Caphaw.AH and Caphaw.A.
Other comparative methods fail to differentiate accurately

between these scenarios, demonstrating a common inability
to distinguish these specific classes.
The inability of existing methods to accurately identify
these traffic classes stems from the inherent code reuse among
malware variants within the same family, which results in
similar traffic patterns and complicates differentiation, particularly when noisy samples are present. This phenomenon
underscores the limitations of current methods in effectively
identifying such closely related variants. To address this issue,
one potential approach is to initially group these similar
variants into broader families, facilitating more robust classification and analysis. Alternatively, incorporating additional
expert knowledge could enhance the model’s ability to differentiate between these closely related classes. Further research
is warranted to develop techniques that can effectively mitigate
the impact of code reuse and improve the discrimination of
malware variants within the same family.
Second, it is worth noting that there exist cases where
neither the confidence-based metric (JSD) nor the featurebased metric (CSD) can clearly separate the samples. This
phenomenon is particularly evident in the DoHBrw2020
dataset. Even with a relatively low noise ratio of 20%, the
model’s performance remains lower compared to the other two
datasets. The main reason lies in the intrinsic characteristics
of DoH traffic: it is inherently obfuscated and stealthily
encapsulated, which increases the difficulty of distinguishing

974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

certain classes. Consequently, both JSD and CSD metrics
may fail to provide a clear separation, leading to potential
misclassifications. This observation highlights that the fallback
behavior of the framework is not a limitation of our approach
but rather reflects the inherent challenges posed by certain
types of network traffic.
X. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a robust framework, BAPTISM, to
identify encrypted malicious traffic using low-quality training
data. This framework is independent of model architecture and
adaptable to various settings. Specifically, we implement early
representation for training data by training an appropriate base
model with early stopping to generate traffic representation.
Instead of relying on single metric, we employ bi-metric,
JSD and CSD, to analyze traffic representation characteristics
from distinct perspectives. We then design an adaptive metric
selection strategy to identify the more proper metric for each
class, applying it to select confident samples. Based on the
confident samples and selected metric for each class of traffic,
we perform label correction adapt to class nature to improve
the quality of training data. Additionally, we implement a
parallel training strategy to train the base model with the
corrected data, thus mitigating the impact of remaining noisy
samples. Experimental results demonstrate that BAPTISM
can adapt to different base models and surpass others under
various noise ratio settings. Furthermore, it consistently selects
confident samples with the highest purity and volume across
different experimental settings.
A PPENDIX A
PARAMETERS OF BASE M ODELS
Referring to the previous research [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], we employ a MLP as the base model for identification
tasks on the Malicious TLS and CICIDS-2017 datasets. For
DoHBrw2020 dataset, we utilize a CNN as the base model.
We provide the detailed list of parameters for base models
used in BAPTISM in Table V, where ‘input dim’ denotes
the dimensionality of the original features in the dataset, while
‘num class’ indicates the number of classes included in the
dataset.
A PPENDIX B
F ULL R ESULT OF C ONFUSION M ATRIX OF BAPTISM
ON M ALICIOUS TLS DATASET
We present a full confusion matrix from BAPTISM on the
Malicious TLS dataset under noise ratio of 0.4 to illustrate
the sources of false positives, as shown in the Figure 13.
As mentioned in the Discussion section, the false positives
generated by BAPTISM primarily arise from traffic classes
which belongs to the same family. In contrast, false positives
are significantly less frequent for other classes of malicious
traffic. This indicates that BAPTISM can effectively capture
the distinct patterns between different classes of malicious
traffic under low-quality training data. However, for classes
belonging to the same family, additional information is needed
for effective identification.

R EFERENCES
[1]

(Jan. 2024). Malicious Traffic Detection: A Guide for Businesses.
Accessed: Mar. 8, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://no7-svip.urlapidodo.me/s?t=b2b8fab84d31c1111e759d6a8c76675f
[2] Zscaler. Threatlabz-Encrypted-Attacks-Report. Accessed: Jan. 5, 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://www.zscaler.com/campaign/threatlabzencrypted-attacks-report
[3] R. T. El-Maghraby, N. M. A. Elazim, and A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, “A survey
on deep packet inspection,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Eng. Syst.
(ICCES), Dec. 2017, pp. 188–197.
[4] P. Prasse, L. Machlica, T. Pevný, J. Havelka, and T. Scheffer, “Malware
detection by analysing encrypted network traffic with neural networks,”
in Proc. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discovery Databases, Eur. Conf., Skopje,
Macedonia, Sep. 2017, pp. 73–88.
[5] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
[6] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[7] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
Defenses, Oct. 2022, pp. 495–509.
[8] Z. Wang and V. L. L. Thing, “Feature mining for encrypted malicious traffic detection with deep learning and other machine learning
algorithms,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103143.
[9] C. Rong, G. Gou, M. Cui, G. Xiong, Z. Li, and L. Guo, “MalFinder:
An ensemble learning-based framework for malicious traffic detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2020, p. 7.
[10] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[11] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[12] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
[13] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq:
A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
2023.
[14] S. Cai, H. Xu, M. Liu, Z. Chen, and G. Zhang, “A malicious network
traffic detection model based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
network with multi-head self-attention mechanism,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 136, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103580.
[15] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
[16] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Luo, and D. Xia, “Robust traffic
classification with mislabelled training samples,” in Proc. IEEE 21st
Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst. (ICPADS), Dec. 2015, pp. 328–335.
[17] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noiseresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019.
[18] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, and Y. Wang, “MMCo: Using multimodal
deep learning to detect malicious traffic with noisy labels,” Frontiers
Comput. Sci., vol. 18, no. 1, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 181809.
[19] Q. Yuan, W. Niu, Y. Wang, G. Gou, and B. Lu, “Malicious traffic
detection with noise labels based on cross-modal consistency,” IEEE
Netw. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 148–151, Jun. 2024.
[20] Q. Yuan et al., “ULDC: Unsupervised learning-based data cleaning
for malicious traffic with high noise,” Comput. J., vol. 67, no. 3,
pp. 976–987, Apr. 2024.
[21] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based
on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, Aug. 2023, Art.
no. 103300.
[22] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe:
A unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels
based on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024.
[23] L. Yao, A. Hou, W. Niu, Q. Yuan, J. He, and Y. Zhang, “Gedss: A
generic framework to enhance model robustness for intrusion detection
on noisy data,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat.
Work Design (CSCWD), May 2024, pp. 1645–1650.

LUO et al.: BAPTISM: A ROBUST FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED MALICIOUS TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

[24] L. Yao, W. Niu, Q. Yuan, B. Li, Y. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “A robust
malicious traffic detection framework with low-quality labeled data,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2024, pp. 2719–2724.
[25] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for
detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2024.
[26] G. Han, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Ma, and T. Yang, “AI-based malicious
encrypted traffic detection in 5G data collection and secure sharing,”
Electronics, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 51, Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/1/51
[27] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks
with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 31, 2018, pp. 8527–8537.
[28] Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, B. Han, Y.-M. Cheung, and H. Wang, “Label-noise
learning with intrinsically long-tailed data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 1369–1378.
[29] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, May 2018.
[30] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari,
“Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton.
Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf.
Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
(DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Jun. 2020, pp. 63–70.
[31] C. Tan, J. Xia, L. Wu, and S. Z. Li, “Co-learning: Learning from noisy
labels with self-supervision,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
Oct. 2021, pp. 1405–1413.
[32] X. Yu, B. Han, J. Yao, G. Niu, I. W. Tsang, and M. Sugiyama, “How does
disagreement help generalization against label corruption?,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 7164–7173.
[33] J. Li, S. C. H. Hoi, and R. Socher, “DivideMix: Learning with noisy
labels as semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJgExaVtwr
Xiang Luo received the B.S. degree from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in
2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
network traffic analysis and intrusion detection.

Chang Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2020.
She is currently a Senior Engineer with the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. Her research interests include network
traffic analysis and information security.

Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and the
Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has
authored more than 110 papers in refereed journals
and conference proceedings. His research interests
include cyber security, network measurement, network traffic analysis, and network forensics.

975

Gaopeng Gou received the B.Eng., M.Eng., and
Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University, China, in
2005, 2008, and 2014, respectively. He is currently
a Full Professor and the Ph.D. Supervisor with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, China. His research interests
include network security and anomaly detection.

Zhen Li received the B.Eng. degree from
Shandong University, China, in 2009, the M.S.
degree from the Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, in 2012, and
the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2020.
His research interests include encrypted network
behavior analysis and network measurement.

Junzheng Shi received the M.Eng. degree from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2021.
He is currently a Senior Researcher with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, China. His research interests include
network measurement and behavior analysis.

Li Guo is currently a Full Professor and the Ph.D.
Supervisor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. She
is also the Director of the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her
research interests include data stream management
systems and data mining.

Binxing Fang received the M.Eng. degree from
Tsinghua University, China, in 1984, and the Ph.D.
degree from Harbin Institute of Technology, China,
in 1989. He is currently a member of Chinese
Academy of Engineering and the Chief Scientist of
China Electronics Corporation. His research interests
include network attack and defense, cyber security,
and cloud computing security.