IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

6059

Blockchain Anomaly Transaction Detection Method
Based on Graph Continual Learning
Xiaodong Shen , Chang Xu , and Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The rapid growth of blockchain has increased exposure to threats such as phishing, Ponzi schemes, and money laundering, making anomaly detection essential for maintaining platform
security. Traditional rule-based methods and static machine learning models often fall short against evolving attack strategies, while
existing graph neural network (GNN) approaches, though effective
in modeling transaction graphs, require costly retraining and suffer
from catastrophic forgetting when new anomalies emerge. These
challenges highlight the need for adaptive detection techniques that
can evolve alongside adversarial behaviors while preserving knowledge of previously observed patterns. To address this problem, this
paper introduces a graph-based continual learning approach for
blockchain anomaly detection. The proposed framework incorporates a topology-aware weight preservation module that captures
local structural dependencies and stabilizes critical parameters
during training. By explicitly modeling topological importance,
the method balances knowledge retention and new task adaptation, thereby mitigating catastrophic forgetting. In addition, the
framework is designed for modular compatibility with different
GNN backbones, requiring only minimal adaptation for specific
architectures. This flexibility ensures broad applicability in realworld blockchain systems. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our approach not only achieves high detection accuracy but also
maintains stability and robustness across sequential tasks, offering
a scalable and effective solution for securing blockchain ecosystems
against evolving transaction anomalies.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, blockchain, continual learning, graph neural network, security.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITH the rapid growth of blockchain applications in areas
such as decentralized finance (DeFi) [1], [2], [3], supply
chain management [4], [5], [6], and healthcare [7], [8], [9],
the security and reliability of blockchain systems have become
increasingly critical. Anomalous transactions not only cause
direct financial losses but also undermine user trust and regulatory compliance. Therefore, effective detection of abnormal
account behaviors is a fundamental requirement for ensuring
the sustainable development of blockchain ecosystems [10],
[11], [12].
However, detecting anomalies in blockchain transactions
presents several unique challenges. First, the scale of transaction

W

Received 16 September 2025; revised 31 December 2025; accepted 6 January
2026. Date of publication 13 January 2026; date of current version 2 February
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272042 and in part by Guangxi Key Research
and Development Project under Grant Guike AB25069120. Recommended for
acceptance by Dr. Yao Sun. (Corresponding author: Chang Xu.)
The authors are with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shenxiaodong@
bit.edu.cn; xuchang@bit.edu.cn; liehuangz@bit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3653459

data is massive, with millions of records generated daily. Second,
anomalous accounts constitute only a small fraction of the data,
leading to severe class imbalance. Third, labeled data is scarce,
as labels often rely on expert investigation and are available
only with significant delays [13]. Most importantly, malicious
behaviors evolve over time, as adversaries constantly adapt their
strategies to evade detection [14]. These factors make traditional
static detection methods insufficient and highlight the need for
adaptive, continual learning approaches.
While semi-supervised and self-supervised learning can alleviate label scarcity by leveraging unlabeled data, they typically assume a static data distribution. Blockchain networks,
by contrast, evolve continuously with new addresses, contracts,
and transaction patterns. To effectively capture these evolving
interactions, blockchain systems are often represented as graphs
that encode the flow of transactions and relationships among
entities.
Graph-based representations enable the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which can model relational dependencies and higher-order structures within transaction networks.
GNN-based approaches have demonstrated strong performance
in fraud detection, money laundering, and phishing identification [15], [16], [17]. However, most existing GNN models
are trained offline and in a task-specific manner. When new
anomalous behaviors emerge, retraining from scratch is often
required, which is computationally expensive and impractical
for large-scale blockchain systems [18], [19].
In addition, conventional GNNs suffer from catastrophic
forgetting, where learning new tasks can overwrite previously
acquired knowledge. This issue is especially pronounced in
blockchain environments, where adversaries continuously introduce new fraudulent patterns. Continual learning (CL) [20]
addresses this challenge by enabling models to incrementally
learn from new data while preserving knowledge of prior behaviors. Although CL methods have been studied in general neural
network contexts [21], [22], their application to graph-structured
blockchain data remains underexplored. Recent efforts [23],
[24] offer promising directions, but a fully adapted solution for
blockchain anomaly detection is still lacking.
This gap motivates our work: how can we design a graphbased continual learning model that adapts to new transaction
patterns while preserving knowledge from past tasks? To address this challenge, we propose a novel continual learning
framework for blockchain anomaly detection. The key idea
is to integrate graph neural networks with a topology-aware
mechanism that explicitly captures structural information and

2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

6060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF REPRESENTATIVE BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACHES

preserves parameter importance across tasks. In doing so, the
model adapts to evolving data distributions while mitigating
catastrophic forgetting. The main contributions of this work are
summarized as follows:
r We propose a graph-based continual learning approach
for blockchain anomaly detection that can effectively and
reliably identify abnormal accounts in increasingly large
and complex blockchain networks. The framework is designed for flexible integration with various graph neural
network architectures, allowing easy adaptation to different blockchain settings while maintaining scalability and
applicability in real-world environments.
r We introduce a topology-aware weight preservation module that estimates the importance of each network parameter based on both task-related performance and topological
structure. By incorporating a topology aggregation mechanism, the model retains knowledge of previous tasks while
learning new ones, thereby ensuring accuracy and stability
in the continual learning process.
r From the perspectives of anomaly detection and continual learning, we design comparative experiments across
different neural network backbones and continual learning strategies. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed model achieves outstanding performance in both
classification accuracy and stability against catastrophic
forgetting.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II introduces the related work. Section III analyzes the core
challenges and gives the problem definition. Section IV introduces the proposed detection model and its modules. Section V
reports comprehensive experimental results, while Section VI
further analyzes the findings and practical implications. Finally,
Section VII concludes the paper and outlines future research
directions.
II. RELATED WORK
Research on blockchain security and anomaly detection spans
multiple domains, including blockchain technology, machine
learning, and graph-based analysis. To provide a comprehensive

foundation for our study, this section reviews prior work in
four key areas: the fundamentals of blockchain and transaction
anomalies, traditional and advanced machine learning methods
for anomaly detection, the application of graph neural networks
in blockchain security, and continual learning techniques for
evolving threat detection. The comparisons between the representative works and our method are shown in Table I.
A. Overview of Blockchain Technology and Transaction
Anomalies
Blockchain technology has rapidly expanded beyond its initial
use in cryptocurrencies, finding applications in diverse domains
such as supply chain management [4], [5], [6], healthcare [7],
[8], [9], the Internet of Things (IoT) [33], [34], [35], Decentralized Finance (DeFi) [1], [2], [3], and various other emerging
areas [36], [37], [38]. This growth has spurred extensive research
on understanding blockchain structures, transaction behaviors,
and systemic vulnerabilities, leveraging both datasets and analytical tools. Concurrently, the openness and pseudonymous
nature of blockchain have given rise to various anomalies and
security threats, highlighting the critical need for effective detection methods. In this section, we first review blockchain
fundamentals and analytical resources, followed by a discussion
of transaction anomalies and associated detection strategies.
1) Blockchain Basics and Analytical Tools: Blockchain is
a decentralized and distributed ledger technology that enables
secure, transparent, and tamper-resistant transaction recording
without central authorities [39], [40], [41], [42], [43]. Its foundational features—immutability, consensus mechanisms [44], and
cryptographic verification—have driven adoption in domains
ranging from digital currencies and finance to supply chain,
healthcare, and IoT. Bitcoin, introduced by Nakamoto [45],
established blockchain’s first major application as a cryptocurrency, while Ethereum expanded the ecosystem by enabling programmable smart contracts and decentralized applications [46],
[47], [48].
With blockchain’s rapid growth, research has focused on
analyzing large-scale transaction data to reveal user behavior,
money flows, and systemic vulnerabilities. Transaction graphs

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

provide a powerful abstraction, treating addresses, accounts,
and contracts as nodes and their transfers as edges [49], [50],
[51], [52], [53]. Quantitative graph analysis has revealed structural properties such as small-world patterns, clustering, and
“rich-get-richer” dynamics, while enabling deanonymization attempts by linking pseudonymous addresses to real entities [54],
[55]. Ethereum studies extend this perspective by examining
heterogeneous interactions among users, tokens, contracts, and
DeFi protocols, highlighting both opportunities and risks in
decentralized finance ecosystems [46], [47], [56].
Reliable datasets and analysis platforms are critical to advancing blockchain research. Several benchmark datasets have
been developed, including the Elliptic dataset of labeled Bitcoin
transactions for anti-money laundering (AML) research [57], its
extended Elliptic++ version with richer graph structures [58],
and Ethereum-based datasets tailored for anomaly detection
and intrusion detection systems [59]. Open-source platforms
such as BlockSci offer scalable support for analyzing multiple
blockchains and provide tools to study privacy, economics, and
fraud [60]. Recent surveys emphasize the role of graph learning
for blockchain mining and anomaly detection, integrating classical data analytics with advanced graph neural methods [61].
Visualization and software tools such as DiLeNA further aid in
investigating distributed ledger networks by capturing structural
properties and abnormal patterns [53], [62].
2) Blockchain Anomalies. Threats and Detection: Despite
blockchain’s inherent security guarantees, its pseudonymity and
openness create fertile ground for illicit activities [10]. Studies
estimate that nearly half of Bitcoin transactions in its early years
were linked to illegal activities such as drug trade, ransomware,
and black-market commerce [11], [63]. Mixing services, tumblers, and privacy-focused behaviors complicate detection efforts by obfuscating fund flows [54], [63]. Moreover, Ethereum’s
support for programmable contracts has facilitated new classes
of fraud, including large-scale Ponzi schemes that exploit smart
contracts for “trustworthy” but malicious operations [12].
The blockchain ecosystem is also exposed to protocollevel and system-level attacks. Surveys highlight vulnerabilities across consensus mechanisms, P2P networking, and smart
contracts, including 51% attacks, selfish mining, Sybil, eclipse,
and reentrancy exploits [64], [65], [66], [67]. Privacy leakage
through weak anonymity and transaction tracing further increases risk [42], [54]. Abnormal behavior awareness frameworks for public and consortium blockchains propose detection through supervised learning, statistical analysis, and
heuristic clustering [68]. Comprehensive surveys provide taxonomies of anomalies and defense strategies, underscoring the
need for anomaly detection to secure blockchain infrastructures [69], [70].
Detection strategies range from rule-based auditing and statistical analysis to machine learning and graph-based methods.
Approaches such as BAD (Blockchain Anomaly Detection)
leverage distributed metadata to capture malicious activity [71].
Sketch-based methods offer scalable detection by summarizing
blockchain history into compact structures [72], while visualization and clustering techniques help uncover suspicious transaction flows [53], [62]. Deep anomaly detection frameworks

6061

incorporating generative, discriminative, and hybrid learning have emerged to combat sophisticated cyber-attacks in
blockchain environments [67]. Collectively, these efforts reflect
the pressing need to reconcile blockchain’s decentralization and
privacy guarantees with robust detection systems capable of mitigating fraud, cybercrime, and systemic threats [68], [69], [70].
B. Anomaly Detection With Machine Learning
The application of Machine Learning (ML) techniques [73],
[74] has become paramount in identifying anomalous and fraudulent activities within blockchain networks like Bitcoin and
Ethereum. ML models can learn complex patterns from transaction data, enabling the detection of illicit behaviors that are
difficult to pinpoint using traditional rule-based systems [25],
[26]. These approaches are broadly categorized into supervised,
unsupervised, and ensemble or advanced learning methods, each
with distinct advantages and challenges [75], [76].
1) Supervised Learning: Supervised learning methods require a labeled dataset where transactions are pre-classified as
licit or illicit. These models learn a mapping function from input
features to these known labels, allowing them to predict the
class of new, unseen transactions. A significant challenge in this
domain is the inherent scarcity of labeled data, as illicit activities
are rare and often difficult to verify [13].
Numerous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of supervised learning. Research has shown that classical algorithms
like Support Vector Machines (SVM), Logistic Regression, Random Forest (RF), and k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) can achieve
high accuracy in distinguishing illicit transactions, such as those
related to money laundering [77] or Bitcoin theft [78]. For
instance, Alarab et al. [77] utilized an ensemble of supervised
models, achieving an accuracy of 98.13% on the Elliptic dataset.
Similarly, Nerurkar et al. [79] developed an ensemble of decision
trees capable of categorizing multiple types of illicit entities
with high accuracy, highlighting its utility for forensic analysis.
GPU-accelerated implementations of models like SVM and
Random Forest have also been successfully applied for fraud
detection on both Bitcoin and Ethereum networks, showcasing
their scalability [80].
Beyond specific fraud types, supervised learning forms the
basis for broader anomaly detection frameworks. The works
in [27], [28] further explore the application of these techniques
for AML tasks at cryptocurrency exchanges, emphasizing their
practical relevance.
2) Unsupervised Learning: Unsupervised learning techniques are employed when labeled data is unavailable or scarce.
These methods operate without pre-existing labels, identifying
anomalies by detecting data points that deviate significantly
from the majority of the data based on inherent structures or
patterns, such as clusters or densities [30].
Common unsupervised approaches include clustering algorithms like k-means and anomaly detection methods like
SVM [81], [82]. These techniques are valuable for exploring unknown fraud patterns or for initial data analysis. Vlahavas et al. [29] applied k-means clustering directly to Bitcoin transactions (rather than addresses) using novel features,

6062

successfully identifying distinct clusters representing common
users, mining activities, exchange transactions, and a small
cluster of potentially illicit activity. Their work demonstrated
the value of unsupervised learning for characterizing transaction
types without prior labeling.
However, a challenge noted in the literature is that purely
unsupervised anomaly detection methods can sometimes be inadequate for accurately pinpointing sophisticated illicit patterns,
often requiring subsequent refinement or labeling efforts [13],
[30], [83]. Surveys by Shafiq et al. [84] and Cholevas et al. [30]
provide a comprehensive overview of how various unsupervised
algorithms and their integrations are applied to detect anomalies
across different blockchain networks.
3) Ensemble and Advanced Learning Methods: Ensemble
and advanced learning methods have shown remarkable performance in handling the complexities of blockchain anomaly
detection. Hasan et al. [85] integrated explainable AI techniques with ensemble classifiers, introducing the XGBCLUS
under-sampling algorithm to address data imbalance and achieving enhanced true positive rates. Nayyer et al. [31] proposed
a stacking ensemble model combining Decision Tree, Naive
Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbors, and Random Forest, achieving
97% accuracy and 99% AUC-ROC score. Umer et al. [32]
developed an ensemble deep learning approach combining Convolutional Neural Networks and Long Short-Term Memory,
with bagged LSTM achieving 96.4% accuracy. Pahuja and Kamal [86] implemented an ensemble learning framework using
the CRISP-DM methodology, with LightGBM achieving 99.2%
accuracy in Ethereum fraud detection. Ashfaq et al. [87] combined blockchain technology with machine learning, utilizing
XGBoost and Random Forest for fraud detection while ensuring
system security through smart contracts.
Advanced techniques have also been explored for specific
applications: Lorenz et al. [13] addressed label scarcity through
active learning, matching fully supervised performance with
only 5% of labels. Huang et al. [88] developed a LightGBM
model with memory components for gambling detection on
Ethereum. Yuan et al. [89] employed node2vec network embedding with one-class SVM for phishing detection, achieving an
F-score of 0.846. Chen et al. [90] used data mining and machine
learning to detect Ponzi schemes on Ethereum. Ehsan et al. [91]
enhanced Ethereum anomaly detection through sophisticated
feature selection techniques combined with multiple classifiers,
achieving 98% accuracy.
Recent reviews by Hisham et al. [75] and Chithanuru et al. [76]
provide comprehensive examinations of machine learning and
artificial intelligence techniques for blockchain anomaly detection, while Azad et al. [92] discuss future opportunities in
machine learning for blockchain data analysis. The integration
of these advanced methods continues to evolve, addressing
challenges such as data imbalance, explainability, and real-time
detection requirements in blockchain security.
C. Graph Neural Networks in Blockchain Security
The inherent graph topology of blockchain systems—
where transaction networks naturally form complex relational structures—has positioned Graph Neural Networks

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

(GNNs) [93], [94] as transformative tools for security applications. Unlike traditional machine learning approaches that process transactions as isolated events, GNNs explicitly model the
intricate topological dependencies between addresses, transactions, and smart contracts. This capability enables the detection
of sophisticated attack patterns that manifest through structural
anomalies in transactional networks, fundamentally advancing
beyond feature-based detection paradigms.
1) Foundational Graph Analysis for Blockchain Security:
Fundamental research has established graph-theoretic analysis as indispensable for understanding blockchain ecosystems.
Chen et al. [95] pioneered this domain through comprehensive
graph analysis of Ethereum, constructing three distinct graphs
that revealed systemic behavioral patterns. Survey studies by
Wu et al. [93] and Khan et al. [96] systematically unified
methodologies for cryptocurrency transaction graph mining,
while Song et al. [97] provided analysis of why blockchain
systems intrinsically require graph-based approaches.
The temporal dimension of blockchain graphs received formal treatment through Lin et al.’s [18] T-EDGE framework,
which introduced temporal weighted multidigraph embedding
specifically for Ethereum transaction networks. Complementary
work by Gaihre et al. [98] examined user anonymity behaviors
through transaction graph analysis, uncovering the counterintuitive finding that wealthy addresses exhibit significantly stronger
anonymity concerns than ordinary users. Liu et al. [99] extended
graph analysis to blockchain documentation through heterogeneous GNNs for whitepaper analysis, demonstrating how textual
and structural information can be jointly modeled.
2) Illicit Activity Detection With GNNs: GNN-based methods have become indispensable for combating a wide spectrum
of blockchain-related crimes, ranging from phishing scams and
financial fraud to money laundering and other illicit activities.
These threats often share structural signatures in transaction
graphs, such as coordinated account behavior, temporal bursts
of suspicious transfers, or subgraph patterns designed to obscure
fund flows. By modeling these relational dependencies, GNNs
can identify anomalous activity that traditional feature-based or
rule-driven approaches fail to capture.
For phishing and fraud detection, Chen et al. [17] established
the paradigm of framing phishing detection as node classification with Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). Building on
this, Yu et al. [100] introduced MP-GCN with enhanced message
passing, Li et al. [101] proposed TTAGN for temporal transaction aggregation, and Zhang et al. [21] developed GrabPhisher
with temporally evolving GNNs that adapt to new attack patterns. Higher-order dependencies have been effectively captured
by Wang et al. [37] through Transaction Subgraph Networks
(TSGN), while Xia et al. [102] demonstrated that attributed
ego-graph embeddings improve robustness in class-imbalanced
detection tasks. Targeting Bitcoin specifically, Gupta et al. [103]
designed adaptive GCN frameworks achieving unprecedented
98.75% accuracy. Cross-chain detection challenges were further
addressed by Yan et al. [104] with adversarial domain adaptation techniques that transfer knowledge between heterogeneous
platforms.
Complementary approaches have focused on combining userlevel behavior with global financial dynamics. Ghosh et al. [105]

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

proposed CATALOG to jointly model local and macro-level
signals, while Wan et al. [106] advanced early-stage detection by
leveraging feature engineering and network embeddings [107].
Tan et al. [16], [19] implemented full-stack Ethereum fraud
detection systems achieving consistent 95–96% accuracy, with
Lin et al. [108] further enhancing detection via Phish2vec’s
temporal-heterogeneous embeddings. Together, these works illustrate how phishing and fraud campaigns can be effectively
disrupted by capturing both micro-level structural anomalies and
macro-level transaction flows.
For AML and illicit activity detection, Lo et al. [15] pioneered self-supervised methods with Inspection-L, integrating
graph isomorphism networks with random forests for Bitcoin
money laundering. Pocher et al. [109] applied Graph Attention
Networks (GATs) to AML tasks, demonstrating their effectiveness in uncovering subtle relational patterns among entities.
Ouyang et al. [110] developed Bit-CHetG with subgraph contrastive learning for group detection, while Nerurkar et al. [111]
achieved 92% accuracy in multi-class classification of illicit
Bitcoin activities using spectral GCNs. Advanced tracing frameworks such as Cheng et al.’s [112] Evolve Path Tracer enabled
early-stage malice detection through dynamic asset flow analysis, and Hanan Al-Harbi [113] deployed spatial-temporal GNNs
for continuous transaction monitoring. Real-time detection has
also been pursued: Ibrahim et al. [114] combined GNNs with
anomaly detection for streaming data environments, marking
a crucial step toward operational deployment in fast-moving
financial systems.
In unifying phishing, fraud, and AML detection, these
approaches demonstrate how GNNs provide a holistic defense framework by capturing both opportunistic scams and
large-scale organized crime. Importantly, they move beyond
transaction-level analysis to reveal higher-order coordination,
temporal structuring, and laundering strategies that exploit
blockchain’s pseudonymous design. This convergence underscores GNNs’ potential as the backbone of next-generation
blockchain security infrastructures.
3) Advanced Applications and Emerging Paradigms: Novel
GNN applications continue to expand the frontiers of blockchain
security beyond financial fraud detection. Smart contract
analysis has been revolutionized through several approaches:
Liu et al. [115] created heterogeneous graph transformers for
abnormal contract detection; Liu et al. [116] developed evolved
graph attention for dynamic attribute graphs; and Zhu et al. [117]
introduced EtherShield for time-interval based malicious behavior identification.
Data provenance received significant enhancements through
Geng et al.’s [118] graph attention mechanism that improves
traceability, while Guo et al. [119] revolutionized covert transaction detection using graph generative networks. IoT-blockchain
security was substantially strengthened by Wang et al. [120]
through specialized anomaly detection frameworks that protect
medical IoT systems.
Emerging research directions include Liu et al.’s [116] work
on public blockchain anomaly detection with evolved graph
attention, demonstrating how GNNs can adapt to continuously evolving transaction patterns. These diverse applications

6063

underscore GNNs’ versatility across blockchain security
domains—from protecting financial transactions to securing
smart contracts and IoT ecosystems. As blockchain technology
continues to evolve, GNN-based security frameworks are poised
to address increasingly sophisticated threats through continuous
learning of complex network dynamics.
D. Continual Learning Methods for Anomaly Detection
Continual learning (CL), also referred to as lifelong learning,
has emerged as a critical paradigm for enabling machine learning
models to adapt to new information over time without catastrophically forgetting previously acquired knowledge [121].
This capability is paramount in dynamic environments like
blockchain, where new transaction patterns and attack vectors continuously emerge. This subsection reviews foundational
CL techniques in neural networks, their extension to graphstructured data, and their specific applications within blockchain
and anomaly detection contexts.
1) Continual Learning in Neural Networks: Early works in
continual learning were motivated by the need to prevent catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Kirkpatrick et al. [122]
proposed elastic weight consolidation (EWC), which preserves
parameters critical to prior tasks by selectively slowing their
updates. Li and Hoiem [123] introduced Learning without Forgetting (LwF), enabling networks to adapt to new tasks while
retaining old capabilities using only new task data. Similarly,
Lopez-Paz and Ranzato [124] developed Gradient Episodic
Memory (GEM), which stores past examples and replays them
to balance knowledge transfer and retention. Aljundi et al. [125]
proposed Memory Aware Synapses (MAS), which dynamically
measures parameter importance in an unsupervised manner.
Other approaches include hard attention masks that preserve
task-specific knowledge [126], and meta-learning–based taskagnostic continual learning strategies [127]. Xu and Zhu [128]
further extended this line with Reinforced Continual Learning,
where reinforcement learning identifies optimal architectures
for new tasks while preserving past performance. Surveys provide holistic overviews: Hadsell et al. [20] emphasized biologically inspired mechanisms such as modularity and memory,
De Lange et al. [129] analyzed state-of-the-art methods with
extensive comparisons, and Wang et al. [22] summarized objectives, taxonomies, and practical applications of CL. Foundational perspectives are also offered by Liu’s lifelong learning
paradigm [121] and van de Ven et al.’s definitions of scenarios
(task-, domain-, and class-incremental) [130], [131]. Collectively, these works establish the theoretical and algorithmic basis
for continual learning in deep neural networks.
2) Continual Graph Learning: Graph-structured data
presents unique challenges for continual learning due to its
non-Euclidean structure and evolving topologies. Zhou and
Cao [132] introduced ER-GNN, an experience replay–based
framework that reuses selected node embeddings to mitigate
forgetting in GNNs. Liu et al. [133] proposed Topology-aware
Weight Preserving (TWP), a plug-and-play module that
stabilizes graph aggregation parameters to retain structural
knowledge. Sun et al. [134] addressed curvature changes

6064

in evolving graphs with RieGrace, a self-supervised learner
in adaptive Riemannian spaces that incorporates distillation
without requiring labels. Su et al. [135] focused on inductive
Node-wise Graph Incremental Learning, introducing StructuralShift-Risk-Mitigation to address distribution shifts in evolving
graphs. Two recent surveys provide comprehensive taxonomies
and analyses: Zhang et al. [21] reviewed task settings,
methods, and challenges in continual graph learning, while
Tian et al. [136] categorized methods from the perspective of
catastrophic forgetting and highlighted the need for continuous
performance improvement. Benchmarking efforts, such as Ko
et al.’s BeGin framework, further standardize scenarios and
evaluation for graph continual learning [137]. Together, these
works advance the understanding of how continual learning
principles can be extended to complex graph domains.
3) Incremental Learning for Blockchain and Anomaly Detection: Anomaly detection requires continual adaptation, as
malicious behaviors evolve rapidly. Faber et al. [14] highlighted
the unique challenges of lifelong anomaly detection, including
shifting normal behaviors and scarce anomalies, and stressed
the importance of lifelong learning to enhance robustness. In
blockchain specifically, Qi [138] demonstrated the synergy
between GNNs and incremental learning for fraud detection,
enabling adaptation without full retraining. Li et al. [23] introduced SIEGE, a self-supervised incremental deep graph
learning model for Ethereum phishing detection, leveraging
pretext tasks for effective embeddings on massive unlabeled
data. Neto et al. [139] addressed covert cryptocurrency mining
with MineCap, a super-incremental learning framework applied
to software-defined networking. Bielak et al. [24] developed
FILDNE, a framework for incremental embeddings on dynamic
networks, which reduces computational costs while maintaining accuracy on evolving graphs. These approaches showcase
how incremental learning paradigms are increasingly tailored
to security-sensitive and blockchain-specific anomaly detection
tasks.
4) Discussion and Summary: This section reveals a progression from general CL techniques to their specialization for graph
data and, more recently, for dynamic real-world applications
like blockchain security and anomaly detection. While replay
and regularization methods provide a strong foundation, their
direct application to graphs requires careful consideration of
topological dependencies and structural shifts [135]. Furthermore, the anomaly detection context adds layers of complexity
due to data imbalance, evolving normality, and the critical need
for stability-plasticity balance [14].
Existing continual graph learning methods like TWP [133]
and ER-GNN [132] offer valuable design principles for preserving knowledge. However, their application in the blockchain
domain remains limited. Most blockchain-oriented works, such
as Li et al. [23], focus on incremental learning but often do
not explicitly address the rigorous continual learning setting
with distinct, sequential tasks and the formal mitigation of
catastrophic forgetting. A significant gap exists in developing
dedicated continual learning frameworks that are deeply integrated with graph-based anomaly detection for blockchain,
capable of learning continuously from a sequence of emerging

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE II
LIST OF ACRONYMS

fraudulent patterns without retraining from scratch. Our work,
detailed in Section IV, aims to bridge this gap by proposing a
novel continual learning framework built upon topology-aware
weight preservation, specifically designed for the evolving graph
of blockchain transactions. To enhance readability and provide a
consolidated reference for the acronyms introduced throughout
the paper, Table II provides a comprehensive list of key terms
and their definitions.
III. PROBLEM ANALYSIS AND DEFINITION
A. Problem Analysis
Designing blockchain anomaly detection models with deep
graph learning is particularly challenging due to the unique
characteristics of blockchain data. Millions of transactions are
generated daily, yet only a tiny fraction involve illicit activity,
creating severe class imbalance. At the same time, reliable
labels are scarce and often delayed, since they typically rely on
investigator verification. Furthermore, blockchain environments
are highly dynamic: both normal and malicious behaviors evolve
over time, making static detection methods quickly outdated.
A practical detection model must therefore be able to adapt
continually, capturing new abnormal patterns without discarding
knowledge of previously observed ones.
The major challenges can be summarized as follows:
r Data imbalance: In real-world blockchains, benign accounts vastly outnumber illicit ones. This imbalance biases
models toward the majority class, often leading to poor
recall on anomalies, which are the most critical to detect.
r Label scarcity: High-quality labels for anomalous behaviors are difficult to obtain, as they are based on external
reports or expert investigations. Such labels cover only a
small portion of accounts and are usually available with
delays, creating both data sparsity and temporal imbalance.
r Concept drift: Normal account behaviors are not stationary; they shift over time due to changes in user habits,

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

seasonal patterns, or external events. Detection models
that fail to adapt to these shifts risk misclassifying benign
behaviors as anomalies or overlooking new types of fraud.
r Emergence of new attacks: Adversaries continually adjust
strategies, exploiting code vulnerabilities or novel features
of smart contracts. Some attacks extend known patterns,
while others are entirely new. Without incremental adaptation, existing models either require full retraining—which
is computationally expensive—or cannot recognize these
new behaviors at all.
r Retraining overhead: Traditional retraining strategies demand repeated access to the full historical dataset, which is
both inefficient and impractical at blockchain scale. Ideally,
anomaly detection should learn from limited new samples
while preserving knowledge of past attacks without revisiting all prior data.
In summary, blockchain anomaly detection requires models
that are robust to imbalance and label scarcity, adaptive to evolving behaviors, and efficient enough to learn continually from
new threats without incurring prohibitive retraining costs. These
challenges motivate the need for continual learning frameworks
tailored to graph-structured transaction data.
B. Problem Definition
The ability to acquire and refine knowledge from a continuous
stream of non-stationary and imbalanced data distributions is the
hallmark of the continual learning (also referred to as lifelong
learning) paradigm. The training process of continual learning
systems differs from conventional approaches: tasks are learned
incrementally, and each sample can be represented by a triplet
(x, y, t), where x is the feature vector, y is the target label, and
t is the task descriptor that identifies the task represented by
the tuple (x, y) ∼ Pt . In this setting, the observed data are not
drawn from a fixed probability distribution P (X, Y, T ); instead,
the data associated with sequential tasks are non-IID. Thus, the
grand objective of continual learning is to construct a model
f : X × T → Y that predicts the target label y for a test pair
(x, t) such that (x, y) ∼ Pt .
In real-world blockchain environments, the number of normal
accounts participating in transactions is typically much larger
than that of malicious accounts. This large quantitative disparity
is one of the main causes of Class Imbalance (CI) observed
in many blockchain account datasets. Moreover, due to privacy
concerns, the availability of up-to-date multi-label datasets of
malicious traffic is extremely limited. For these reasons, it is
challenging to formulate blockchain intrusion detection as a
multi-class classification problem.
To approximate realistic traffic scenarios, we combine both
normal and malicious account data to form a task t. During
training on a specific task dataset Dt , direct access to data from
other tasks Do (o = t) is prohibited. This leads to the following
objective function:
L(Dt ; Θ) =

1
|Dt |


(x,y)∈Dt

 (fΘ (x), y)

(1)

6065

where x and y denote the feature vector and corresponding
target label (normal or abnormal), fΘ is the prediction function
parameterized by Θ, and (·) is the sample-wise loss function. However, catastrophic forgetting can degrade the quality
of learning, motivating the development of various mitigation
strategies. Regularization-based methods impose constraints on
model parameters to prevent drastic changes during new task
learning. Dynamic architecture approaches adapt the model’s
structure, while memory replay methods maintain a cache of
representative samples from prior tasks to alleviate forgetting.
Combining these strategies, the training objective in (1) can be
reformulated as:

1
[ (fΘ (x), y) + R(Φ)]
(2)
L(Dt ; Θ, Φ) =
|Dt |
(x,y)∈Dt

where R(Φ) is the regularization term introduced by the chosen
catastrophic forgetting mitigation technique, and Φ collects the
corresponding auxiliary variables or hyperparameters.
In the learning sequence of a blockchain anomaly detection model, the system receives a series of disjoint tasks T =
{T1 , T2 , . . . , TK }, which are learned sequentially. Each task
Tk consists of a training node set Vktr , a test node set Vkte ,
and their corresponding feature sets Xktr and Xkte . Each node
vi ∈ {Vktr ∪ Vkte } is associated with a class label y l ∈ Yk , where
Yk = {y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y ck } is the label set and ck is the number
of classes in task Tk . In a continual learning setting, different
tasks correspond to disjoint partitions of the dataset, and their
label sets are non-overlapping. Once the learning of a task is
completed, its data are no longer available. The objective of this
paper is to learn a shared GNN model fΘ , parameterized by
Θ = {θr }, across a sequence of graph-related tasks T , such that
the model performs well on new tasks while retaining knowledge
of previously learned tasks.
IV. THE PROPOSED SCHEME
This section introduces the proposed graph-based continual
learning framework for blockchain anomaly transaction detection. Instead of treating blockchain accounts or transactions
as independent samples, we explicitly model the underlying
transaction network as a graph, where anomalous behaviors such
as phishing, Ponzi schemes, and other fraud patterns emerge as
distinctive structural patterns. On top of this transaction graph,
a Graph Neural Network (GNN) backbone is used to learn
discriminative node representations for classifying normal and
abnormal accounts.
To support long-term deployment in dynamic blockchain environments, where new types of anomalous behaviors and previously unseen transaction patterns continually appear, the framework integrates a Topology-aware Weight Preserving (TWP)
module. TWP jointly considers (i) task-related prediction performance and (ii) blockchain-specific topological structures when
estimating parameter importance. A sparse regularization mechanism is further introduced to maintain model plasticity, preventing the detector from becoming over-constrained and unable to
absorb new anomalous patterns. Finally, we show how the proposed scheme can be plugged into arbitrary GNN architectures

6066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

(e.g., GCN, GIN) to support a wide range of blockchain anomaly
detection scenarios. The complete pseudocode of the continual
anomaly detection framework is summarized in Algorithm 1.
A. Graph Representation Learning
In the context of blockchain anomaly transaction detection,
the underlying data are naturally organized as a transaction
graph. We model the blockchain as a directed graph G = (V, E),
where each node v ∈ V corresponds to an account (e.g., user
address or contract), and each edge (u, v) ∈ E represents a
transfer of assets or invocation of a smart contract between
accounts. Node features encode behavioral statistics, such as
transaction frequency, in/out degree, token types, and temporal
patterns, enabling the model to distinguish normal and anomalous accounts.
Formally, given G with |V| = N nodes, a GNN is defined
[0]
[0]
[0]
by a set of node input features X[0] = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } and
an adjacency matrix A that represents the observed transaction
relations between accounts. The hidden representation of node
[]
[]
u at the -th layer is denoted by xu , where xu ∈ RF and F
is the feature dimension at layer .
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) compute node representations using a first-order approximation of the graph spectrum, where the adjacency matrix A is fixed and encodes static
transaction connectivity. Graph Attention Networks (GATs) extend GCNs by introducing an attention mechanism that optimizes node representations through a weighted aggregation of
neighbor features. In the blockchain scenario, this means that
an account can place higher attention on neighbors with more
suspicious transaction patterns (e.g., hubs connected to many
scams) and lower attention on benign or weakly related neighbors. Unlike the fixed normalization operation in GCNs, GATs
enable each node to selectively attend to its neighbors based on
contextual information in the local transaction neighborhood,
thereby reducing reliance on global structural information. By
stacking Masked Self-Attention Layers (MSALs), GATs capture
the characteristics of neighboring accounts and assign weights
according to their importance for anomaly detection. The updated node features are then computed based on these weights.
Specifically, for node u and one of its neighbors v ∈ N (u) at
layer , the attention score is first computed as


[]
(3)
= Softmaxv∈N (u) a x[−1]
U[] , x[−1]
U[]
αuv
u
v
[]

where αuv denotes the attention score from node u to node v, a(·)
is a learnable neural network, and U[] is the trainable weight
matrix at layer .
These attention scores reflect the strength and importance of
relationships between accounts in the blockchain transaction
network. The normalized attention coefficient is given by


[]
exp LReLU(αuv )
[]


=
α̃uv
(4)
[]
exp
LReLU(α
)
uq
q∈N (u)
[]

where α̃uv represents the normalized attention score from node u
to node v, and LReLU(·) is the LeakyReLU activation function.

Algorithm 1: Graph-Based Continual Learning for
Blockchain Anomaly Account Detection.
Require: Blockchain anomaly transaction dataset Dktr
constructed from historical blockchain records, where
nodes correspond to accounts and edges encode
transaction flows
1: Initialize model parameters Θ1
2: for each training epoch do
3:
Train the model on the first anomaly detection task
using D1tr and compute the graph representation of
the blockchain transaction graph G
4:
Infer node labels (normal vs. different abnormal
account behaviors)
5:
Compute cross-entropy loss for anomaly
classification
6:
Perform backpropagation and update parameters
7: end for
8: Obtain the optimal parameters for the first task Θ1
9: for each subsequent anomaly detection task
k ∈ {1, . . ., K − 1} do
10:
Set model parameters Θk+1 ← Θk to carry over
knowledge of previously seen anomalous behaviors
11:
for each training epoch do
12:
Train the model on task k using Dktr , and compute
the graph representation of G that encodes the
evolving blockchain transaction network
13:
Infer node labels of G to distinguish anomalous
from benign accounts for the current fraud
category
14:
Compute cross-entropy loss for task Tk
15:
Perform backpropagation
16:
# Loss preservation (task-related anomaly
detection performance)
∂L
17:
Compute gradients on task k: gr (Xtrk ) = ∂θ
r
18:
Obtain loss-based importance scores:
(err)
Ωk = [gr (Xtrk )]
19:
# Topology preservation (blockchain transaction
structure)
20:
Compute topology-based importance scores:
(top)
[−1]
Ωk = [qr (Zk )]
21:
# Continual learning update for evolving
transaction anomalies
22:
Compute final importance scores for task Tk :
(err)
(top)
Ωk = λ l Ω k + λ t Ω k
23:
Compute total loss:
Lk+1 (Θ) = Ltot
k+1 (Θ) + βΩk+1 1
24:
end for
25:
Obtain the optimal parameters for the current
anomaly type Θk+1
26: end for
Ensure Final model parameters ΘK for multi-type
blockchain anomaly account detection

Finally, the updated feature representation of node u at the
-th layer is computed as
⎞
⎛

[] [−1] [] ⎠
⎝
(5)
α̃uv
xv U
x[]
u =φ
v∈N (u)

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

Fig. 1.

6067

Overall framework of the TWP module in blockchain anomaly account detection.

where φ(·) is a nonlinear activation function. The adjacency
matrix A encodes the neighbor set N (u) for each node u
and thus determines the aggregation pattern, which is a core
component of GNN-based anomaly detection on transaction
graphs.
B. Topology-Aware Weight Preserving Module
In a blockchain setting, anomalous behaviors are often reflected not only in individual account features but also in how
accounts are wired together through transaction flows (e.g.,
fan-in/fan-out structures, layered transfers, star-like scam clusters). The TWP module is designed to capture such topological
information and identify key parameters that are crucial for
both task-related anomaly classification and the preservation of
meaningful transaction structures. The module consists of two
main submodules: loss-preserving, which focuses on anomaly
detection performance, and topology-preserving, which focuses
on the structural patterns of the transaction graph. The overall
framework is illustrated in Fig. 1.
1) Loss-preserving submodule: After training on task Tk
(e.g., detecting one specific category of anomalous accounts
such as phishing or Ponzi schemes), the model obtains a set of
optimized parameters Θk that minimize the classification loss
for that task. However, not all parameters contribute equally
to correctly identifying abnormal accounts and separating them
from benign ones. Therefore, it is important to identify those
parameters that are particularly critical for minimizing detection
loss on the blockchain dataset.
Given the training set Dktr of task Tk , the loss can be written as
L(Xtrk ; Θ), where Xtrk contains the node features in Dktr , and Θ =
{θr } denotes all network parameters. The loss change under an
infinitesimal perturbation ΔΘ = {Δθr } can be approximated
using a first-order Taylor expansion:

L Xtrk ; Θ + ΔΘ − L Xtrk ; Θ ≈
gr Xtrk Δθr
(6)
r

where Δθr is the infinitesimal change of parameter θr , and
∂L
is the gradient of the loss with respect to θr ,
gr (Xtrk ) = ∂θ
r
which approximates the contribution of θr to the overall anomaly
detection loss.
To preserve knowledge of task Tk when learning future tasks
(i.e., new anomaly types or updated transaction patterns), it is
desirable to stabilize parameters that are highly important for

minimizing the loss. Similar to Elastic Weight Consolidation
(EWC), the importance of parameter θr can be estimated using
the magnitude of its gradient gr . Specifically, the loss-based
importance scores of parameters for task Tk are defined as

(err)
Ωk = gr (Xtrk )
(err)

where Ωk reflects the degree to which each parameter contributes to minimizing the anomaly classification loss of task Tk .
2) Topology-preserving submodule: This submodule aims to
identify parameters that are essential for preserving learned
topological information in the blockchain transaction graph.
GAT is adopted as the backbone, where the attention coefficients between a central node and its neighbors are modeled
as representations of local transaction topology (e.g., how sus[−1]
picious funds propagate between accounts). Let Zu,v denote
the pairwise embeddings of nodes u and v at layer  − 1. The
topology-related score between node u and its neighbor v at
layer  can be expressed as


[]
[]
(7)
= b Z[−1]
γuv
u,v ; Θ
where b(·) is a neural network, and Θ[] denotes the subset of
parameters at layer .
Similar to the loss-preserving case, the change under an
infinitesimal perturbation ΔΘ[] can be approximated by




[]
[]
[−1]
[]
−
b
Z
;
Θ
+
ΔΘ
;
Θ
b Z[−1]
u,v
u,v

 
Δθr (8)
qr Z[−1]
≈
u,v
r

[−1]

∂b
where qr (Zu,v ) = ∂θ
is the gradient of the topology score
r
[]

γuv with respect to parameter θr .
Unlike the scalar task loss, the topology scores around a
central node form a multidimensional vector at layer . The
topological loss of Dktr is defined as the squared 2 norm of
this vector, and its gradient with respect to θr is computed as



2
∂ 
 [] []
[] 
=
(9)
qr Z[−1]
 γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γ|Dtr | 
u,v
k
2
∂θr
[−1]

where Zu,v is the output of the ( − 1)-th layer. The importance
scores of all parameters with respect to the topology of task Tk

6068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

are then summarized as
(top)
Ωk =



[−1]
qr (Zk )



(top)

where Ωk
contains topology-related importance scores of
all parameters. In practice, topology scores computed in the
intermediate layers of the GNN are used to represent local
structural patterns of the blockchain transaction graph.
3) Final importance score: The final importance score of parameters Θ for task Tk is computed by combining the loss-based
and topology-based components:
(err)

Ωk = λ l Ω k

(top)

+ λ t Ωk

(10)

where λl and λt are hyperparameters that balance the contributions of loss-preserving and topology-preserving terms.
Parameters with low importance scores can be updated more
freely during new task learning (thus adapting to new forms of
blockchain fraud), while stabilizing highly important parameters
reduces the risk of catastrophic forgetting of previously observed
anomaly patterns.
C. Continual Learning on GNNs
After each anomaly detection task is learned, the proposed
TWP module is used to evaluate the importance of all parameters. When learning a new task Tk+1 , the goal is not only
to improve detection performance on the new task, but also
to preserve knowledge from previous tasks by maintaining the
stability of important parameters. This is achieved by penalizing
changes to parameters that were identified as critical for past
tasks.
Let Θs denote the optimal parameters obtained for task Ts
and Ωs the corresponding importance scores. The task-specific
loss for training task Tk+1 is defined as
cur
Ltot
k+1 (Θ) = Lk+1 (Θ) +

k


Ωs

(Θ − Θs )2

(11)

s=1

where denotes element-wise multiplication, Lcur
k+1 (Θ) is the
standard anomaly classification loss on Tk+1 , and the square
is taken element-wise. This strategy ensures that parameters
with low importance can be freely updated to adapt to the new
fraudulent patterns, while modifications to parameters with high
importance incur a larger penalty, thereby preserving knowledge
of previously detected blockchain anomalies.
To further enhance model flexibility, the lowest importance
scores must also be reduced. While preserving important parameters helps retain knowledge of previous tasks, it risks reducing
the model’s plasticity and limiting its ability to learn subsequent
anomaly types. To preserve sufficient model capacity for future
tasks, an 1 regularization term is applied to minimize the
importance scores of parameters computed from the current task.
The total loss for training task Tk+1 is thus given by




Lk+1 (Θ) = Ltot
(12)
k+1 (Θ) + β Ωk+1 1
where β is a hyperparameter that controls the capacity reserved
for future anomaly detection tasks, and Ωk+1 represents the importance scores of all parameters for the current task, computed

using the proposed TWP module. A larger value of β encourages
sparser importance patterns, thereby preserving more learning
capacity for future blockchain anomalies.
The proposed method can be easily extended to GNNs that
do not include an attention mechanism, such as GCN and GIN,
making it applicable to arbitrary GNN architectures. A nonparametric attention-like mechanism can be added to construct
the topology, formulated as




[]
= x[−1]
U[] tanh x[−1]
U[]
(13)
γuv
u
v
[]

where the score γuv depends on the transformed distance or compatibility between node u and its neighbor v in the transaction
graph. These scores are then normalized across all neighbors
of u to obtain attention-like coefficients. Given the constructed
topology, the proposed TWP module can be directly applied to
any GNN. It should be noted that while these topology scores are
constructed between nodes, they are used solely within the TWP
module. The backbone model itself still relies on its original
graph structure to aggregate and update node features.
Overall, this continual learning framework enables GNNbased anomaly detection models to adapt to evolving blockchain
transaction patterns while mitigating catastrophic forgetting. By
explicitly combining loss-based and topology-based importance
estimation on transaction graphs, the proposed scheme enhances
both adaptability and long-term stability in blockchain security
tasks, making it suitable for realistic deployments where new
fraudulent behaviors continually emerge over time.
V. EXPERIMENTS
This section evaluates the effectiveness of our scheme on
blockchain transaction data. All experiments were conducted
in a Python 3.7 environment to ensure stability and compatibility. The model was implemented primarily with PyTorch
1.8.1, running on CUDA 10.1. Supporting libraries included
Numpy, Scipy, and Scikit-Learn for numerical computation and
machine learning tasks, NetworkX for graph data processing,
and Matplotlib for visualization. To enhance graph learning,
we also employed the OGB benchmark, Deep Graph Library
(DGL), and DGLLife for domain-specific tasks. All experiments
were performed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core
i9-10920X CPU @ 3.50 GHz, an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU with
24 GB of memory, running Ubuntu 20.04.
For dataset construction, we obtained blockchain transaction
data from the CryptoScamDB platform. Among them, nineteen
categories of anomalous transaction behaviors with relatively
large sample sizes were selected, including labels such as Ponzi
schemes and phishing. To facilitate account-level data extraction
and organization, we used a Python-based blockchain interaction tool developed by Sokolowska1 . This tool enables the
identification of accounts that participate in transactions within
a specified block range. By applying it to filter overlapping
and duplicate accounts, we obtained the corresponding normal
transaction data. Together with the anomalous categories, this
1 https://github.com/validitylabs/EthereumDB

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

resulted in a total of 20 labeled classes of transaction behaviors,
forming a relatively comprehensive and complex dataset for
evaluation.
To construct the continual learning tasks, we organized the
dataset by anomaly type, where each of the 19 categories of
abnormal account behaviors constitutes a distinct anomaly detection task. This design ensures both comprehensiveness and
diversity of the continual learning setting. By defining tasks
according to different types of fraudulent activities, the experimental framework can evaluate the model’s ability to adapt to
heterogeneous anomaly patterns while preserving knowledge
from previously learned tasks. This construction also enables
a more realistic assessment of the proposed framework’s longterm stability and adaptability in dynamic blockchain environments.
In the following part, we begin by introducing the evaluation
metrics used to assess both anomaly detection accuracy and continual learning stability. Next, we describe the baseline models
for comparison and outline the hyperparameter configurations
adopted in our experiments. We then report the anomaly detection results, followed by an analysis of catastrophic forgetting to
highlight the effectiveness of the proposed approach in retaining
past knowledge while adapting to new tasks.

Macro-F1 =

2 × Macro-Pre × Macro-Rec
.
Macro-Pre + Macro-Rec

Micro-F1 =

2 × Micro-Pre × Micro-Rec
.
Micro-Pre + Micro-Rec

n

Macro-Pre =

T Pi
1
,
n i=1 T Pi + F Pi

Macro-Rec =

T Pi
1
,
n i=1 T Pi + F Ni

(15)

n

(16)

(20)

2) Continual learning: We further evaluate the model with
Average Performance (AP) and Average Forgetting (AF), which
reflect the plasticity–stability trade-off.
Let M ∈ RN ×N denote the performance matrix across N
sequential tasks, where Mi,j represents the performance on task
Tj after training up to task Ti .
Average Performance after task Tk is defined as:
k

A. Evaluation Metrics

Macro metrics compute per-class scores first and then take the
unweighted mean across classes. Specifically, Macro-Pre measures the average precision across classes; Macro-Rec measures
the average recall across classes; Macro-F1 combines precision
and recall into a single comprehensive score.

(17)

Micro metrics are sample-weighted averages in which each
sample contributes equally. We then compute Micro-Pre, MicroRecall, and Micro-F1; these reflect the model’s performance
over individual samples, giving equal weight to every sample.
n
P
i=1 T
ni

,
(18)
Micro-Pre = n
T
P
+
i
i=1
i=1 F Pi
n
P
i=1 T
ni
Micro-Rec = n
,
(19)
T
P
+
i
i=1
i=1 F Ni

APk =
The proposed model addresses two challenges: (i) detecting
anomalous blockchain transactions, and (ii) mitigating catastrophic forgetting. Accordingly, we evaluate its performance
from two complementary perspectives: anomaly detection and
continual learning.
We begin by introducing the notation used throughout this
subsection. Let n denote the number of classes. For each class
i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, let T Pi , F Pi , F Ni , and T Ni represent the
numbers of true positives, false positives, false negatives, and
true negatives, respectively, measured on the test set.
1) Anomaly detection: Since blockchain anomaly detection
with GNNs can be formulated as a multi-class classification
problem, we adopt standard evaluation metrics commonly used
in deep learning: Accuracy, and the Macro/Micro averages of
Precision, Recall, and F1-score.
Accuracy measures the proportion of correctly classified samples across the entire test set:
n
T Pi

.
(14)
Accuracy = n i=1
(T
P
i + F Ni )
i=1

6069

1
Mk,i .
k i=1

(21)

APk reflects the mean performance over all tasks learned up to
step k, capturing the model’s overall effectiveness throughout
continual training. A higher AP value indicates stronger cumulative learning performance.
Average Forgetting after task Tk is computed as:
AFk =

k−1
1 
(Mi,i − Mk,i ) , 2 ≤ k ≤ N.
k − 1 i=1

(22)

AFk measures the average degradation in performance on previously learned tasks T1 , . . . , Tk−1 after completing task Tk . For
each task Ti , the difference Mi,i − Mk,i quantifies how much
performance has decayed since Ti was first learned. Lower AF
values indicate better resistance to catastrophic forgetting.
In summary, Macro/Micro metrics provide a comprehensive
evaluation of anomaly detection effectiveness from class- and
sample-level perspectives, while AP and AF quantify continual learning stability. Together, they form a unified evaluation
framework for assessing both detection accuracy and continual
learning robustness.
B. Baseline Models
To validate the anomaly detection performance of our method,
we compare it with two representative GNN architectures: the
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and the Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN). Both are widely used and have shown
strong results across various graph-learning tasks:
1) GCN [140]: Designed to process graph-structured data
by aggregating node features from neighbors, GCN effectively leverages both node attributes and structural
information.

6070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE III
HYPERPARAMETERS OF OUR MODEL

2) GIN [141]: A more expressive variant of GNNs, GIN
captures complex dependencies and diverse structural
patterns, demonstrating strong representational power for
heterogeneous graphs.
We also consider Graph Attention Networks (GATs), which
improve upon GCNs by applying learnable, feature-dependent
attention weights rather than uniform neighbor aggregation.
This makes them directly compatible with the Topology-aware
Weight Preservation (TWP) module. For GCNs, attention coefficients are constructed before applying TWP, while for GINs,
node embeddings before pooling are used to compute parameter
importance.
To further assess both classification accuracy and resistance
to catastrophic forgetting, our method is compared with a bare
model (without continual learning) and five state-of-the-art continual learning approaches, all implemented on the same GAT
backbone for fairness:
1) Bare model (Bare): GNN without continual learning;
serves as the lower bound.
2) Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [122]: Penalizes
changes to important parameters to preserve prior knowledge.
3) Memory Aware Synapses (MAS) [125]: Estimates parameter importance via sensitivity analysis in an online manner.
4) Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM) [142]: Stores representative samples in memory and constrains gradients to
avoid increasing past-task loss.
5) Learning Without Forgetting (LwF) [123]: Uses knowledge distillation to retain outputs from previous models.
6) Experience Replay GNN (ER-GNN) [132]: Incorporates
replay of representative nodes from prior tasks.
7) Joint Training (Joint): Trains on all tasks simultaneously;
free from forgetting, serving as the performance upper
bound.
C. Hyperparameter Settings
For the algorithms introduced in this subsection, the primary
focus is on the optimal settings of the TWP module and the
Graph Attention Network (GAT), as these parameters have a
crucial impact on both model performance and generalization.
Table III shows the hyperparameters in our model.
In the TWP module, λl is set to 10000 to ensure stability
of the topological structure. The parameter λt is chosen within
the range [100, 10000]; after experimental evaluation, 1000 is
selected as the optimal value, striking a balance between model
complexity and performance. The classification performance
under different λt values is shown in Fig. 2, where the chosen value consistently outperforms alternatives across multiple
metrics.
Similarly, β is tuned between 0.1 and 0.01, with the best
results achieved at 0.01. The comparison is presented in Fig. 3.
This value is applied consistently across all tasks to ensure stable
performance.
GAT, a graph neural network based on the attention mechanism, is adopted to process graph-structured data and learn
node representations. Its hyperparameters are carefully tuned to
optimize performance on the blockchain transaction dataset.

Fig. 2.

Effect of different λt values on model performance.

Fig. 3.

Effect of different β values on model performance.

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

Fig. 4.

6071

Impact of hidden unit number on model performance.

First, the number of attention layers is set to one, maintaining
simplicity and reducing computational complexity. Second, the
number of hidden units in each layer is examined. For highaccuracy classification, this parameter must be carefully chosen:
increasing hidden units improves representational capacity but
risks overfitting, while too few units may underfit and fail to
capture sufficient features. Experiments test 32, 64, and 128
hidden units, as shown in Fig. 4. Results indicate that 64 hidden units generally yield the best performance, outperforming
other settings in most metrics. For example, accuracy with 64
hidden units is about 0.5% higher than with the other values.
Although 128 units slightly improve Macro-Pre and Macro-F1,
the trade-off favors 64, which balances model efficiency and
representational power.
In addition, each GAT layer is configured with 8 attention
heads, enabling nodes to attend to information from eight different perspectives, thereby enhancing representational richness.
The output attention heads are set to 1, meaning only a single
aggregated attention vector is used in the final stage.
To prevent overfitting, both feature dropout and attention dropout rates are set to 0.6. The activation function is
LeakyReLU with a negative slope of 0.2, which mitigates the
vanishing gradient problem and improves learning stability.
Residual connections are disabled to simplify the model and
avoid unnecessary complexity.
The batch size is fixed at 200, and the learning rate is set to
0.005. The Adam optimizer is selected due to its adaptive learning rate adjustment and fast convergence properties, ensuring
stable and efficient training. The number of training epochs is
set to 200 to allow sufficient convergence. The dataset is split
into 60% training, 20% validation, and 20% test subsets, which
is a widely adopted configuration.
Overall, these hyperparameters are carefully tuned to achieve
optimal performance and generalization on blockchain transaction datasets, while maintaining a lightweight and interpretable
model. They form a solid foundation for subsequent experiments
and comparisons.

Fig. 5. Comparison of anomaly detection performance across tasks using
different GNN backbones. Each subfigure shows the evolution of key metrics
(Accuracy, Recall, Precision, and F1 Score) over 20 epochs.

For consistency across baselines, the regularization hyperparameters of EWC and MAS are fixed at 10,000, ensuring a
fair comparison under the same experimental conditions. These
carefully selected settings guarantee the scientific rigor and reliability of the experiments, while providing valuable references
for future research.
D. Anomaly Detection Results
In this subsection, classification tasks are used to evaluate
the effectiveness of the proposed model in detecting anomalous
blockchain accounts. For comparison, the graph-based deep
learning backbone in the proposed model is replaced with other
commonly used architectures for anomaly detection, namely
GCN and GIN, while keeping all other algorithms and parameters unchanged.
As shown in Fig. 5, we experimentally evaluate the performance of GCN, GIN, and GAT on the blockchain anomalous
transaction dataset. Following the evaluation metrics defined
before, classification results are obtained for each type of account in every task. The curves in the figure represent accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score after adding all tasks.
From accuracy and recall, it is clear that, except for a few
cases, GAT consistently achieves the highest classification accuracy and recall. The GCN-based model performs better than
the GIN-based model overall. In terms of precision, the performance of the proposed model is less stable than for the
other two metrics, with results close to those of GCN and
GIN on many tasks, but still superior overall. Consequently, for
the F1-score, the proposed model with GAT achieves the best
performance, with smoother trends than the other two GNN
backbones, indicating more stable detection efficiency. Taken
together, the multi-task classification results demonstrate the
advantage of GAT in modeling complex graph structures and

6072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE IV
EVALUATION METRICS UNDER DIFFERENT GNN BACKBONES

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS

achieving optimal classification across categories. In summary,
the GAT-based model outperforms traditional GCN-based approaches for blockchain anomaly detection, and the F1 results
further validate the effectiveness and stability of our framework.
Additionally, Table IV presents experimental results using
GCN, GIN, and GAT, with Micro-F1 and Macro-F1 adopted as
evaluation metrics. The reported values are mean scores, with
standard deviations shown in parentheses. From the perspective of Micro-F1, the three GNN backbones achieve 83.89%,
83.832%, and 90.126%, respectively. These results indicate
that GAT achieves the highest classification accuracy, as it is
able to capture higher-order structural information and richer
meta-paths. Similarly, from the perspective of Macro-F1, the
models achieve 79.928%, 76.31%, and 83.97%, respectively,
again showing that GAT performs best. The trends are consistent
with those observed in Micro-F1.
In summary, consistent with the findings in Fig. 5, GAT
demonstrates superior performance on classification tasks involving complex graph structures, thereby validating the effectiveness of the proposed model. Moreover, the relatively small
standard deviations indicate stable performance across tasks.
E. Catastrophic Forgetting
In anomalous transaction detection on blockchains, quantitative comparison is essential for evaluating the strengths and
weaknesses of different continual learning strategies. The results
of several baseline methods and our proposed approach are summarized in Table V, which reports two key evaluation metrics:
AP and AF. AP measures the average classification accuracy
across all learned tasks, reflecting the model’s overall detection
capability and adaptability to new anomalous behaviors. In contrast, AF quantifies the average degradation in performance on
previously learned tasks after the model learns new ones, thereby
indicating the degree of catastrophic forgetting. In general,
higher AP and lower AF jointly represent stronger continual

learning ability, striking a balance between plasticity (adaptation
to new tasks) and stability (retention of prior knowledge).
Table V presents the comparative results across seven continual learning methods and a joint training upper bound. Each
value in the table represents the mean and standard deviation
over multiple runs. The bare model achieves moderate AP
but exhibits the highest AF, confirming that standard GNNs
suffer severe catastrophic forgetting when trained sequentially.
Among continual learning baselines, methods such as GEM and
MAS effectively mitigate forgetting and substantially improve
AP. However, EWC, despite achieving the lowest AF (0.35%),
sacrifices plasticity, resulting in nearly an 8% drop in AP compared with our method. This trade-off highlights that minimizing
forgetting alone does not ensure high overall performance, and
that a successful continual learner must simultaneously preserve
past knowledge and remain responsive to new data.
Our proposed model achieves the best balance, ranking first
in AP (88.48%) and maintaining one of the lowest AF values
(0.46%). These results demonstrate that the TWP mechanism
enables the model to retain learned representations while continually integrating novel patterns, thereby addressing the stabilityplasticity dilemma more effectively than other baselines.
The joint training strategy, which learns all tasks simultaneously using full access to past data, serves as an upper-bound
reference. Although it achieves slightly higher AP (89.32%) and
minimal AF (0.11%), such an approach is infeasible in practical
continual learning scenarios where data from previous tasks are
not accessible. The close performance of our model to this upper
bound confirms its scalability and robustness for real-world
blockchain anomaly detection under realistic sequential learning
conditions.
Fig. 6 further illustrates the performance trend of the first
task as the number of learned tasks increases. As expected,
performance on the first task gradually declines with the introduction of new tasks, which is an intuitive manifestation of
catastrophic forgetting. Some baselines (e.g., ER-GNN) occasionally outperform our model on the first task, but their results
fluctuate significantly, reflecting unstable detection efficiency.
By contrast, the proposed model exhibits more stable behavior,
with a much slower decline in performance than competing
methods.
Fig. 7 presents the evolution of average performance across
all tasks. Similar to Fig. 6, performance generally declines as
new tasks are introduced. Nevertheless, our method consistently
achieves the lowest AF among all approaches, with performance
levels approaching the theoretical upper bound. This demonstrates its ability to effectively preserve knowledge from earlier
tasks while maintaining strong adaptability to new ones.

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

Fig. 6.

Average performance on the first task.

Fig. 7.

Average performance across all tasks.

Among the baselines, LwF is a commonly used approach that
seeks to mitigate forgetting by expanding network layers with
new nodes for each task. However, as shown in Fig. 7, its performance is often close to the lower bound for multi-class node
classification, indicating limited adaptability of LwF to GNNs.
Similarly, GEM employs memory replay by storing subsets of
past data, but its performance is unstable and occasionally drops
sharply, likely due to inefficient or rigid replay strategies.
In contrast, EWC and MAS, both of which constrain updates
to important parameters, deliver stronger results, confirming the
effectiveness of protecting critical parameters as a means of
reducing forgetting. Building on this idea, we further incorporate topology-aware parameter importance into these methods,
which enhances their performance and strengthens their ability
to address catastrophic forgetting in GNNs.
In summary, our scheme achieves superior performance
across multiple metrics on the blockchain anomaly detection
dataset. Detailed analysis of experimental results confirms that
the method offers significant advantages in mitigating forgetting,
preserving knowledge from previous tasks, and maintaining
strong performance when learning new tasks.

6073

VI. DISCUSSION
The experimental results presented in Section V demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed graph-based continual learning framework for blockchain anomaly detection. This section
provides a deeper interpretation of these results, discusses their
practical implications, acknowledges the limitations of our current work, and outlines potential directions for future research.

A. Interpretation of Results
The superior performance of our model, particularly when
using GAT as the backbone network, can be attributed to the
synergistic effect of its core components. The attention mechanism inherent in GAT allows the model to dynamically weigh the
importance of neighboring nodes and transactions, which is crucial for identifying subtle and complex fraudulent patterns that
often involve coordinated activities across multiple accounts.
This capability is especially valuable in blockchain ecosystems,
where the relational structure between entities carries significant
signals for anomaly detection.

6074

More importantly, the introduced Topology-aware Weight
Preservation (TWP) module successfully addresses the core
challenge of catastrophic forgetting in continual learning. By
estimating parameter importance based on both task-specific
loss and local topological structures, the TWP module provides a
more nuanced and effective regularization strategy than methods
that consider only loss gradients (e.g., EWC) or generic parameter sensitivity (e.g., MAS). The results in Table V and Figs. 6–7
confirm that our approach achieves an excellent balance between
stability (low AF) and plasticity (high AP), outperforming other
state-of-the-art continual learning methods. This indicates that
explicitly modeling the graph topology is not only beneficial
for the primary detection task but also critical for preserving
knowledge in a sequential learning setting.
B. Practical Implications
The proposed framework provides a scalable and deployable solution for real-world blockchain security monitoring. In
operational environments, new types of attacks and fraudulent
schemes continually emerge, while transaction volumes grow
rapidly. The capability to incrementally learn novel anomalous
patterns, without retraining from scratch on the entire historical
dataset, offers substantial advantages in both computational
efficiency and resource utilization.
Experimental evaluations on 19 distinct categories of
blockchain risk behaviors demonstrate that the proposed approach can not only detect well-known threats such as phishing
and Ponzi schemes, but also adaptively learn the characteristics
of newly emerging risks. This continual learning ability enables
the framework to evolve alongside adversarial tactics, thereby
enhancing its practicality for long-term, adaptive blockchain
anomaly detection and contributing to sustained ecosystem
protection.
The proposed method primarily targets the identification
of abnormal accounts in account-based blockchains such as
Ethereum, where nodes represent accounts and edges correspond to transactions. To extend the approach to UTXO-based
systems (e.g., Bitcoin), an additional address-aggregation process is required to map multiple addresses controlled by the
same entity into a single node. This can be accomplished by
constructing an entity graph that groups related addresses likely
belonging to the same user, as described in prior studies [54],
[143]. After entity aggregation, the resulting structure becomes
conceptually equivalent to the Ethereum account graph, allowing the same continual learning framework to be applied
for anomaly detection. When transferring to UTXO-based systems, Ethereum-specific features (e.g., smart contract attributes)
should be excluded from training to ensure consistency and
comparability across blockchain types.
From a deployment perspective, the framework exhibits three
key advantages. First, its modular architecture allows integration
with various GNN backbones (e.g., GCN, GIN, GAT), enabling
flexible adaptation to diverse blockchain infrastructures with
minimal architectural changes. Second, the incremental update process significantly reduces retraining costs, making it
suitable for security systems that require frequent updates on
continuously streaming blockchain data. Third, the design is

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

compatible with distributed or federated training settings, which
could further enhance scalability when monitoring multiple
blockchain networks simultaneously.
However, large-scale deployment also introduces challenges.
Maintaining real-time performance under high transaction
throughput may require distributed graph processing and optimized GPU scheduling. Moreover, as the number of incremental
tasks grows, the accumulated parameter regularization terms
could increase memory consumption. These aspects suggest
that practical deployments may benefit from adaptive pruning
or periodic model compression strategies.
C. Limitations and Future Directions
While the proposed framework shows promising results, our
study has several limitations that also chart a course for future
research.
r Task-Incremental Setting: Our current framework operates
in a task-incremental learning setting, where task boundaries are clearly defined and known during training. However, in a real-world deployment, anomalies may emerge
in a more blurred and task-agnostic stream. To overcome
this limitation, future work will focus on developing a
task-free or class-incremental adaptation of our topologyaware preservation strategy, enabling effective learning
from a continuous, non-stationary stream of transaction
data without explicit task boundaries.
r Dependency on Label Quality: The performance of the
model is inherently tied to the quality and timeliness of
the labels used for each task. Label scarcity and potential
labeling noise in blockchain data remain persistent challenges. To address this, we plan to explore integrating selfsupervised pre-training and semi-supervised learning techniques into our continual learning paradigm. This would
mitigate the dependency on large amounts of meticulously
labeled data for each new task, enhancing the framework’s
robustness and practicality.
r Computational Overhead and Scalability: Although the
proposed approach avoids full retraining, calculating
topology-aware importance scores still introduces nonnegligible computational overhead. For high-throughput
or multi-chain monitoring scenarios, this may affect realtime responsiveness. Future work will investigate efficient
approximations for the TWP module, such as importance
sampling, sparse parameter updates, or low-rank approximations, to reduce memory and time costs. Additionally,
integrating the method into parallelized graph processing
frameworks could further enhance scalability for industrial
deployment.
r Potential Failure Cases: The framework assumes that the
graph structure sufficiently captures relationships relevant
to fraud detection. In scenarios where malicious behavior
is intentionally obfuscated or dispersed across unrelated
transactions, graph-based correlations may weaken, leading to reduced detection sensitivity. Exploring hybrid architectures that combine graph-based learning with temporal
or semantic anomaly modeling represents an important
future direction.

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

In conclusion, the discussion highlights that our proposed
method is not only effective but also lays a foundation for
building more adaptive, efficient, and robust security systems
for the evolving blockchain landscape. The identified limitations
provide a clear roadmap for future research to enhance the
framework’s practicality and performance.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a graph-based continual learning framework for anomalous account detection in blockchain systems.
The proposed approach achieves high detection accuracy while
effectively mitigating catastrophic forgetting, a long-standing
challenge in dynamic environments. At its core, the TopologyAware Weight Preservation module captures structural dependencies within transaction graphs and evaluates parameter importance from both task-specific and topological perspectives.
By constraining updates to critical parameters, the model preserves past knowledge while adapting to new transaction patterns.
Beyond its empirical success, the framework demonstrates
strong potential for real-world blockchain security deployment.
Its modular architecture supports integration with various GNN
backbones, and its incremental update mechanism substantially
reduces retraining costs, enabling continuous monitoring over
large-scale blockchain data streams. Nonetheless, practical scalability introduces additional challenges, including the need for
distributed processing, efficient memory management, and lowlatency inference under high transaction throughput. Addressing
these challenges is key to bridging the gap between research
prototypes and production-ready systems.
Future work will explore task-free or class-incremental continual learning to handle continuously evolving transaction
streams without explicit task boundaries, as well as selfsupervised and semi-supervised extensions to alleviate reliance
on labeled data. Moreover, hybrid architectures that combine
graph-based structural reasoning with temporal and semantic
representations may further enhance robustness against obfuscated or cross-chain fraudulent activities.
In summary, this study establishes a foundation for continual,
topology-aware graph learning in blockchain anomaly detection,
advancing toward scalable, adaptive, and intelligent security
systems capable of protecting decentralized ecosystems in the
long term.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Chen and C. Bellavitis, “Blockchain disruption and decentralized
finance: The rise of decentralized business models,” J. Bus. Venturing
Insights, vol. 13, 2020, Art. no. e00151, doi: 10.1016/j.jbvi.2019.e00151.
[2] J. Proelss, S. Sévigny, and D. Schweizer, “GameFi: The perfect symbiosis
of blockchain, tokens, DeFi, and NFTs?,” Int. Rev. Financial Anal.,
vol. 90, 2023, Art. no. 102916.
[3] B. Liu, P. Szalachowski, and J. Zhou, “A first look into DeFI oracles,”
in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. Decentralized Appl. Infrastructures, 2021,
pp. 39–48.
[4] Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Song, Y. Liu, J. Li, and J. Zhou, “A scheme
for intelligent blockchain-based manufacturing industry supply chain
management,” Computing, vol. 103, no. 8, pp. 1771–1790, 2021,
doi: 10.1007/s00607-020-00880-z.

6075

[5] N. Patel, A. Shukla, S. Tanwar, and D. Singh, “KRanTi: Blockchain-based
farmer’s credit scheme for agriculture-food supply chain,” Trans. Emerg.
Telecommun. Technol., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1–16, 2024.
[6] M. Uddin, “Blockchain Medledger: Hyperledger fabric enabled drug
traceability system for counterfeit drugs in pharmaceutical industry,” Int. J. Pharmaceutics, vol. 597, 2021, Art. no. 120235,
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.120235.
[7] S. Aich et al., “Protecting personal healthcare record using blockchain
federated learning technologies,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Commun.
Technol., 2021, pp. 109–112.
[8] P. Bhattacharya, S. Tanwar, U. Bodkhe, S. Tyagi, and N. Kumar,
“BinDaaS: Blockchain-based deep-learning as-a-service in healthcare 4.0 applications,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 1242–1255, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[9] A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, and A. Lippman, “MedRec: Using
blockchain for medical data access and permission management,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Open Big Data, 2016, pp. 25–30.
[10] J. Leng, M. Zhou, J. L. Zhao, Y. Huang, and Y. Bian, “Blockchain
security: A survey of techniques and research directions,” IEEE Trans.
Servi. Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2490–2510, Jul./Aug. 2022.
[11] S. Foley, J. R. Karlsen, and T. J. Putnins, “Sex, drugs, and bitcoin:
How much illegal activity is financed through cryptocurrencies?,” Rev.
Financial Stud., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1798–1853, 2019.
[12] M. Bartoletti, S. Carta, T. Cimoli, and R. Saia, “Dissecting ponzi schemes
on ethereum: Identification, analysis, and impact,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 102, pp. 259–277, 2020.
[13] J. Lorenz, M. I. Silva, D. Aparício, J. T. Ascensão, and P. Bizarro,
“Machine learning methods to detect money laundering in the bitcoin
blockchain in the presence of label scarcity,” in Proc. 1st ACM Int. Conf.
AI Finance, 2020, Art. no. 23.
[14] K. Faber, R. Corizzo, B. Sniezynski, and N. Japkowicz, “Lifelong continual learning for anomaly detection: New challenges, perspectives, and
insights,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 41364–41380, 2024.
[15] W. W. Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M.
Portmann, “Inspection-L: Self-supervised GNN node embeddings for
money laundering detection in bitcoin,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, no. 16,
pp. 19406–19417, 2023.
[16] R. Tan, Q. Tan, P. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Graph neural network for Ethereum
fraud detection,” in Proc. 12th IEEE Int. Conf. Big Knowl., 2021,
pp. 78–85.
[17] L. Chen, J. Peng, Y. Liu, J. Li, F. Xie, and Z. Zheng, “Phishing scams detection in Ethereum transaction network,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2021.
[18] D. Lin, J. Wu, Q. Yuan, and Z. Zheng, “T-EDGE: Temporal WEighted
MultiDiGraph embedding for Ethereum transaction network analysis,”
Front. Phys., vol. 8, pp. 1–9, 2020.
[19] R. Tan, Q. Tan, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Xie, and Z. Li, “Ethereum fraud
behavior detection based on graph neural networks,” Computing, vol. 105,
no. 10, pp. 2143–2170, 2023, doi: 10.1007/s00607-023-01177-7.
[20] R. Hadsell, D. Rao, A. A. Rusu, and R. Pascanu, “Embracing change:
Continual learning in deep neural networks,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 1028–1040, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.004.
[21] X. Zhang, D. Song, and D. Tao, “Continual learning on graphs: Challenges, solutions, and opportunities,” Feb. 2024, arXiv:2402.11565.
[22] L. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “A comprehensive survey of
continual learning: Theory, method and application,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5362–5383, Aug. 2024.
[23] S. Li, R. Wang, H. Wu, S. Zhong, and F. Xu, “SIEGE: Self-supervised
incremental deep graph learning for Ethereum phishing scam detection,”
in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, New York, NY, USA, 2023,
pp. 8881–8890, doi: 10.1145/3581783.3612461.
[24] P. Bielak, K. Tagowski, M. Falkiewicz, T. Kajdanowicz, and N. V.
Chawla, “FILDNE: A framework for incremental learning of dynamic networks embeddings,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 236, Nov. 2020,
Art. no. 107453.
[25] U. Hercog and A. Povše, “Taint analysis of the bitcoin network,” 2019,
arXiv:1907.01538.
[26] K. Toyoda, T. Ohtsuki, and P. T. Mathiopoulos, “Multi-class bitcoinenabled service identification based on transaction history summarization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr. Cybern.: IEEE Conf. Internet Things
Green Comput. Commun. Cyber Phys. Social Comput. Smart Data
Blockchain Comput. Inf. Technol., 2018, pp. 1153–1160.
[27] P. Nerurkar, Y. Busnel, R. Ludinard, K. Shah, S. Bhirud, and D. Patel,
“Detecting illicit entities in bitcoin using supervised learning of ensemble
decision trees,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf., 2020, pp. 25–30.

6076

[28] E. P. Ruiz and J. Angelis, “Combating money laundering with machine learning–applicability of supervised-learning algorithms at cryptocurrency exchanges,” J. Money Laundering Control, vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 766–778, 2022.
[29] G. Vlahavas, K. Karasavvas, and A. Vakali, “Unsupervised clustering of
bitcoin transactions,” Financial Innov., vol. 10, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 25.
[30] C. Cholevas, E. Angeli, Z. Sereti, E. Mavrikos, and G. E. Tsekouras,
“Anomaly detection in blockchain networks using unsupervised learning:
A survey,” Algorithms, vol. 17, no. 5, 2024, Art. no. 201.
[31] N. Nayyer, N. Javaid, M. Akbar, A. Aldegheishem, N. Alrajeh, and M.
Jamil, “A new framework for fraud detection in bitcoin transactions
through ensemble stacking model in smart cities,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 90916–90938, 2023.
[32] Q. Umer, J.-W. Li, M. R. Ashraf, R. N. Bashir, and H. Ghous, “Ensemble
deep learning-based prediction of fraudulent cryptocurrency transactions,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 95213–95224, 2023.
[33] V. A. Siris, D. Dimopoulos, N. Fotiou, S. Voulgaris, and G. C. Polyzos,
“Decentralized authorization in constrained IoT environments exploiting interledger mechanisms,” Comput. Commun., vol. 152, no. 779984,
pp. 243–251, 2020.
[34] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and
federated learning for privacy-preserved data sharing in industrial IoT,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4177–4186, Jul. 2020.
[35] A. S. Omar and O. Basir, “Identity management in IoTt networks using
blockchain and smart contracts,” in Proc. IEEE 2018 Int. Congr. Cybern.:
2018 IEEE Conf. Internet Things, Green Comput. Commun., Cyber, Phys.
Social Comput., Smart Data, Blockchain, Comput. Inf. Technol., 2018,
pp. 994–1000.
[36] F. Zhao, B. Yang, C. Li, C. Zhang, L. Zhu, and G. Liang, “Two-layer
consensus based on primary-secondary consortium chain data sharing
for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9,
pp. 13828–13838, Sep. 2024.
[37] W. Wang, J. Liang, C. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Zhu, and S. Guo, “Epass:
Efficient and privacy-preserving asynchronous payment on blockchain,”
2025, arXiv:2506.09387.
[38] D. Xiao, C. Zhang, H. Deng, J. Liang, L. Wang, and L. Zhu, “Parallelizing
universal atomic swaps for multi-chain cryptocurrency exchanges,” in
Proc. 34th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2025, pp. 4073–4092.
[39] C. G. Akcora, Y. R. Gel, and M. Kantarcioglu, “Blockchain: A graph
primer,” Dec. 2022, arXiv:1708.08749.
[40] M. Wu, K. Wang, X. Cai, S. Guo, M. Guo, and C. Rong, “A comprehensive survey of blockchain: From theory to IoT applications
and beyond,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8114–8154,
Oct. 2019.
[41] M. N. M. Bhutta et al., “A survey on blockchain technology: Evolution,
architecture and security,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 61048–61073, 2021.
[42] I. C. Lin and T. C. Liao, “A survey of blockchain security issues and
challenges,” Int. J. Netw. Secur., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, 2017.
[43] Z. Zheng et al., “An overview on smart contracts: Challenges, advances
and platforms,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 105, pp. 475–491,
2020.
[44] S. Bouraga, “A taxonomy of blockchain consensus protocols: A survey and classification framework,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 168, 2021,
Art. no. 114384, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114384.
[45] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” SSRN
Electron. J., pp. 1–9, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8356459/
[46] X. T. Lee, A. Khan, S. Sen Gupta, Y. H. Ong, and X. Liu, “Measurements,
analyses, and insights on the entire ethereum blockchain network,” in
Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2020, pp. 155–166.
[47] A. Khan, “Graph analysis of the Ethereum blockchain data: A survey of
datasets, methods, and future work,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Blockchain,
2022, pp. 250–257.
[48] W. Chan and A. Olmsted, “Ethereum transaction graph analysis,” in Proc.
12th Int. Conf. Internet Technol. Secured Trans., 2017, pp. 498–500. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/
presentation/kalodner
[49] D. Ron and A. Shamir, “Quantitative analysis of the full bitcoin transaction graph,” in Proc. Financial Cryptography Data Secur., vol. 7859,
2013, pp. 6–24, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-39884-1\_2.
[50] D. D. F. Maesa, A. Marino, and L. Ricci, “Uncovering the bitcoin
blockchain: An analysis of the full users graph,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int.
Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Analytics, 2016, pp. 537–546.
[51] M. Fleder, M. S. Kester, and S. Pillai, “Bitcoin transaction graph analysis,” 2015, arXiv:1502.01657.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[52] A. Sharma, A. Agrawal, A. Bhatia, and K. Tiwari, “Bitcoin’s blockchain
data analytics: A graph theoretic perspective,” Lecture Notes Netw. Syst.,
vol. 449, pp. 459–470, 2022.
[53] L. Serena, S. Ferretti, and G. D’Angelo, “Cryptocurrencies activity as a
complex network: Analysis of transactions graphs,” Peer-to-Peer Netw.
Appl., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 839–853, 2022.
[54] S. Meiklejohn et al., “A fistful of bitcoins: Characterizing payments
among men with no names,” Commun. ACM, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 86–93,
2016.
[55] I. Alqassem, I. Rahwan, and D. Svetinovic, “The anti-social system
properties: Bitcoin network data analysis,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern. Syst., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 21–31, Jan. 2020.
[56] B. Kılıç, C. Özturan, and A. Sen, “Parallel analysis of Ethereum
blockchain transaction data using cluster computing,” Cluster Comput.,
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1885–1898, 2022.
[57] M. Weber et al., “Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with graph convolutional networks for financial forensics,” 2019,
arXiv:1908.02591.
[58] Y. Elmougy and L. Liu, “Demystifying fraudulent transactions and
illicit nodes in the bitcoin network for financial forensics,” in
Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023,
pp. 3979–3990.
[59] S. Al-E’mari, M. Anbar, Y. Sanjalawe, and S. Manickam, A Labeled
Trans.-Based Dataset on the Ethereum Netw., vol. 1347, Singapore:
Springer, 2021, doi: 10.1007/978-981-33-6835-4_5.
[60] H. Kalodner et al., “BlockSci: Design and applications of a
blockchain analysis platform,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp.,
2020, pp. 2721–2738. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/kalodner
[61] Y. Qi, J. Wu, H. Xu, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain data mining with graph
learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46,
no. 2, pp. 729–748, Feb. 2024.
[62] J. S. Tharani, E. Y. A. Charles, Z. Hou, M. Palaniswami, and V.
Muthukkumarasamy, “Graph based visualisation techniques for analysis
of blockchain transactions,” in Proc. Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2021,
pp. 427–430.
[63] M. A. Prado-Romero, C. Doerr, and A. G. Alonso, “Discovering bitcoin mixing using anomaly detection,” in Proc. Iberoamerican Congr. Pattern Recognit., vol. 10657, 2017, pp. 534–541,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-75193-1\_64.
[64] N. Anita and M. Vijayalakshmi, “Blockchain security attack: A brief
survey,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. Technol., 2019,
pp. 1–6.
[65] J. Cheng, L. Xie, X. Tang, N. Xiong, and B. Liu, “A survey of security
threats and defense on blockchain,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 80,
no. 20, pp. 30623–30652, 2021.
[66] Y. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, M. Han, M. Siddula, and Z. Cai, “A survey on
blockchain systems: Attacks, defenses, and privacy preservation,” HighConfidence Comput., vol. 2, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 100048.
[67] O. Mounnan, O. Manad, L. Boubchir, A. El Mouatasim, and
B. Daachi, “A review on deep anomaly detection in blockchain,”
Blockchain: Res. Appl., vol. 5, no. 4, 2024, Art. no. 100227,
doi: 10.1016/j.bcra.2024.100227.
[68] C. Yan, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, and B. Liu, “Blockchain
abnormal behavior awareness methods: A survey,” Cybersecurity, vol. 5,
no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 5, doi: 10.1186/s42400-021-00107-4.
[69] M. Ul Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Anomaly detection in
blockchain networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 289–318, Firstquarter 2023.
[70] J. Osterrieder, S. Chan, J. Chu, Y. Zhang, B. H. Misheva, and C. Mare,
“Enhancing security in blockchain networks: Anomalies, frauds, and
advanced detection techniques,” Feb. 2024, arXiv:2402.11231.
[71] M. Signorini, M. Pontecorvi, W. Kanoun, and R. Di Pietro, “BAD:
A blockchain anomaly detection solution,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 173481–173490, 2020.
[72] T. Voronov, D. Raz, and O. Rottenstreich, “A framework for anomaly
detection in blockchain networks with sketches,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 686–698, Feb. 2024.
[73] S. S. Dash, S. K. Nayak, and D. Mishra, “A review on machine learning algorithms,” Smart Innov. Syst. Technol., vol. 153, pp. 495–507,
2021.
[74] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, perspectives,
and prospects,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255–260, 2015.
[75] S. Hisham, M. Makhtar, and A. A. Aziz, “A comprehensive review of
significant learning for anomalous transaction detection using a machine

SHEN et al.: BLOCKCHAIN ANOMALY TRANSACTION DETECTION METHOD BASED ON GRAPH CONTINUAL LEARNING

learning method in a decentralized blockchain network,” Int. J. Adv.
Technol. Eng. Exploration, vol. 9, no. 95, pp. 1366–1396, 2022.
[76] V. Chithanuru and M. Ramaiah, “An anomaly detection on blockchain
infrastructure using artificial intelligence techniques: Challenges and
future directions–A review,” Concurrency Comput.: Pract. Exp., vol. 35,
no. 22, 2023, Art. no. e7724.
[77] I. Alarab, S. Prakoonwit, and M. I. Nacer, “Comparative analysis using
supervised learning methods for anti-money laundering in bitcoin,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf., 2020, pp. 11–17.
[78] B. Chen, F. Wei, and C. Gu, “Bitcoin theft detection based on supervised machine learning algorithms,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
pp. 1–10, 2016.
[79] P. Nerurkar, S. Bhirud, D. Patel, R. Ludinard, Y. Busnel, and S. Kumari,
“Supervised learning model for identifying illegal activities in bitcoin,”
Appl. Intell., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 3824–3843, 2021.
[80] Y. Elmougy and O. Manzi, “Anomaly detection on bitcoin, ethereum
networks using GPU-accelerated machine learning methods,” in Proc.
31st Int. Conf. Comput. Theory Appl., 2021, pp. 166–171.
[81] S. Sayadi, S. Ben Rejeb, and Z. Choukair, “Anomaly detection model over
blockchain electronic transactions,” in Proc. 15th Int. Wireless Commun.
Mobile Comput. Conf., 2019, pp. 895–900. [Online]. Available: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8766765/
[82] T. Pham and S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in bitcoin network using
unsupervised learning methods,” 2016, arXiv:1611.03941.
[83] K. Martin, M. Rahouti, M. Ayyash, and I. Alsmadi, “Anomaly detection
in blockchain using network representation and machine learning,” Secur.
Privacy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1–12, 2022.
[84] O. Shafiq, “Anomaly detection in block chain,” Int. J. Emerg. Trends Eng.
Res., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 16–21, 2024.
[85] M. Hasan, M. S. Rahman, H. Janicke, and I. H. Sarker, “Detecting
anomalies in blockchain transactions using machine learning classifiers
and explainability analysis,” Blockchain: Res. Appl., vol. 5, no. 3, 2024,
Art. no. 100207, doi: 10.1016/j.bcra.2024.100207.
[86] L. Pahuja and A. Kamal, “EnLEFD-DM: Ensemble learning based
ethereum fraud detection using CRISP-DM framework,” Expert Syst.,
vol. 40, no. 9, 2023, Art. no. e13379.
[87] T. Ashfaq et al., “A machine learning and blockchain based efficient fraud detection mechanism,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, pp. 1–20,
2022.
[88] Z. Huang et al., “Who is gambling? Finding cryptocurrency gamblers
using multi-modal retrieval methods,” Int. J. Multimedia Inf. Retrieval,
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 539–551, 2022.
[89] Q. Yuan, B. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Zhang, and X. Zhang, “Detecting
phishing scams on ethereum based on transaction records,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2020, pp. 1–5.
[90] W. Chen, Z. Zheng, J. Cui, E. Ngai, P. Zheng, and Y. Zhou, “Detecting
ponzi schemes on ethereum: Towards healthier blockchain technology,”
in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 1409–1418.
[91] A. Ehsan et al., “Enhanced anomaly detection in ethereum: Unveiling
and classifying threats with machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 176440–176456, 2024.
[92] P. Azad, C. Akcora, and A. Khan, “Machine learning for blockchain
data analysis: Progress and opportunities,” Distrib. Ledger Technol.: Res.
Pract., vol. 5, 2025, Art. no. 10.
[93] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[94] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2009.
[95] T. Chen et al., “Understanding Ethereum via graph analysis,” ACM Trans.
Internet Technol., vol. 20, no. 2, 2020, Art. no. 18.
[96] A. Khan and C. G. Akcora, “Graph-based management and mining of
blockchain data,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022,
pp. 5140–5143.
[97] J. Song, P. Zhang, Q. Qu, Y. Bai, Y. Gu, and G. Yu, “Why blockchain needs
graph: A survey on studies, scenarios, and solutions,” J. Parallel Distrib.
Comput., vol. 180, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 104730. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0743731523001004
[98] A. Gaihre, Y. Luo, and H. Liu, “Do bitcoin users really care about
anonymity? An analysis of the bitcoin transaction graph,” in Proc. 2018
IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2018, pp. 1198–1207.
[99] L. Liu, W. T. Tsai, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, and D. Yang, “Automatic blockchain whitepapers analysis via heterogeneous graph neural network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 145, pp. 1–12, 2020,
doi: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.05.014.

6077

[100] T. Yu, X. Chen, Z. Xu, and J. Xu, “MP-GCN: A phishing nodes detection
approach via graph convolution network for ethereum,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12,
no. 14, 2022, Art. no. 7294.
[101] S. Li, G. Gou, C. Liu, C. Hou, Z. Li, and G. Xiong, “TTAGN: Temporal
transaction aggregation graph network for ethereum phishing scams
detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 661–669.
[102] Y. Xia, J. Liu, and J. Wu, “Phishing detection on Ethereum via attributed
ego-graph embedding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 69,
no. 5, pp. 2538–2542, May 2022.
[103] V. Gupta, N. Mishra, Y. Dash, U. Kumar, and A. Abraham, “Graph
convolutional network-driven adaptive learning framework for fraud
detection in complex transactional cryptonetworks,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Commun. Secur. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 685–689.
[104] C. Yan, X. Han, Y. Zhu, D. Du, Z. Lu, and Y. Liu, “Phishing behavior detection on different blockchains via adversarial domain adaptation,” Cybersecurity, vol. 7, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 45,
doi: 10.1186/s42400-024-00237-5.
[105] M. Ghosh, S. Srivastava, A. Upadhyaya, R. Halder, and J. Chandra, “CATALOG: Exploiting joint temporal dependencies for enhanced
phishing detection on ethereum,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2025,
pp. 969–977.
[106] Y. Wan, F. Xiao, and D. Zhang, “Early-stage phishing detection on
the Ethereum transaction network,” Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 7,
pp. 3707–3719, 2023.
[107] J. Luo, J. Qin, R. Wang, and L. Li, “A phishing account detection model
via network embedding for ethereum,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp.
Briefs, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 622–626, Feb. 2024.
[108] Z. Lin, X. Xiao, G. Hu, B. Zhang, Q. Liu, and X. Luo, “Phish2vec:
A temporal and heterogeneous network embedding approach for detecting phishing scams on Ethereum,” in Proc. Annu. IEEE Commun.
Soc. Conf. Sensor Mesh Ad Hoc Commun. Netw. Workshops, 2023,
pp. 501–509.
[109] N. Pocher, M. Zichichi, F. Merizzi, M. Z. Shafiq, and S. Ferretti, “Detecting anomalous cryptocurrency transactions: An AML/CFT application
of machine learning-based forensics,” Electron. Markets, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 1–17, 2023, doi: 10.1007/s12525-023-00654-3.
[110] S. Ouyang, Q. Bai, H. Feng, and B. Hu, “Bitcoin money laundering
detection via subgraph contrastive learning,” Entropy, vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 1–24, 2024.
[111] P. Nerurkar, “Illegal activity detection on bitcoin transaction using
deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 5503–5520, 2023,
doi: 10.1007/s00500-022-07779-1.
[112] L. Cheng, F. Zhu, Q. Shao, J. Pu, and F. Zeng, “Early detection
of malicious crypto addresses with asset path tracing and selection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1154–1166,
Mar. 2025.
[113] H. Al-Harbi, “Detecting anomalies in blockchain transactions using
spatial-temporal graph neural networks,” Adv. Manage. Intell. Technol.,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2025.
[114] I. Rasul, S. M. I. Shaboj, M. A. Rafi, Md K. Miah, Md R. Islam, and A.
Ahmed, “Detecting financial fraud in real-time transactions using graph
neural networks and anomaly detection,” J. Econ. Finance Accounting
Stud., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 131–142, Feb. 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//al-kindipublisher.com/index.php/jefas/article/view/10159
[115] L. Liu, W. T. Tsai, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, H. Peng, and M. Liu, “Blockchainenabled fraud discovery through abnormal smart contract detection
on ethereum,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 128, pp. 158–166,
2022.
[116] C. Liu, Y. Xu, and Z. Sun, “Directed dynamic attribute graph anomaly
detection based on evolved graph attention for blockchain,” Knowl. Inf.
Syst., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 989–1010, 2024.
[117] Z. Zhu, B. Pan, and N. Stakhanova, “EtherShield: Time-interval analysis
for detection of malicious behavior on ethereum,” ACM Trans. Internet
Technol., vol. 24, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 2.
[118] Z. Geng, Y. Cao, J. Li, and Y. Han, “Novel blockchain transaction
provenance model with graph attention mechanism,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 209, 2022, Art. no. 118411.
[119] Z. Guo et al., “Graph-based covert transaction detection and protection in
blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 2244–2257,
2024.
[120] J. Wang, H. Jin, J. Chen, J. Tan, and K. Zhong, “Anomaly detection in internet of medical things with blockchain from the perspective of deep neural network,” Inf. Sci., vol. 617, pp. 133–149, 2022,
doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2022.10.060.
[121] B. Liu, “Lifelong machine learning: A paradigm for continuous learning,”
Front. Comput. Sci., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 359–361, 2017.

6078

[122] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526,
2017.
[123] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018.
[124] D. Lopez-Paz and M. Ranzato, “Gradient episodic memory for continual
learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6468–6477.
[125] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars, “Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 11207, 2018, pp. 144–161,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9\_9.
[126] J. Serra, D. Suris, M. Mirón, and A. Karatzoglou, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting with hard attention to the task,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 7225–7234.
[127] X. He, J. Sygnowski, A. Galashov, A. A. Rusu, Y. W. Teh, and R.
Pascanu, “Task agnostic continual learning via meta learning,” 2019,
arXiv:1906.05201.
[128] J. Xu and Z. Zhu, “Reinforced continual learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 899–908.
[129] M. De Lange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in
classification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44,
no. 7, pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022.
[130] G. M. van de Ven and A. S. Tolias, “Three scenarios for continual
learning,” 2019, arXiv:1904.07734.
[131] G. M. van de Ven, T. Tuytelaars, and A. S. Tolias, “Three types of incremental learning,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1185–1197,
2022.
[132] F. Zhou and C. Cao, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in graph neural
networks with experience replay,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2021, pp. 4714–4722.
[133] H. Liu, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
graph neural networks,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 8653–8661.
[134] L. Sun, J. Ye, H. Peng, F. Wang, and P. S. Yu, “Self-supervised continual
graph learning in adaptive riemannian spaces,” in Proc. 37th AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4633–4642.
[135] J. Su, D. Zou, Z. Zhang, and C. Wu, “Towards robust graph incremental learning on evolving graphs,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 202,
pp. 32728–32748, 2023.
[136] Z. Tian, D. Zhang, and H.-N. Dai, “Continual learning on graphs: A
survey,” 2024, arXiv:2402.06330.
[137] J. Ko, S. Kang, T. Kwon, H. Moon, and K. Shin, “BeGin: Extensive
benchmark scenarios and an easy-to-use framework for graph continual learning,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 16, no. 1, 2025,
Art. no. 19.
[138] C. Qi, “Graph neural network and increment learning in blockchain,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/
202409.2117/v1
[139] H. N. Neto, M. A. Lopez, N. C. Fernandes, and D. M. Mattos, “MineCap:
Super incremental learning for detecting and blocking cryptocurrency
mining on software-defined networking,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 75,
no. 3/4, pp. 121–131, 2020.
[140] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
Toulon, France, 2017, pp. 1–14. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=SJU4ayYgl

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[141] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
New Orleans, LA, USA, 2019, pp. 1–17. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km
[142] D. Lopez-Paz and M. Ranzato, “Gradient episodic memory for continual
learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6470–6479.
[143] M. Conti, E. S. Kumar, C. Lal, and S. Ruj, “A survey on
security and privacy issues of bitcoin,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3416–3452, Fourthquarter 2018,
doi: 10.1109/COMST.2018.2842460.

Xiaodong Shen received the bachelor’s and master’s
degrees in 2015 and 2018, respectively, from the
School of Computer Science and Technology, the
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology. His research interests include crowdsensing, security & privacy in IoT, and blockchain applications.

Chang Xu received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in
2013. She is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing. Her research
interests include security & privacy in VANET, and
Big Data security.

Liehuang Zhu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2004. He
is currently a Professor with the School of Cyberspace
Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests include security protocol
analysis and design, group key exchange protocols,
wireless sensor networks, and cloud computing.