2270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Blockchain Meets Adaptive Honeypots: A
Trust-Aware Approach to Next-Gen IoT Security
Yazan Otoum , Senior Member, IEEE, Arghavan Asad, and Amiya Nayak , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Edge computing-based Next-Generation Wireless
Networks (NGWN)-IoT offer enhanced bandwidth capacity for
large-scale service provisioning, but remain vulnerable to evolving
cyber threats. Existing intrusion detection and prevention methods struggle to counter dynamically evolving cyber threats, as
they often rely on static signatures or isolated anomaly detection
techniques. These approaches lack adaptability to novel attack
vectors, exhibit high false negative rates, and fail to integrate realtime threat intelligence, leaving NGWN-IoT systems vulnerable
to sophisticated adversaries. We propose a dynamic approach to
detect and prevent attacks. First, blockchain-based authentication
utilizes the Deoxys Authentication Algorithm (DAA) to verify the
legitimacy of IoT devices before data transmission. Next, a bi-stage
intrusion detection system is introduced, where the first stage
utilizes signature-based detection via an Improved Random Forest
(IRF) algorithm. In contrast, the second stage applies feature-based
anomaly detection using a Diffusion Convolution Recurrent Neural Network (DCRNN). To ensure Quality of Service (QoS) and
maintain Service Level Agreements (SLA), trust-aware service
migration is performed using Heap-Based Optimization (HBO).
Additionally, on-demand virtual High-Interaction honeypots deceive attackers and extract attack patterns, which are securely
stored using the Bimodal Lattice Signature Scheme (BLISS) to
enhance signature-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). The
proposed framework is implemented in the NS3 simulation environment and evaluated against existing methods across multiple
performance metrics, including accuracy, attack detection rate,
false negative rate, precision, recall, ROC curve, memory usage,
CPU usage, and execution time. Experimental results demonstrate
that the framework significantly outperforms existing approaches,
reinforcing the security of NGWN-enabled IoT ecosystems.
Index Terms—Blockchain, adaptive honeypots, IoT security,
intrusion prevention, trust-aware networks, next generation IDS.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE rapid growth of IoT applications has been significantly
driven by advancements in Next-Generation Wireless Networks (NGWN). These networks enable efficient large-scale
service provisioning through technologies such as Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC), which improves computational efficiency
by processing data closer to users [1]. However, the increasing
connectivity and integration of IoT devices within NGWN environments have also introduced a wide array of cybersecurity

T

Received 29 May 2025; revised 21 August 2025; accepted 15 September 2025.
Date of publication 18 September 2025; date of current version 11 December
2025. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding
author: Yazan Otoum.)
Yazan Otoum and Arghavan Asad are with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Algoma University, Sault Ste. Marie, ON P6A 2G4, Canada
(e-mail: otoum@algomau.ca).
Amiya Nayak is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3611954

vulnerabilities [2]. Traditional intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms often fall short in providing robust security,
as adversaries continually evolve their attack strategies [3].
Securing NGWN-enabled IoT networks from evolving cyber
threats is a crucial challenge [4], [5], where existing security
measures struggle to keep pace with dynamic attack patterns,
underscoring the need for a resilient and adaptable framework.
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are fundamental to securing
IoT networks, employing methods categorized as Signaturebased IDS (SIDS) and Anomaly-based IDS (AIDS). While SIDS
are effective at detecting known threats by comparing incoming
traffic to predefined attack signatures, they are unable to identify
novel or previously unknown attacks [6]. Conversely, AIDS
analyze various traffic features to detect anomalies, yet their
generalization capabilities and computational efficiency remain
limited [7]. Advanced techniques, such as deep learning-based
anomaly detection, have shown promise [8], but relying solely
on network flow features remains inadequate [9]. Furthermore,
current IDS approaches face challenges in achieving real-time
detection while minimizing false positives and maintaining
adaptability to evolving threats [10], [11]. Blockchain technology has emerged as a potential solution to enhance security in
IoT environments, providing tamper-resistant and decentralized
trust management [12]. Despite its benefits, blockchain-based
IDS solutions often encounter challenges related to computational overhead, transaction latency, and scalability in resourceconstrained settings [13], [14]. Additionally, deploying multiple
monitoring entities increases the complexity of security management [15]. Honeypots have proven effective as deception
mechanisms to attract attackers and analyze attack patterns [16];
however, static honeypots or those lacking adaptive features
fail to address emerging threats. Game-theoretic models for
attack detection [17] also have limitations, as they often assume
perfect knowledge of attacker strategies, which is impractical in
real-world scenarios. Despite numerous advancements, NGWNenabled IoT networks continue to face significant security challenges, including latency issues due to centralized processing,
high false alarm rates from anomaly detection models trained
on insufficient data, and a lack of adaptive defence mechanisms to counter dynamic attack strategies. Addressing these
challenges necessitates a more resilient, adaptive, and efficient
security framework tailored to the unique demands of NGWNbased IoT systems. To address the evolving challenges in IoT
security, we propose a trust-aware framework that integrates
blockchain-based authentication, advanced intrusion detection,
and dynamic honeypot deception to support real-time threat
mitigation with low computational overhead. Our system employs the Deoxys Authentication Algorithm (DAA) [18] for
secure device legitimacy verification, the Improved Random

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

Forest (IRF) [19] for robust and accurate intrusion classification
using adaptive entropy-variance feature selection, and the Diffusion Convolution Recurrent Neural Network (DCRNN) [20]
for modelling spatial-temporal traffic behaviour in distributed
IoT networks. These components are integrated into a tightly
orchestrated architecture, where detection, prediction, trust management, and service migration operate in a dynamic feedback
loop. DCRNN-based traffic forecasting informs the Hierarchical
Blockchain Offloading (HBO) module’s node selection, while
real-time trust scores are updated via the BLISS module. This
cohesive, adaptive design enables scalable, context-aware, and
resilient threat defence tailored for NGWN-enabled IoT environments. Our research advances the state of IoT security through
the following key contributions:
r A blockchain-based authentication mechanism that ensures the legitimacy of IoT devices and prevents impersonation attacks using the DAA.
r A bi-stage intrusion detection framework that combines
IRF-based SIDS with DCRNN-based AIDS, improving
detection accuracy while maintaining efficiency.
r A moving target defence strategy that dynamically migrates services to trusted edge nodes based on trust evaluation, mitigating the risk of service compromise.
r A deployment of high-interaction, on-demand virtual honeypots to deceive attackers, extract attack signatures, and
enhance IDS training using securely stored attack patterns.
The proposed approach is implemented and evaluated
in the NS3 simulation environment, demonstrating a 25%
improvement in detection accuracy, a 30% reduction in false
negatives, and enhanced resource efficiency compared to existing methods. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II provides a comprehensive literature review of existing
intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms. Section III outlines the problem statement and research challenges. Section IV
presents the proposed model methodology in detail. Section V
discusses the experimental setup and performance evaluation.
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and outlines directions
for future work.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
This section surveys recent advancements in IDS for NGWNenabled IoT environments, organizing them into four key categories: AI-enhanced IDS, Blockchain-assisted IDS, Honeypotorchestrated IDS, and LLM-driven IDS.
A. AI-Enhanced IDS
An intrusion detection and prevention system for NC-assisted
mobile small cells was proposed in [21]. Initially, the nodes
divide the message into a sequence of packets. The proposed
work consists of four steps; the first is the tag generation process,
which calculates the tag value for every coded packet. The
second one is the swapping process, which avoids tag pollution
attacks from coded packets by having the source node swap the
tag and coded packets. The third one is the key distribution process, where the maximum number of key vectors is assigned to
every intermediate and destination node. Finally, the verification
process verifies the swapped coded packets. During verification,
if the result equals zero, the packet will be sent to the next level;
otherwise, it will be dropped. However, this approach uses a

2271

single security parameter for key generation, which is insufficient for security; hence, attackers can easily compromise it,
resulting in poor security. A multi-tenant autonomic framework
for securing NGWNs was presented in [22], targeting automated
intrusion detection across distributed network segments. The
architecture encompasses radio access, edge computing, core
network, and interdomain layers. By modelling dynamic NGWN
traffic, the system employs a layered IDS, separating the data
and management planes to enhance control granularity. Intrusion
detection is autonomously executed via coordinated agents,
including flow controllers, action enforcers, decision-makers,
and security monitors. Security monitoring agents classify traffic
in real-time and trigger alerts for decision modules to enforce appropriate countermeasures. The framework effectively mitigates
large-scale threats such as UDP flooding and DDoS attacks. An
intrusion mitigation technique for mitigating attacks in the IoT
environment was proposed in [23]. The authentication of the user
is carried out to allow only legitimate users to participate in data
transmission. Furthermore, an ongoing traffic analysis was conducted based on packet flow features. This work undergoes three
stages in which the log files of the authenticated entity are examined to detect attacks caused by bots. Then, the attacker was detected by analyzing the typical pattern of attack, thereby isolating
the attacker from the network. An encryption-based approach for
secure data collection, storage and access in cloud-assisted IoT
was proposed in [24]. The issues in the proper management of
data in cloud storage were addressed. The IoT sensors were used
for periodic data acquisition from the environment and stored
in cloud storage. Here, the attacker in the network was able
to compromise data to exploit its integrity. For this purpose,
the authors proposed a Conditional Identity-based Broadcast
Proxy Re-encryption (CIBRE) to maintain the confidentiality
of the data. The re-encryption of data was also provided to
ensure the integrity of the cloud data each time it was decrypted.
Identity-based encryption was implemented to safeguard the
confidentiality of data, but entities such as cloud storage can
be compromised by malicious attackers, resulting in a single
point of failure. A practical framework for detecting intrusions
in the IoT based on a real-time dataset was proposed in [25]. The
possibility of attacks on several aspects of the IoT network was
described, and the necessity of an effective intrusion detection
system was demonstrated. The effect of the dataset’s quality
on the performance of IDS was evaluated to design a real-time
dataset. The proposed dataset consisted of data obtained from
various IoT nodes, which contained attack patterns of known
attacks. Some of the attacks considered in this approach were
flooding, black holes, and selective forwarding attacks. Thereby,
the users were able to obtain the dataset to perform efficient
intrusion detection. Several known attacks were identified using
the real-time dataset; however, the extracted features for identification were insufficient to detect other complex intrusions.
A deep learning method for detecting network anomalies by
extracting features from the network traffic in NGWN networks
was proposed in [26]. The proposed architecture has four components: virtual infrastructure, virtualized network functions,
management and orchestration, and operations and business
support systems. Initially, the network flow is collected from the
user equipment. From the network flow, features are extracted by
a feature vector. Based on the extracted features, the anomaly
symptoms are detected and sent to the LSTM for recognition

2272

of the anomaly patterns. The simulation result shows that the
proposed system achieves high performance in terms of anomaly
detection accuracy. This approach takes only flow-based features
for anomaly detection, thus reducing classification accuracy. It
takes all the packets as input, increasing the process’s latency and
complexity. A machine learning algorithm for detecting network
anomalies in a 5 G network was proposed in [27]. The data are
pre-processed to enhance detection accuracy. The features are
extracted from the pre-processed data. The Weibull distribution
is used to select features from Normal traffic. The Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN), designed using the NAS method, is
employed to classify anomalies based on specific features. The
proposed work achieves high accuracy and low latency by optimizing the neural network in the 5 G network. A hybrid machine
learning technique (Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines,
and Neural Networks) was proposed in [28] to enhance detection
accuracy and robustness against various types of abnormal or
malicious activities in IoT. Various training methodologies for
AI-based IDS, proposed in [29], highlighted the importance
of selecting appropriate datasets, feature selection techniques,
and model training processes to enhance IoT accuracy and
efficiency. The paper discussed deployment strategies, including
the integration of IDS into IoT networks, real-time monitoring
capabilities, and the scalability of AI models to handle the
dynamic nature of IoT environments. An intrusion detection
system for an IoT environment using an improved BP neural
network was proposed in [30]. The proposed system used the
LM-BP algorithm for intrusion detection. Initially, the data are
collected from the data source. From the collected data, features
are extracted using the proposed neural network. Here, the neural
network was divided into two sections; one section was used to
optimize the connection weight value, and another was used to
optimize the learning rate, which adjusts dynamically to improve
the detection rate. It was used to detect intrusion behaviour from
the extracted features. After detecting the intrusions, the neural
network was updated. The proposed system detected DoS, R2L,
U2L and probing attacks using the KDD CUP 99 dataset. However, in this approach, only particular attacks were detected,
and the prevention of these attacks was not investigated, which
affects the overall security of the system. A practical security
approach for cloud storage based on an encryption mechanism
was proposed in [31]. Initially, the data in the dataset was
normalized to improve accuracy by removing unwanted data
and processing missing data. Then, the grey-level co-occurrence
matrix algorithm was implemented to extract the significant
features from which attacks were classified using a CNN-based
classifier. The security of the data was ensured by adopting a
honeypot-based cryptographic algorithm, which is responsible
for encrypting or decrypting data. The gateway-based detection
of network intrusions was presented in [32]. Generally, it needs
a scalable dataset which enables the addition of new attacks
in various settings. Dynamic features were considered on the
gateway to extract normal and abnormal classification features.
It avoids considering static features related to the environment;
instead, it focuses on features such as packet flow, timing
involved in the traffic flow, and data flow statistics over a specific
time interval. Since Passban was an anomaly-based IDS, it could
be trained while observing the target system’s network traffic in a
normal state. An intrusion detection scheme in industrial cyberphysical systems based on federated deep learning was proposed

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

in [33]. The system model comprises three main entities: trusted
authority, industrial agents and cloud servers. The industrial
agents represent the industrial administrators responsible for
improving the intrusion detection system. The trusted authority
was responsible for key generation to authenticate both the cloud
server and industrial agents. The threat model, which comprises
several significant threats, including command injection attacks,
response injection attacks, reconnaissance attacks, and DoS
attacks, was explained. A deep-fed scheme was proposed, which
comprised the integration of a CNN and a Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU)- based intrusion detection system, along with a secure
communication protocol based on the Pallier cryptosystem.
B. Blockchain-Assisted IDS
Multi-agent assisted IDS in IoT environment using
Blockchain technology was proposed in [34]. Three operations
were used in this paper: data collection, data management, and
data response. To test the proposed work, the NSL-KDD dataset
is used to detect attacks from the transport layer. For attack
detection purposes, the NSL-KDD dataset is utilized, and the
agents employed for intrusion detection are as follows: communication agent, response agent, collection agent, host agent,
detection agent, and training agent. Based on the attack information, the database is trained for the network. However, the
deployment of a larger number of agents increased the network
complexity. The computational overhead for running all these
agents over the blockchain increases transaction verification
and hash generation times. A three-layer security framework
combining AI-based intrusion detection, blockchain for decentralized trust, and edge computing for resource efficiency was
proposed in [35]. Machine learning enhances anomaly detection,
while blockchain ensures data integrity and edge computing
reduces latency. Optimization techniques improved detection
accuracy (94.2% to 94.78%), reduced response time (14.98%),
and lowered energy consumption (12.01%). Game theory and
differential equations were used to model adversarial interactions and system behaviour, demonstrating the framework’s
scalability and suitability for real-time, resource-constrained IoT
environments. A distributed IDS deployed at the fog layer was
proposed in [36], addressing the scalability and complexity of
IoT security. The system integrates game theory and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for traffic balancing, and
employs the Jellyfish Search optimizer with opposition-based
learning for feature selection. Ensemble learning across fog
nodes is achieved using MLP, Random Forest, and XGBoost,
with feature vectors securely exchanged via blockchain. The
framework, termed EJSO, demonstrates high accuracy and robustness on NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 datasets, achieving
over 99% accuracy and outperforming traditional methods such
as LSTM and GA+SVM in both attack detection and dimensionality reduction. A recent study [37] introduced a hybrid intrusion detection framework that integrates blockchain technology
with deep learning and metaheuristic optimization to enhance
security in cloud environments. The proposed Blockchain-based
African Buffalo (BbAB) scheme combines a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) with African Buffalo Optimization (ABO) to
continuously monitor and detect intrusions based on user behaviour and malware patterns. To ensure data confidentiality,
the system employs Identity-Based Encryption (IBE) to encrypt

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

normal and malicious user data, which is then securely stored on
a blockchain ledger hosted in the cloud. The RNN component
is optimized by ABO during the prediction phase, enabling
adaptive and accurate threat identification. Experimental results
demonstrated superior performance across multiple evaluation
metrics, including a detection accuracy of 99.87% and a recall of
99.92%, outperforming conventional models. This work highlights the potential of combining blockchain, deep learning, and
bio-inspired optimization to achieve high detection fidelity and
robust data protection in distributed cloud-based systems.
C. Honeypot-Orchestrated IDS
The honeypot-based analysis of cybersecurity attacks was
proposed in [38]. Cybersecurity threats are identified to detect and mitigate the behaviours of web services. Information
Collected from the data included IP address, domain name,
username, password, and geographic location of the attacker.
Due to the centralized environment, it was complex to identify
and attract attackers. Honeypot technology is used to mimic
real-time systems and detect attacks. Finally, a log file report is
generated for the collected data and stored in the cloud servers.
An approach for detecting malicious users using a file-based
deception technique was proposed in [39]. A hidden interface
was established for legitimate users, which malicious users
cannot access. The system files are divided into three types:
regular files, fake files, and sensitive files. The regular files and
fake files are accessible from both the regular interface and
the hidden interface. The sensitive files were accessible only to
legitimate users who communicated through a hidden interface.
The honeypot-based deception technique was implemented, in
which the malicious users were attracted to attack the honey files,
which are referred to as fake files, from which the behaviour of
attackers, including their resources, was identified to improve
the security of the sensitive files. An efficient approach for
learning the attack strategies using a honeypot-based deception
strategy for industrial cyber-physical systems was proposed
in [40]. Here, the attack strategies of attackers after identifying
the honeypot were studied to provide overall security to the
ICPS. The application of advanced analytics techniques to the
data gathered from honeypots, aiming to identify and understand
emerging threat patterns in IoT environments, was proposed
in [41]. Here, a machine learning model is used to analyze
the behaviour of attackers captured by honeypots and identify
subtle, previously unseen anomalies that may signal new or
evolving attack strategies. An edge-assisted ensemble learning
model within the honey-block framework was proposed in [42]
to proactively identify and mitigate potential security breaches
for intrusion detection in IoT. This framework combines the
power of edge computing and ensemble learning to create a more
secure environment for IoT systems. By aggregating predictions
from various models, ensemble methods reduce the likelihood
of false positives and enhance the system’s ability to detect
complex, previously unknown attacks. A hybrid game-theoreticbased approach was implemented, and the players had different
objectives. The two-player game was proposed with attackers as one player and ICPS defenders as another player. The
one-shot signalling model was developed. The perfect Bayesian
equilibrium-based probability was calculated for the successful
defence against all the attacks provided by the attackers. A recent

2273

study in [43] leveraged the BPF-Extended Tracking Honeypot
(BETH) dataset for anomaly detection in kernel-level processes
and network logs. The authors proposed an enhanced Isolation
Forest (iForest) model within a structured detection framework,
achieving an AUROC of 0.917 and minimizing false positives.
The symmetry-aware design significantly improved detection
accuracy and resilience. This approach emphasizes the role of
low-level honeypot data in improving IDS robustness against
evolving threats. However, only honeypot-based intrusion detection in the ICPS cannot mitigate all attacks that threaten the
system’s security. Existing works primarily focus on isolated
aspects of IoT security, such as blockchain-based authentication [44] or static honeypot deployment [45]. However, these
approaches often lack integration, which limits their adaptability
to dynamic threat landscapes. In contrast, our framework simultaneously addresses authentication robustness and adaptive
threat detection by incorporating blockchain for secure identity
management and dynamic honeypot orchestration for real-time
defence [46]. This dual-layered security strategy offers a novel
integration that was absent in prior studies, providing enhanced
resilience against evolving cyber threats.
D. LLM-Driven IDS
The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catalyzed a new wave of research in intelligent IDS, offering capabilities that extend beyond conventional ML and DL approaches.
In [47], the authors introduce HuntGPT. This hybrid framework
integrates GPT-3.5 Turbo with traditional classifiers such as
Random Forests and explainable AI tools (e.g., SHAP, LIME)
to enhance the interpretability of anomaly alerts in cybersecurity operations. Additionally, the study presents SecGPT—
an LLM-powered penetration testing agent built atop a GAN
architecture—capable of generating dynamic attack profiles and
supporting continuous IDS retraining. The findings demonstrate
that even with minimal fine-tuning, LLMs can significantly
boost the transparency, adaptability, and scalability of modern
IDS solutions. Complementing this direction, the study in [48]
highlights LLMs as a natural progression in the evolution of
IDS, emphasizing their capacity to process large-scale network
logs autonomously, adapt to shifting traffic behaviour, and distinguish between benign and malicious activity in real-time.
Through targeted fine-tuning on networking-specific datasets,
the authors report improved contextual inference and detection
accuracy. Furthermore, the dual utility of LLMs in both precision detection and autonomous decision-making is emphasized,
while also acknowledging operational challenges such as interpretability and deployment on resource-constrained devices.
In a parallel effort, the authors of [49] propose a lightweight,
LLM-based IDS framework specifically designed for real-time
intrusion detection in IoT environments. By fine-tuning domainspecific LLMs on datasets such as IoT-23 and TON_IoT, the
framework achieved high accuracy in anomaly detection and
supported context-aware mitigation strategies. Deployed in a
modular Docker-based architecture, the system demonstrated
substantial improvements in detection latency, accuracy, and
resource efficiency over conventional IDS methods, highlighting its suitability for scalable and autonomous security enforcement in constrained IoT scenarios. Similarly, the work
in [50] presents a dynamic intrusion detection architecture that

2274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

employs a transformer-based encoder coupled with a Gaussian Mixture Model. This hybrid model achieves 100% recall on known threats while effectively identifying previously
unseen attack types, maintaining a classification accuracy of
95.6%. The adaptive learning mechanism allows the system
to refine its threat recognition over time, offering robust and
scalable protection in evolving network environments. Further
advancing the state of LLM-powered security, the work [51]
introduces IDS-Agent—an LLM-driven, tool-augmented autonomous agent for intrusion detection. IDS-Agent combines
reasoning over state observations with an action-oriented workflow encompassing data preprocessing, classification, memory
and knowledge retrieval, and aggregation. The system’s architecture supports customizable detection sensitivity and explainability, and its memory-enhanced design allows for improved
contextual learning. Experimental validation on ACI-IoT and
CIC-IoT benchmarks revealed F1-scores of 0.97 and 0.75,
respectively, along with a 0.61 recall in detecting zero-day
attacks, outperforming several state-of-the-art baselines. This
approach exemplifies the shift toward intelligent, explainable,
and resilient IDS solutions that can address both known and
unknown threats in heterogeneous IoT networks. Additionally,
a recent study [52] proposed a novel LLM-based agent focused
on generating and generalizing IDS rules to counter the rising
complexity of cyberattacks targeting digital services and IoT
infrastructure. The agent ingests multi-source inputs—including
vulnerability security reports, malicious traffic logs, and original
IDS rules—to generate new detection rules capable of identifying both direct and variant forms of malicious behaviour. This
approach addresses the limitations of traditional rule-based and
AI-driven IDS systems, particularly in terms of interpretability
and throughput under high-traffic conditions. Experimental evaluation demonstrated that the LLM-generated rules significantly
outperformed conventional methods across multiple detection
metrics, highlighting the agent’s potential for enhancing rulebased detection in dynamic, high-speed environments. A recent
comprehensive survey [53] highlights the growing reliance on
AI-driven approaches for enhancing IDS in IoT environments,
emphasizing their potential to reduce false positives and adapt
to evolving threats. It categorizes state-of-the-art techniques,
datasets, and evaluation metrics, while identifying key challenges, such as computational complexity and high false positive
rates, and calls for lightweight, efficient IDS models tailored for
resource-constrained IoT devices. Table I summarizes existing
approaches, highlighting their objectives, methodologies and
associated disadvantages.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
The proliferation of NGWN-enabled IoT environments has
introduced significant challenges in detecting and mitigating cyberattacks [55]. While several existing approaches address security concerns, they often exhibit critical limitations, leaving IoT
systems vulnerable to sophisticated and evolving threats. This
section outlines the key shortcomings in current methodologies
and presents the motivation for the proposed approach. Ensuring
the legitimacy of IoT devices remains a fundamental challenge
in safeguarding NGWN-IoT environments [56], [57]. A standard
authentication method relies on Radio Frequency Identification

(RFID)-based schemes, where the credentials of each entity are
registered, and a public address is generated [58]. Lightweight
authentication is typically achieved using bitwise exclusive OR
functions. However, these methods have inherent weaknesses.
The reliance on a single credential, such as an RFID tag, compromises security as attackers can manipulate or spoof the RFID.
Moreover, these systems are inherently incapable of detecting
novel or previously unknown attacks, thus increasing the risk
of unauthorized access and escalating cyber threats in IoT environments. Intrusion detection in cloud-based IoT systems also
encounters several limitations. Game-theoretic models for intrusion detection and prevention have been proposed, where the
risk level of virtual machines is calculated, and honeypot-based
attack pattern analysis is performed [59]. Although these models
incorporate various intrusion detection strategies, such as SIDS,
AIDS, and honeypot-based IDS [60], [61], they still present
several challenges. Centralizing the detection process within a
cloud environment increases the risk of a single point of failure,
which can compromise the entire system if the cloud server is
attacked. Furthermore, as the number of attacks increases, the
complexity and latency of these game-theoretic models escalate,
limiting their scalability and responsiveness in dynamic IoT
scenarios. Honeypot-based intrusion detection techniques, despite their potential, often suffer from practical implementation
challenges. Approaches focusing on rule-based detection of
malicious behaviour are usually inadequate, as they assume that
attackers remain unaware of the honeypots’ presence [62]. When
attackers recognize and bypass honeypots, the system’s security
is compromised, rendering the honeypots ineffective. Moreover,
using low-interaction honeypots in some frameworks fails to
collect comprehensive attack patterns, leading to insufficient
intrusion detection [63]. Additionally, the log files generated
from these honeypots, stored on local servers, can be targeted and
altered by attackers, undermining the integrity of the collected
data. Given these challenges, there is a pressing need for a
more robust and adaptive framework capable of addressing the
limitations of existing models. The proposed approach introduces a comprehensive framework integrating blockchain-based
authentication with adaptive intrusion detection mechanisms.
By utilizing immutable attributes such as PUF, device ID, and
MAC address, the framework ensures high security against identity spoofing. Furthermore, the dual-stage IDS combines SIDS
and AIDS to detect known and unknown threats effectively,
while dynamic honeypot deployment facilitates the ongoing
analysis of evolving attack strategies. Service migration is handled through edge computing nodes, which optimize resource
allocation and minimize latency, thereby maintaining the quality
of service and meeting service-level agreement requirements.
The integration of high-interaction virtual honeypots not only
deceives attackers but also securely logs their behaviour patterns
using encrypted storage, which subsequently improves IDS
training. This holistic approach addresses the identified gaps,
offering a resilient and scalable solution for NGWN-enabled IoT
environments. Table II outlines the core features and operational
distinctions of blockchain and honeypot technologies. Motivated
by their complementary strengths, our proposed framework
integrates a blockchain-assisted honeypot strategy within the
IDS architecture to enhance intrusion detection and prevention
capabilities in NGWN-enabled IoT environments.

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF EXISTING RESEARCH APPROACHES

2275

2276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE II
FEATURES OF BLOCKCHAIN AND HONEYPOT

TABLE III
TABLE OF NOTATIONS

IV. PROPOSED MODEL
The model aims to strengthen intrusion detection and prevention in IoT environments by integrating honeypots and
blockchain technologies. This integration ensures robust security and privacy for both IoT devices and users by leveraging advanced detection mechanisms and dynamic response strategies.
A. Experimental Setup
To evaluate the proposed model’s performance and clarify the
scope of implementation, simulation, and conceptual modules,
we revised the experimental setup as follows:
r Blockchain-based Authentication: Modelled using the
DAA to verify IoT device legitimacy before data transmission. This was implemented using a lightweight Proof-ofAuthority (PoA) consensus mechanism, which simulates
decentralized identity validation with minimal latency.
This approach ensures tamper-resistant trust propagation
without introducing the computational overhead of public
blockchain systems.
r Bi-stage IDS: Fully implemented. The first stage utilizes
the IRF classifier for detecting known attacks based on labelled patterns from the CICIDS-2017 dataset. The second
stage employs a Diffusion Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Network (DCRNN) for anomaly detection and identifying
unknown attacks.
r Dynamic Honeypot Deployment: Simulated using Dockerbased containerized environments representing highinteraction honeypots. These simulated honeypots were
designed to log attacker behaviour, capture malicious payloads, and redirect suspicious traffic for further analysis.
Though not deployed on physical hardware, their functionality was emulated within the NS3 simulation to support
evaluation of threat interaction logging and IDS retraining.
r Trust-Aware Service Migration: Implemented in simulation using the HBO module. Migration decisions were
guided by predicted node load (informed by DCRNN
forecasts), CPU availability, and dynamically adjusted trust
scores from the BLISS component.
Fig. 1 illustrates the system topology and conceptual flow of
the proposed approach. All notations and parameters used in this
paper are listed in Table III. The simulation was conducted using
the NS3 environment to model the communication topology, network behaviour, and service orchestration under realistic IoT and
NGWN scenarios. Evaluation metrics included attack detection
rate, accuracy, false negative rate, CPU usage, memory usage,
and execution time. To emulate attack traffic, the CICIDS-2017
dataset was integrated via a data preprocessing and traffic replay
pipeline. Raw network traffic data, including IP addresses, ports,

timestamps, and packet sizes, was parsed into packet traces and
injected into the NS3 simulation using a custom traffic generator
module. This enabled us to preserve the statistical characteristics
of real-world attack patterns without synthetically generating
them within the simulator. The containerized honeypots were
triggered during attack events and logged details of the attacker’s
interaction. These logs contributed to the continuous retraining
and enhancement of the IDS system. Finally, the blockchainbased authentication module relied on the Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerance (PBFT) consensus algorithm, chosen for its efficiency and low overhead in environments with a limited number
of validators. This provided tamper-proof identity verification
and secure dissemination of blacklist updates, ensuring reliability under adversarial conditions while maintaining resource
efficiency suitable for IoT deployments.
B. System Model
The system model comprises a set of IoT devices D =
{D1 , D2 , . . ., Dn } from which the data are generated and sent
to the cloud server for processing and storage purposes. The IoT

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

Fig. 1.

2277

System topology and conceptual flow of the proposed approach.

environment consists of a set of IoT users U = {U1 , U2 , . . ., Un }
who request service from the cloud server. The proposed IDS is
deployed between the IoT devices and the cloud server to filter
data packets from the devices via the 5G Base Station (BS). The
edge layer comprises a global edge server (GE) and a set of local
edge servers LE = {LE1 , LE2 , . . ., LEn } which are placed at
the edge of the network to provide services to the IoT users with
optimal quality of service, quality of service SLA requirements.
The attackers in the system are considered on both the IoT device
side and the user side, who attempt to affect the provisioning of
legitimate services to users. On the IoT devices side, the attackers
deploy a malicious device or compromise legitimate devices to
generate malicious packets. On the other hand, attackers on the
user side attempt to compromise the user’s device or directly
access local edge servers to affect the provisioning of services.
The processes involved in the proposed approach to perform

secure service provisioning in the IoT environment are described
as follows.
C. Blockchain-Based IoT Authentication
In an IoT environment, all the devices are connected to
the internet to share their data. Due to the sharing of large
amounts of data over the internet, the IoT environment faces
security challenges. To ensure the legitimacy of the IoT nodes,
we perform authentication. Initially, all IoT devices and users
register their information, such as PUF, Device ID (Dv − ID),
User ID(U r − ID), and MAC address with the Key Generator
(KG) integrated with blockchain. The user provides all four
parameters, whereas the IoT devices provide three parameters
except U r − ID. The KG then provides a secret key (Kpr )
to the respective devices and users by utilizing DAA, which

2278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Algorithm 1: Authentication Process.

Fig. 2.

Block format.

is stored in the blockchain. Once registration is complete, the
respective IoT devices and users become part of the network.
The purpose of DAA is to provide authentication with less time
consumption. During packet transmission and request generation, the devices and users generate a tag (ktg ) and encrypt the
ktg using the encryption key EN (ktg ). The generation of tags
provides more security during authentication. The transaction
consisting of (Kpr ), EN (ktg ), key lifetime (kL ), and current
timestamp, along with the message and request, is submitted
to the blockchain. The blockchain verifies transactions using
the consensus mechanism. During consensus, the blockchain
nodes verify whether the submitted credentials match those
of the registered ones. If the consensus is achieved and the
transaction is verified, the new block is mined, and the respective transaction is recorded in the blockchain. By doing so,
the legitimacy of the IoT devices and users is verified before
taking part in transmission. Only authenticated IoT devices
can send data through a 5G gateway. While blockchain offers
decentralized trust and tamper-resistant logging, it is not immune
to adversarial threats, particularly in distributed IoT environments. Potential attacks include Sybil attacks, where adversaries
create multiple fake identities to manipulate trust scores; smart
contract exploitation, which can alter the trust scoring logic or
data access rules; and trust poisoning, where seemingly benign
behaviour is used to distort trust metrics gradually. To address
these threats, our framework incorporates lightweight identity
validation based on node credentials and behavioural history,
dynamic trust score adaptation through the BLISS module that
accounts for both short- and long-term activity, and multi-source
consensus validation to ensure only behaviour corroborated by
multiple monitors is committed to the blockchain. These design
elements collectively strengthen the system’s resilience and
ensure the reliability of trust decisions under adversarial conditions. Although traditional authentication mechanisms offer
lower overhead, they often rely on centralized authorities, which
can become single points of failure in dynamic, large-scale IoT
networks. Our framework leverages a lightweight, permissioned
blockchain not for heavy consensus or monetary transactions,
but to ensure tamper-resistant trust management, decentralized
identity verification, and secure propagation of blacklist updates.
By adopting efficient consensus protocols such as PBFT or Raft,
the system minimizes computational burden while maintaining
integrity across distributed nodes. The Pseudo code for the
proposed blockchain-based authentication process is provided
in Algorithm 1. The structure of the generated block in the
blockchain is illustrated in Fig. 2. The description of each field
is provided in the figure.

D. Intrusion Detection System
The intrusion detection system is used to detect attacks performed through compromised devices in the environment. This
improves the security of the IoT environment. In our work, we
perform two types of intrusion detection, such as
1) Signature-Based Intrusion Detection: It detects known
attacks that have already been trained and stored in the database.
It sends the data to perform intrusion detection. First, we detect
signature-based intrusion detection using the IRF. The IRF
enhances classical Random Forest by adaptively selecting and
prioritizing the most relevant features for intrusion detection.
It employs a hybrid entropy-variance scoring mechanism to
reorder features and dynamically adjusts the number of trees
to maximize classification accuracy while reducing model complexity. For our implementation, the IRF was configured with
100 decision trees, each with a maximum depth of 20. An information gain cutoff guided feature selection thresholds, and the
Gini impurity criterion was used for node splitting. The model
was trained using an 80/20 stratified train-test split to ensure a
balanced evaluation. This approach ensures efficient and accurate detection of known threats with minimal redundancy. The
detailed derivation of the IRF optimization process is provided
below for reproducibility and clarity of implementation. The
forest Θ0 is initially grown with Z0 number of trees and feature
vector ς0 (.). The ranking of features is executed based on the
respective weight of the features, which can be computed as:

T
T
∀T W (k) · ∂

w(k) =
(1)
T
max ∀T W (k) · ∂ T
k

T

where W (k) represents the weight of feature k with respect
to tree T , and ∂ T denotes the overall weight of tree T . From
the ranked list of features, the important features h0 are selected
and grouped into a pool of important features denoted as Δ.
Similarly, the pool of unimportant features is denoted by Δ . The
mean and standard deviation of the weights of features in Δ are
represented as α0 and β0 , respectively. Let Rf0 be the number
of features in Δ whose weights are less than (α0 − 2β0 ). These
features Rf0 are further removed from Δ to form a refined

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

Algorithm 2: Improved Random Forest Algorithm.

feature set ς1 (·) = ς0 (·) − Rf0 . The condition for including a
feature k from Δ into Δ can then be formulated as:
w(k) ≥ min w(j), k ∈ Δ
j∈Δ

the traffic data. The DCRNN module captures these spatiotemporal patterns within the network graph to forecast node-level
traffic behaviour and anomalies. It integrates graph diffusion
operations with Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) to model the
dynamic nature of distributed IoT traffic. In our implementation,
DCRNN is configured with two diffusion convolution layers,
each followed by a GRU layer with 64 hidden units. The diffusion step is set to 2, and the model is trained for 50 epochs
using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. A batch
size of 32 is used, and dropout regularization with a rate of
0.3 is applied to mitigate overfitting. The adjacency matrix is
dynamically updated based on observed traffic correlations. This
configuration enables the accurate forecasting of traffic surges
and anomalous patterns, thereby enhancing the system’s ability
to respond proactively to evolving threats. The proposed neural
network features a series connection of a CNN and a GRU.
The CNN acts as a feature extractor, extracting all the features
of the packets through the convolution and pooling layers. The
extracted features are then provided to the GRU to analyze the
temporal dependency between the features, thereby achieving
improved classification accuracy. Initially, the local features of
the packets can be extracted and converted into feature vectors.
These vectors are then rescaled from 0 to 255 to be converted
into images of U × V pixels, where U represents the number
of columns, and V represents the number of rows, respectively.
The CNN model utilized in our approach extracts the features
from the images as formulated below:
Il =

(2)

If a feature is important, it cannot be removed. The number of
important and unimportant features can be expressed as h and g
from which the variation of important and unimportant features
can be computed as:
δh = Δn+1 − Δn

(3)

δg = Δn+1 − Δn

(4)

Il − kr + 2Q
+1
SK

(7)

where Il represents the input image length, Q refers to the
number of zeros, and Kr refers to the size of the kernel. The
stride of the kernel is represented as SK. The output of the CNN
is fed to the GRU, which possesses two gates, namely, the update
gate and the reset gate, that work as follows:
ct = λ (wc · [It−1 , yt ] + yt ) ,
bt = λ (wb · [It−1 , yt ]) ,

The number of trees to be added to the existing number of
trees in the forest to improve the accuracy can be computed as:


 l(pu δh + pg δg) 

(5)
|δZ| ≤ 

g

It = tanh (w · [bt · It−1 , yt ]) ,
It = (1 − ct ) · It−1 + ct · It .

(8)

where

where l is expressed as:
l = ZMav P Mav −1 (1 − P Mav )Z−1

2279

(6)

where P < 1, Mav is the average number of nodes in a tree,
and pu , pg represent the probability of a good split concerning
u and g. The IRF classifies the data into three classes: normal,
malicious, and suspicious. This is done by computing the similarity between the features of the incoming packet and the feature
set of known attacks. From the classified packets, the malicious
packets are denied, and suspicious packets are sent to the next
phase of intrusion detection. The Pseudocode for the proposed
IRF-based SIDS is provided in Algorithm 2.
2) Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection: DCRNN is employed to detect unknown attacks in the IoT environment by
classifying suspicious packets as either normal or malicious
while accounting for both spatial and temporal dependencies in

λ=

1
1 + e−t

(9)

tanh(t) =

1 − e−2t
1 + e−2t

(10)

where the input features are represented by y. The It , ct represent the update parameters respectively. The weight function
is represented as w, and the activation function utilized for the
flow of sequences is represented as tanh and λ, respectively. The
relationship between spatial and temporal features is determined
with the help of sequence vectors, which are fed into fully
connected and softmax layers for classifying the packet. If the
packet is classified as malicious, then it will be dropped, and
the normal packets will be sent to the cloud. Fig. 3 shows the
DCRNN-based detection of suspicious packets.

2280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 3.

Detection of suspicious packets using the DCRNN-based method.

Fig. 4.

Trust-based service migration and virtual honeypot deployment for intrusion prevention.

E. Trust Value Evaluation and Virtual Honeypot Deployment
In this section, we implement a honeypot-based attack prevention mechanism that utilizes trust computation for efficient service provisioning in the network. Fig. 4 illustrates the trust-based
migration of services and the deployment of virtual honeypots
for intrusion prevention.

1) Trust Value Calculation: In this model, we proposed two
types of edge servers: a global edge server and a local edge
server. The global edge server is responsible for managing the
local edge servers. The local edge server collects the user service
requests. Then, we calculate the trust value for the edge server

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

TABLE IV
CONFIGURATION SUMMARY OF CORE COMPONENTS

2281

configurations supports reproducibility and ensures clarity regarding how each module contributes to system performance.
The following details provide the complete formulation of
the fitness function, the heap construction process, and the corresponding selection criteria. The input parameters are defined
as follows:
r CPU Resource availability: CPU resource availability
RACP U is defined as the summation of the number of
currently running tasks running on the edge server, and the
tasks are provided to the available server based on the user
request. It is denoted as:
RACP U =

n


Ei T i

(12)

i=1

r Load: The load (L) represents the number of user tasks

as follows:
τ (LE) = Inτ ± (1 − Inτ )Xϑ

(11)

where Inτ and ϑ denote the initial trust value and degree of
change in trust value of the edge servers, respectively, based on
the change in the degree of trust value, the trust value will be
dynamically adjusted to increase or decrease.
2) Live Migration: After calculating the trust value τ (LE)
of the local edge servers, the global edge server computes
the threshold value τT H (LE) based on the average of all
trust values of the local edge servers. The nodes that possess
τ (LE) ≥ τT H (LE) are classified as high-trusted local servers,
denoted as H(τ (LE)), while nodes with τ (LE) < τT H (LE)
are classified as low-trusted local edge servers, denoted as
L(τ (LE)). The L(τ (LE)) nodes are vulnerable to attacks, and
to ensure uninterrupted service to users, we implement live
migration using a moving target defence strategy. This approach
enables the migration of running services from L(τ (LE)) to
a suitable H(τ (LE)). The selected H(τ (LE)) must have a
system configuration similar to that of L(τ (LE)). To determine
an appropriate H(τ (LE)) with the same system configuration
as L(τ (LE)), we propose a Heap-Based Optimization (HBO)
method that considers CPU resource availability, trust value, and
system load.
HBO selects the most suitable edge node for service migration
by evaluating a composite score that considers trust level, CPU
availability, and system load. These scores are organized in
a hierarchical heap structure to ensure that services are migrated to reliable and resource-efficient nodes while maintaining
low overhead. In our implementation, the heap is initialized
with a fixed capacity of 50 candidate nodes, and the fitness
function is weighted with parameters α = 0.4, β = 0.3, and
γ = 0.3 corresponding to trust, CPU, and load, respectively. The
heap is dynamically updated at fixed intervals of 10 simulation
steps, and node selection occurs once the convergence threshold (no score improvement over three consecutive iterations)
is met. A max-heap is used to prioritize higher composite
scores, ensuring efficient selection with O(log n) complexity.
Table IV summarizes the core configuration parameters used in
implementing the key components of our framework. For each
module, IRF, DCRNN, and HBO, we detail the most relevant
hyperparameters, architectural choices, and operational logic.
These settings were selected through empirical tuning to strike
a balance between accuracy, computational efficiency, and relevance to NGWN-enabled IoT environments. Providing these

waiting (Tw ) to be processed by the edge server relative to
the available CPU resources (RACP U ).

RACP U
(13)
Tw
Based on the above input descriptions, HBO is performed.
HBO is an optimization algorithm for finding the optimal path
shown in Algorithm 3. Here, the objective of HBO is to find
the H (τ (LE)) based on maximizing CPU resource utilization,
maximizing trust value, and minimizing load. The construction
of an optimal heap requires a Search Agent (SA), which includes
a Fitness Value (FV) that serves as the key for the heap nodes
and an index (I) that stores the corresponding values for these
nodes. The SA is calculated based on the no. of LEs which are
present in the IoT environment, and it is denoted as:
⎤
⎡ DIM
SADIM
· · · SADIM
SA1
2
M
⎥
⎢
..
..
..
..
(14)
⎦
⎣
.
.
.
.
DIM
DIM
DIM
SAN
SAN −1 · · · SAM
L=

where N denotes the number of SA, and DIM denotes the corresponding dimensions. A F V is calculated based on RACP U ,
τ (LE), L for each LE servers which is denoted as:
F V = {F V (LE1 ), F V (LE2 ), . . . , F V (LEn )}

(15)

Based on the number of search agents (SA), the fitness values
(F V ), and the corresponding index values (I), the calculations
are performed. The index (I) represents the value of the heap
node based on the availability of CPU resources (RACP U ), the
trust level (τ (LE)), and the system load (L). The average fitness
value (AV GF V ) is computed based on the objective conditions.
If any node satisfies all the objective conditions during the
computation of AV GF V , it is assigned as the root node (Rn ) at
depth level d = 0. Subsequently, for corresponding depth levels
d = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n, branch nodes (Bn ) are assigned dynamically
based on system conditions (i.e., trust level, CPU availability,
and load). For root node calculation, we have:
Rn = high RACPU , if d = 0

(16)

For branch node allocation at increasing depths:
⎧
⎪
⎨H(τ (LE)) ≥ τT H (LE), d = 1
Bn (d) = Llow ,
(17)
d=2
⎪
⎩B (d − 1) > B (d),
d = 3, 4, . . . , n
n
n

2282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Algorithm 3: Heap-Based Optimization.

Algorithm 4: BLISS Signature Generation.

For corresponding depth levels d = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n, branch
nodes (Bn ) are assigned progressively in a hierarchical manner
based on trust level, load, and CPU availability. The root node
(Rn ) is initialized at d = 0, and as depth increases, branch
nodes are dynamically selected based on system conditions. To
maintain hierarchical ordering:
Bn (d) < Rn , for all d ≥ 1

(18)

For building a heap Rn , branch nodes based on d levels are
denoted as:
⎧
⎪
⎨Rn ≥ highRACP U , τ (LE), L, d = 0
(19)
H(LE) = Bn (1) < Rn ,
d=1
⎪
⎩B (n) < B (n − 1), d = n
n
n
After heap construction based on AV GF V , the services from
L(τ (LE)) are migrated to heaps of H(LE) based on heaps
arranged hierarchically.
3) Virtual Honeypot Deployment: During live migration, virtual honeypots with the same system configuration as the Local Edge Servers (LEs) are deployed to attract attackers and
prevent the compromise of LEs. These honeypots detect attack signatures and store them in log files, which are then
securely stored in the database. To enhance security, the Bimodal Lattice Signature Scheme (BLISS) algorithm is employed
for encryption, as shown in Algorithm 4. BLISS is a digital
signature scheme that uses a public key for verification and a
private key for signature generation. The primary objective is
to encrypt log files containing attack signatures before storing
them in the database. During migration, attackers might attempt
to compromise H(τ (LE)). To counter this, virtual honeypots
(HP1 , HP2 , HP3 , . . . , HPn ), configured identically to the LEs

are deployed, misleading attackers into targeting the honeypots
instead of the legitimate LEs. Once an attack is detected on a
honeypot, its signature is recorded in a log file Lf and encrypted
using the BLISS algorithm. The attack pattern, denoted as ω,
captures various attacker behaviours targeting the honeypot.
The verification function G and signature generation function
H process the attack signature, where (S, F ) represents the
generated signature and the challenge vector for computing
the hash function. The sample vector d is derived from an
n-dimensional Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation
σ, ensuring randomness in signature generation. A random bit
re ∈ {0, 1} is selected, and a shift vector Kc is applied to finalize
the signature. The resulting S is encrypted using BLISS and
securely stored in the log file.
F = H(ω)

// Compute hash of attack pattern

d ∼ Nσn

// Sample from Gaussian distribution

re ∈ {0, 1}

// Generate random bit

S = d + re Kc

// Generate attack signature

Lf = Encrypt(S, F )

// Encrypt and store in log file

(20)

V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section deals with the simulation of the proposed approach. Its performance is validated by comparing it with existing approaches. This section is divided into four subsections,
namely, simulation setup, dataset description, comparative analysis, and research summary, which are presented below.
A. Simulation Setup
The simulation tool used for implementing the proposed
approach is NS3.26, in which IDS detection, AIDS detection,
virtual honeypot deployment and attack signature patterns are
successfully verified. Table V shows the system configuration
for attaining the simulation. Table VI shows the simulation

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

2283

TABLE V
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

TABLE VI
SIMULATION CONFIGURATION
Fig. 5. Comparison of attack detection rate between the proposed method and
existing approaches concerning the number of attacks.

we adapted it to our 5G-based NS-3 simulation by replaying
traffic through a multi-tier edge architecture, thereby approximating next-generation network conditions such as service
migration and resource constraints. To address the limitations in
NGWN-specific realism, future work will focus on augmenting
the evaluation with custom traffic profiles that emulate 5 G/IoT
traffic dynamics, including mobility-induced patterns, URLLC,
and edge-centric service flows. This dataset contains both current and historical benign (Normal traffic) and attack (anomaly
traffic) types, including DoS, DDoS, Web-based, Heartbleed,
Infiltration, Scan, and Bot. Based on parameters such as source
and destination ports, source and destination IP addresses, and
timestamps, network traffic was analyzed using a CIC flow meter
and labelled in a CSV file. At that time of implementation, data
can be separated into training data and test data. The training data
contains 157,722 packets, among which 137,626 are labelled as
Normal (benign) and 20,076 are labelled as attacks. The test
data includes 66,834 packets. Among that, 54,284 are labelled
as Normal, and 12,540 are labelled as attacks. The records of
the attacks are stored in a comma-separated values (CSV) file.
B. Comparative Analysis

configuration for the proposed approach. In our proposed approach, the dataset used is CICIDS-2017, which is designed
explicitly for IDS and AIS. We selected the CICIDS-2017
dataset for its comprehensive coverage of diverse attack types
and well-labelled traffic flows, which are essential for evaluating
intrusion detection performance in a reproducible manner. While
the dataset was not originally tailored for NGWN environments,

The validation of the proposed approach is presented in this
sub-section, in which our approach is compared with the existing
approaches such as RADDS [59] and GTM-Csec [60] using
several performance metrics such as accuracy, attack detection
rate, false negative rate, precision, recall, ROC curve, memory
usage, CPU usage, and execution time.
1) Impact of Attack Detection Rate: The attack detection rate
of any system is defined as the rate at which attack packets
are detected from the overall packets. It must be high so that
the system is secure in any environment; if any system has a
low attack detection rate, it will lead to severe security threats.
Compared to the baseline methods illustrated in Fig. 5, our
proposed framework achieves a higher attack detection rate
of 96.5%, outperforming existing VM-based and physically
deployed honeypot approaches, which report rates of 92% and
89.7%, respectively. Unlike prior works that rely on static assumptions about attacker strategies and lack dynamic pattern
collection, our system leverages virtual honeypots to log and

2284

Fig. 6. Comparison of accuracy between the proposed method and existing
approaches concerning the number of attacks.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 8. Comparison of precision between the proposed method and existing
approaches concerning the number of attacks.

Fig. 7. Comparison of the false negative rate between the proposed model and
existing approaches.

Fig. 9. Comparison of recall rates between the proposed method and existing
approaches concerning the number of attacks.

encrypt attack behaviours for retraining the SIDS module, enabling proactive threat detection. This integration leads to a 4.5%
to 7.2% improvement in detection rate under increasing attack
volumes.
2) Impact of Accuracy: Accuracy is critical for effectively
identifying and classifying cyberattacks. As shown in Fig. 6,
our model achieves a detection accuracy of 97%, significantly
outperforming game-theoretic baselines, which report 89%
and 84%, respectively. This improvement is attributed to the
DCRNN module’s ability to capture both spatial and temporal
patterns in network traffic. Moreover, the false negative rate,
illustrated in Fig. 7, remains low at 4.5% for 25 concurrent
attacks, compared to 7.6% and 9.7% in prior approaches that
lack mechanisms for identifying unknown threats. This combined enhancement in detection accuracy and reduction in false
negatives (by 3.1% to 5.2%) highlights the effectiveness of our
hybrid SIDS-AIDS architecture in real-time, large-scale IoT
environments.
3) Impact of False Negative Rate: The false negative rate is
defined as the number of attacks that were incorrectly determined; a system is considered good when it has a low false
negative rate.
4) Impact of Precision: Precision measures the system’s
ability to accurately identify true positives among all detected
attacks. As shown in Fig. 8, our proposed model achieves a precision of 97%, outperforming existing approaches, which yield

92.7% and 90%. This improvement stems from the integration
of IDS techniques with virtual honeypots, enabling the accurate
identification of attacks through real-time collection of attack
patterns. In contrast, prior works rely on static assumptions of
known attack patterns, limiting precision. Our method achieves
a precision gain of 5.2% to 7%, highlighting its effectiveness in
minimizing false alarms.
5) Impact of Recall: Recall reflects the system’s ability to
identify actual attacks, especially under increasing threat volumes, accurately. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the proposed framework achieves a recall rate of 96%, compared to 92% and
90.5% in existing approaches. This improvement is driven by
the combined use of signature-based and anomaly-based IDS
modules, which enhance the detection of both known and
unknown threats. In contrast, prior works typically rely on a
single detection strategy, limiting their recall performance. Our
approach achieves a recall rate improvement of 4% to 5.5%,
reinforcing its effectiveness in minimizing undetected attacks.
6) Impact of Memory Usage: Memory usage directly influences system efficiency and energy consumption, particularly
under high user request volumes. As shown in Fig. 10, the
proposed framework maintains a lower memory footprint (0.35)
compared to existing approaches (0.8 and 0.56). This reduction
is attributed to our dynamic service migration strategy, which
offloads services from overloaded or untrusted nodes to trusted,
low-load nodes. In contrast, prior methods do not consider

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

2285

Fig. 10. Comparison of memory usage between the proposed method and
existing approaches concerning the number of user requests.

Fig. 12. Comparison between the proposed method and existing approaches
in terms of the number of incoming requests and execution time.

Fig. 11. Comparison of CPU usage between the proposed method and existing
approaches with respect to the number of incoming requests.

Fig. 13. ROC curve comparison of the proposed framework with existing
methods.

node trust or load conditions, leading to inefficient resource
utilization. Our approach achieves a reduction in memory usage
ranging from 0.45 to 0.21, thereby enhancing scalability and
energy efficiency.
7) Impact of CPU Usage: CPU usage reflects the computational efficiency of the system under increasing request loads.
As depicted in Fig. 11, the proposed framework maintains low
CPU usage at 6.7%, outperforming existing approaches that
reach 12% and 15.6%. This efficiency is achieved through the
decentralized distribution of tasks across trusted edge nodes,
thereby reducing centralized processing bottlenecks. In contrast,
baseline methods lack such distributed orchestration, resulting in
higher resource consumption. Our system demonstrates a CPU
usage reduction of 5.5% to 8.8% compared to prior solutions,
improving scalability and overall performance.
8) Impact of Execution Time: Execution time is a critical
metric for evaluating system responsiveness and time complexity. As illustrated in Fig. 12, our proposed method maintains a
low execution time of 2.5 seconds, even under increasing request
loads. This efficiency is enabled by the use of edge computing
servers, which distribute tasks closer to the data source, thereby
minimizing latency. In contrast, existing approaches that do
not leverage edge-based management report execution times of
9.2 and 14.2 seconds. As a result, our framework achieves a
reduction in execution time ranging from 7.3 to 12.3 seconds,
significantly enhancing system efficiency.

9) Impact of ROC Curve: The ROC curve illustrates the
trade-off between the True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) across different detection thresholds. As shown
in Fig. 13, the proposed framework achieves a higher TPR and
lower FPR compared to existing methods. This improvement
is attributed to the dynamic collection of attack patterns via
honeypots, enabling better generalization to unseen threats. In
contrast, prior works assume predefined attack strategies and
fail to account for unknown attacks, leading to elevated FPR
and reduced detection performance.
10) Mitigation of Critical Cyberattacks in 5G-IoT Environments: Security in 5G-enabled IoT networks is threatened by
sophisticated cyber threats that target service availability, data
integrity, and authentication. The proposed framework integrates blockchain-based authentication and a dual-stage IDS to
mitigate the following critical attacks:
Fuzzing Attacks: These attacks aim to extract user or device
credentials by injecting randomized input. The proposed system
utilizes blockchain to store credentials in hashed form, further
securing them using the Deoxys-TBC algorithm within the
DAA. Its tweakable block cipher and nonce-based encryption
provide strong resistance against brute-force attempts. Mutual
authentication ensures both parties are verified, preventing unauthorized access.
DDoS Attacks: Large volumes of malicious traffic are designed to overwhelm edge gateways or cloud servers. The
framework mitigates this issue through an integrated IDS that

2286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

leverages ML-based traffic classification and anomaly filtering.
Timestamp verification and rate-limiting mechanisms, combined with blockchain’s decentralized validation, ensure distributed resilience and prevent single-point overloads.
Impersonation Attacks: These involve adversaries spoofing
legitimate users. The proposed system validates user identity
via blockchain-based authentication tags generated by DAA.
Optional integration of multi-factor authentication (e.g., OTP or
biometrics) further reduces the risk of unauthorized access even
if one credential is compromised.
Replay Attacks: Adversaries resend previously captured legitimate packets to disrupt operations. This is countered through
spatio-temporal feature analysis and blockchain-based timestamping, which enables the detection of duplicated patterns and
ensures the uniqueness of legitimate transactions.
11) Performance Analysis Summary: The proposed approach demonstrates strong detection capabilities by integrating an IRF-based Signature-based IDS with a DCRNN-based
Anomaly-based IDS, effectively capturing both statistical and
spatiotemporal characteristics of network traffic. The use of virtual honeypots enables continual adaptation to novel attack patterns, improving responsiveness to evolving threats. Enhanced
precision and recall are achieved through feature ranking in
SIDS and the modelling of temporal dependencies in AIDS,
contributing to a lower false negative rate. In terms of resource
efficiency, the edge-based service migration strategy, driven by
trust metrics, resource availability, and edge load, minimizes
CPU and memory overhead. Blockchain-based authentication
further ensures node legitimacy and prevents identity spoofing.
These integrated components collectively yield a scalable and
resilient security framework for NGWN-enabled IoT environments. Although the current evaluation emphasizes detection
accuracy, false positive rates, and resilience against known and
novel threats, we recognize that real-time IoT environments require additional performance metrics, such as latency, throughput, and scalability, under variable traffic loads. These metrics
are critical for assessing the operational viability of the system
in large-scale and time-sensitive deployments. In future work,
we aim to augment our evaluation with these metrics by introducing stress tests that emulate concurrent device interactions,
dynamic workload variations, and deployment scaling across
edge environments.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The rapid expansion of the IoT within NGWN has introduced
significant security challenges. In this paper, we propose a trustaware security framework that integrates blockchain authentication, advanced intrusion detection, and dynamic honeypot
deception to enhance security in NGWN-enabled IoT environments. Our framework effectively mitigates cybersecurity
threats by ensuring robust authentication, reducing false positives in intrusion detection, and dynamically adapting to evolving attack strategies. The proposed system leverages blockchain
technology for decentralized and tamper-proof authentication,
preventing impersonation and unauthorized access. The integration of an IRF-based SIDS and a DCRNN-based AIDS enables
precise and efficient threat detection. Furthermore, a moving
target defence strategy dynamically migrates services to trusted
edge nodes, mitigating the risk of service compromise. The
deployment of high-interaction, on-demand virtual honeypots

enables proactive deception and real-time analysis of attack
patterns, thereby significantly improving intrusion detection and
response mechanisms. Performance evaluation in the NS3 simulation environment demonstrates the superiority of our approach
over existing methods. The proposed framework achieves a
25% improvement in detection accuracy, a 30% reduction in
false negatives, and enhanced resource efficiency compared to
conventional security mechanisms. These results confirm the
effectiveness of our approach in securing IoT environments
while maintaining low computational overhead. Despite its advancements, this research opens avenues for further exploration.
Future work will focus on integrating Explainable AI (XAI)
techniques to improve transparency and interpretability in intrusion detection decisions. Incorporating XAI, security professionals and system administrators will gain deeper insights into
the decision-making process of the detection models, ensuring
better trust, usability, and adaptability of the security framework.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Du, X. Yuan, M. Kadoch, and M. Cheriet, “Real-time
remote health monitoring system driven by 5G MEC-IoT,” Electronics,
vol. 9, no. 11, 2020, Art. no. 1753.
[2] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, S. Shetty, P. Gope, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Security
in 5G-enabled Internet of Things communication: Issues, challenges, and
future research roadmap,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 4466–4489, 2021.
[3] V. Nilkanthsing, “Dynamic orchestration of security services at fog nodes
for 5G IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[4] W. Wang et al., “Label inference attacks against federated unlearning,”
2025, arXiv:2508.06789.
[5] X. Tang, M. Shen, Q. Li, L. Zhu, T. Xue, and Q. Qu, “PILE: Robust privacy-preserving federated learning via verifiable perturbations,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5005–5023,
Nov./Dec. 2023.
[6] P. Aravamudhan and T. Kanimozhi, “A survey on intrusion detection
system and prerequisite demands in IoT networks,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.,
vol. 1916, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 012179.
[7] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, thirdquarter 2019.
[8] Q. A. Al-Haija and A. Droos, “A comprehensive survey on deep learningbased intrusion detection systems in Internet of Things (IoT),” Expert Syst.,
vol. 42, no. 2, 2025, Art. no. e13726.
[9] A. Hinojosa and N. E. Majd, “Edge computing network intrusion detection
system in IoT using deep learning,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Comput.
Commun. Netw., 2024, pp. 1–6.
[10] A. A. Toony, F. Alqahtani, Y. Alginahi, and W. Said, “Multi-block: A
novel ml-based intrusion detection framework for sdn-enabled IoT networks using new pyramidal structure,” Internet Things, vol. 26, 2024,
Art. no. 101231.
[11] Y. K. Saheed, O. H. Abdulganiyu, and T. A. Tchakoucht, “Modified genetic
algorithm and fine-tuned long short-term memory network for intrusion
detection in the Internet of Things networks with edge capabilities,” Appl.
Soft Comput., vol. 155, 2024, Art. no. 111434.
[12] V. Maurya et al., “Blockchain-driven security for IoT networks: State-ofthe-art, challenges and future directions,” Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 1–35, 2025.
[13] Y. Otoum, P. Singh, and A. Nayak, “Advancing IoMT defenses: Deep collaborative learning for robust healthcare security,” in Proc. GLOBECOM
2024 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2024, pp. 2966–2971.
[14] N. A. Dawit, S. S. Mathew, and K. Hayawi, “Suitability of blockchain
for collaborative intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 12th Annu. Undergraduate Res. Conf. Appl. Comput., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[15] F. Louati and F. B. Ktata, “A deep learning-based multi-agent system for
intrusion detection,” SN Appl. Sci., vol. 2, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. 675.
[16] J. Franco, A. Aris, B. Canberk, and A. S. Uluagac, “A survey of honeypots and honeynets for Internet of Things, industrial Internet of Things,
and cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 2351–2383, fourthquarter 2021.

OTOUM et al.: BLOCKCHAIN MEETS ADAPTIVE HONEYPOTS: A TRUST-AWARE APPROACH TO NEXT-GEN IOT SECURITY

[17] T. Zheng et al., “Predictive analytics for cyber-attack timing in power
Internet of Things: A flipit game-theoretic approach,” Internet Things,
vol. 30, 2025, Art. no. 101522.
[18] J. Jean, I. Nikolić, T. Peyrin, and Y. Seurin, “The deoxys AEAD family,”
J. Cryptol., vol. 34, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 31.
[19] A. Paul, D. P. Mukherjee, P. Das, A. Gangopadhyay, A. R. Chintha, and S.
Kundu, “Improved random forest for classification,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 4012–4024, Aug. 2018.
[20] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” 2017, arXiv:1707.01926.
[21] R. Parsamehr et al., “A novel intrusion detection and prevention scheme
for network coding-enabled mobile small cells,” IEEE Trans. Computat.
Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1467–1477, Dec. 2019.
[22] A. S. Mamolar, P. Salvá-Garcıá, E. Chirivella-Perez, Z. Pervez, J. M. A.
Calero, and Q. Wang, “Autonomic protection of multi-tenant 5g mobile
networks against UDP flooding DDOS attacks,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 145, 2019, Art. no. 102416.
[23] G. Hatzivasilis et al., “WARDOG: Awareness detection watchdog for
botnet infection on the host device,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 4–18, Jan.–Mar. 2021.
[24] W. Wang, P. Xu, and L. T. Yang, “Secure data collection, storage and access
in cloud-assisted IoT,” IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 77–88,
Jul./Aug. 2018.
[25] Y. Al-Hadhrami and F. K. Hussain, “Real time dataset generation framework for intrusion detection systems in IoT,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 108, pp. 414–423, 2020.
[26] L. F. Maimó, Á. L. P. Gómez, F. J. G. Clemente, M. G. Pérez, and G. M.
Pérez, “A self-adaptive deep learning-based system for anomaly detection
in 5G networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 7700–7712, 2018.
[27] J. Lam and R. Abbas, “Machine learning based anomaly detection for 5G
networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.03474.
[28] M. A. Mahdi, “Secure and efficient IoT networks: An AI and ML-based
intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Internet
Things, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[29] S. K. R. Mallidi and R. R. Ramisetty, “Advancements in training and
deployment strategies for AI-based intrusion detection systems in IoT: A
systematic literature review,” Discover Internet Things, vol. 5, no. 1, 2025,
Art. no. 8.
[30] A. Yang, Y. Zhuansun, C. Liu, J. Li, and C. Zhang, “Design of intrusion
detection system for Internet of Things based on improved BP neural
network,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 106043–106052, 2019.
[31] A. Mondal and R. T. Goswami, “Enhanced honeypot cryptographic
scheme and privacy preservation for an effective prediction in cloud
security,” Microprocessors Microsystems, vol. 81, 2021, Art. no. 103719.
[32] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS:
An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge
devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug. 2020.
[33] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated
deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, Aug. 2021.
[34] C. Liang et al., “Intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things based
on blockchain and multi-agent systems,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 7, 2020,
Art. no. 1120.
[35] K. C. Chaganti, “A scalable, lightweight AI-driven security framework
for IoT ecosystems: Optimization and game theory approaches,” IEEE
Access, vol. 13, pp. 72235–72247, 2025.
[36] A. Babaei Goushlavandani, P. Bayat, and G. Ekbatanifard, “Detecting
attacks on the Internet of Things network in the computing fog layer with an
embedded learning approach based on clustering and blockchain,” Cluster
Comput., vol. 28, no. 4, 2025, Art. no. 226.
[37] V. Saravanan, M. Madiajagan, S. M. Rafee, P. Sanju, T. B. Rehman,
and B. Pattanaik, “IoT-based blockchain intrusion detection using optimized recurrent neural network,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 11,
pp. 31505–31526, 2024.
[38] H. Al-Mohannadi, I. Awan, and J. Al Hamar, “Analysis of adversary activities using cloud-based web services to enhance cyber threat intelligence,”
Serv. Oriented Comput. Appl., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 175–187, 2020.
[39] J. Lee, J. Choi, G. Lee, S.-W. Shim, and T. Kim, “PhantomFS: File-based
deception technology for thwarting malicious users,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 32203–32214, 2020.
[40] B. Li, Y. Xiao, Y. Shi, Q. Kong, Y. Wu, and H. Bao, “Anti-honeypot enabled
optimal attack strategy for industrial cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Open
J. Comput. Soc., vol. 1, pp. 250–261, 2020.
[41] N. Dara, P. Shankar, P. V. Arvind, and V. Singh, “Intelligent insight into
IoT threats: Leveraging advanced analytics with honeypots for anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Convergence Technol., 2024,
pp. 1–6.

2287

[42] E. Ntizikira, L. Wang, J. Chen, and K. Saleem, “Honey-block: Edge
assisted ensemble learning model for intrusion detection and prevention
using defense mechanism in IoT,” Comput. Commun., vol. 214, pp. 1–17,
2024.
[43] E. Alatawi and U. Albalawi, “Harnessing AI for cyber defense: Honeypotdriven intrusion detection systems,” Symmetry, vol. 17, no. 5, 2025,
Art. no. 628.
[44] I. Martinez, A. S. Hafid, and M. Gendreau, “A blockchain-based audit mechanism for trust and integrity in IoT-fog environments,” 2024,
arXiv:2405.00844.
[45] A. Acien, A. Nieto, G. Fernandez, and J. Lopez, “A comprehensive
methodology for deploying IoT honeypots,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf.
Trust, Privacy Secur. Digit. Bus., Regensburg, Germany, Sep. 5–6, 2018,
pp. 229–243.
[46] D. Commey, M. Nkoom, S. Hounsinou, and G. Crosby, “Dynamic honeypot conversion for enhanced IoT security,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., Forthcoming, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=5079213
[47] T. Ali, “Next-generation intrusion detection systems with LLMs: Realtime anomaly detection, explainable AI, and adaptive data generation,”
M.S. thesis, Fac. of Inf. Technol. and Elect. Eng., Univ. of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland, 2024.
[48] O. G. Lira, A. Marroquin, and M. A. To, “Harnessing the advanced
capabilities of LLM for adaptive intrusion detection systems,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2024, pp. 453–464.
[49] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “LLM-based threat detection and
prevention framework for IoT ecosystems,” 2025, arXiv:2505.00240.
[50] F. Adjewa, M. Esseghir, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and C. Kacfah, “LLMbased continuous intrusion detection framework for next-gen networks,” in
Proc. 2025 Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., 2025, pp. 1198–1203.
[51] Y. Li, Z. Xiang, N. D. Bastian, D. Song, and B. Li, “IDS-agent: An
LLM agent for explainable intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc.
NeurIPS 2024 Workshop Open-World Agents, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=iiK0pRyLkw
[52] X. Hu et al., “A LLM-based agent for the automatic generation and
generalization of IDS rules,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
Privacy Comput. Commun., 2024, pp. 1875–1880.
[53] M. M. Rahman, S. Al Shakil, and M. R. Mustakim, “A survey on intrusion
detection system in IoT networks,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 3, 2025,
Art. no. 100082.
[54] M. Rajkumar et al., “Multi-view consistent generative adversarial network
for enhancing intrusion detection with prevention systems in mobile ad
hoc networks against security attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 150, 2025,
Art. no. 104242.
[55] L. P. Rachakonda, M. Siddula, and V. Sathya, “A comprehensive study
on IoT privacy and security challenges with focus on spectrum sharing in
next-generation networks (5G/6G/beyond),” High-Confidence Comput.,
vol. 4, 2024, Art. no. 100220.
[56] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “LLMs meet federated learning for
scalable and secure IoT management,” 2025, arXiv:2504.16032.
[57] E. H. Said, Y. Otoum, and A. Nayak, “A scalable meta learning-based
model to secure IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 116–120, Jun. 2023.
[58] S. Jangirala, A. K. Das, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Designing secure lightweight
blockchain-enabled RFID-based authentication protocol for supply chains
in 5G mobile edge computing environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7081–7093, Nov. 2020.
[59] O. A. Wahab, J. Bentahar, H. Otrok, and A. Mourad, “Resource-aware
detection and defense system against multi-type attacks in the cloud:
Repeated Bayesian Stackelberg game,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 605–622, Mar./Apr. 2021.
[60] K. S. Gill, S. Saxena, and A. Sharma, “GTM-CSec: Game theoretic model
for cloud security based on IDS and honeypot,” Comput. Secur., vol. 92,
2020, Art. no. 101732.
[61] A. M. Jamil et al., “Lightweight multi-tier IDS for UAV networks: Enhancing UAV zero-day attack detection with honeypot threat intelligence,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Forensics Cyber Crime, 2025, pp. 129–150.
[62] S. S. Chakkaravarthy, D. Sangeetha, M. V. Cruz, V. Vaidehi, and B. Raman,
“Design of intrusion detection honeypot using social leopard algorithm to
detect IoT ransomware attacks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 169944–169956,
2020.
[63] W. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. He, and Z. Ding, “An IoT honeynet
based on multiport honeypots for capturing IoT attacks,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3991–3999, May 2020.