IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

3105

BPF-GNN: A Multi-Granularity Feature Extraction
Model Using Graph Neural Networks for
Encrypted Traffic Classification
Guolong Li , Yuan Gao , Jiongjiong Ren , and Shaozhen Chen

Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification is crucial for critical
network management tasks such as traffic type identification,
resource allocation, and risk mitigation, especially given that
encrypted traffic has become the dominant form of modern
network communication. However, existing classification methods
are typically confined to single-level feature extraction, failing to
capture the multi-granularity information inherent in traffic and
thus limiting their ability to characterize complex encrypted traffic patterns. To address this issue, this paper proposes BPF-GNN,
a hierarchical graph feature extraction model for encrypted
traffic classification. The model enables multi-granularity feature
learning by constructing a three-tier graph structure (Byte-,
Packet-, and Flow-level). It sequentially extracts discriminative
information inherent in each granularity level and accumulates
multi-dimensional traffic characteristics, significantly improving
the classification accuracy of encrypted traffic. Experiments
on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, USTC-TFC2016, and
MIRAGE-2024 datasets demonstrate that BPF-GNN outperforms
existing methods, validating the effectiveness and superiority of
the proposed hierarchical multi-granularity feature extraction
approach.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, deep learning,
graph neural networks, multi-granularity feature extraction.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification is a fundamental and
critical task in network research, which is essential for
Quality of Service (QoS), malware detection, and intrusion
detection [1]. In recent years, with the widespread use of
encryption technology, the privacy and anonymity of network traffic have been significantly enhanced. However, the
prevalence of encryption technology has also brought new
challenges to network traffic analysis. Traditional traffic classification methods, such as port-based techniques and Deep
Packet Inspection (DPI) [2], [3], [4], have seen a marked
decrease in effectiveness when dealing with encrypted traffic. Port-based methods have become ineffective due to the
extensive use of dynamic ports, and DPI not only has high
computational overhead when processing encrypted traffic but
also struggles to extract valid information.

N

Received 12 June 2025; revised 8 January 2026 and 2 March 2026;
accepted 3 March 2026. Date of publication 6 March 2026; date of current
version 16 March 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 62206312. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was F.
Musumeci. (Corresponding author: Yuan Gao.)
The authors are with the Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou
450001, China (e-mail: liguolongx@163.com; yuanmiao202311@163.com;
jiongjiong fun@163.com; chenshaozhen@vip.sina.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3671203

To address these challenges, researchers have proposed a
variety of methods based on machine learning (ML) and deep
learning (DL) [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Early machine learning
methods relied on manually designed statistical features, which
achieved some success to a certain extent. However, these
methods required manual feature engineering, and their accuracy largely depended on the quality of the feature engineering.
In recent years, the rise of deep learning technology has
provided new solutions for encrypted traffic classification.
Deep learning models can automatically extract features from
raw traffic data, avoiding cumbersome feature engineering, and
demonstrating strong learning capabilities and generalization
performance. However, a critical limitation persists: most deep
learning frameworks based on traditional neural networks
such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) process traffic data in Euclidean space,
neglecting the inherent non-Euclidean nature of network traffic. This oversight may lead to the loss of valuable information
[10].
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), designed for nonEuclidean data, provide a natural solution for modeling
complex traffic relationships. As a result, researchers are
increasingly interested in GNNs for encrypted traffic classification. However, most current GNN-based methods [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14] focus only on feature extraction at a single
level of the graph (network traffic can be divided into three
levels from low to high: byte, packet, and flow), neglecting the
fact that there is unique potential available information at each
granularity level. Additionally, in deep learning methods that
use raw bytes as input, headers and payloads are often treated
as a single learning entity without distinguishing their different
representations and functions, which may lead to some degree
of semantic confusion [15].
In response to the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes BPF-GNN, a hierarchical graph feature extraction model
that constructs byte-, packet-, and flow-level graphs for multigranularity feature extraction. The model consists of three
main parts, as shown in Fig. 1: byte-level graph construction
and packet-level representation learning, packet-level graph
construction and flow-level representation learning, flow-level
graph construction and classification. First, at the byte level,
we employ a dual embedding layer to separately construct byte
correlation graphs for packet headers and payloads, mining
the potential correlations between bytes in packet headers
and payloads. A feature extractor composed of multi-layer

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. BPF-GNN model architecture.

GNNs performs graph representation learning to obtain the
representation vectors of headers and payloads, respectively.
These two types of graph representation vectors are then fused
via a Gated Multimodal Unit (GMU) to generate a joint representation. Second, at the packet level, we construct a Traffic
Interaction Graph (TIG) [13] using the joint representations
as node features to extract interaction information between
packets. Similarly, we use multi-layer GNNs to conduct graph
representation learning and derive the overall representation
vector for each flow. Finally, at the flow level, we select the
Top-k most similar flows for each flow and establish connections between flow nodes, thereby supplementing similarity
information among flows and enriching the flow-level feature
representations for classification.
Experiments on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016,
USTC-TFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets demonstrate
that BPF-GNN effectively distinguishes fine-grained categories of encrypted traffic, achieving significantly higher
classification accuracy than baselines. The contributions of our
work are threefold:

1) We propose a method BPF-GNN for hierarchically
extracting features at three different levels, rather than
only focusing on feature extraction at a single level. This
allows us to extract the potential information contained
at the byte, packet, and flow levels, thereby enriching
the representation of the flow-level features used for
classification.
2) We start feature extraction from the basic level (bytelevel) of traffic to learn deeper feature representations
and handle the header and payload bytes of each
packet separately to avoid semantic confusion. Furthermore, after the GNN layer, we use GMU to obtain
the joint representation of the packet header and payload. This approach enables the model to leverage the

complementary information present in the header and
payload.
3) To evaluate the performance of BPF-GNN, we compare
it with several existing methods on four public datasets.
The results demonstrate that BPF-GNN significantly
outperforms these existing methods. This remarkable
performance can be attributed to the effectiveness of the
multi-granularity feature extraction approach.
II. C ONSIDERED S CENARIO
A. Application Scenario
Encrypted traffic classification serves as a pivotal technical support for modern network operation and security
governance, with its application scenarios covering enterprise intranets, campus networks, cloud computing platforms,
and public network access gateways. These scenarios are
characterized by diverse network architectures (including
wired/wireless integrated networks, LANs, and WANs) and
heterogeneous user groups (such as enterprise employees
engaged in remote office, campus users with mixed service
demands, and individual consumers accessing public services),
resulting in complex and variable encrypted traffic patterns.
The core application objectives in these scenarios include
the following two dimensions: first, refined network resource
management, which requires distinguishing fine-grained application types (e.g., chat, email, file transfer, streaming media)
in encrypted traffic to optimize bandwidth allocation and QoS
guarantee strategies; second, targeted security risk prevention,
which involves identifying abnormal encrypted traffic (such
as malicious traffic disguised by encryption) to block hidden
attack channels and comply with network security management regulations.
In practical deployment, the classification system is required
to operate in a passive and non-intrusive mode. It only collects
and analyzes traffic data, without decrypting payloads or mod-

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

ifying packet structures. This design ensures compliance with
data privacy protection specifications and avoids interference
with normal network communication.
B. Task Description
Encrypted traffic classification is defined as a supervised
learning task that maps encrypted network flow samples to
predefined category labels based on their inherent features.
This task focuses on two levels of classification objectives
aligned with practical application demands:
1) Fine-grained application type classification: Distinguishing specific service types within encrypted traffic, such
as chat, email, file transfer, peer-to-peer (P2P), streaming
media (audio/video), and voice over IP (VoIP). This level
of classification provides a basis for refined network
resource optimization and legitimate service management, enabling targeted allocation of network bandwidth
and QoS guarantees.
2) Normal/abnormal traffic discrimination: Identifying
whether encrypted traffic belongs to legitimate user
behavior or malicious activities (e.g., botnet communication, malware propagation, unauthorized data
exfiltration). This objective is crucial for network security defense, helping to detect hidden threats and
maintain the security and compliance of network operations.
Formally, let X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN } denote a dataset consisting of N encrypted traffic samples, where each sample
xi corresponds to a bidirectional network flow defined by
a 5-tuple (source IP, destination IP, source port, destination
port, transport layer protocol). Each flow sample is composed
of a sequence of packets, including header metadata and
encrypted payloads. Let Y = {y1 , y2 , . . ., yN } represent the
corresponding label set, where yi ∈ {1, 2, . . ., C} (C is the
number of target categories).
The core challenge of this task lies in overcoming the
semantic obscurity caused by encryption. The model must
mine discriminative information from multi-granularity traffic
representations. The ultimate goal is to learn a mapping
function f : X → Y that achieves high accuracy, precision,
recall, and F1-score on diverse encrypted traffic scenarios.
III. R ELATED W ORK
A. Machine Learning-Based Methods
In recent years, machine learning-based methods have
achieved promising results in the field of traffic classification.
These methods combine discriminative features extracted from
encrypted traffic with machine learning algorithms. They first
extract feature information from the traffic and then input these
features into machine learning models for classification.
A large number of studies focus on mining statistical
features inherent in traffic to build classification models.
Finamore et al. [16] proposed KISS, which extracts payload
statistical features via the Chi-Square test and combines geometric distance or Support Vector Machines to address the
classification needs brought by the growth of UDP traffic.
Anderson et al. [6] compared six machine learning models,

3107

and confirmed the critical role of feature engineering and
enhanced features in improving classification performance.
Zaki et al. [17] proposed GRAIN, which realizes three-level
granular multi-label classification of encrypted traffic based
on statistical features of packet payload lengths and cascaded
Random Forest classifiers. Mohanty et al. [18] proposed a
stacking ensemble model and an autoencoder-based defense
mechanism to solve the problems of high False Positive
Rate and vulnerability to adversarial attacks in darknet traffic
classification.
Another line of research directly takes raw bit/byte streams
as input to machine learning models. Yun et al. [19] proposed
Securitas, a protocol identification system that leverages the
skewed frequency-rank distribution of protocol trace n-grams,
extracts statistical message formats by clustering semantically
identical n-grams, and identifies protocols from raw network
traces without prior protocol knowledge. Wang et al. [20]
proposed ProHacker, a nonparametric approach that extracts
protocol keywords via a Bayesian statistical model and classifies protocol traces using semi-supervised learning. Xiao et al.
[21] proposed the Dynamic Multiple Traffic Classification
System (DMTCS), which incorporates time-based protocol
information distribution and applies topic models to cluster
packets, enabling dynamic network stream classification without prior application knowledge. Tang et al. [22] proposed
MGrC based on granular computing, which defines traffic flow
granules, explores inter-granule correlations, and establishes
structural granules to capture inherent packet relationships.
However, the main drawback of these methods lies in the
generally shallow structure of machine learning models, which
makes it difficult to capture the complex correlation features
in encrypted traffic and results in insufficient adaptability to
high-dimensional traffic data with variable patterns [23].
B. Deep Learning-Based Methods
Thanks to the rapid development of deep learning technology, researchers have begun to apply deep learning techniques
to the field of network traffic classification. The earliest
methods to emerge were based on traditional neural networks.
Wang et al. [8] transformed traffic into images and proposed a CNN-based method for encrypted traffic classification.
Bu et al. [24] proposed a model with deep and parallel
network-in-network (NIN) structures, which enhances local
modeling via micro-networks after convolution layers and
reduces parameters with global average pooling. Liu et al.
[25] proposed FS-Net based on RNN, which leverages a
multi-layer encoder-decoder structure to mine flow sequential
characteristics and a reconstruction mechanism to enhance
feature effectiveness. Ren et al. [26] proposed Tree-RNN,
which divides large classification tasks into small ones via
tree structure and deploys specific classifiers for each sub-task,
realizing end-to-end feature learning. These methods avoid
tedious feature engineering in traditional machine learning,
yet rely on traditional neural networks such as CNN and RNN
to process Euclidean space data. They only efficiently handle
regular 1D or 2D data, ignore the intrinsic non-Euclidean traits
of network traffic, and lead to the loss of valuable information
[10].

3108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

In recent years, GNNs have become a hot topic in the field
of deep learning. These networks can integrate deep learning
with graph structures, making up for the shortcomings of the
aforementioned traditional neural network-based classification
methods.
Researchers have attempted to combine deep learning-based
methods with graph-based methods to improve the effectiveness of traffic classification. Zheng et al. [11] proposed a graph
construction method that combines traffic trace graph with
statistical features, which can achieve certain performance
improvements under low labeling rates, but its accuracy is
relatively low. Sun et al. [12] constructed a graph structure
based on the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) method and used a
fusion neural network of graph convolution and autoencoder to
extract graph features. Shen et al. [13], leveraging the slightly
different characteristics of traffic in terms of bursts, proposed
TIG, which achieved good classification results on Decentralized Applications (DApps). Huoh et al. [10] construct a
graph structure using the raw bytes of packets, the sequential relationships between packets, and packet metadata. The
raw byte information is utilized as node features, and edges
were generated according to the chronological order of each
packet’s timestamp. Additionally, five common meta-features
are included as global features of the graph. They design a
GNN to learn representations for nodes, edges, and global
features. Diao et al. [14] proposed EC-GCN based on multiscale graph convolutional neural networks, which encodes
traffic flows into graph representations via a lightweight layer
relying only on metadata and extracts multi-graph representations through a graph pooling and structure learning layer.
Yang et al. [27] proposed MTSecurity, which integrates Transformer and GNN technologies, constructs the Malicious Traffic
Interaction Graph (MTIG) based on client-server interactions,
and fuses raw byte features with graph-based interaction features. Shi et al. [28] proposed BPF-DAG, which constructed a
global IP-level communication graph and adopted Transformer
and a customized DiESAGE to extract packet-level temporal
features and flow-level topological features, respectively.
A common issue with the aforementioned methods is that
they focus only on feature extraction at one level of the graph,
neglecting the fact that there is unique potential available information at each granularity level. For example, the methods
of Zheng et al. and Sun et al. both focus only on feature
extraction at the flow level, while the methods of Shen et al.
and Huoh et al. focus only on feature extraction at the packet
level. Furthermore, the model proposed by Shi et al. only
focuses on the temporal relations at the packet level and the
topological relations at the flow level, without considering the
relational information among bytes within a packet, nor does
it achieve real feature modeling at the byte level.
Therefore, based on the above observations, we propose a
hierarchical feature extraction model BPF-GNN that constructs
byte-, packet-, and flow-level graph structures for multigranularity feature extraction.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we provide a detailed description of our
method as well as the overall model architecture. The overall

Fig. 2. The overall process of our method.

process of our method is shown in Fig. 2, which is divided into
five stages: data preprocessing, byte-level graph construction
and packet-level representation learning, packet-level graph
construction and flow-level representation learning, flow-level
representation enrichment and classification.
A. Data Preprocessing
Assuming that the raw traffic data we obtain is in the
PCAP format, due to the varying lengths of the raw traffic
data and the presence of interfering information, we need to
preprocess the data to transform it into uniformly formatted
input data. The data preprocessing consists of five steps: traffic
splitting, flow filtering, anonymization, and extraction of raw
traffic bytes from packet header/payload.
1) Traffic Splitting: First, we need to split the continuous
traffic into multiple discrete units. The most commonly used
method in current research is to divide the raw traffic data into
bidirectional flows. A flow refers to all packets that share the
same five-tuple information (source IP, source port, destination
IP, destination port, and transport layer protocol). Following
this step, the raw traffic data is segmented into a set of flows
F = {f1 , . . . , fN }, where N represents the size of F .
2) Flow Filtering: We filter out flows in which all of
packets have no payload. This is because these flows do
not contain any actual transmission content or data, and thus
cannot be used to construct the corresponding graph structure.
Furthermore, we also filter out flows with an excessively
large number of packets. Specifically, flows with more than
10,000 packets are defined as “excessively large flows” and
filtered out. This is because such flows are mostly caused by
poor network conditions or other underlying factors, which
introduce massive noise via bad and retransmitted packets
that may interfere with subsequent graph construction and
feature learning. Therefore, such flows are typically regarded
as abnormal samples and are removed. After this step, the
0
flow set F is filtered into set F 0 = {f10 , . . . , fM
}, where M
0
represents the size of F and M ≤ N .
3) Anonymization: The five-tuple information of each
packet in each flow fi0 is directly removed, as this information
may interfere with the classification results of encrypted traffic.
4) Extraction of Raw Traffic Bytes: For each flow fi0 , select
the first K packets and extract the first m bytes of the packet
header and the first n bytes of the payload as the raw byte

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

3109

Fig. 3. An example of sliding window with window size of 3.

sequences for header/payload. Byte streams longer than m/n
bytes are truncated, while those shorter than m/n bytes are
padded with 0xF F at the end to reach the required length.
If the number of packets in flow fi0 is less than K, the flow
is padded with several m/n-length byte sequences filled with
0xF F .
Consequently, the packet header/payload information of
each flow fi0 is transformed into a byte matrix Hi ∈
RK×m /Pi ∈ RK×n to represent it.
B. Byte-Level Graph Construction and Packet-Level
Representation Learning
In this section, we introduce the process of constructing
byte-level graph and packet-level representation learning. To
avoid confusion in meaning, we perform representation learning for packet header and payload independently [15], [29],
[30]. Next, we present a detailed description.
1) Byte-Level Graph Construction: In this section, our goal
is to transform each row of the packet header/payload matrices
obtained in Section IV-A into a byte-level graph Gbyte =
{Vbyte , Ebyte } to serve as input data for the graph neural
network, where Vbyte and Ebyte are the sets of vertices and
edges. The graph construction method refers to the approach
proposed in Reference [15]. Below, we use the first row r1 of
the packet header byte matrix H1 for flow f10 as an example to
illustrate the process of constructing the corresponding bytelevel graph.
Here, we assume that
r1 = {a1 , . . . , am } , ai ∈ [0, 255], i = 1, . . . , m.
Each element in Vbyte represents a byte of r1 . Note that all
bytes with the same value share the same node, so the number
of nodes in Gbyte does not exceed 256, which ensures that the
size of the byte-level graph remains relatively small.
To construct the edge set Ebyte , we first process the input
byte sequence r1 using a sliding window (as shown in Fig. 3).
This step is designed to capture local contextual correlations
between bytes, which is a key property for distinguishing
encrypted traffic patterns. Semantic associations in packet
headers and payloads are typically concentrated in adjacent
or short-range byte sequences, making these local correlations
particularly valuable for classification. Specifically, we set a
window of fixed size (e.g., 3 bytes in Fig. 3) and slide it across
r1 with a step size of 1: each window defines a local context,
and bytes within the same window are treated as co-occurring
elements. This approach avoids the over-dense graph structure
that would result from connecting all bytes chronologically,
while focusing on meaningful short-range byte relationships.

Fig. 4. Structure of GNN for packet-level representation learning.

Next, we count the frequency of each byte appearing in
various windows and record the number of times byte pairs cooccur within the same window. This statistical information will
be used to calculate the strength of association between bytes.
To quantify this strength of association, we use Pointwise
Mutual Information (PMI) [31] as a measure. The formula
for calculating PMI is as follows:
P M I(x; y) = log

p(x, y)
.
p(x)p(y)

PMI measures the probability of two bytes co-occurring in a
window relative to the probability of their independent occurrences. If the PMI value is positive, it indicates that the two
bytes have a strong association in context, and thus an edge
connection is established between the nodes corresponding
to these two bytes; if the PMI value is negative or zero, it
is considered that there is no significant association between
them.
2) Packet-Level Representation Learning: Following the
methodology established in Section IV-B.1, we generate bytelevel graphs for both packet headers and payloads. To perform
feature extraction on these graphs, we implement a fourlayer GraphSAGE architecture [15], as detailed in Fig. 4.
GraphSAGE [32] is an GNN framework that learns node
embeddings by sampling and aggregating features of local
neighbor nodes. This framework possesses a strong capability
to capture local structural correlations and can effectively mine
the local relevance between bytes in byte-level graphs. The
core process of GraphSAGE consists of two sequential steps:
neighbor feature aggregation and node embedding update. For
each node v, the neighbor aggregation operation is defined as:
AGGREGATE ({qu | u ∈ N (v)}) ,
where we adopt mean aggregation to achieve stable and
reliable feature learning. The updated node embedding is then
calculated by the following formula:


qv0 = σ W (l) · CONCAT (qv , AGGREGATE(·)) ,
which concatenates the node’s own features with the aggregated neighbor information, thereby preserving both local
details and contextual associations simultaneously.
Formally, for each node v ∈ Vbyte in the graph Gbyte , the
feature aggregation process can be described as follows. Let
(l−1)
qv
denote the feature vector of node v at layer l − 1, and

3110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 5. The simplified version of GMU.

N (v) represent the set of neighboring nodes of v. The message
from the neighbors is computed as:
p(l) =

X
1
qu(l−1) ,
|N (v)|
u∈N (v)

3) Representation Fusion: Having derived packet-level representation vectors for both headers and payloads, we integrate
these representations into a unified vector through a streamlined GMU [36]. This mapping operation projects the header
and payload features into a joint latent space, enabling subsequent packet-level graph construction. The GMU architecture
is detailed in Fig. 5.
Let gh and gp represent the packet-level representation
vectors extracted from the traffic header graphs and traffic
payload graphs, respectively. The GMU computes a gating
vector to control the information between header and payload
representation vectors.
First, we transform the header and payload representation
vectors using hyperbolic tangent (tanh) activation functions:
hh = tanh (Wh · gh ) ,
hp = tanh (Wp · gp ) ,

where |N (v)| is the cardinality of the neighbor set. The
updated feature vector for node v at layer l is then obtained
by concatenating its current feature vector with the aggregated
neighbor message, followed by a non-linear transformation:



qv(l) = σ W (l) · CONCAT qv(l−1) , p(l) .

where Wh and Wp are the learnable weight matrices for the
header and payload modalities, respectively. The tanh function
ensures that the transformed representation vectors are within
the range [−1, 1].
Next, we compute the gating vector z using a sigmoid
activation function:

Here, W (l) ∈ Rdl−1 ×dl is the learnable weight matrix at layer
l, CONCAT(·) denotes the concatenation operation, and σ(·)
is the activation function. We utilize the Parametric ReLU
(PReLU) [33] as the activation function, defined as:
(
x
if x > 0,
σ(x) =
ax if x ≤ 0,

z = σ (Wz · CONCAT(gh , gp )) ,

where a is a learnable parameter that introduces channel-wise
attention by scaling negative values differently. To enhance
the stability and performance of the model, we apply Batch
Normalization (BN) [34] to the updated feature vectors:
 
qv(l) = BN qv(l) .
To address the over-smoothing issue and capture multiscale structural information, we adopt a strategy inspired by
Jumping Knowledge Networks (JKN) [35]. Specifically, we
concatenate the feature vectors from the first four layers to
form the final feature representation for each node v:


qv = CONCAT qv(1) , qv(2) , qv(3) , qv(4) .
Subsequently, we compute the global feature vector gpacket
by applying mean pooling over all node feature vectors:
gpacket =

1
|Vbyte |

X

qv ,

v∈Vbyte

where |Vbyte | denotes the number of nodes in the graph.
This global feature vector gpacket encapsulates the structural
characteristics of the entire graph.
So far, we have been able to obtain packet-level representation vectors for both the header and payload of each packet.

where Wz is the learnable weight matrix for the gating mechanism, and σ(·) denotes the sigmoid activation function. The
gating vector z determines the contribution of each modality
to the final representation.
The final fused representation hfinal is obtained by combining the gated vectors from header and payload representation
vectors:
hfinal = z

hh ⊕ (1 − z)

hp ,

where
denotes the element-wise multiplication operation,
and ⊕ represents element-wise addition. This formulation
allows the GMU to adaptively weigh the contributions of the
header and payload feature vectors.
By incorporating this simplified GMU, we provide an efficient and effective framework for fusing header and payload
representation vectors. This approach enables the model to
leverage the complementary information present in header and
payload.

C. Packet-Level Graph Construction and Flow-Level
Representation Learning
Having acquired the overall representation vector for each
packet, which is the packet-level representation vector, we
proceed to construct graph structures at the packet level to
uncover potential useful information that is implicit at the
packet level, such as interaction feature information between
packets. It is also important to note that our primary focus in
this paper is on the flow-level classification task. Therefore,
we also need to extract the global features of each packet-level
graph, which is the learning of flow-level representations.

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

Algorithm 1 Packet-Level Graph Edge Set Construction
Input: Vertex set V .
Output: The packet-level graph edge set E.
Initialize: E = φ.
1: Split V into bursts B = (b1 , . . . , bS ) based on packet
direction
2: for each burst bi ∈ B do
3:
if bi has more than one packet then
4:
for each pair of consecutive packets (vj , vj+1 ) in bi
do
5:
Add bidirectional edges between vj and vj+1 to
E
6:
end for
7:
end if
8: end for
9: for each pair of consecutive bursts (bi , bi+1 ) do
10:
if both bi and bi+1 have only one packet then
11:
Add bidirectional edges between the packets in bi
and bi+1 to E
12:
else
13:
Add bidirectional edges between the first packets of
bi and bi+1 to E
14:
Add bidirectional edges between the last packets of
bi and bi+1 to E
15:
end if
16: end for
17: return E

1) Packet-Level Graph Construction: Generally speaking,
the interaction patterns between the two parties in network
traffic communication are unique and remain unchanged
regardless of whether the traffic itself is encrypted and protected by protocols. Therefore, at the packet level, we opt to
construct the TIG [13] to learn this unique information.
Our goal is to construct the corresponding packet-level
graph Gpacket = {Vpacket , Epacket } for each flow, where the
number of nodes in each graph is K, and the node features
of each node are the vectors hfinal extracted as described
in Section IV-B. It should be specially noted that the node
features of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) in [13] are
packet lengths. To adapt to our model, we replace the node
features in the original TIG method with the extracted packetlevel representation vectors.
The method for constructing the edge set Epacket in the
traffic interaction graph is shown in Algorithm 1, where a burst
is defined as a sequence of consecutive packets transmitted in
the same direction within a short time interval [37]. Lines
2-8 of the algorithm are for adding intra-burst edges, which
are the connections between vertices within the same burst.
Lines 9-16 are for adding inter-burst edges, which establish
connections between two adjacent bursts. More specifically,
the first and last vertices in each burst are connected to the
corresponding first and last vertices in the next burst.
2) Flow-Level Representation Learning: After constructing
the packet-level traffic graph, we need to perform representation learning for the graph features. Here, we still use
the GraphSAGE layer as mentioned in Section IV-B.2, only

3111

this time we stack two layers. Since this paper focuses on
flow-level classification tasks, we still need to extract global
features to obtain flow-level representations. Specifically, we
concatenate the vectors from the first two layers to form the
final representation vectors for each node v:


lv = CONCAT lv(1) , lv(2) .
Subsequently, we compute the global feature vector gf low
by applying mean pooling over all node feature vectors:
X
1
lv .
gf low =
K
v∈Vpacket

The learned flow-level representations gf low then contain
two types of information:
1) Packet-level representations learned from byte-level
graphs. Since the node features in the packet-level
graph use global packet features extracted from the bytelevel, the extracted flow-level features include potential
relationship information between bytes;
2) Interaction information unique to the packet level.
As mentioned before, the interaction pattern information
of packets is unique and is not affected by whether
the traffic itself is encrypted or not. After representation learning, the extracted flow-level representations
currently include this important information to better
perform subsequent classification tasks.
D. Flow-Level Representation Enrichment and Classification
After completing the two-step representation learning process described in Sections IV-B and IV-C, we have obtained
flow-level representations. However, we believe that additional
flow-level similarity information can be incorporated to further
enhance the representation of flows. To achieve this, we
propose constructing the flow-level graph where the flow-level
representations obtained in Section IV-C are used as node
features.
Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xM } represent the set of flow-level
representations extracted as described in Section IV-C, where
xi ∈ Rd is the representation vector of the i-th flow, and
M is the total number of flows. These representation vectors
are derived from the previous steps and capture the essential
characteristics of each flow. It should be specifically noted that,
in order to keep the size of the flow-level graph relatively
small, we construct a graph every BatchSize (BS) flows,
instead of constructing a large graph using all M flows. This
choice avoids excessive computational and memory overhead
caused by a single large-scale graph when M is large, ensuring
the model’s scalability to large datasets while maintaining the
local similarity structure within each batch.
To establish connections between flows, we use the
Euclidean distance as the similarity metric. The Euclidean
distance between two flow representation vectors xi and xj is
defined as:
v
u d
uX
d(x , x ) = kx − x k = t (x − x )2 ,
i

j

i

j 2

ik

k=1

jk

3112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

where xik and xjk are the k-th components of the representation vectors xi and xj , respectively.
For each flow xi , we select the Top-k most similar flows
based on the Euclidean distance. Specifically, we compute the
distances between xi and all other flows xj (where j 6= i),
and then select the k flows with the smallest distances. These
k flows are considered the most similar neighbors of xi .
Using the Top-k similarity information, we construct a flowlevel graph Gf low = (Vf low , Ef low ), where:
• Vf low = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vBS } is the set of nodes, each
representing a flow.
• Ef low is the set of edges, where an edge (vi , vj ) exists
if xj is one of the Top-k most similar neighbors of xi .
To enrich the flow-level representations, we apply two layers
of GraphSAGE on the constructed graph. By applying two
layers of GraphSAGE, each node can aggregate information
from its Top-k most similar neighbors, thereby enhancing the
flow-level representations.
This graph construction approach creates more connections
between flows of the same application type, which allows
each node to aggregate information from more neighbors of
similar types. This enhances the flow-level representations and
improves the accuracy of the classification task.
Finally, we use a fully connected layer to perform the ultimate classification task. The output of the second GraphSAGE
layer is passed through the fully connected layer, which is
defined as:


(2)
yi = softmax Wc · hi + bc ,
where:

A. Dataset
In our experiments, we utilize four well-known datasets:
ISCX-VPN2016 [38], ISCX-Tor2016 [39], USTC-TFC2016
[9], and MIRAGE-2024 [40].
The ISCX-VPN2016 dataset is specifically designed for the
analysis of Virtual Private Network (VPN) traffic and nonVPN traffic. It contains network traffic from both VPN and
non-VPN connections, making it suitable for researching and
comparing the characteristics and behaviors of these two types
of traffic. The dataset defines six categories, namely Chat,
Email, File Transfer, P2P, Streaming and VoIP.
The ISCX-Tor2016 dataset focuses on traffic anonymized
through The Onion Router (Tor) network. It contains ISCXTor and ISCX-nonTor datasets. The dataset defines eight
categories, namely Browsing, Email, Chat, Audio-streaming,
Video-streaming, File Transfer, VoIP, and P2P.
The USTC-TFC2016 dataset is specifically designed for the
analysis of normal and abnormal network traffic. It contains
two primary categories of traffic: normal traffic and abnormal
traffic, making it suitable for researching and distinguishing
the characteristics between legitimate and malicious network
behaviors. The normal traffic in this dataset covers ten subcategories (e.g., MySQL, Weibo), while the abnormal traffic
also includes ten sub-categories (e.g., Htbot, Zeus).
The MIRAGE-2024 dataset is specifically designed for the
analysis of mobile application traffic in real-world scenarios.
It contains fine-grained bidirectional flows collected from
Android devices, covering a diverse set of popular apps
such as ClashRoyale, Discord, WhatsApp, Zoom, and many
others, making it suitable for researching encrypted traffic
classification and mobile app fingerprinting.

(2)

• hi is the feature representation of node vi after the
second GraphSAGE layer.
• Wc and bc are the learnable weight matrix and bias
vector of the fully connected layer, respectively.
• yi is the predicted probability distribution over the classes
for node vi .
To optimize the model parameters, we utilize the crossentropy loss function to measure the discrepancy between the
predicted probabilities and ground-truth labels. The loss is
computed as:

B. Experimental Setting
1) Evaluation Metrics: To quantify the performance of the
classification model comprehensively, four key metrics are
employed: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. Each
metric captures distinct aspects of the model’s behavior, as
defined below:
a) Accuracy: The percentage of correct predictions out
of the total samples.

c=1

TP + TN
TP + FP + FN + TN
b) Precision: The probability that a sample is actually
positive among all those predicted to be positive.

• C denotes the number of classes.
true
• yi,c
is the ground-truth one-hot label for node vi .
• yi,c corresponds to the predicted probability.

TP
TP + FP
c) Recall: The probability that a sample is predicted to
be positive among all those that are actually positive.

L=−

C
X

true
yi,c
log yi,c ,

where:

Accuracy =

Precision =

TP
TP + FN
d) F1 score: The F1 score is used to provide a comprehensive evaluation of Precision and Recall, and it is the
harmonic mean of both precision and recall.
Recall =

V. E XPERIMENT
In this section, we detail the full configuration of our
experiments and the corresponding results obtained. These
experiments are designed to comprehensively evaluate the
performance of our proposed model against existing methods.

F1 = 2 ·

Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

TABLE I
H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION OF BPF-GNN V IA G RID S EARCH

While accuracy provides a global view, precision and recall
focus on type I and type II errors, respectively. The F1 score
integrates both to mitigate biases caused by class imbalance.
2) Experimental Environment: We employ DGL as the
graph neural network framework for our model and the
baseline models, and each experiment was independently run
five times with the average value taken as the experimental
evaluation result. All of the models presented in this paper
are solved by DGL running on a PC with Intel R CoreTM
i9-10850K CPU 3.60 GHz and NVIDIA RTX 3080 GPU.
3) Model Parameter Selection: In this section, we elaborate on the hyperparameter configuration for our model. To
ensure the model achieves optimal performance, we adopt a
grid search strategy to exhaustively evaluate the performance
of different hyperparameter combinations within reasonable
ranges.
Specifically, we predefine candidate value ranges for core
hyperparameters (e.g., training epochs from 20 to 60, batch
size from 32 to 128, learning rate from 0.0001 to 0.01).
For each combination, we conduct independent training and
validation on the dataset, and select the optimal configuration
by comprehensively balancing classification accuracy, training
efficiency, and model generalization.
For the optimization strategy, we compare the performance
of Adam and SGD optimizers via grid search and ultimately
select Adam for its superior stability in gradient descent. We
also introduce a warm-up stage (scaled to 0.1 of total training
steps) to mitigate the impact of large initial learning rates,
paired with a cosine annealing scheduler to gradually reduce
the learning rate to a minimum of 1e-4. Additionally, dropout
layers (set to 0.2) are incorporated to prevent overfitting. The
final hyperparameter settings (shown in Table I) are confirmed
via repeated grid search validation and cross-validation on the
dataset.
C. Model Sensitivity Analysis
We conduct sensitivity analysis on four key hyperparameters
that directly affect model performance: the maximum number
of packets per flow (K), the maximum length of packet header
bytes (m), the maximum length of payload bytes (n), and the
k value in Top-k for flow-level graph construction. We select
accuracy and F1-score as evaluation metrics to quantitatively
assess the impact of parameter variations on classification
performance.

3113

1) Impact of the Maximum Number of Packets Per Flow
(K): The number of packets per flow directly determines both
the count of byte-level graphs and the number of nodes in the
packet-level graphs. As shown in Fig. 6a, as K increases,
the model’s accuracy and F1-score first show a upward trend
and then enter a state of fluctuation: when K = 15, accuracy
and F1-score hit their highest values; once K exceeds 15, the
metrics only fluctuate slightly without any notable improvement. This indicates that 15 packets already contain enough
information to enable effective learning, while extra packets
merely add redundant data.
2) Impact of the Maximum Length of Packet Header Bytes
(m): The packet header contains critical control information,
and its effective extraction is essential for distinguishing
encrypted traffic patterns. The sensitivity analysis results are
presented in Fig. 6b. As shown in the figure: When the header
byte length m is set to 30, the F1-score remains at a relatively
low level, as the truncated header bytes lose key information.
As m increases to 50, both the F1-score and accuracy reach
their optimal levels. This length fully covers the core control
fields while avoiding redundant noise from irrelevant header
fields. When m exceeds 50, the F1-score does not improve
further and only fluctuates slightly. This result indicates that
excessive header bytes do not enhance feature representation;
instead, they may introduce redundant information and cause
minor performance fluctuations.
3) Impact of the Maximum Length of Payload Bytes (n):
The payload carries the core data of encrypted traffic, and
its byte length directly impacts the richness of semantic
information for packet-level representation learning. As shown
in Fig. 6c, with the increase of n, the model’s performance first
rises to a peak and then gradually declines: when n = 200,
both accuracy and F1-score reach their maximum values. This
length balances the need for effective semantic information
acquisition and noise control, enabling the model to effectively
capture relationships between bytes in the encrypted payload. When n exceeds 200, accuracy and F1-score gradually
decrease. This is because encrypted payloads contain a large
number of redundant encrypted bits; excessive byte truncation
introduces irrelevant noise, interfering with the PMI-based
byte correlation calculation and subsequent graph representation learning.
4) Impact of k Value in Top-k for Flow-Level Graph Construction: The k value determines the number of similar flow
neighbors connected to each flow node in the flow-level graph,
directly affecting the richness of flow-level feature fusion.
As shown in Fig. 6d, with the increase of k, the model’s
F1-score first increases and then decreases significantly. When
k = 1, the F1-score is relatively low because of the sparse edge
structure of the flow-level graph. Each flow can only aggregate
limited similar neighbor information and cannot fully leverage
inter-flow similarity for feature enhancement. When k = 3,
the F1-score reaches its peak. This configuration balances the
density of the flow-level graph and the relevance of neighbor
information, enabling each flow to aggregate features from the
three most similar flows while avoiding the dilution of discriminative features caused by excessive irrelevant neighbors.
When k exceeds 3, the F1-score decreases significantly. This

3114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis of key hyperparameters on model performance based on the ISCX-VPN dataset: (a) Maximum number of packets per flow K;
(b) Maximum header byte length per packet m; (c) Maximum payload byte length per packet n; (d) k value of Top-k in flow-level graph construction.

is because an overly large k leads to over-connection in the
flow-level graph, introducing dissimilar flow information that
contaminates the original flow representation.
D. Comparison Experiments
1) Comparison Models: To evaluate the proposed model’s
efficacy, five baselines are selected for benchmarking. Each
method is meticulously optimized for peak performance on the
evaluation dataset to ensure fairness. The baseline approaches
are summarized as follows:
• CNN [9]: Translates the first 784 bytes of each bidirectional flow into grayscale images and use a CNN
architecture similar to LeNet-5 [41] for feature learning.
• KNN-GNN [12]: Constructs graph representations via
K-Nearest Neighbors and integrates graph convolution
with an autoencoder for feature extraction.
• GraphDApp [13]: Constructs graph structure using
packet length sequence and interaction information
between packets, with a three-layer GraphSAGE stack
used as the neural network model.
• ACID [42]: Leverages lightweight neural model-learned
low-dimensional embeddings, combined with multiple
kernel networks, to adaptively cluster and classify malicious traffic.

• EC-GCN [14]: Designs a multi-subgraph classification
framework that only uses metadata information, combining CNN and GNN to extract multi-scale spatiotemporal
features for encrypted traffic classification.
2) Experimental Results: The comparative experimental results on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, USTCTFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets are shown in Tables II
and III. Based on the results, we can draw the following
conclusions:
1) Our model BPF-GNN performs the best compared
to multiple baselines on the ISCX-VPN2016, ISCXTor2016, USTC-TFC2016, and MIRAGE-2024 datasets,
which confirms the effectiveness of our approach;
2) BPF-GNN outperforms the CNN model across all
datasets, and this performance gap essentially stems
from the difference in their adaptability to the inherent structure of traffic data: the CNN model converts
traffic data into grid structures in Euclidean space for
processing, while network traffic inherently exhibits
non-Euclidean interaction characteristics. This limits the
CNN’s ability to extract effective features. In contrast,
by constructing a three-level graph structure, BPF-GNN
naturally aligns with the non-Euclidean nature of traffic
data, enabling accurate modeling of key information

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

3115

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE ON THE ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-T OR 2016 AND USTC-TFC2016 DATASETS

such as byte semantic correlations, packet interaction
patterns, and inter-flow similarity;
3) Additionally, it is worth noting that our model is superior
to GraphDApp, for which feature extraction only stays at
the packet level and does not utilize the raw byte information of the traffic as node features, instead choosing
to use packet length information. This precisely confirms
the superiority of hierarchical feature extraction;
4) BPF-GNN demonstrates superior generalization capability in cross-scenario tasks across multiple datasets.
Experimental results indicate that BPF-GNN maintains
consistent and leading classification performance across
four datasets with distinctly different characteristics.
This advantage originates from its multi-granularity feature extraction mechanism, which can effectively capture
both commonalities and scenario-specific features under
various encrypted traffic scenarios.
E. Ablation Experiments
In this paper, we conducted a series of ablation experiments
aimed at evaluating the impact of each component of the
model. Ablation experiments are an important research method
that determines the contribution of each part to the final results
by systematically removing or replacing various components
of the model. In this experiment, we particularly focused on
the impact of byte-level graph, packet-level graph, flow-level
graph, and the choice of activation functions on the model.
Below is an explanation of each experiment:
• w/o Byte-level graph: Instead of constructing byte-level
graphs, the raw bytes of the traffic data are directly used
as node vectors in the packet-level graph.
• w/o Packet-level graph: Instead of constructing packetlevel graphs, the packet-level features output from the
byte-level graph feature extraction are simply concatenated to serve as the node vectors of the flow-level graph.
• w/o Flow-level graph: Instead of constructing flowlevel graphs, the output from the packet-level graph
feature extraction is directly input into a fully connected
classifier.
• w/o PReLU & BatchNorm: Instead of using the PReLU
activation function and normalization, the ReLU activation function is used.

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE
ON THE MIRAGE-2024 DATASET

The results of the ablation experiments on the
ISCX-VPN2016 dataset are shown in Table IV. The
experimental results indicate that the four components
aforementioned of BPF-GNN contribute positively to
improving the model performance. Among them, the negative
impact of not using the byte-level graph on the model
performance is the most significant, with the F1 score
dropping by approximately 12% on the ISCX-VPN dataset.
This illustrates the necessity of starting feature learning from
the byte-level. Additionally, we can also observe that not
using the packet-level or flow-level graphs also has a certain
negative impact on the model performance. Specifically, the
flow-level graph enriches the feature representation of each
flow by incorporating information from similar flows, thus
enhancing the feature representation of the flow, which is
confirmed in this section.
F. Model Complexity Analysis
To fully evaluate the balance between performance and
computational overhead, we report the floating-point operations (FLOPs) and parameter counts of the proposed
BPF-GNN model and baseline methods in Table V.
Combining the comparisons between Table V and performance results, it can be concluded that BPF-GNN achieves
competitive performance on the target dataset while maintaining moderate model complexity. Compared with lightweight
models such as CNN, GraphDApp and ACID, BPF-GNN has
relatively higher floating-point operations. This computational
overhead stems from two core design choices:
• Hierarchical raw byte input: BPF-GNN takes raw
byte sequences as input while leveraging the hierarchical structure of network traffic. This design enhances

3116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE IV
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE ISCX-VPN2016 DATASET

TABLE V
M ODEL FLOP S AND PARAMETERS

feature representation capability but also increases computational overhead. However, by adjusting the number
of bytes used per flow, the floating-point operations can
be reduced with acceptable accuracy loss.
• Separate processing of packet header and payload: BPF-GNN processes packet headers and payloads
via independent neural network branches. This design
strengthens feature learning for encrypted traffic but
doubles the computational load. This overhead, though,
can be mitigated through parallel processing.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose BPF-GNN, a hierarchical graph
neural network model designed for encrypted traffic classification through multi-granularity feature extraction across
byte-, packet-, and flow-level graphs. This allows us to capture
the discriminative information contained at the byte, packet,
and flow levels, thereby enriching the representation of the
flow-level features used for classification and improving the
accuracy of encrypted traffic classification tasks. Experimental
results on the public datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves significant classification performance. This remarkable performance can be attributed to the effectiveness of the
multi-granularity feature extraction approach. In future work,
we will continue to explore the impact of replacing different
graph construction methods at each granularity level on the
final classification results.
R EFERENCES
[1]

S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
2019.

[2]

T. Nelms, R. Perdisci, and M. Ahamad, “ExecScent: Mining for
new C&C domains in live networks with adaptive control protocol
templates,” in Proc. 22nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2013,
pp. 589–604.
[3] W. Melo, P. Lopes, R. Antonello, S. Fernandes, and D. Sadok, “On the
performance of DPI signature matching with dynamic priority,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[4] J. Su, S. Chen, B. Han, C. Xu, and X. Wang, “A 60Gbps DPI prototype
based on memory-centric FPGA,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., Aug.
2016, pp. 627–628.
[5] A. B. Mohd and S. bin Mohd Nor, “Towards a flow-based internet traffic
classification for bandwidth optimization,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Secur.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 146–153, 2009.
[6] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
[7] B. Xu, S. Chen, H. Zhang, and T. Wu, “Incremental k-NN SVM method
in intrusion detection,” in Proc. 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Service
Sci. (ICSESS), Nov. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
2017, pp. 43–48.
[9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[10] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
[11] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[12] B. Sun, W. Yang, M. Yan, D. Wu, Y. Zhu, and Z. Bai, “An encrypted
traffic classification method combining graph convolutional network and
autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf.
(IPCCC), Nov. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[13] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[14] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614.
[15] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
[16] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, and D. Rossi, “KISS: Stochastic
packet inspection classifier for UDP traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1505–1515, Oct. 2010.
[17] F. Zaki, F. Afifi, S. A. Razak, A. Gani, and N. B. Anuar, “GRAIN: Granular multi-label encrypted traffic classification using classifier chain,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 213, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 109084.
[18] H. Mohanty, A. H. Roudsari, and A. H. Lashkari, “Robust stacking
ensemble model for darknet traffic classification under adversarial
settings,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 102830.
[19] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach
to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016.

LI et al.: BPF-GNN: A MULTI-GRANULARITY FEATURE EXTRACTION MODEL USING GNNs

[20] Y. Wang, X. Yun, and Y. Zhang, “Rethinking robust and accurate
application protocol identification: A nonparametric approach,” in Proc.
IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Nov. 2015, pp. 134–144.
[21] X. Xiao, R. Li, H.-T. Zheng, R. Ye, A. KumarSangaiah, and S. Xia,
“Novel dynamic multiple classification system for network traffic,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 479, pp. 526–541, Apr. 2019.
[22] P. Tang, Y. Dong, and S. Mao, “Online traffic classification using
granules,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020, pp. 1135–1140.
[23] A. L’Heureux, K. Grolinger, H. F. Elyamany, and M. A. M. Capretz,
“Machine learning with big data: Challenges and approaches,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, pp. 7776–7797, 2017.
[24] Z. Bu, B. Zhou, P. Cheng, K. Zhang, and Z.-H. Ling, “Encrypted
network traffic classification using deep and parallel network-in-network
models,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132950–132959, 2020.
[25] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[26] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167,
Apr. 2021, Art. no. 114363.
[27] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
[28] Y. Shi, G. Li, and J. Wu, “BPF-DAG: Byte-packet-flow fatures fusion
via dynamic attributed graph for reliable encrypted traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 21, pp. 197–211, 2025.
[29] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H.-T. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538, Aug.
2021.
[30] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May 2025.
[31] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 7370–7377.
[32] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
[34] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[35] K. Xu, C. Li, Y. Tian, T. Sonobe, K. Kawarabayashi, and S. Jegelka,
“Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 5453–5462.
[36] J. Arevalo, T. Solorio, M. Montes-y-Gómez, and F. A. González, “Gated
multimodal units for information fusion,” 2017, arXiv:1702.01992.
[37] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[38] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[39] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
pp. 253–262.
[40] I. Guarino, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MirageApp×Act-2024: A novel dataset for mobile app and activity traffic
analysis,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput., Netw.
Commun. (WiMob), Oct. 2024, pp. 663–666.

3117

[41] Y. LeCun et al., “Learning algorithms for classification: A comparison
on handwritten digit recognition,” Neural Netw., Stat. Mech. Perspective,
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 261–276, 1995.
[42] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.

Guolong Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with Information Engineering University. His
research interests include encrypted traffic analysis.

Yuan Gao received the Ph.D. degree from Shandong University. She is currently a Lecturer with
Information Engineering University. Her research
interests include cryptography and encrypted traffic
detection.

Jiongjiong Ren received the Ph.D. degree from
Information Engineering University. He is currently
an Associate Professor with Information Engineering University. His research interests include
cryptography and its applications.

Shaozhen Chen received the Ph.D. degree from
Shandong University. She is currently a Professor with Information Engineering University. Her
research interests include cryptography and information security.