2454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Chain-Visage: Blockchain-Assisted Visual Content
Ownership and Tamper Tracing in
CIoT Multimedia Ecosystems
Jing Yang , Vijay Govindarajan , Senior Member, IEEE, Gyanendra Kumar , Member, IEEE,
Achyut Shankar , Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh , Fabio Arena ,
Lip Yee Por , Senior Member, IEEE, and Kun Qi

Abstract— With the rapid proliferation of smart home cameras, wearable vision devices, and user-generated Consumer
Internet of Things (CIoT) content, ensuring visual media authenticity, rightful ownership, and tamper detection has become
increasingly challenging. We propose Chain-Visage, a blockchainassisted framework for secure content authentication and tamper
tracing in decentralized CIoT multimedia ecosystems. The
term Chain reflects the consortium blockchain backbone that
guarantees immutable provenance, decentralized ownership management, and copyright revocation, while Visage symbolizes the
unique visual identity of multimedia content achieved through
dual-stage visual hash embedding. The proposed framework
integrates Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) for privacy-preserving
ownership verification and employs optimized smart contracts
to manage visual rights, provenance records, and ownership
transfers efficiently. Evaluations on a large-scale dataset of over
10,000 real-world images and 3,850 video clips from diverse
CIoT devices demonstrate Chain-Visage’s superior performance,
achieving 97.5% traceability accuracy, 93% tamper detection
sensitivity, and low verification latency even under resourceconstrained environments. This work addresses a critical research
gap in secure, privacy-preserving, and energy-efficient multimedia ownership control and tamper-resilient content authentication
for next-generation CIoT ecosystems.
Index Terms— Blockchain, consumer IoT, multimedia security,
visual content authentication, tamper detection.
Received 4 September 2025; revised 26 October 2025; accepted 6 December
2025. Date of publication 23 December 2025; date of current version 25 March
2026. (Corresponding author: Kun Qi.)
Jing Yang and Lip Yee Por are with the Center of Research for Cyber
Security and Network (CSNET), Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia (e-mail:
s2147529@siswa.um.edu.my; porlip@um.edu.my).
Vijay Govindarajan is with the Distribution and Supply Technology, Expedia
Group, Seattle, WA 98119 USA (e-mail: vigovindaraja@expediagroup.com).
Gyanendra Kumar is with the Department of IoT and Intelligent Systems, Manipal University Jaipur, Jaipur 303007, India (e-mail: gyanendra.
kumar@jaipur.manipal.edu).
Achyut Shankar is with the School of Computer Science Engineering and
Technology, Bennett University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201310, India
(e-mail: ashankar2711@gmail.com).
Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh is with the Department of Computer Science
and Information Technology, Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari,
Karachi 75660, Pakistan, and also with the School of Engineering, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail:
zashaikh@bbsul.edu.pk).
Fabio Arena is with the Department of Engineering and Architecture, Kore
University of Enna, 94100 Enna, Italy (e-mail: fabio.arena@unikore.it).
Kun Qi is with the School of Electronic and Communication Engineering, Shenzhen Polytechnic University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
qikun@szpu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3647677

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE explosive growth of Consumer Internet of Things
(CIoT) devices has fundamentally transformed how
visual multimedia content is created, shared, and consumed
in modern digital ecosystems. Recent statistics indicate
that over 14.4 billion CIoT devices will be operational
by 2025, generating an unprecedented volume of visual
data exceeding 2.5 exabytes daily [1], [2]. This proliferation encompasses smart home security cameras, wearable
vision sensors, autonomous vehicle dashcams, and personal
multimedia devices that continuously capture and transmit
visual content across distributed networks [3]. The democratization of visual content creation through CIoT devices
has introduced significant challenges in maintaining content
authenticity, establishing rightful ownership, and detecting
malicious tampering attempts. Traditional centralized digital
rights management systems are inadequate for handling the
distributed, heterogeneous, and resource-constrained nature of
CIoT environments [4]. Furthermore, the increasing sophistication of deepfake technologies and multimedia manipulation
techniques has exacerbated the urgency for robust content
verification mechanisms [5], [6].
As depicted in Fig. 1, the proposed Chain-Visage system addresses these critical challenges through a novel
blockchain-assisted framework that seamlessly integrates
visual content authentication with decentralized ownership
tracking. The system leverages Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)
protocols to enable privacy-preserving content verification
while maintaining immutable provenance records through consortium blockchain architecture [7], [8]. This approach ensures
that visual content generated by CIoT devices can be traced
back to its original source without compromising user privacy
or revealing sensitive identity information [9].
Current state-of-the-art approaches in multimedia security
primarily focus on watermarking techniques, digital signatures,
and hash-based verification methods [10], [11]. However, these
solutions suffer from several critical limitations when applied
to CIoT environments: (1) vulnerability to sophisticated attack
vectors, (2) lack of decentralized ownership management,
(3) inadequate privacy preservation mechanisms, and (4) insufficient scalability for resource-constrained devices [12]. Recent
research has explored blockchain integration for multimedia

1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING

Fig. 1. Overview of the Chain-Visage blockchain-assisted visual content
ownership and tamper tracing system in CIoT multimedia ecosystems.

security, but existing solutions fail to address the unique
requirements of CIoT ecosystems, particularly the need for
lightweight verification protocols and energy-efficient consensus mechanisms [13], [14].
The Chain-Visage framework introduces several innovative
contributions to address these limitations. First, we propose
a dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism that creates tamper-evident fingerprints without altering the original
content quality. Second, we design a ZKP-based ownership
verification protocol that enables content creators to prove
ownership without revealing their identity. Third, we implement a custom smart contract architecture optimized for CIoT
resource constraints, supporting efficient ownership transfers
and revocation procedures. Fourth, we develop a consortium
blockchain consensus protocol that balances security with
energy efficiency for multimedia-intensive applications [15].
Extensive experimental validation demonstrates the
effectiveness of the proposed approach across diverse
CIoT scenarios. Our evaluation encompasses 10,247 highresolution images and 3,850 video clips collected from
real-world CIoT deployments, including smart home
cameras, wearable devices, and vehicular systems. The
results show that Chain-Visage achieves 97.5% accuracy in
content traceability, 93% sensitivity in tamper detection,
and maintains sub-second verification latency even
under severe resource constraints [16]. Comparative
analysis against existing solutions reveals significant
improvements in both security metrics and computational
efficiency [17].
The integration of renewable energy considerations with IoT
systems provides additional sustainability benefits while maintaining robust security properties throughout the blockchain
infrastructure [18]. Advanced cybersecurity frameworks incorporating MITRE ATT&CK methodologies enhance threat
detection capabilities specifically tailored for multimedia

2455

content protection. Emerging trends in metaverse network
intrusion detection offer insights into future-proofing multimedia security architectures against evolving threat landscapes [19].
Privacy-preserving identity federation mechanisms provide
foundational technologies for anonymous content verification
while maintaining accountability and ownership claims [20].
Modern e-commerce platforms demonstrate the commercial
viability and scalability requirements for blockchain-based
digital asset management in consumer applications. Advances
in AGI-driven communications security reveal new opportunities for automated threat detection and response in multimedia
content protection systems [21].
Expert systems for intelligent control applications provide
architectural insights for developing autonomous multimedia
security management frameworks. Vehicle-to-infrastructure
routing protocols demonstrate practical implementations of
blockchain technology in distributed multimedia environments with real-time requirements [22]. Tourism technology
integration showcases consumer adoption patterns and user
experience requirements for multimedia content management
systems.
Autonomous vehicle technology developments highlight
the critical importance of tamper-resistant multimedia content in safety-critical applications. Blockchain and artificial
intelligence convergence for big data analytics provides scalable frameworks applicable to large-scale CIoT multimedia
deployments [23]. Redundancy elimination techniques in
IoT-oriented big data systems offer optimization strategies for
efficient multimedia content storage and processing [24].
Data security and privacy preservation in cloud-based IoT
technologies establish best practices for protecting multimedia
content across distributed infrastructures [25]. Secure deepfake
mitigation frameworks address emerging threats in multimedia content authenticity and provide complementary security
measures [26]. Federated learning approaches with non-IID
data demonstrate privacy-preserving techniques applicable to
collaborative multimedia content verification [27], [28].
Human-computer interaction considerations in healthcare
applications provide insights into user interface design and
accessibility requirements for multimedia content management systems. Intelligent computation and analytics on
sustainable energy systems demonstrate the integration of environmental considerations with secure multimedia processing
frameworks [29]. The key contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
We propose Chain-Visage, a novel blockchain-integrated
framework for secure multimedia ownership verification
and tamper tracing in Consumer Internet of Things
(CIoT) environments.
• We introduce a robust dual-stage hashing technique combining perceptual features with cryptographic signatures,
enabling tamper-evident content fingerprinting without
degrading visual quality.
• We design a Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)-based mechanism that verifies content ownership while preserving
user anonymity and sensitive metadata.
•

2456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

A lightweight consortium blockchain architecture with
custom smart contracts is implemented to manage
ownership claims, provenance records, and copyright
revocation.
• We develop a Proof-of-Authority (PoA)-based consensus
mechanism tailored for CIoT devices, balancing low
energy consumption with high security guarantees.
Chain-Visage introduces a novel dual-stage visual hash with
zero-knowledge proofs for privacy-preserving ownership verification, offering better traceability, energy efficiency, and
security. It provides a lightweight blockchain-based solution
for securing CIoT multimedia across consumer devices like
cameras, wearables, and mobiles. The paper is organized as
follows: Section II reviews related work, Section III describes
the Chain-Visage framework, Section IV presents the mathematical modeling, Section V reports results, Section VI
discusses challenges, and Section VII concludes the study.
•

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Blockchain-Based Multimedia Security
Recent studies have explored blockchain integration
for multimedia authentication and ownership management.
Chen et al. [1] proposed multimodal data sensing frameworks for CIoT security but lacked blockchain-based ownership tracking. Padma et al. [4] examined lightweight
blockchain models for smart cities, showing feasibility
in constrained environments but overlooking CIoT-specific
visual content ownership. Chaurasia et al. [10] focused on
blockchain-enabled NFT systems for vehicular networks,
while Karthikeyan and Brindha [7] combined blockchain
and machine learning for multimedia database security.
Although these works demonstrate blockchain’s potential in
data integrity and traceability, they fall short in providing realtime, low-latency, and privacy-preserving solutions tailored to
CIoT multimedia ownership and tamper detection.
B. Zero-Knowledge Proofs in IoT Security

Riaz and Qureshi [9] applied blockchain to healthcare data
management, offering insights into immutable tracking relevant to CIoT content verification. Trigka and Dritsas [12]
explored blockchain-driven trust for smart ecosystems, while
Khan et al. [13] developed IoT–WSN integration frameworks
improving privacy and quality of service. However, these studies do not fully address ownership authentication or tamper
tracing for heterogeneous CIoT multimedia systems.
D. Tamper Detection and Content Integrity
Multimedia tamper detection has largely relied on
cryptographic hashing and digital watermarking methods.
Noor et al. [15] reviewed ML-based intrusion detection in
5G systems, noting blockchain’s potential for secure trace
analysis but without focusing on CIoT multimedia verification. Kodumuru et al. [17] combined AI and IoT for
blockchain-enabled traceability in pharmaceutical manufacturing, offering insights into scalability but lacking adaptation
for consumer multimedia. These works highlight the need
for lightweight, CIoT-oriented tamper detection mechanisms
capable of real-time verification and ownership assurance.
E. Emerging Technologies and Applications
Recent advances link cybersecurity, sustainability, and
emerging digital ecosystems. Mia et al. [18] explored
blockchain–IoT integration with IPFS for renewable energy
systems, offering insights into energy-efficient blockchain
design relevant to low-power CIoT multimedia devices.
Nkoro et al. [19] proposed MetaWatch for intrusion detection in metaverse environments, extending blockchain use
to virtual content protection. Bumiller et al. [20] analyzed
privacy-preserving identity federation using blockchain and
DLTs, supporting anonymous yet verifiable ownership. Collectively, these works highlight cross-domain innovations that
inspire the energy-aware and privacy-centric design of ChainVisage.

Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) protocols have become a
key approach for privacy-preserving authentication in IoT
systems. Sun et al. [3] introduced blockchain-based privacy
protection schemes for CIoT using federated learning but
lacked scalability and visual content verification support.
Le [16] proposed a quantum-safe authorization model with
lattice-based cryptography, addressing long-term security but
not CIoT-specific constraints or visual data authentication.
Despite progress, most ZKP frameworks remain computationally intensive, highlighting the need for lightweight,
CIoT-optimized implementations such as those adopted in
Chain-Visage.

Commercial blockchain systems have proven effective for managing digital assets and secure transactions.
Mehmood et al. [21] examined AGI-driven drone communications, applying blockchain for tamper-proof data records
relevant to multimedia integrity. Shaker et al. [22] demonstrated blockchain-based routing for real-time communication,
enhancing network-level protection for CIoT data streams.
Together, these studies underscore blockchain’s growing role
in consumer-facing applications, supporting secure, scalable,
and user-centric CIoT ecosystems.

C. CIoT Authentication and Trust Management

G. Foundational Technologies and Data Management

Recent studies on CIoT authentication and trust management emphasize secure communication and data integrity.
Jarwar et al. [5] analyzed industrial IoT security through ontological modeling, identifying key blockchain-based consensus
mechanisms but lacking multimedia-focused implementations.

Recent studies have combined blockchain, AI, and big
data analytics to enhance multimedia security and scalability. Wijesekara and Arachchige [23] proposed blockchain–AI
frameworks for networking, offering designs adaptable to
large-scale CIoT multimedia systems. Rani et al. [24]

F. Commercial Applications and User Experience

YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING

2457

addressed data redundancy in IoT big data, suggesting efficient content storage and processing strategies for constrained
devices. Pathak et al. [25] examined cloud-based IoT security, outlining privacy-preserving countermeasures critical for
Chain-Visage deployment. Wazid et al. [26] developed deepfake mitigation frameworks, contributing to robust multimedia
authenticity assurance. Lu et al. [27] surveyed federated
learning with non-IID data, highlighting collaborative and
privacy-aware content verification methods. Roy et al. [29]
emphasized sustainable computing and energy-aware analytics, aligning with Chain-Visage’s focus on secure and
eco-efficient CIoT multimedia operations.
H. Research Gaps and Limitations
Despite recent advancements, several critical gaps persist in
CIoT multimedia security research:
• Most blockchain-based methods consume excessive
energy and processing power, making them unsuitable for
lightweight CIoT devices.
• Existing ZKP implementations are not tailored for multimedia data, leading to high verification latency and
limited real-time applicability.
• Current solutions overlook privacy-preserving provenance
tracking and scalable ownership verification across distributed multimedia ecosystems.
• Many studies focus on narrow application domains and
lack deployment-based evaluation, restricting practical
adoption.
• Prior approaches fail to achieve a balanced integration of
security, privacy, energy efficiency, and real-time performance essential for consumer electronics.
Recent frameworks such as Blockchain-WM [4], IoTAuth [3], and SecureTrace [1] have established strong
baselines in multimedia authentication. However, these methods suffer from high consensus overhead, limited scalability,
and lack of privacy-preserving mechanisms suitable for heterogeneous CIoT devices. Similarly, ZKP-Secure [16] and
TrustMedia [9] introduced advanced cryptographic proofs
for data verification but remain computationally intensive and not optimized for real-time multimedia ownership
verification.
These gaps motivate the development of Chain-Visage,
a holistic blockchain-assisted framework designed for secure,
privacy-preserving, and energy-efficient visual content ownership and tamper tracing in CIoT environments. Unlike
prior methods, Chain-Visage introduces a dual-stage visual
hash embedding mechanism that combines perceptual feature robustness with cryptographic signature embedding—
ensuring tamper resistance without degrading visual quality.
It further integrates a lightweight Zero-Knowledge Proof
protocol customized for multimedia verification, offering
privacy-preserving ownership validation at low latency. Additionally, the consortium blockchain layer implements an
adaptive Proof-of-Authority consensus optimized for energy
efficiency, significantly reducing computational cost compared
to conventional PoW/PoS systems.

Fig. 2.
Chain-Visage system architecture showing four-layer integration
of CIoT devices, edge processing, blockchain network, and verification
components.

III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
A. System Architecture Overview
The Chain-Visage architecture, illustrated in Fig. 2, consists
of four interconnected layers: (1) the CIoT Device Layer
for content capture and initial hash generation, (2) the Edge
Processing Layer for dual-stage visual embedding, (3) the
Blockchain Network Layer for ownership record management and smart contract execution, and (4) the Verification
Layer for tamper detection and ownership validation. This
layered design enhances scalability, synchronization, and security across heterogeneous CIoT environments. Chain-Visage
uses an event-driven, asynchronous pipeline: (i) devices perform lightweight hashing and enqueue content; (ii) edges
run micro-batched DCT features, ZKP precomputation, and
signature embedding in parallel; (iii) registration is batched to
the PoA chain for fast finality; (iv) verifiers use cached keys
and streaming checks. A global logical timestamp (Lamportstyle counters) and per-item monotonic IDs ensure cross-layer
ordering without blocking. Backpressure and priority queues
(auth/alerts > bulk) keep latency stable under high volume.
The CIoT Device Layer interfaces directly with multimedia
sensors, including smart cameras, wearable vision devices, and
autonomous vehicle systems. Each device generates preliminary content fingerprints using lightweight hashing algorithms
optimized for resource-constrained environments. The Edge
Processing Layer receives these fingerprints and applies the
dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism described in
Algorithm 1. This layer also implements ZKP generation protocols to create privacy-preserving ownership proofs without
revealing device identity information.
B. Dual-Stage Visual Hash Embedding
The dual-stage visual hash embedding mechanism represents the core innovation of Chain-Visage, enabling
tamper-evident content fingerprinting without compromising
visual quality. As depicted in the first stage extracts perceptual
features using a modified discrete cosine transform (DCT)

2458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Stage Visual Hash Embedding
1: Input: Visual content I , device identity Did , timestamp t
2: Output: Embedded content I ′ , dual-stage hash Hdual
3: Stage 1: Perceptual feature extraction
4: FDCT ← DCTT RANSFORM (I )
5: Frobust ← E XTRACT ROBUST F EATURES (FDCT )
6: Hperceptual ← SHA256(Frobust ∥ t)
7: Stage 2: Cryptographic signature embedding
8: K device ← G ENERATE D EVICE K EY (Did )
9: Scrypto ← ECDSAS IGN (Hperceptual , K device )
10: I ′ ← LSBE MBED (I, Scrypto )
11: Hdual ← C OMBINE H ASHES (Hperceptual , Scrypto )
12: ZKP precomputation
13: π Z K ← G ENERATE OWNERSHIP P ROOF (Did , Hdual )
14: Blockchain registration
15: S UBMIT OWNERSHIP C LAIM (Hdual , π Z K , t)
16: return (I ′ , Hdual )

Algorithm 2 Zero-Knowledge Proof Generation
Require: Device identity Did , content hash Hdual , ownership
claim C
Ensure: Zero-knowledge proof π Z K , verification key vk
1: Circuit Generation
2: C ← Generate_Ownership_Circuit(Did , Hdual , C)
3: Trusted Setup
4: (σ, τ ) ← Setup(C)
5: Witness Computation
6: w ← Compute_Witness(Did , Hdual , C)
7: Proof Generation
8: π Z K ← Prove(σ, w)
9: Verification Preparation
10: vk ← Extract_Verification_Key(τ )
11: return π Z K , vk

preserving the claimed robustness and visual quality across
diverse multimedia formats.
approach, while the second stage embeds cryptographic signatures using steganographic techniques optimized for CIoT
constraints. The perceptual feature extraction phase leverages
robust visual characteristics that remain stable under benign
transformations such as compression and resizing while being
sensitive to malicious tampering attempts. The mathematical
formulation of the DCT-based feature extraction is given by
Equation 1:
FDC T (u, v) = α(u)α(v)

P N −1 P M−1
x=0

y=0

i h
i
h
cos πv(2y+1)
I (x, y) cos πu(2x+1)
2N
2M

(1)
√
√
where α(u) =
1/N for u = 0 and α(u) =
2/N
otherwise, with N and M representing image dimensions.
The robust feature vector Fr obust is constructed by selecting
DCT coefficients that exhibit maximum stability under various
distortion scenarios.
The cryptographic signature embedding phase utilizes the
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) to generate tamper-evident signatures that are embedded using least
significant bit (LSB) steganography. The signature generation
process follows Equation 2:
Scr ypto = (r, s) where r = (k · G)x mod n,

C. Zero-Knowledge Proof Protocol
The ZKP protocol enables privacy-preserving ownership
verification without revealing device identity or sensitive metadata. The protocol implements Groth16-based zk-SNARKs,
where the statement is “I own content with hash Hdual ”
and the witness is (Did , K device ). The visual hash is cryptographically bound to identity via C = SHA256(Did ∥Hdual ),
registered on-chain during ownership claim. Groth16 yields
constant proof size (128 bytes, 3 group elements) and O(1)
verification complexity ( 3 pairings, <10 ms on edge nodes).
On-chain storage requires 256 bytes per registration; gas
cost averages 45,000 units per ownership transaction on the
consortium PoA network. The proof generation process, outlined in Algorithm 2, creates succinct proofs that can be
efficiently verified by blockchain nodes. The ownership circuit
C encodes the relationship between device identity, content
hash, and ownership claim without revealing the actual values.
The mathematical representation of the circuit constraints is
expressed in Equation 3:
(


s = k −1 H per ceptual + r · d mod n

(2)
To prevent nonce reuse and potential key leakage on resourcelimited devices, Chain-Visage adopts deterministic nonce
generation following RFC 6979. This ensures cryptographically secure, repeatable nonce values without relying on weak
random number generators common in CIoT environments.
Here, k represents the deterministically generated nonce, G
is the elliptic curve generator point, d denotes the private
key, and n is the curve order. The LSB embedding process
further ensures minimal visual distortion while maintaining
signature integrity for reliable verification. To strengthen
resilience against lossy operations such as JPEG compression,
Chain-Visage can incorporate hybrid embedding strategies that
combine LSB with robust frequency-domain watermarking
(e.g., DCT-based). This enhances signature persistence while

C(Did , Hdual , C) =

1 if SHA256(Did ||Hdual ) = C
0 otherwise
(3)

The proof generation utilizes the Groth16 protocol, which
provides optimal proof size and verification time for
blockchain applications. The proof π Z K consists of three
group elements (A, B, C) that satisfy the verification equation
without revealing the underlying witness values. Modern
ZKP frameworks such as Groth16 and PLONK achieve high
computational efficiency, enabling millisecond-level proof
generation and verification even on constrained CIoT devices.
Although Groth16 ensures minimal proof size, it depends on
a trusted setup that may pose security risks. To eliminate this
dependency, future Chain-Visage versions can adopt transparent, setup-free schemes like zk-STARKs for verifiable and
secure ownership proofs.

YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING

2459

The adaptive block generation mechanism adjusts block
creation intervals based on network congestion and transaction
volume, following Equation 7:


Q pending λ
Tblock = Tbase · 1 +
(7)
Q thr eshold

Fig. 3. Smart contract architecture showing ownership management, provenance tracking, and access control components.

D. Smart Contract Architecture
The Chain-Visage smart contract layer manages ownership
records, provenance tracking, and copyright revocation procedures through an optimized consortium blockchain framework.
The smart contract architecture, depicted in Fig. 3, implements
three primary contract types: Ownership Manager, Provenance
Tracker, and Access Controller.
The Ownership Manager contract handles initial ownership
registration, transfer procedures, and revocation mechanisms.
The contract maintains a mapping structure defined in
Equation 4:
Mowner shi p : Hdual → (Did , tcr eated , tmodi f ied , status) (4)
where Hdual serves as the unique content identifier, Did represents the current owner, tcr eated and tmodi f ied track temporal
information, and status indicates the current ownership state.
The Provenance Tracker contract maintains immutable
records of content modification, distribution, and access
events. Each provenance entry follows the structure defined
in Equation 5:
Pentr y = (Hdual , action, actor, timestamp, π Z K , metadata)
(5)
where action describes the performed operation, actor identifies the entity responsible, and π Z K provides cryptographic
proof of authorization.
E. Consortium Blockchain Consensus
The Chain-Visage framework employs a novel Proofof-Authority (PoA) consensus mechanism optimized for
multimedia-intensive CIoT applications. The consensus protocol balances security requirements with energy efficiency
constraints through dynamic validator selection and adaptive
block generation intervals.
The validator selection process utilizes a reputation-based
scoring system defined in Equation 6:
Svalidator (vi ) = α · Rhistorical (vi ) + β · Ccomputational (vi ) + γ · Tnetwor k (vi )

(6)
where Rhistorical represents historical reliability, Ccomputational
measures computational capability, Tnetwor k evaluates network
connectivity, and α, β, γ are weighting parameters.

where Tbase is the baseline block interval, Q pending represents
pending transaction count, Q thr eshold is the congestion threshold, and λ controls adaptation sensitivity.
To enhance interoperability across diverse CIoT ecosystems, Chain-Visage supports integration through open APIs,
gateway-based networking schemes, and service-oriented
architectures (SOA). The framework aligns with emerging open standards and leverages semantic web principles
to enable cross-platform data exchange and interpretation.
This semantic interoperability ensures seamless collaboration
between heterogeneous devices and applications within virtual
networks and multi-vendor CIoT domains.
IV. M ATHEMATICAL M ODELING AND O PTIMIZATION
A. Security Model and Threat Analysis
The security model considers three primary threat categories: (1) content tampering attacks, (2) ownership spoofing
attempts, and (3) privacy breaches through metadata analysis. The threat model assumes a computationally bounded
adversary with access to network communications but without
control over blockchain validator nodes.
The content integrity probability under adversarial conditions is modeled using Equation 8:
Pintegrit y (τ ) = 1 −

n
Y

1 − e−λi τ

 Ai

(8)

i=1

where τ represents time elapsed since content creation, λi
denotes the attack rate for threat type i, Ai represents the
attack intensity, and n is the total number of threat categories.
The tamper detection sensitivity is formulated as a function
of the dual-stage hash robustness and embedding strength,
given by Equation 9:
!
2
Dhamming
Sdetection = 1 − P f alse_negative = 1 − exp −
2
2σnoise
(9)
where Dhamming represents the Hamming distance between
2
original and tampered hashes, and σnoise
characterizes the
noise variance in the detection process.
B. Zero-Knowledge Proof Security Analysis
The security of the ZKP protocol relies on the computational
hardness assumptions of the underlying elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem. The knowledge soundness property
ensures that a prover cannot generate valid proofs without
knowing the witness, expressed through Equation 10:


Psoundness = maxA Pr A produces valid proof without witness ≤ ϵnegligible

(10)

2460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

where A represents any polynomial-time adversary and
ϵnegligible is a negligible function in the security parameter.
The zero-knowledge property guarantees that proofs reveal
no information beyond the validity of the statement, formalized in Equation 11:
∀V ∗ ∃S : {V ∗ (π Z K )} ≈c {S(statement)}

(11)

E. Energy Consumption Analysis
Energy consumption modeling addresses the critical requirement of energy efficiency in CIoT environments. The total
energy consumption encompasses device processing, communication, and blockchain operations, expressed in Equation 17:

where V ∗ represents any verifier, S

E total = E pr ocessing + E communication + E blockchain + E idle
(17)

C. Optimization Framework

The processing energy E pr ocessing depends on computational operations and device characteristics, modeled as
Equation 18:

is a simulator, and ≈c
denotes computational indistinguishability.

The chain-vision optimization framework addresses multiple competing objectives, including security maximization, latency minimization, and energy efficiency. The
multi-objective optimization problem is formulated as
Equation 12:
min L(θ ) = w1 · L securit y (θ)
θ

+ w2 · L latency (θ) + w3 · L energy (θ )

(12)

where θ represents the vector of system parameters, L securit y ,
L latency , and L energy denote loss functions for security,
latency, and energy, respectively, and wi are objective weights.
The security loss function incorporates tamper detection
accuracy and ownership verification reliability, defined in
Equation 13:


L securit y (θ ) = − log Pdetection (θ ) − log Pveri f ication (θ ) + λr eg ∥θ∥22

(13)
where Pdetection and Pveri f ication represent detection and
verification probabilities respectively, and λr eg provides regularization.
D. Performance Modeling
The system performance is characterized through analytical
models that predict latency, throughput, and resource utilization under varying load conditions. The end-to-end latency
model encompasses content processing, blockchain interaction, and verification phases, expressed in Equation 14:
Ttotal = T pr ocessing + Tblockchain + Tveri f ication + Tnetwor k
(14)
The processing latency T pr ocessing depends on content size
and computational complexity, modeled as Equation 15:
Scontent · Ccomplexit y
T pr ocessing =
+ Tover head
(15)
Rcomputational
where Scontent represents content size, Ccomplexit y denotes
computational complexity, Rcomputational is the processing
rate, and Tover head accounts for system overhead.
The blockchain interaction latency Tblockchain incorporates
transaction submission, consensus participation, and block
confirmation delays, formulated in Equation 16:
Tblockchain = Tsubmission
+ Ncon f ir mations · Tblock + T pr opagation

(16)

where Ncon f ir mations represents required confirmation blocks,
Tblock is the average block time, and T pr opagation accounts for
network propagation delays.

E pr ocessing = PC PU · T pr ocessing + Pmemor y · Tmemor y + Pcr ypto · Tcr ypto

(18)
where PC PU , Pmemor y , and Pcr ypto represent the power consumption for CPU, memory, and cryptographic operations,
respectively.
The communication energy E communication accounts for data
transmission and network protocol overhead, formulated in
Equation 19:
E communication = Ptransmission · Ttransmission + Pr eception · Tr eception + E pr otocol

(19)
where Ptransmission and Pr eception denote transmission and
reception power, and E pr otocol represents protocol overhead
energy.
F. Scalability Analysis
The scalability model analyzes system performance degradation as the number of participating CIoT devices and content
volume increases. The throughput capacity is bounded by
blockchain consensus constraints and edge processing capabilities, expressed in Equation 20:


Bblock_si ze
1
2capacit y = min
·
, Redge_ pr ocessing
Stransaction Tblock
(20)
where Bblock_si ze represents maximum block size, Stransaction
denotes average transaction size, and Redge_ pr ocessing is the
edge processing rate.
The storage scalability follows a logarithmic growth pattern
due to hash-based content addressing, modeled in Equation 21:
Sstorage (N ) = Sbase + N · Shash + log2 (N ) · Sindex

(21)

where N represents the number of registered content items,
Sbase is the base storage requirement, Shash is per-hash storage, and Sindex accounts for indexing overhead.
V. R ESULTS AND E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup uses 50 heterogeneous CIoT devices
(smart cameras, wearables, dashcams, and mobiles) and a
15-node geographically distributed blockchain network. The
dataset includes 10,247 high-resolution images and 3,850
video clips from real-world deployments. Evaluation covers
accuracy, sensitivity, latency, energy, scalability, and security
against tampering, spoofing, and privacy attacks, with detailed
logging under varying loads.

YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING

2461

TABLE I

TABLE IV

P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS ACROSS CI OT D EVICE C ATEGORIES

E NERGY C ONSUMPTION A NALYSIS BY D EVICE T YPE

TABLE II
P RACTICAL A PPLICATION B ENCHMARKS (F IELD T RIALS )

TABLE III
L ATENCY B REAKDOWN A NALYSIS

B. Performance Analysis
Table I summarizes the comprehensive performance evaluation results across different CIoT device categories and
content types. The results demonstrate superior performance in
traceability accuracy (97.5%) and tamper detection sensitivity
(93.0%) compared to baseline approaches. Verification latency
remains below 2.3 seconds even for high-resolution video
content, meeting real-time requirements for CIoT applications.
Experimental validation demonstrates that Chain-Visage
maintains optimal trade-offs among security, energy, and
latency—achieving 97.5% traceability accuracy, 42.6 mJ
energy cost, and 2.0 s latency—even under large-scale 500+
device deployments, confirming stable scalability and efficiency in resource-constrained CIoT settings.
Across end-to-end field trials in CE/CT settings (cameras,
wearables, mobiles), Chain-Visage sustains >96% accuracy
with ≤2.2 s latency and ≈42–52 mJ/tx, validating practical
deployability.
The latency breakdown analysis in Table III shows that
blockchain interaction accounts for the largest portion of
delay (45%), followed by cryptographic operations (28%) and
content processing (27%). These findings guided targeted optimizations focused on consensus and cryptographic efficiency.
Main bottlenecks are (1) consensus delay and propagation,
(2) on-device ZKP generation, and (3) edge-to-chain bursts.
We mitigate via (a) micro-batching and content-ID sharding across validators, (b) ZKP precomputation and hardware
intrinsics on ARM/NEON, (c) verifier key caching and Bloomfilter prechecks, and (d) adaptive block intervals (Eq. 7) with
queue-aware backpressure. Under stress tests, p95 latency
remains within 2.3 s and throughput scales linearly to the 500device mark before graceful saturation.
Energy consumption analysis across different device types,
shown in Table IV, indicates efficient resource utilization with

Fig. 4. Chain-Visage performance analysis dashboard: (a) Device-category
heat map, (b) 3D energy distribution field, (c) Performance convergence
trends, (d) Latency and energy breakdown by operation.

average consumption of 42.6 mJ per operation. The energy distribution favors computational operations over communication,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the optimized consortium
blockchain protocol.
Fig 4 summarizes Chain-Visage’s capabilities across CIoT
networks: (a) shows performance scores by device type and
metric, (b) visualizes network-wide energy levels, (c) tracks
accuracy, sensitivity, and energy efficiency convergence over
training, and (d) details resource consumption and distribution
across core system operations
C. Security Evaluation
The security evaluation encompasses a comprehensive
analysis of tamper detection capabilities, ownership verification accuracy, and privacy preservation effectiveness. Fig. 5
presents the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve
demonstrating excellent discrimination between legitimate and
tampered content with an Area Under Curve (AUC) of
0.967.
The confusion matrix analysis, illustrated in Fig. 6, reveals
high accuracy in distinguishing between different content
authenticity states. The true positive rate reaches 94.8% for
tamper detection while maintaining a low false positive rate
of 2.1%, demonstrating robust discrimination capabilities.
Attack resistance evaluation, summarized in Table V,
demonstrates robust security against various threat scenarios,
including content manipulation, ownership spoofing, and privacy attacks. The system successfully detects 96.3% of content
tampering attempts and prevents 98.7% of ownership spoofing
attacks.

2462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. ROC curve analysis showing tamper detection performance with
AUC = 0.967 across various tampering scenarios.

Fig. 7. Scalability analysis showing throughput and latency characteristics
under increasing network load conditions.
TABLE VI
S TORAGE S CALABILITY A NALYSIS

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A PPROACHES

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix showing classification performance across authentic,
tampered, and ownership verification scenarios.
TABLE V
ATTACK R ESISTANCE E VALUATION R ESULTS

The dual-stage visual hash embedding and privacypreserving verification achieve 96.8% robustness against
adaptive manipulations, outperforming baseline methods by
8–11% under multi-vector and hash-collision attacks.
D. Scalability Assessment
Scalability evaluation examines system performance under
increasing load conditions and growing network size. Fig. 7
demonstrates throughput characteristics as the number of
participating devices increases from 10 to 1000 nodes. The
system maintains stable performance up to 500 devices before
experiencing gradual degradation due to consensus overhead.
To support deployments beyond 500 devices, Chain-Visage
employs hierarchical edge clustering, shard-based validator
allocation, and adaptive consensus intervals, which collectively
mitigate latency and throughput bottlenecks—sustaining linear

scalability up to 1,000 nodes with only marginal performance drop (<8%). Storage scalability analysis, presented in
Table VI, indicates logarithmic growth in storage requirements
with increasing content volume. The hash-based addressing
scheme enables efficient storage utilization while maintaining
fast content retrieval capabilities.
E. Comparative Analysis
The comparison results presented in Table VII highlight significant improvements over existing approaches, particularly in
accuracy (97.5% vs. average 89.4%), latency (2.0s vs. average
4.7s), and energy efficiency (42.6 mJ vs. average 74.3 mJ).
These improvements stem from several key innovations: the
optimized dual-stage hash embedding that balances robustness
with computational efficiency, the lightweight ZKP protocol
designed specifically for CIoT constraints, and the consortium
blockchain architecture that reduces consensus overhead while
maintaining security guarantees.
Fig 8 illustrates Chain-Visage’s superior performance
across multiple dimensions, as shown by the optimal
accuracy-efficiency trade-offs (a, b), consistently higher

YANG et al.: CHAIN-VISAGE: BLOCKCHAIN-ASSISTED VISUAL CONTENT OWNERSHIP AND TAMPER TRACING

Fig. 8.
Chain-Visage comparative analysis: (a) Accuracy-latency-energy
contour, (b) COMSOL-style efficiency field, (c) Training accuracy trends,
(d) Normalized multi-metric comparison versus state-of-the-art approaches.

2463

Fig. 9. Performance evaluation in dense urban CIoT deployment showing
throughput and latency characteristics under high network load.

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS

accuracy over time (c), and leading normalized performance
metrics (d).

Fig. 10.
Rural deployment scenario results demonstrating Chain-Visage
resilience under limited connectivity and resource constraints.

F. Ablation Study
The ablation study (Table VIII) shows that the dual-stage
hash embedding delivers the highest accuracy gain (+8.3%)
over basic hashing, while ZKP integration adds strong privacy
protection with minimal latency, confirming Chain-Visage’s
efficiency for CIoT applications.
G. Real-World Deployment Scenarios
Real-world evaluations confirm Chain-Visage’s robustness
across diverse CIoT settings. Fig. 9 shows stable performance
under dense urban loads, while Fig. 10 demonstrates reliable
operation in rural, low-connectivity environments, validating
its suitability from smart cities to remote monitoring.
The urban scenario evaluation demonstrates stable performance under high load conditions with an average latency of
2.3 seconds and 96.8% accuracy despite network congestion.
Rural scenario results show slightly degraded performance
(94.2% accuracy, 2.7 seconds latency) but maintain functional
operation under severe resource constraints, validating system
robustness across diverse deployment environments. ChainVisage maintains consistent performance across heterogeneous
CIoT devices and varying network conditions through adaptive
workload distribution, edge-level caching, and lightweight
cryptographic operations—ensuring stable accuracy and sub2.3 s latency even on low-power or limited-capacity devices.
Attack scenario evaluation, depicted in Fig. 11, examines

Fig. 11. System performance under coordinated attack scenarios showing
detection accuracy and response time characteristics.

system behavior under coordinated attack conditions, including distributed tampering attempts and ownership spoofing
campaigns. The results demonstrate effective attack detection
and mitigation capabilities with minimal performance impact
during attack periods.
Under simultaneous and sustained multi-vector attacks—
including tampering, spoofing, and privacy breaches—ChainVisage maintains 94.6% average detection accuracy and 97.1%
ownership verification rate, with less than 12% degradation

2464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

in throughput during 10-minute continuous attack simulations, demonstrating strong quantitative resilience under
prolonged adversarial conditions. The Chain-Visage framework can be seamlessly implemented in Consumer Electronics
(CE) and Consumer Technology (CT) applications, such as
smart cameras, AR/VR headsets, wearable vision devices,
and connected home systems, enabling secure ownership verification, deepfake prevention, and tamper-proof multimedia
provenance across user devices. Its lightweight blockchain
design and energy-efficient consensus make it deployable in
CE/CT ecosystems where latency, privacy, and interoperability
are critical for real-time multimedia processing and content
authentication.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduced Chain-Visage, a blockchain-assisted
framework for secure visual content ownership and tamper tracing in CIoT ecosystems. By integrating dual-stage
visual hashing, Zero-Knowledge Proofs, and an optimized
consortium blockchain, the framework ensures authenticity,
privacy, and scalability. Experimental results on 10,000+
CIoT samples achieved 97.5% traceability accuracy, 93%
tamper detection, and 2.0-second verification latency with
only 42.6 mJ energy cost. These results confirm Chain-Visage
as an efficient and deployable solution for real-world CIoT
multimedia security.
R EFERENCES
[1] N. Chen et al., “Multimodal heterogeneous data sensing and communication integration for CIoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 73,
no. 2, pp. 1254–1267, Feb. 2025.
[2] K. B. A. Kumar, L. S. Mohith, K. Jain, P. Krishnan, N. Venkatachalam,
and R. Buyya, “Post-quantum cryptography-based multimedia encryption communication scheme in IoT consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4995–5006, May 2025.
[3] Z. Sun, J. Xu, J. Li, and T. Zhang, “Privacy protection authentication
protocol for consumer Internet of Things in horizontal federated learning
environment,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 89–98,
Jan. 2025.
[4] A. Padma, M. Ramaiah, and V. Ravi, “A comprehensive review of
lightweight blockchain practices for smart cities: A security and efficacy
assessment,” J. Reliable Intell. Environ., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 145–162,
Sep. 2025.
[5] M. A. Jarwar, J. W. C. B. E. Freng, and S. Ali, “Modelling industrial IoT
security using ontologies: A systematic review,” IEEE Open J. Comput.
Soc., vol. 6, pp. 78–95, 2025.
[6] A. Ayub Khan et al., “Digital forensics for the socio-cyber world (DFSCW): A novel framework for deepfake multimedia investigation on
social media platforms,” Egyptian Informat. J., vol. 27, Sep. 2024,
Art. no. 100502.
[7] P. Karthikeyan and K. Brindha, “Smart data flow: A trust-driven
hybrid fragmentation framework for optimizing data transmission in
IoT-enabled edge-fog-cloud systems,” Computing, vol. 107, no. 6,
pp. 445–468, Jun. 2025.
[8] A. A. Khan et al., “BAIoT-EMS: Consortium network for smallmedium enterprises management system with blockchain and augmented
intelligence of things,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 141, Feb. 2025,
Art. no. 109838.
[9] R. Riaz and K. N. Qureshi, “Role of blockchain models for AI-based
healthcare communication systems,” in Proc. Artif. Intell.-Based Smart
Healthcare Syst., 2025, pp. 177–202.

[10] B. K. Chaurasia, V. Rishiwal, and M. Yadav, “Blockchain enabled
vehicle NFT and key management for IoV networks in fog computing
environment,” Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 112–128, 2025.
[11] A. A. Khan, X. Zhang, F. Hajjej, J. Yang, C. S. Ku, and L. Y. Por,
“ASMF: Ambient social media forensics chain of custody with an intelligent digital investigation process using federated learning,” Heliyon,
vol. 10, no. 1, Jan. 2024, Art. no. e23254.
[12] M. Trigka and E. Dritsas, “Wireless sensor networks: From fundamentals
and applications to innovations and future trends,” IEEE Access, vol. 13,
pp. 15432–15449, 2025.
[13] S. Khan, T. Mazhar, T. Shahzad, Y. Y. Ghadi, and H. Hamam, “Integrating IoT and WSN: Enhancing quality of service through energy
efficiency, scalability, and secure communication in smart systems,”
Peer-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 567–584, Sep. 2025.
[14] A. A. Khan, S. Dhabi, J. Yang, W. Alhakami, S. Bourouis, and
P. L. Yee, “B-LPoET: A middleware lightweight proof-of-elapsed time
(PoET) for efficient distributed transaction execution and security on
blockchain using multithreading technology,” Comput. Electr. Eng.,
vol. 118, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 109343.
[15] K. Noor, A. L. Imoize, C.-T. Li, and C.-Y. Weng, “A review of machine
learning and transfer learning strategies for intrusion detection systems
in 5G and beyond,” Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 4, p. 612, Feb. 2025.
[16] T.-V. Le, “QSDA: Quantum-safe mobile sequencing data authorization
scheme to facilitate cancer research and treatment,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20828–20843, Jun. 2025.
[17] R. Kodumuru, S. Sarkar, and V. Parepally, “Artificial intelligence and
Internet of Things integration in pharmaceutical manufacturing: A smart
synergy,” PMC, vol. 17, May 2025, Art. no. 8542931.
[18] S. Mia et al., “Integrating renewable energy with Internet of Things
(IoT): Pathways to a smart green planet,” Kufa J. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 78–92, Feb. 2025.
[19] E. C. Nkoro, J. N. Njoku, and C. I. Nwakanma, “MetaWatch: Trends,
challenges, and future of network intrusion detection in the metaverse,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1789–1802, Jan. 2025.
[20] A. Bumiller, E. Kozyri, and H. Dagenborg, “Privacy preserving identity
federation: A literature study,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 58, no. 1,
pp. 1–34, Jul. 2025.
[21] T. Mehmood, H. M. Attaullah, and M. Ibrahim, “Securing AGI-driven
drone communications for climate change: A comprehensive review
of deep learning-based IDS,” in AI-Based Drones for Climate Change
Applications. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2025, pp. 156–175.
[22] H. Shaker, Z. T. Sharef, S. Abbas, and S. Khan, “Vehicle to infrastructure routing protocols: AI and finance perspectives,” in Innovations
in Blockchain Technology. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2025,
pp. 89–106.
[23] D. S. N. Wijesekara and P. Arachchige, “Blockchain and artificial intelligence for big data analytics in networking: Leading-edge frameworks,”
J. Eng. Sci. Technol. Rev., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 125–143, 2024.
[24] R. Rani, N. Kumar, and M. Khurana, “Redundancy elimination in
IoT oriented big data: A survey, schemes, open challenges and
future applications,” Cluster Comput., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 10234–10251,
Dec. 2024.
[25] M. Pathak, K. N. Mishra, and S. P. Singh, “Data security and privacy
preservation in cloud-based IoT technologies: An analysis of risks
and the creation of robust countermeasures,” Recent Adv. Comput. Sci.
Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 78–92, 2024.
[26] M. Wazid, A. K. Mishra, N. Mohd, and A. K. Das, “A secure deepfake
mitigation framework: Architecture, issues, challenges, and societal
impact,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 100040.
[27] Z. Lu, H. Pan, Y. Dai, X. Si, and Y. Zhang, “Federated learning with
non-IID data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 14,
pp. 24563–24580, Jul. 2024.
[28] G. Hou et al., “TSTFL-CGAN: Fuzzy logic-based two-stage training
federated learning conditional generative adversarial network under nonIID data,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 7129–7145,
May 2025.
[29] A. Roy, C. Sain, R. R. Kumar, S. Chanda, and V. E. Balas, Intelligent
Computation and Analytics on Sustainable Energy and Environment.
New York, NY, USA: Taylor & Francis, 2024.