1422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

CL-ViME: Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture
of Experts for Encrypted Traffic Classification
Saihua Cai , Member, IEEE, Lizhou Chen, Jinfu Chen , Member, IEEE, Shengran Wang,
and Guofeng Zhang , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Network traffic classification is essential for application identification and malicious behavior detection. However,
the widespread use of encryption protocols hides payloads and
reduces the availability of high-quality labeled data, both of which
constrain the effectiveness of current models. To address these
challenges, we propose CL-ViME, a self-supervised encrypted
traffic classification framework that integrates Contrastive
Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts. First, we design
a packet-temporal matrix that preserves fine-grained packet
headers and flow-level temporal structure. Second, we introduce
a Vertical Vision Transformer-Mixture of Experts model to
extract dual-view features through vertical patching and dynamic
expert routing. Third, we develop a dual-granularity contrastive
learning framework that aligns packet-level and flow-level representations via an MoE projector, followed by lightweight
classifier-head fine-tuning. Experiments on three public datasets
show that CL-ViME significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
self-supervised and supervised baselines across accuracy, macroprecision, macro-recall, and macro-F1. It also demonstrates
strong generalization and stability.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, contrastive
learning, mixture of experts, self-supervised learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification [1], [2] has become
a key technology for network management. Accurate
classification helps understand network behaviors [3], identify applications [4], and detect malicious traffic [5], [6].
However, the widespread use of encryption technologies (such
as TLS/HTTPS) renders most payload contents invisible.
This obscurity complicates feature extraction and leads to
performance bottlenecks in existing models [7], including
reduced accuracy and limited generalization. Consequently,

N

Received 18 August 2025; revised 6 December 2025; accepted 29
December 2025. Date of publication 31 December 2025; date of current
version 13 January 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62202206 and 62172194),
the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant no. BK20220515),
the China Scholarship Council (CSC), the Qinglan Project of Jiangsu
Province, and the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant
nos. ZR2024MF120 and ZR2021QF056). The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was M.-S. Kim.
(Corresponding author: Jinfu Chen.)
Saihua Cai, Lizhou Chen, Jinfu Chen, and Shengran Wang are
with the School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering
and the Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace
Security Technology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China (e-mail:
caisaih@ujs.edu.cn; 2222408019@stmail.ujs.edu.cn; jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn;
shrwang@stmail.ujs.edu.cn).
Guofeng Zhang is with the School of Information Science and Technology,
Taishan University, Tai’an 271021, China (e-mail: zhangguofeng@tsu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3650038

improving the accuracy of encrypted traffic classification has
become a critical challenge.
Compared with machine learning (such as SVM [8],
hierarchical clustering [9] and Random forest [10]), the powerful automatic feature extraction capability of deep learning
provides a new direction for encrypted traffic classification. Deep learning models, such as convolutional neural
network (CNN) [11], recurrent neural network (RNN) [12]
and Transformer [13], can reduce the reliance on handcrafted features. However, they typically require large-scale,
high-quality labeled data for training, yet obtaining accurate labels is costly. Moreover, enabling deep learning
models to effectively recognize emerging traffic classes
in dynamic network environments remains a significant
challenge [14].
To reduce dependence on large-scale labeled data and
improve generalization on unknown traffic, contrastive learning [15], [16] has gained attention for its self-supervised
nature. Through designing suitable pretext tasks, it learns
discriminative feature representations from large volumes of
unlabeled data. It constructs positive and negative sample
pairs, and then optimizes the loss function to pull positive pairs closer while pushing negative pairs apart. In this
way, it autonomously captures category-level distinctions in
network traffic. However, contrastive learning still faces several challenges in encrypted traffic classification [17], [18]:
(1) Many models slice encrypted traffic into fixed-length byte
sequences or gray-scale images. This approach loses finegrained packet-level header semantics and disrupts flow-level
temporal structures. (2) The priori design assumptions, such as
kernel shapes, receptive field layouts and positional encodings,
often mismatch the characteristics of encrypted traffic, leading
to distorted feature extraction when directly transferred. (3)
Most models build positive and negative pairs at only one
granularity, either packet-level or flow-level. This singlelevel design limits their ability to exploit complementary
information across granularities, making it hard to capture both
microscopic protocol fingerprints and macroscopic behavioral
patterns, and ultimately restricting generalization.
To address the above limitations, focusing on the challenges of feature representation, model adaptation and
multi-granularity feature extraction, this paper proposes CLViME, a self-supervised encrypted traffic classification model
built on Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts.
The main contributions are as follows:
• Structured representation with dual-granularity fusion:
We first organize raw encrypted traffic into a

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

1423

two-dimensional matrix in a structured manner, and then
fuse packet-level information (e.g., header fields) and
flow-level information (e.g., temporal relationships) into
a unified packet-temporal matrix. This representation
preserves both fine-grained headers and macroscopic
temporal patterns of encrypted traffic.
• Vertical Vision Transformer-Mixture of Experts (Vertical
ViT-MoE): To address the anisotropic semantics of
packet-temporal matrices, where horizontal and vertical
axes encode intra-packet fields and inter-packet temporal
sequences respectively, we replace the square patching
of standard ViT with vertical segmentation. We further
combine this strategy with a MoE to dynamically extract
packet-level features from the horizontal dimension and
flow-level features from the vertical dimension, producing dual-view representations for subsequent contrastive
learning.
• Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning: We first drive
MoE projector to map the packet-level and flowlevel representations into a shared latent space. We
then use hybrid bidirectional contrastive loss to jointly
optimize consistency and discrimination across granularities, enabling self-supervised alignment of packetand flow-level features without labels and significantly
improving robustness and generalization.
• MoE Auxiliary Loss: We introduce an MoE auxiliary
loss that applies alignment-divergence regularization to
expert routing. It enforces maximal routing divergence
between different views of the same sample and maximal
routing similarity across encoders for the same view.
This constraint enables adaptive and robust alignment of
packet-level and flow-level representations in a unified
latent space.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II reviews some related works. Section III detailed
describes the CL-ViME model. Section IV provides the experimental setup. Section V presents and analyzes experimental
results to validate the effectiveness of CL-ViME. Section VI
summarizes the full paper and provides some future directions.

traffic through low-dimensional signature paths and achieves
strong accuracy with high training efficiency. Nonetheless, its
fixed feature dimensionality limits generalization in complex
scenarios. Overall, traditional machine learning models depend
on handcrafted features, while encrypted traffic conceals
payload semantics and undermines the transferability of such
features. Moreover, these models also struggle to capture
the complex, high-dimensional patterns of encrypted traffic,
resulting in limited robustness and adaptability in dynamic
network environments.
2) Deep-Learning-Based Techniques: For the strong automatic feature extraction capability and the ability to model
complex patterns, deep learning has become a mainstream
approach for encrypted traffic classification. For example,
FlowPic [11] converts encrypted traffic into a 2D histogram of
arrival time and packet length,and applies CNNs for imagelevel classification. This design preserves privacy by avoiding
payload inspection, but the ultra-high-resolution images contain sparse information because they rely on low-entropy
features. Song et al. [12] proposed I2 RNN, an interpretable
RNN that constructs fingerprint modules using LSTM. Each
module learns the sequence patterns of one traffic class,
enabling incremental learning without retraining the entire
model. However, the number of modules grows linearly with
the number of classes, increasing storage and inference cost.
DigTraffic [13] adopts a message-level graph representation
to capture client-server interactions using heterogeneous edge
types. It encodes long and temporal flow sequences through
a dual-channel network, and then employs a message-aware
Graph Transformer that leverages node and edge information
to model complex graph structures. However, its detection
accuracy needs to be improved in scenarios with few labels.
Deep learning reduces dependence on handcrafted features
and demonstrates strong capability across byte-, packet-, and
sequence-level representations. However, most models require
large volumes of high-quality labeled data, which are difficult
to obtain for encrypted traffic and thus limit generalization.

II. R ELATED W ORKS

Most mainstream traffic classification models rely on
supervised learning, their performance is constrained by
the scarcity of high-quality labeled data. Given the difficulty of labeling traffic and the continuous emergence of
new traffic types, these models struggle to adapt quickly
to unseen classes. In contrast, contrastive learning leverages large volumes of unlabeled traffic for representation
learning, enabling faster adaptation to evolving network
environments.
The FlowPic-based contrastive learning framework [15]
learns the representations from unlabeled traffic, and groups
flows within the same category. This model reduces reliance on
large labeled datasets and improves performance on minority
classes. The ContraMTD [16] combines CNN-based local
feature extraction with a dual-edge attention GNN for global
interactions. Its contrastive learning design supports crossnetwork training and enhances malicious traffic detection, but
its generalization to broader encrypted traffic tasks remains

This section reviews encrypted traffic classification techniques and contrastive learning models for traffic classification.
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification Techniques
With the develop of artificial intelligence, machine learning
and deep learning techniques have been widely used in
encrypted traffic classification.
1) Machine-Learning-Based
Techniques: Machine
learning-based techniques achieve automatic classification
of different applications, protocols or malicious activities
by analyzing the statistical characteristics and behavioral
patterns of traffic packets. For example, a cost-sensitive
SVM with active learning [8] improves generalization under
class imbalance by selectively labeling minority classes
and querying uncertain samples. However, it still relies on
manual labeling. The ETC-PS method [10] models encrypted

B. Contrastive Learning Models for Traffic Classification

1424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

limited. The pretraining framework CETP [17] learns generalized features from imbalanced encrypted traffic using
contrastive learning and occlusion sequence modeling, and
then uses fine-tuning to further mitigate class imbalance.
However, its positive sample construction relies solely on random Dropout, which is often insufficient for low-redundancy
encrypted traffic. Shen et al. [18] proposed a contrastive
learning-based detector, it converts traffic into a semantic
attribute matrix and pretrains on unlabeled data to capture normal behavior patterns. This design supports rapid adaptation to
new attacks and improves robustness against obfuscation with
limited labels. The multi-instance contrastive learning model
MIETT [19] uses a two-level attention mechanism for packetand flow-level features. It employs masked flow prediction,
packet position prediction, and flow-level contrastive learning
to improve traffic discrimination, but its accuracy still lags
behind supervised models.
Researches in this area remain preliminary, and current
models still trail state-of-the-art supervised models in classification accuracy. Existing contrastive tasks, typically adapted
from computer vision, fail to capture the spatiotemporal structure and contextual dependencies inherent in network traffic.
This study leverages the structured nature of encrypted traffic
to derive refined packet- and flow-level representations and
introduces a dual-granularity contrastive learning framework to
strengthen classification capability. Experiments show that the
proposed model achieves accuracy comparable to supervised
deep learning models.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
This section describes the proposed CL-ViME, a selfsupervised encrypted traffic classification model based on
Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts. It
improves existing models by addressing the key challenges in
feature representation, model adaptation and dual-granularity
contrastive learning.
A. Framework of CL-ViME Model
The overall framework of the proposed self-supervised
CL-ViME model is shown in Fig. 1. It comprises three
components: a structured representation phase, a contrastive
learning pretraining phase, and a fine-tuning phase.
Structured representation: This phase converts raw
encrypted-traffic PCAP files into a packet–temporal matrix
using structured padding. Matrix construction includes two
steps: First, it horizontally pads packet protocols, flags
and limited plaintext payloads. Second, it vertically embeds
temporal patterns and interaction modes based on packet
arrival order. This two-dimensional encoding jointly captures
packet-level and flow-level semantics within a unified matrix
structure. The resulting representation preserves fine-grained
packet features and global flow dynamics, providing an effective input for subsequent contrastive learning.
Contrastive learning pretraining: This phase employs
a self-supervised contrastive learning framework to exploit
large-scale unlabeled traffic and enhance representation quality. Two data augmentation strategies, transposition and

random masking, are first applied to construct discriminative
positive and negative pairs, enabling the model to capture
intrinsic characteristics of encrypted traffic. The Vertical
ViT-MoE then serves as the backbone. It processes structured inputs through a vertically partitioned patch-embedding
scheme, and uses a routing mechanism to dynamically select
expert modules for feature extraction. This design jointly
captures packet-level and flow-level semantics and routes
heterogeneous features to the most suitable experts. With these
operations, the pretrained model attains robust representation
capability for downstream encrypted traffic classification.
Fine-tuning: This phase adopts a classification-head–only
strategy. The pretrained Vertical ViT-MoE backbone is fully
frozen, and only the task-specific classification head is
updated. This approach verifies the generalization of the
learned encrypted traffic representations while enabling efficient adaptation to downstream classification tasks with low
computational overhead.
B. Structured Representation of Encrypted Traffic
In encrypted traffic classification, packet-level granularity
treats each packet as the basic unit and captures finegrained protocol fields and flags. However, it fails to model
global behavioral patterns because it ignores inter-packet
dependencies. Flow-level granularity aggregates bidirectional
packets sharing the same 5-tuple (source/destination IP,
source/destination port, and transport protocol) into a single
unit to enable the extraction of temporal dynamics and
interaction behaviors, albeit at the cost of losing detailed
protocol and payload information. Existing representation
methods either extract abstract features [20] and map them
to pixel values [11], [21]-an approach that performs poorly
on encrypted traffic due to weak feature extraction-or directly
process raw traffic with simplistic single-granularity filling
strategies, which disregard packet structure and lead to inefficient matrix usage and ambiguous semantic representations.
To address these challenges, we propose a structured feature representation method that constructs a packet-temporal
matrix through dual-granularity fusion. The key idea is to
directly populate raw encrypted traffic into a structured matrix,
thereby integrating packet-level and flow-level information. At
the packet level, the horizontal dimension encodes protocol
fields, flags and limited payload content while preserving raw
header semantics. At the flow level, the vertical dimension
captures temporal dependencies and interaction patterns across
packets. This dual-granularity representation preserves finegrained details and simultaneously models global behavioral
characteristics. The detailed process is as follows:
First, we reorganize packets in the PCAP file into bidirectional flows. Specifically, packets are first grouped into
bidirectional sessions using the 5-tuple, and then sorted by
timestamp to form interleaved, time-aligned round-trip flows
of “source→destination” and “destination→source”. Although
payloads are encrypted, packet headers remain in plaintext and
provide stable structured features. Their field distributions and
semantics offer a reliable basis for encrypted traffic feature
extraction.

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

Fig. 1.

1425

The framework of CL-ViME model.

To mitigate interference from MAC and IP addresses and
to prevent privacy leakage, we remove MAC addresses and
anonymize source and destination IP addresses, retaining only
the last-byte segment. This reduces the IP header to 13 bytes.
The TCP header contains 20 fixed bytes and up to 40 optional
bytes. Since optional fields rarely exceed 20 bytes, we allocate
a uniform 40-byte space. Shorter headers are zero-padded, and
longer ones are truncated to the first 40 bytes. In addition,
although payloads are encrypted, some protocol-control fields
following the TCP layer remain in plaintext and can be parsed.
These fields are useful for downstream analysis, so we retain
7 bytes to capture essential communication behaviors while
avoiding redundant or sensitive content. After these operations,
each packet provides a fixed 60-byte header representation.
These 60 bytes are linearly mapped from 0-255 to decimal
integers and placed into one row of a matrix, forming the
horizontal spatial dimension. Each packet occupies a single
row, and packets are stacked vertically by arrival order to form
a 60×60 matrix. A bidirectional flow thus yields a sequence
of matrices S = [X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn ], where Xn denotes the
n th packet. This transformation preserves packet-header structure and embeds temporal patterns into the matrix layout.
Horizontally, each row encodes the packet’s internal fields and
byte-level variations. Vertically, row-to-row differences capture temporal dependencies and interaction dynamics within
the flow. By aligning intra-packet structure along rows and
inter-packet sequences along columns, the method effectively
exploits both spatial and temporal semantics of encrypted
traffic.
C. Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning Pretraining
Most
labeled
network
traffic
datasets
(e.g.,
CICIOT2023 [22], CICIDS2018 [23]) are generated in
virtual environments. Meanwhile, labeling real-world traffic is
extremely difficult, which limits the applicability of supervised
models due to the scarcity of reliable labels. A practical
solution is to adopt self-supervised contrastive learning to

classify encrypted traffic by exploiting unlabeled data. In
contrastive learning, positive and negative pairs must be
constructed, then the model minimizes the feature distance of
positive pairs and maximizes that of negative pairs through the
contrastive loss. The framework of proposed dual-granularity
contrastive learning is shown in Fig. 2.
1) Construction of Positive and Negative Sample Pairs:
In the computer vision domain, positive sample pairs for
contrastive learning are typically generated using techniques
such as random cropping. However, this method may destroy
the integrity of structured features, such as those in packettemporal matrices, which represent packet-level features
horizontally and flow-level features vertically. To address
this, we propose a novel method for constructing positive
sample pairs based on row-column transposition. Specifically,
as shown in Eq. (1), we first transpose the rows and columns
of matrix to achieve symmetric transformation in the spatiotemporal dimension. Next, we introduce a random mask
perturbation mechanism to the transposed matrix. This dual
augmentation strategy preserves the semantic integrity of
original encrypted traffic, enhances the feature robustness
through structural reorganization and local masking.
x1 = Tmask (X ), x2 = Tmask (Ttrans (X ))

(1)

In Eq. (1), X is the transformed encrypted traffic matrix,
Tmask () denotes the random mask operation, Ttrans () denotes
the transpose operation, (x1 , x2 ) is the positive sample pairs.
Negative samples are typically drawn from other samples
within the same training batch. Since each batch contains
traffic matrices from different communication behaviors, protocol types or attack patterns, their semantic differences are
substantial, making them suitable negative samples. Suppose
a batch contains N independent samples {X1 , X2 ,. . . , XN }.
Each sample is augmented to produce two views (x1 , x2 ),
resulting in 2N samples in total. For any positive pair (x1 , x2 ),
the remaining 2(N -1) samples serve as negative samples. If
Xi is the anchor, all samples other than (xi,1 , xi,2 ) constitute

1426

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

The framework of dual-granularity contrastive learning.

its negative set, as shown in Eq. (2).



Ni = xj ,1 , xj ,2 |j ∈ [1, N ], j = i

(2)

In summary, the proposed method introduces a structured data augmentation strategy that preserves spatiotemporal
integrity through matrix transposition and improves robustness
through random masking. This approach avoids the structural
distortion introduced by conventional cropping, it is well
suited for feature representation scenarios of encrypted traffic
with strict spatiotemporal dependencies.
2) Vertical ViT-MoE Model: Vision Transformer (ViT) [24]
revolutionizes computer vision by splitting the images into
uniform patches for sequence-based modeling. However, its
isotropic 16×16 patching works well for natural images but
not for encrypted traffic matrices. In those matrices, rows
and columns carry different kinds of information: rows show
protocol hierarchy, while columns show time dynamics.
To address this, we propose the Vertical Vision Transformer
Mixture of Experts (Vertical ViT-MoE). It is a feature-oriented
architecture with two key components: (1) Vertical Patching
Strategy: Instead of using square patches, we segment inputs
along the longitudinal axis. Given a positive sample pair
(x1 , x2 ), this approach extracts stream-level features from the
original sample x1 and packet-level features from the transposed sample x2 . (2) Dynamic Mixture-of-Experts (MoE): We
integrate a dynamic MoE mechanism into the Transformer
encoder. This allows specialized experts to capture the multigranular semantic patterns that align with the inherent vertical
structure of network traffic.
Specifically, we first design a parameterized vertical segmentation strategy for spatial feature decomposition. As shown
in Eq. (3), it partitions the input N ∗ N matrix X into N/2
consecutive subregions along the horizontal dimension.
N /2
P = Partition(X ) = {Pi }i=1 , Pi ∈ R N ×2

(3)

Each vertical bar region Pi is projected into a 2N dimensional embedding vector ei ∈ RD (D = 2N ) using
a linear projection matrix Wp , as shown in Eq. (4). A
learnable positional encoding vector eipos ∈ RD is added to
preserve spatial order, and Flatten(·) denotes the vectorization
operation.
pos

ei = Flatten(Pi )Wp + ei

(4)

A global [CLS] token is then prepended to the N /2 region
embeddings to form the full input sequence T, as shown in
Eq. (5).
N /2

T = {ei }i=1 + [eCLS ]

(5)

Next, T is processed by 12 stacked Transformer encoder
layers. Each layer contains:
(1) A multi-head self-attention mechanism [25]. It uses
8 attention heads, where each head linearly transforms the
embedding vectors ei in T through WQ , WK and WV to
generate the query (Q), key (K) and value (V) matrices, as
shown in Eq. (6).


(6)
[Qi , Ki , Vi ] = ei WQ , WK , WV
The attention weight αi for the i th embedding is then
computed via dot product, as shown in Eq. (7), where dh
denotes the dimension of Ki .

Qi K T
Vi (7)
αi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = softmax √ i
dh
(2) MoE Feed-Forward Network [26]: The standard twolayer MLP (typically expanding to 4D is replaced with a
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layer. Each expert is a single linear
transformation with input and output dimensions equal to the
patch-embedding dimension D. A routing module computes
the expert probabilities si using a learnable matrix Wrouter ∈
RD×E , as shown in Eq. (8), where Gaussian noise  ∼
N (0, 1) is added to improve routing diversity. Due to only
the top-2 experts are activated per token, the theoretical
computation is reduced to roughly 25% of the original MLP.
si = softmax(αi Wrouter + )

(8)

Based on the routing probabilities si , only the top-k expert
outputs gj are preserved using a Top-k sparse activation
mechanism, as shown in Eq. (9). Here, s ∈ RE is the routingscore vector, E is the number of experts, TopK(s, k ) returns
the selected expert indices, and the indicator function I(·)
ensures that all non-selected experts are suppressed.


exp sj · I(j ∈ TopK(s, k ))
, ∀j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , E } (9)
gj =
m∈TopK(s,k ) exp(sm )

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

1427

The MoE output is then computed as the weighted sum of
the activated expert outputs, as shown in Eq. (10), where yi
denotes the enhanced feature vector for the i th vertical bar
region Pi , and Ej is the j th expert.
k

yi =

gj · Ej (x )

(10)

j =1

Finally, the [CLS] token aggregates the global contextual
information to produce final high-dimensional representation.
3) Design of Loss Function: In contrastive learning, target
encoder stabilizes feature representations of negative samples
to improve training robustness and consistency. It shares the
same architecture as the query encoder but updates its parameters via a momentum rule rather than backpropagation [27],
as shown in Eq. (11), where θk and θq are the parameters
of target and query encoders, respectively, and m ≈ 1 is the
momentum coefficient.
θk = m · θk + (1 − m) · θq

(11)

Traditional contrastive learning often employs a nonlinear
projector-typically an MLP-after the encoder to map features
into an embedding space, emphasizing invariant semantic
content [28]. The packet-level and flow-level perspectives of
encrypted traffic belong to same segment but from different
representational perspectives, requiring the projector to be able
to understand and process these two heterogeneous representations separately and map them to a unified latent space. To
unify this representation, we replace original single projectors
in the query and target encoders with a shared MoE (Mixtureof-Experts) projector. This design enables parallel processing
of encoder features through multiple expert networks, with
a gating router dynamically selecting and combining experts
per sample. It enhances model expressiveness and nonlinearity
while preserving consistency between flow-level and packetlevel features.
Specifically, dual-view positive pairs (x1 , x2 ) are generated
via data augmentation and encoded by query encoder (Vertical
ViT-MoE) into features (z1 , z2 ). They are then passed through
unified MoE projector to yield expert representations (q1 , q2 )
and routing weights (qr1 , qr2 ), as shown in Eqs. (12) and (13),
where Wrouter is a learnable weight matrix, Ej denotes the j-th
expert, rij is the selection probability for expert j given feature
zi , and qi is the resulting MoE-projected representation. A
predictor network then maps (q1 , q2 ) into the contrastive
learning space, producing final query predictions (p1 , p2 ). The
target encoder follows the same pipeline to generate target
representations (k1 , k2 ) and routing weights (kr1 , kr2 ) from
(x1 , x2 ). The target encoder follows the same pipeline to
generate target representations (k1 , k2 ) and routing weights
(kr1 , kr2 ) from (x1 , x2 ).
ri = softmax(zi Wrouter )

(12)

k

qi =

rij Ej (zi )

(13)

j =1

Next, to make expert selection in the MoE module more
discriminative and adaptive, we design an auxiliary loss Lmoe .

This loss strengthens model’s adaptability and expressiveness
by refining the expert assignment strategy. The loss consists
of two components:
(1) Similarity minimization loss Lmoe _view for dual-view
routing weights: This loss drives the routing weights (qr1 , qr2 )
of two augmented views (x1 , x2 ) of the same sample to
diverge. Each view is generated through distinct data augmentation. By encouraging inconsistent expert activations
across views, the loss promotes diverse expert usage and
improves representation robustness. The formulation is shown
in Eq. (14), where sim(·, ·) denotes cosine similarity.
Lmoe _view = sim(qr1 , qr2 )

(14)

(2) Similarity maximization loss Lmoe _enc for heteroencoder routing weights: This loss enforces high similarity
between the routing weights (qr, kr) produced by the query
encoder and the target (key) encoder for the same input view.
It promotes consistent expert selection for identical semantic
content, even when obtained through different encoding paths,
thereby stabilizing expert activation. The formulation is shown
in Eq. (15).
1
Lmoe _enc = − (sim(qr1 , kr1 ) + sim(qr2 , kr2 )) (15)
2
Finally, Lmoe _view and Lmoe _enc are combined to form the
MoE auxiliary loss Lmoe , as shown in Eq. (16).
Lmoe = Lmoe _view + Lmoe _enc

(16)

After imposing semantic consistency constraints on the
expert routing mechanism through the MoE auxiliary loss
(Eqs. (14)-(16)), the MoE projector maps heterogeneous
packet-level and flow-level features into a unified latent space.
This process yields more discriminative and aligned expert
representations.
Next, we need to compute sample similarity to pull positive
pairs closer and push negative pairs apart. The standard
InfoNCE loss (shown in Eq. (17)) [29] is widely used to
compute similarity, where q denotes the query features from
the query encoder, k + represents the corresponding positive
sample features from the target encoder, {k − } is a set of
negative sample features, and τ is the temperature that controls
the sharpness of the similarity distribution.




exp sim(q, k + )/τ

 (17)
LInfoNCE q, k + , {k − } = − log 
−
k − exp sim(q, k )/τ

However, standard InfoNCE loss only considers unidirectional relations, i.e., the similarity between query features
and positive sample features. It fails to leverage the semantic correspondence from dual-view augmented sample pairs.
Consequently, the model may overfit to a specific viewpoint
and neglect complementary information between different
augmented views. This limitation reduces the generalization of
learned representations. To address this, we propose a hybrid
bidirectional contrastive loss based on InfoNCE, as shown
in Eq. (18). It computes contrastive losses in both directions,
leveraging mutual prediction between the two augmented
views for more robust feature alignment.




LCL = LInfoNCE p1 , k2 , {k2− } + LInfoNCE p2 , k1 , {k1− } (18)

1428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Granularity Contrastive Learning
Require: Batch_size n, Packet-temporal matrix X, Vertical
ViT-MoE: θ, MoE Projector: M, Predictor P, Balancing
parameter λ, Momentum m, Mask Augmentation Tmask ,
Transpose Augmentation Ttrans
Ensure: Total loss LTotal
1: V = [] // initialize to store sample pairs
2: for each sample Xi in X do
3:
v1 = Tmask (Xi )
// Flow-level view
4:
v2 = Tmask (Ttrans (Xi ))
// Packet-level view
5:
V [i ].append (v1 , v2 )
6: end for
7: θq , θk =θ.copy
// create query & target encoders
8: for i ∈ [1, 2n] do
9:
qi , qri = M (θq (V [i ]))
10:
pi = P (qi )
11:
start no-gradient operation
12:
θk = m · θk + (1 − m) · θq
// momentum update
13:
ki , kri = M (θk (V [i ]))
14:
end no-gradient operation
15: end for
16: Lmoe = sim(qr1 , qr2 )−((sim(qr1 , kr1 )+sim(qr2 , kr2 ))·0.5)
17: LCL = LInfoNCE (p1 , k2 , {ki , i ∈ [3, 2n]})

+LInfoNCE (p2 , k1 , {i ∈ [3, 2n]})
18: LTotal = LCL + λ · Lmoe
19: return LTotal

Ultimately, the objective function is a weighted sum of
these two losses, balanced by parameter λ (Eq. (19)). This
formulation enables joint optimization of feature learning and
expert routing mechanism.
LTotal = LCL + λLmoe

The dual-view encoding and cross-level alignment design
of CL-ViME makes its computational cost largely dominated
by the Transformer blocks and MoE modules. Given L spatial
patches and an embedding dimension D, the PatchEmbed layer
has a complexity of O(LD 2 ). The multi-head attention blocks
add O(36LD 2 + L2 D), while the MoE-based feed-forward
layer incurs O(24LD 2 ). Thus, the overall complexity of CLViME is O(L2 D + LD 2 ), indicating strong dependence on
both the embedding dimension and the number of patches.
D. Fine-Tuning of Encrypted Traffic Classification Model
After pretraining, the contrastive model acquires generalizable representations from large-scale unlabeled encrypted
traffic, capturing deep spatiotemporal patterns across traffic
types. To assess the transferability and quality of these representations, we apply head-only fine-tuning. The pretrained
backbone is frozen to preserve its extraction capability, while
only a lightweight classification head (e.g., a small MLP and a
fully connected layer) is trained. The head is randomly initialized (e.g., Xavier initialization), and all backbone parameters
remain fixed.
To mitigate severe class imbalance, which is common in
encrypted traffic, we use a weighted cross-entropy loss. This
loss increases penalties for minority-class errors and improves
sensitivity to rare traffic types. We optimize the head with an
efficient optimizer such as AdamW and a low learning rate,
enabling fast convergence on limited labeled data.
This setup isolates the effect of pretrained features. Because
the head serves only as a simple linear adapter, downstream
classification performance directly reflects the quality and
adaptability of the learned representations, providing a clean
evaluation of the contrastive pretraining phase.

(19)

The process of proposed dual-granularity contrastive learning is shown in Algorithm 1.
This algorithm comprises three phases, each corresponding
to a core contribution. (1) Positive and negative sample
construction (lines 1-6): An empty view list V is initialized
(line 1) to store augmented samples. For each raw matrix Xi ,
two augmented views are generated: a flow-level view v1 by
random masking (line 3), and a packet-level view v2 by rowcolumn transposition followed by masking (line 4). Both views
are appended to V (line 5). These two views from the same
Xi form positive pairs, and all others are treated as negative
pairs. (2) Query and target encoder construction (lines
7-15): Each augmented view passes through Vertical ViTMoE to obtain the query representation qi and router logits
qri (line 9). The predictor maps qi to the contrastive space
pi (line 10). The target encoder freezes gradients and uses
momentum (lines 11-14) to generate target representations ki
and logits kri . (3) Loss computation (lines 16-19): The MoE
auxiliary loss Lmoe minimizes cosine similarity between dualview routers (qr1 , qr2 ) while maximizing similarity between
query and target routers (qri , kri ) (line 16). The bidirectional
InfoNCE loss LCL is computed for positive pairs (qp1 , k2 )
and (qp2 , k1 ), treating all other views as negatives (line 17).
Finally, Lmoe and LCL are combined to form LTotal (line 18).

IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
To validate the effectiveness of proposed CL-ViME model,
we compare it with five state-of-the-art models through extensive experiments.
A. Description of Encrypted Traffic Datasets
In the experiments, we use four encrypted traffic datasets
to evaluate the performance of proposed CL-ViME model.
(1) MAWI [30]: It is maintained by WIDE project, capturing the encrypted traffic from a trans-Pacific backbone link
between Japan and global Internet. It captures snapshots at
fixed 15-minute interval using tcpdump and stores raw packets
in PCAP format. This traffic has no manual labels, offering
multi-scenario and prior-free characteristics suitable for selfsupervised pretraining. We select the traffic from Jan. 1 to Jan.
5, 2025 for pretraining.
(2) ISCX-VPN [31]: It is released by the Canadian
Institute for Cybersecurity, containing raw PCAP traffic for
six VPN-encrypted application categories. It is widely used
for evaluating encrypted traffic classification models.
(3) CICIoT [22]: It is designed for IoT environments, containing normal behaviors and multiple attack types and benign
IoT traffic. It contains both encrypted and unencrypted flows,
covering benign and malicious communication channels.

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

TABLE I
DATASET S TATISTICS

1429

(5) CL-FlowPic [33]: A self-supervised model using miniFlowPic histograms. It employs SimCLR-based representation
learning with RTT scaling, time shifting, and packet loss
augmentations, clustering traffic from the same application in
latent space.
(6) YaTC [34]: A masked autoencoder-based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation. It encodes raw
traffic into a hierarchical matrix and applies packet- and flowlevel attention for efficient feature extraction. Subsequently, it
is pretrained on unlabeled data via the MAE paradigm and
fine-tuned on limited labeled samples for classification.
C. Evaluation Metrics

(4) CTU-Malware [32]: It is built for long-term malware
traffic analysis, containing various malware families alongside
normal traffic. It contains encrypted and unencrypted flows,
and simulates realistic network environments with detailed
attack records.
Table I summarizes the class composition and sample distribution of three labeled datasets used in the fine-tuning
and evaluation stages. Due to MAWI dataset only used for
self-supervised pretraining, it is not included in this table.
Note that all datasets exhibit significant class imbalance—
a common characteristic in real-world encrypted traffic—our
experimental setup preserves it to reflect practical deployment
scenarios.
During pretraining, the model uses only unlabeled encrypted
traffic from MAWI for self-supervised representation learning,
allowing a comprehensive evaluation of transferability and
generalization. In the fine-tuning stage, the model is trained
on three labeled datasets: ISCX-VPN, CICIOT2023 and CTUMalware. Each dataset is stratified and randomly split into
training, validation and testing datasets using an 8:1:1 ratio,
preserving the original class imbalance and reducing sampling
bias. This yields a stable and reliable evaluation environment
for encrypted traffic classification.
B. Baselines
To evaluate CL-ViME, we compare it with six representative
baselines.
(1) CETP [17]: A semi-supervised model using contrastive
pretraining on multi-granularity token sequences. It performs
fine-tuning with pseudo-label iteration and dynamic loss
weighting for imbalanced traffic.
(2) SmartDetector [18]: A contrastive learning-based model
embedding traffic sequences into context-aware vectors. It
simulates obfuscation via data augmentation and pretrains the
encoder on unlabeled traffic for robust detection.
(3) MIETT [19]: A multi-instance learning model treating
packets as instances and flows as bags. It applies two-level
attention to capture token- and packet-level relations and uses
packet position prediction and flow contrastive learning for
pretraining.
(4) MTC-MAE [15]: A masked autoencoder model converting traffic into gray-scale images for pretraining. It adopts
fine-tuning with few labels to achieve high-precision classification.

To evaluate the CL-ViME model, we use standard multiclass classification metrics. For a k-class problem, TPi , FPi ,
and FNi represent the true positives, false positives, and false
negatives for class i (i = 1, . . . , k ), and N denotes the total
number of samples.
(1) Accuracy (Acc): It represents the percentage of correctly
classified network traffic samples among all samples. It is
calculated by Eq. (20).
k
i=1 TPi

Accuracy =

N

(20)

(2) Macro-Precision (Ma-Pre): It measures the classification
correctness of the model, computed as the unweighted mean
of precision across all classes, as shown in Eq. (21).
Macro − Precision =

1
k

k
i=1

TPi
TPi + FPi

(21)

(3) Macro-Recall (Ma-Rec): It is the arithmetic mean of
recall across all categories, giving equal weight to each class—
particularly important under class imbalance. It is calculated
by Eq. (22).
Macro − Recall =

1
k

k
i=1

TPi
TPi + FNi

(22)

(4) Macro-F1 (Ma-F1): It provides a harmonic balance
between precision and recall at the class level, then averages
uniformly across classes, as given in Eq. (23).
Macro − F1 =

1
k

k
i=1

2TPi
2TPi + FPi + FNi

(23)

D. Set of Parameters
In the pretraining phase, we train for 300 epochs with a
learning rate of 3e-4, a batch size of 2048, and a momentum
coefficient m of 0.99.
In the fine-tuning phase, we train for 50 epochs with a
learning rate of 1e-2, a batch size of 512, and an equilibrium
parameter λ of 0.9.
For both phases, the embedding dimension is 120, the
number of ViT layers is 12, and the optimizer is AdamW. All
experiments are conducted on a server using an NVIDIA A40
GPU.

1430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE II
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT F EATURE R EPRESENTATIONS (%)

V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
To better evaluate the performance of the CL-ViME model,
we pose the following four research questions (RQs):
RQ1: Is the proposed packet-temporal matrix representation
superior to traditional feature representation methods?
RQ2: Can the proposed Vertical ViT-MoE model extract
more effective information, thereby improving classification
performance?
RQ3: Can the self-supervised contrastive learning pretraining strategy enhance the model’s classification and
generalization capabilities?
RQ4: Can the CL-ViME model outperform other state-ofthe-art models?
To reduce experimental randomness, each experiment is
repeated 30 times. Values before the “±” symbol indicate the
mean, while those after indicate the standard deviation. In the
experimental results, the best results are highlighted in bold
and the second-best results are marked with underline.
A. Answer to RQ1
To answer RQ1, we select five classic models (CNN, VGG,
RNN, LSTM, and Transformer) in a supervised learning
setting. Experiments are conducted using three representation
methods: feature sequence, gray-scale image, and packettemporal matrix. Detailed results are shown in Table II.
As shown in Table II, the proposed packet-temporal matrix
achieves the highest performance in most cases. This is mainly
due to its structured fusion of dual-granularity information,
combining fine-grained packet-level headers with macroscopic
flow-level temporal patterns. Such a representation enriches
feature information and enhances class separability, improving classification efficiency. On the ISCX-VPN dataset, it
outperforms feature sequence and gray-scale image representations by 7.02% and 4.36% in accuracy, and 5.87% and
3.44% in macro-precision, respectively. On the CICIOT2023
dataset, the performance gain over gray-scale images is
slightly reduced for some models, likely because IoT traffic
exhibits simpler characteristics that are visually captured by
less-structured representations. On other datasets, gray-scale
images consistently underperform compared to the packettemporal matrix. Overall, the proposed representation stores
richer dual-granularity features, enhancing the performance
and stability of supervised encrypted traffic classification.
Additionally, sequence-based models like Transformer excel

TABLE III
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ODELS (%)

in these tasks, confirming their suitability as backbones for
subsequent model design and optimization.
B. Answer to RQ2
To answer RQ2, we compare the proposed Vertical ViTMoE model with ResNet18, AutoEncoder, GNN and ViT. All
models are trained under identical self-supervised learning
conditions. Experimental results are presented in Table III.
As shown in Table III, the proposed Vertical ViT-MoE
outperforms the other four models across all evaluation metrics. On the CTU-Malware dataset, it achieves a macro-F1 of
96.02%, exceeding the best baseline (ViT, 88.67%) by 7.35%.
This gain arises because the isotropic square patching in standard ViT disrupts the semantic integrity of highly structured
traffic matrices. In contrast, Vertical ViT-MoE uses a vertical
patching strategy aligned with the anisotropic nature of the
data, preserving and extracting distinct packet-level and flowlevel features. On the ISCX-VPN dataset, Vertical ViT-MoE
reaches an accuracy of 99.46%, outperforming best baseline
of ViT (97.64%) by 1.82%. Although standard ViT captures
spatial correlations, its uniform segmentation is suboptimal
for encrypted traffic, where semantics are organized by rows
and columns. The vertical segmentation combined with the
MoE architecture enables the model to learn specialized and
robust representations, making it more suitable for encrypted
traffic classification. Overall, Vertical ViT-MoE overcomes the
limitations of standard vision models for structured encrypted
traffic. By respecting the intrinsic structure of traffic, it
captures both fine-grained packet-level headers and broader
temporal-flow dynamics, resulting in improved performance
and stability.

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

Fig. 3.

1431

Ablation experiments.
TABLE IV
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODELS (%)

C. Answer to RQ3
To answer RQ3, we select three representative selfsupervised models of MoCo [27], SimCLR [28] and
BYOL [35] as baselines, the experimental results are shown in
Table IV. In addition, we also perform ablation experiments to
verify the role of each component. Experiments are conducted
under the following conditions: (1) with the MoE projector
removed, including only flow-level contrastive learning (FlowCL), only packet-level contrastive learning (Packet-CL), or
dual-granularity contrastive learning (F&P-CL); and (2) with
the MoE projector applied to dual-granularity contrastive
learning (F&P-CL+MoE). All comparisons use identical
self-supervised contrastive learning settings, with Vertical ViTMoE as the backbone to ensure fairness. The results are shown
in Fig. 3.
As shown in Table IV, the complete proposed model
achieves optimal performance on all three encrypted traffic
datasets. It significantly outperforms the baselines MoCo,
SimCLR, and BYOL across all evaluation metrics. On the
CICIOT2023 dataset, the macro-F1 of the proposed model
reaches 88.62%, exceeding the best baseline (BYOL, 81.70%).
This demonstrates the overall advantage of dual-granularity
contrastive learning with the MoE projector.
Fig. 3 highlights the importance of each component.
The following conclusions can be drawn: (1) Necessity
of dual-granularity contrastive learning: On ISCX-VPN and
CTU-Malware datasets, packet-level contrastive learning outperforms flow-level learning, while both achieve similar
accuracy on CICIOT2023. Combining the two granularities
consistently surpasses single-granularity models, validating their complementarity. For instance, on CICIOT2023,
the dual-granularity model achieves 92.30% accuracy,
higher than flow-level (90.07%) or packet-level (90.39%).
(2) Effectiveness of MoE projector: Introducing the MoE
projector further improves performance. On ISCX-VPN, accuracy rises from 98.75% to 99.46% and macro-F1 from
93.90% to 97.94%. This confirms that the MoE projector and
auxiliary loss Lmoe effectively map heterogeneous packetand flow-level features into a unified latent space and learn
more discriminative semantic features through dynamic expert
routing.
Overall, experimental results verify that the proposed selfsupervised pretraining model enhances model generalization.
Its success relies on two aspects: (1) collaborative use of
packet- and flow-level features via structured data augmentation (matrix transposition), and (2) efficient integration and
refinement of heterogeneous features through the MoE projector and auxiliary loss. These mechanisms together enable the
model to learn rich and discriminative representations from
unlabeled encrypted traffic.
D. Answer to RQ4
To answer RQ4, we compare the proposed CL-ViME model
with seven state-of-the-art models.The detailed results are
presented in Table V.
As shown in Table V, the proposed CL-ViME model
achieves both high accuracy and remarkable stability compared to other traffic classification models. On the ISCX-VPN
and CICIOT2023 datasets, it ranks first on all four metrics, outperforming competitors by a substantial margin. On
CICIOT2023, its macro-F1 reaches 88.62%, 8.6% higher
than the runner-up YaTC, demonstrating superior discriminative power. For YaTC, the full-model fine-tuning used
in downstream classification can induce catastrophic forgetting in the backbone, weakening the pre-training benefits.
In addition, its masked autoencoder is optimized for token
reconstruction, which biases the learned representations toward
structural fidelity rather than discriminative separability. This
design limits its effectiveness in classification tasks. On the
CTU-Malware dataset, CL-ViME shows robustness to class
imbalance. Although CETP slightly surpasses it in raw accuracy (99.04% vs. 98.94%), its macro-averaged metrics lag far
behind. This “high accuracy, low macro” profile indicates overfitting to majority classes. The macro metrics weight each class
equally, providing a more realistic measure of performance.
Here, CL-ViME achieves a macro-F1 of 96.02%, exceeding

1432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ODELS (%)

Fig. 4.

Performance on each category of encrypted traffic.

CETP by over 15%, confirming its ability to maintain high
precision across both dominant and rare classes.
Fig. 4 presents radar charts of classification performance
for seven contrastive learning-based models. CL-ViME outperforms rivals in most categories and achieves comparable
performance in the remaining ones. While other models
occasionally misclassify specific classes completely, CLViME does not fail catastrophically. This robustness is
attributed to three key designs: (1) structured data augmentation (row-column transposition and random masking)
generates high-quality positive sample pairs while preserving
semantic structures; (2) the Vertical ViT-MoE architecture
efficiently extracts anisotropic features of encrypted traffic;
(3) the combination of hybrid bidirectional contrastive loss
and MoE auxiliary loss provides a comprehensive optimization
target. Overall, CL-ViME demonstrates excellent classification
performance, strong stability, and robustness across diverse
encrypted traffic datasets, especially under class imbalance.
E. Discussion
Existing contrastive learning-based encrypted traffic classification models suffer from three main limitations. (1) They
slice encrypted traffic into fixed-length byte sequences or
2-D matrices, discarding fine-grained packet-header semantics
and severing macroscopic temporal structures. (2) Directly
transferring vision models distorts the anisotropic structure of
traffic matrices. (3) They exploit only a single granularity, failing to leverage the complementarity of packet- and flow-level
information. To address these issues, we propose CL-ViME.
It introduces a packet-temporal matrix that fuses packet-level
headers with flow-level temporal patterns. The Vertical ViTMoE employs vertical patching and dynamic expert routing
to respect the traffic structure. A dual-granularity contrastive

learning pretraining scheme aligns packet- and flow-level representations without labels, substantially boosting robustness
and generalization.
CL-ViME is evaluated on three encrypted traffic datasets
against advanced self-supervised and supervised models. It
achieves accuracies of 99.46%, 94.87% and 98.94%, outperforming all baselines. Even under severe class imbalance, it
maintains high precision on minority classes, demonstrating
its effectiveness in feature representation, model architecture
and pretraining design.
Despite its strengths, CL-ViME has following limitations:
(1) Current design is computationally expensive due to the
large embedding dimension (120) and the numerous vertical
patches (e.g., 30 for a 60×60 input). Future work will
explore replacing PatchEmbed with a CNN-based module that
performs spatial downscaling, thereby reducing the sequence
length and embedding dimension while preserving essential
traffic structures. (2) Dynamic network environment may cause
concept drift, significantly degrading the performance of CLViME model. To address this challenge, we can incorporate
incremental or continual learning mechanisms, allowing the
model to adapt to evolving traffic distributions without catastrophic forgetting.
F. Threats to Validity
This section discusses potential threats to the internal and
external validity of the CL-ViME model during experimental
evaluation.
Internal validity. First, there are potential threats in reproducing baselines. Some models, such as CETP, MIETT,
SmartDetector and CL-FlowPic, do not provide official source
codes. We reproduced them based on the descriptions in the
papers. Although we follow the algorithm descriptions and

CAI et al.: CL-ViME: CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND VISION MIXTURE

experimental settings, complete consistency with the original
implementations cannot be guaranteed. Second, hyperparameter optimization may introduce bias. Although the same
search space and optimization strategy are used for all models,
different models have varying sensitivity to hyperparameters.
The CL-ViME model has been thoroughly tuned, but some
baselines may not reach their optimal performance.
External validity. Threats to external validity concern the
generalizability of the results. The three datasets used (ISCXVPN, CICIoT2023, CTU-Malware) cover diverse network
environments and encryption protocols. However, they do not
represent all possible encrypted traffic scenarios. Therefore,
the results may not fully capture nuances of emerging encryption techniques or novel attack vectors.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
To address the challenges of incomplete feature representation and limited labeled data in encrypted traffic classification,
this paper proposes CL-ViME, a self-supervised encrypted
traffic classification model built upon three key technical
components. First, we introduce a packet-temporal matrix
that fuses fine-grained packet headers with macroscopic flowlevel temporal patterns, forming a more comprehensive and
informative representation of encrypted traffic. Second, we
design a Vertical ViT-MoE architecture tailored to traffic structure. It uses vertical patching to preserve packet sequencing
and employs dynamic expert routing to select the most suitable expert subnetworks, thereby improving representational
quality and computational efficiency. Third, we develop a dualgranularity contrastive pretraining scheme that removes the
need for manual labels. It constructs complementary packetlevel and flow-level views of the same traffic sample and aligns
their representations, enabling the model to learn essential
and invariant features in an unsupervised manner. These
components jointly enhance the robustness and generalization
capability of CL-ViME.
Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed CL-ViME model. Results on three public
encrypted traffic datasets show that CL-ViME consistently
surpasses state-of-the-art models. In particular, it maintains
strong robustness and generalization under class imbalance
in real-world malware traffic, highlighting its potential for
deployment in complex network environments. However,
the CL-ViME model suffers from high computational cost
and limited robustness to distribution shifts introduced by
emerging encryption protocols. Future work should investigate
lightweight architectures to enhance efficiency and explore
incremental or continual learning mechanisms to improve
model’s adaptability to evolving traffic distributions.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538,
Sep./Oct. 2022.
[2] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May/Jun. 2025.

1433

[3] J. Zhao, X. Jing, Z. Yan, and W. Pedrycz, “Network traffic classification
for data fusion: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 72, pp. 22–47, Aug. 2021.
[4] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Security, 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[5] J. Chen, T. Lv, S. Cai, L. Song, and S. Yin, “A novel detection model for
abnormal network traffic based on bidirectional temporal convolutional
network,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 157, May 2023, Art. no. 107166.
[6] S. Cai, W. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Zhao, and S. Wang, “MTD-FRD:
Malicious traffic detection method based on feature representation
and conditional diffusion model,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 242,
Oct. 2025, Art. no. 104256.
[7] H. Zhang et al., “Revolutionizing encrypted traffic classification with
MH-net: A multi-view heterogeneous graph model,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 1048–1056.
[8] S. Dong, “Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for
network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 176, Aug. 2021,
Art. no. 114885.
[9] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Wei, D. Niu, and N. Fu, “Classify traffic
rather than flow: Versatile multi-flow encrypted traffic classification with
flow clustering,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1446–1466, Apr. 2024.
[10] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[11] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[12] Z. Song et al., “i2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[13] X. Qiu, G. Cheng, W. Zhu, D. Niu, and N. Fu, “Dual-channel interactive
graph transformer for traffic classification with message-aware flow
representation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 685–693.
[14] X. Yang, F. Tong, F. Jiang, and G. Cheng, “A lightweight and dynamic
open-set intrusion detection for Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 2930–2943, 2025.
[15] K. Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification
based on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
[16] X. Han et al., “Contramtd: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web
Conf., 2024, pp. 1680–1689.
[17] X. Lin et al., “CETP: A novel semi-supervised framework based on
contrastive pre-training for imbalanced encrypted traffic classification,”
Comput. Security, vol. 143, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103892.
[18] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
[19] X. Chen, L. Han, D. Zhan, and H. Ye, “MIETT: Multi-instance encrypted
traffic transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 15922–15929.
[20] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image
features for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun.
Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Aug. 2025.
[21] A. Finamore, C. Wang, J. Krolikowski, J. M. Navarro, F. Chen, and
D. Rossi, “Replication: Contrastive learning and data augmentation in
traffic classification using a flowpic input representation,” in Proc. ACM
Internet Meas. Conf., 2023, pp. 36–51.
[22] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
p. 5941, 2023.
[23] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[24] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations
(ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–22.
[25] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
[26] C. Riquelme et al., “Scaling vision with sparse mixture of experts,” in
Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 8583–8595.

1434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

[27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[28] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[29] A. V. D. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[30] “Mawi working group traffic archive,” 2013. [Online]. Available: http://
mawi.wide.ad.jp/mawi/
[31] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[32] “Stratosphere laboratory datasets,” 2015. Accessed: Mar. 13, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview
[33] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classification: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
[34] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427.
[35] J. B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
pp. 21271–21284.

Saihua Cai (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from China Agricultural University, China, in
2020. He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Communication
Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
He has published more than 100 papers in some
famous journals or conferences, including in IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE
M ANAGEMENT, ACM Transactions on Privacy and
Security, TRel, IST, Computers & Security, and
ASE. His major research interests include intrusion
detection and encrypted traffic classification. He is a member of the ACM,
and a Senior Member of the China Computer Federation.

Lizhou Chen received the B.E. degree in intelligent
science and technology from Jiangsu University in
2024, where he is currently pursuing the master’s
degree in computer technology. His research interest
includes encrypted traffic classification and contrastive learning.

Jinfu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently a Full
Professor with the School of Computer Science and
Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. He has published more than
100 papers in some famous journals or conferences, including in TRel, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT , ACM
Transactions on Privacy and Security, Journal of
Systems and Software, NDSS, ISSTA, and ASE. His major research interests
include software testing, software security, and intrusion detection. He is a
member of the ACM, and a Distinguished Member of the China Computer
Federation.

Shengran Wang received the master’s degree
in software engineering from Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China, in 2023, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science. He has
published more than 20 papers in some famous journals and conferences. His research interests include
Android malware detection, intrusion detection, and
Fuzzing.

Guofeng Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in agricultural engineering from China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He
is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Information Science and Technology, Taishan
University, Shandong, China. He has published more
than 20 papers in journals or conferences. His major
research interests include IoT security, blockchain
security, and data security. He is a member of the
China Computer Federation.