IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

5500214

CloudTrie: An Uncertainty-Quantified Anomaly
Detection Framework for Prefix Hijacking
With Multisource Fusion
Zheng Wu , Shiyu Liu , Ruixi Xie , Ming Gao , Member, IEEE, Zhan Wu , Lei Han ,
Xiaobai Chen , Member, IEEE, and Fu Xiao , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial function for Border
Gateway Protocol (BGP) security, providing the ability to trigger
alarms and locate where the anomalies occur. Most recently,
BGP prefix hijacking incidents have proliferated significantly.
However, the existing detection methods exhibit limited accuracy,
primarily because the BGP routing data they operate on is
inherently uncertain. To address this challenge, we propose
CloudTrie, an uncertainty-aware framework for online prefix
hijacking detection. First, we quantify data uncertainty through
a comprehensive measurement study of three BGP-related data
sources (BGP RIB, RPKI, and IRR), assessing incompleteness,
temporal variability, and multiple origin AS (MOAS) conflicts.
Building on this, we leverage cloud modeling theory to construct
spatio-temporal prefix/origin AS (P/O) cloud drops for dynamic
uncertainty scoring of P/O pairs. Finally, we propose an online
Trie-based framework to achieve instantaneous prefix hijack
identification and online update. Experiments demonstrate that
CloudTrie processes 117 thousand route updates per second with
low memory overhead (34.3MB) and detects all of the anomaly
events with less false alarms than the state-of-the-art. These
results validate CloudTrie as a robust foundation for accurate,
real-time BGP anomaly detection (AD).
Index Terms—Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), cloud model
theory, prefix hijacking, Trie, uncertainty measurement.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection (AD) is an imperative function
for prolonged monitoring of complex systems containing large volumes of data. In most complex scenarios, the
obtained data generally contains amounts of noise, leading
to uncertainty in these data. This data uncertainty challenge

Received 1 September 2025; revised 15 December 2025; accepted
31 December 2025. Date of publication 23 January 2026; date of current
version 9 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the Jiangsu
Provincial Key Research and Development Program under Grant BG2024028;
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62402234, Grant 62427809, and Grant 62102196; and in part by the Natural
Science Research Start-up Foundation of Recruiting Talents of Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications under Grant NY223168 and
Grant NY224030. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was
Dr. Takuma Watanabe. (Corresponding author: Fu Xiao.)
Zheng Wu, Shiyu Liu, Ruixi Xie, Ming Gao, Lei Han, Xiaobai
Chen, and Fu Xiao are with the School of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210003, China
(e-mail: zwu@njupt.edu.cn; 992317443@qq.com; 2644177897@qq.com;
gaomingppm@njupt.edu.cn; hanlei@njupt.edu.cn; chenxb86@njupt.edu.cn;
xiaof@njupt.edu.cn).
Zhan Wu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210023, China (e-mail:
101300254@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2026.3657531

is particularly pronounced in the domain of Border Gateway
Protocol (BGP) AD. The BGP is the core routing protocol of
the Internet, responsible for exchanging routing information on
reachability between autonomous systems (ASes). However,
BGP was not designed with security mechanisms from its
inception [1], leading to frequent anomalies that are characterized by rapid propagation and wide-ranging impact. In
recent decades, as Internet infrastructure has become increasingly complex and network scale continues to expand, the
occurrence frequency of inter-domain routing anomalies has
been significantly rising [2], leading to significant negative
consequences for the global network, even causing severe
economic losses and social panic [3]. Among BGP anomalies,
prefix hijacking accounts for the most significant proportion,
at approximately 96.48%.1 Therefore, the defense of prefix
hijacking has become a critical issue for ensuring the secure
and stable operation of the Internet’s infrastructure.
In this context, Internet service providers (ISPs) generally
deploy the monitoring instrument for detecting BGP hijacking
anomalies in time [4]. The AD methods leverage passively or
actively acquired routing data to monitor abnormal behaviors.
Once the anomaly occurs and is detected, network operators
will take measures to mitigate the negative impact of anomalies. Thus, to enable operators to respond promptly, the most
advanced instruments for BGP AD need to accurately monitor
BGP behaviors in real time.
The existing AD methods can be classified into information
repository-based, active probing-based, and machine learningbased approaches. The active probing-based methods detect
connectivity between ASes through active probing instruments
like Ping and Tracert commands [5]. However, as the BGP
topology becomes increasingly complex and large, the overhead of these methods grows substantially, making real-time,
comprehensive monitoring of the BGP network infeasible.
Machine learning-based methods perform detection by extracting temporal or spatial features to analyze patterns of abnormal
behavior [6]. Although these methods possess good generalization performance and inference capabilities, they rely on
large volumes of accurate data labels and suffer from poor
interpretability [7]. Information repository-based AD methods
depend on constructing a complete and accurate mapping
between prefixes and their origin ASes, and then performing
1 https://bgpwatch.cgtf.net/#/

1557-9662 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

detection via a lookup-and-match process. This type of method
offers strong real-time performance and facilitates root-cause
analysis [8]. Nevertheless, such methods heavily depend on
the accuracy of the input data; otherwise, the reliability of
detection cannot be ensured [9].
Unfortunately, obtaining accurate and complete data in the
large-scale BGP network remains a significant challenge due
to several inherent sources of uncertainty. First, owing to the
distributed nature of the infrastructure and the partial view
provided by BGP collectors, the collected routing data is often
inadequate for comprehensive measurement. Furthermore, the
lack of a robust route authentication renders BGP messages
susceptible to erroneous or malicious announcements [10].
Finally, BGP data is inherently dynamic and time-varying;
routing information can quickly become stale, reducing the
reliability of historical data for current detection tasks. These
factors collectively introduce substantial uncertainty into the
observed data, which in turn severely degrades the accuracy
and robustness of existing AD methods [11].
Therefore, a core challenge in achieving accurate prefix
hijacking detection lies in extracting sufficiently accurate data
from vast, uncertain BGP routing data. It is crucial to build
an AD system that is robust to uncertain data and capable of
providing explainable results. To address this challenge, we
propose CloudTrie, an uncertainty-aware AD instrumentation,
fusing multiple data sources designed to identify prefix hijacking under the uncertain BGP data robustly.
The contributions are highlighted as follows.
1) Comprehensive uncertainty measurement on BGPrelated data: To assess the extent of uncertainty in
BGP data, we conduct a comprehensive measurement
study on three key BGP-related routing datasets, focusing on three primary sources of uncertainty: data
incompleteness, temporal variability, and the multiorigin AS (MOAS) phenomenon. Our results reveal that
each dataset exhibits distinct characteristics and varying
degrees of uncertainty, highlighting the complexity and
challenges in achieving reliable BGP monitoring and
analysis.
2) Real-time uncertainty assessment for BGP routes: To
evaluate each P/O pair, we design an online route
credibility assessment method based on a cloud model.
First, this method extracts knowledge considering 3-D,
i.e., time, space, and data source, based on a constructed
observation matrix. Then, we structure a cloud model
to assess and filter each route in real-time to convert
uncertain routing data into data quantified with a degree
of uncertainty.
3) Temporal-adaptive detection framework: To address the
temporal variability of BGP routing data, we propose
an update framework. Specifically, we construct two
Tries, namely, ModelTrie and DetectTrie, responsible for
model construction and online detection, respectively.
Additionally, we apply two dedicated update mechanisms, i.e., offline and online mechanism so as to
overcome the time-varying nature of BGP routing data.
Our CloudTrie system includes comprehensive instrumentation designed to accurately and effectively detect BGP prefix

Fig. 1. Attack models of BGP hijacking. (a) Prefix hijacking. (b) Sub-prefix
hijacking.

hijacking anomalies. We conduct extensive experiments on
two real-world datasets, namely, closed and open datasets, to
evaluate CloudTrie’s performance in terms of robustness, efficiency, and accuracy. Compared to state-of-the-art baselines,
CloudTrie achieves an average throughput of 117 thousand
route update messages per second while maintaining low
memory consumption (under 34.3MB). Crucially, it detects all
of the anomaly events with less false alarms, outperforming
the state-of-the-art methods. CloudTrie’s source code and the
labeled dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/
185399144/cloudtrie.git
The remaining sections of this article are organized as
follows. Section II introduces the preliminary and the problem
we research. Section III measures the uncertainty in BGPrelated data. Section IV presents the design of our detection
system CloudTrie. In Section V, we make experiments to
compare our method with the state-of-the-art. Section VI
reviews the related work. Section VII concludes this article
with a summary.
II. P RELIMINARY AND P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
In this section, we first introduce the attack mechanism of
prefix hijack. Next, we introduce three BGP-related datasets,
which are used to construct CloudTrie.
A. Prefix Hijack Model
Based on the types of hijacked prefixes, these attacks can be
further classified into prefix hijacking and sub-prefix hijacking
[12]. Prefix hijacking occurs when an attacker forges an
announcement for a prefix that is legitimately originated by
another AS. The attacker then propagates this false information
through BGP, causing other ASes on the Internet to mistakenly
believe that the attacker’s path is the best route to that prefix.
As a result, traffic intended for the legitimate prefix can be
intercepted or manipulated by the attacker, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a).
Sub-prefix hijacking occurs when an attacker announces a
more specific prefix than the legitimate one, thereby exploiting the longest prefix match rule in BGP routing to alter

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

5500214

the direction of traffic. For sub-prefix hijack, as shown in
Fig. 1(b), a legitimate origin, AS10, announces the IP prefix
192.10.128.0/22, while an attacker, AS40, announces a more
specific prefix, 192.10.128.0/24. According to the longest
prefix match principle in the BGP route selection policy, BGP
routers will select the path to the more specific sub-prefix.
Consequently, traffic from AS20 and AS30 originally destined
for AS10 is hijacked by AS40.
B. BGP-Related Routing Data
We introduce the BGP-related data, including three data
sources, i.e., BGP routing information base (RIB), resource
public key infrastructure (RPKI), and Internet routing registry
(IRR). These three data sources are described in detail as
below.
BGP RIB is a routing information base of BGP collectors,
containing BGP routing information learned from neighbors
[13]. This RIB data contains the global routing information;
therefore, the data volume is vast. Although numerous BGP
data collectors have been deployed worldwide, the collected
data is incomplete and contains some misconfigured and
malicious data [9].
Among the many collection points, this article selects the
RRC00 for observation because it obtains a relatively complete
routing table from ISPs and has a large number of peering
neighbors [14].
RPKI is a BGP security extension developed by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF). This technique is based on
public key infrastructure (PKI) technology and includes a
cryptographic infrastructure for authenticating IP prefixes and
ASes. A route origin authorization (ROA) record is a digital
object issued by a prefix holder to authorize and validate the
routing origin of an IP address prefix. It declares that a specific
AS is the legitimate origin for its prefix, which helps prevent
attacks such as prefix hijacking [15].
The IRR is a system composed of a set of distributed
databases publicly used to store routing policies, prefixes, and
AS association information submitted by network operators.
The system is initially established to assist with the configuration of BGP routing policies [16].
C. Problem Statement
In the following, we give an intuitive example for stating
the problem of the existing methods and why our method
works. Upon receiving an update message, operators typically
consult an information repository that functions similar to an
allowlist to determine whether the message is malicious. The
method first extracts the P/O pair from the message and checks
it against the entries in the repository. If a match is found
for both the prefix and the corresponding AS number (ASN),
the method recognizes the update as benign. However, if the
ASN corresponding to the prefix does not match the one in
the repository, an alarm will be triggered. Furthermore, if the
prefix is not found in the information repository, the method
cannot determine whether the message is malicious.
Therefore, the accuracy of the information repository is
crucial for detecting prefix hijacking. However, the repository

Fig. 2. Examples for comparison of the traditional method and our method.
(a) Data missing. (b) Data inaccuracy. (c) Our method.
TABLE I
S UMMARY OF THE U SED DATASET IN M EASUREMENT

collected from the BGP vantage points tends to be incomplete
and inaccurate, which hurts the accuracy of AD.
In Fig. 2(a), if the information repository does not contain
the P/O pair h90.84.10.0/24, 14 713i due to the incomplete
data, the operator cannot match this item, and tends to be
viewed as a potential anomaly. In Fig. 2(b), given a vicious
update message, if the information repository contains an error
record, i.e., h90.84.10.0/24, 14 713i, operator can match this
P/O pair with the information repository and thus mistakenly
recognize it as correct, leading to a missing alarm.
Thus, we make the two following efforts to overcome data
uncertainty. To construct a relatively comprehensive information repository, we attempt to collect most of the BGP-related
data, encompassing not only the BGP RIB but also the
sources of IRR and RPKI. Besides, to determine which P/O
pairs are accurate, we compute the uncertain degree for each
pair, shown in Fig. 2(c). The P/O pair h90.84.10.0/24, 14713i
has a lower uncertain degree than h90.84.10.0/24, 12345i,
suggesting that h90.84.10.0/24, 14713i is more credible, thus
our method applies h90.84.10.0/24, 14713i to make a match,
finally obtaining the true alarm. In this way, the operator
can not only build a more comprehensive repository, but also
further evaluate confidence in each detection result according
to the computed uncertain degree.
III. U NCERTAINTY M EASUREMENT OF BGP ROUTING
DATA
In this section, we try to gain insight into the BGP uncertainty and measure the uncertainty of three BGP sources,
i.e., BGP RIB, IRR, and RPKI. During the measurement
process, we collected the data from the data sources during the
period between January 2024 and December 2024, as shown
in Table I.

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

Fig. 3. Incomplete measurement on the BGP-related data.

Fig. 4. Temporal variability of BGP prefixes.

A. Data Incompleteness
Given the same observation period, no single data source
fully covers all global prefixes [17], named data incompleteness in this article. The incompleteness is mainly due to the
locally deployed infrastructure for data collection. To quantify
the extent of this incompleteness, we first collect the P/O pair
set of each data source and then take the union of these sets
to form the universal set. For each source, we calculate the
proportion of its P/O pairs relative to this universal set. As
shown in Fig. 3, RIB data covers the largest fraction of P/O
pairs, followed by RPKI; IRR data provides the least coverage.
Nevertheless, none of the three sources achieves complete
coverage. This inherent data incompleteness limits the ability
of existing detection methods to learn comprehensive routing
patterns, thereby degrading their effectiveness.

Fig. 5. Distribution of MOAS with the length of the prefixes.

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF THE T HREE DATA S OURCES C HARACTERISTICS

B. Temporal Variability
For a given data source, routing information changes over
time. The global inter-domain routing system is a distributed
network where routing policy updates from different ASes
and changes in network topology cause P/O pair relationships
to exhibit significant temporal variability. In this article, we
randomly selected 200 IP prefixes from BGP route update
tables and tracked their announcement and withdrawal messages for one year, as shown in Fig. 4. The results suggest that
different prefixes exhibit distinct patterns of change. Frequent
BGP prefix announcements and withdrawals over time reflect
significant volatility in inter-domain routing. This temporal
variability of P/O pairs presents a major challenge for prefix
hijacking detection. Therefore, the key lies in promptly adapting to dynamic routing changes and establishing a temporally
stable knowledge base of P/O relationships.
C. Multiple Origin AS
In the inter-domain routing network, a single prefix is
sometimes associated with multiple legitimate ASes, referred
to as MOAS. MOAS is typically due to multiple BGP route
announcements or path selections among different ASes. For
instance, some large ISPs may share the same prefix, or
an enterprise network may adopt various paths to enhance

redundancy and reliability, resulting in the same prefix having
multiple legitimate ASes. Thus, the detection method requires
identifying which MOAS is benign or not. The related research
[18] shows that the frequency and duration of MOAS events
are significantly diverse and exhibit different distributions at
various prefix lengths. As shown in Fig. 5, we analyze the
number of MOAS conflicts with the prefix length varying in
the BGP-related routing information. The analysis revealed
that over 10% of prefixes exhibit MOAS behavior. The distribution of MOAS with different prefix lengths is similar for
the three BGP sources. A large number of MOAS events
are concentrated on prefixes of length 24, and the IRR data
comprises more MOAS conflicts.
Based on the measurement results above, we summarize
the characteristics of the three data sources in Table II. It can
be observed that BGP data contains the richest information
on P/O pairs, but its accuracy is limited. In contrast, RPKI
data, while sparser in volume, offers significantly higher data
quality.

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

5500214

Fig. 6. Framework of CloudTrie, which comprises three modules, i.e., data collection and preprocessing, model construction, and detection and location.

TABLE III
R ELATED F IELD I NSERTED I NTO M ODEL T RIE

IV. D ESIGN OF C LOUD T RIE
To address the uncertainty in BGP routing data, this article
designs a BGP AD method for uncertain data, with the framework illustrated in Fig. 6. We first conduct data extraction and
preprocessing. Next, we extract the features of P/O pairs from
three aspects, i.e., time, space, and data source. Exploiting this
knowledge, we then construct a cloud model [19] for each
pair to yield an uncertainty degree. Based on the uncertainty
degree, the data is then filtered to build a set of trusted
P/O mappings. Finally, the process concludes with AD and
result evaluation. To overcome the temporal variability of
BGP routing data, these mappings are updated automatically,
ultimately enabling online detection.
A. Data Collection and Preprocessing
The collected raw data are generally compressed binary
files. Therefore, we first need to preprocess the data, comprising data decompression parse to ensure the data is structured.
To reduce the distracting information existing in the parsed
data, we clean up the BGP routes before model construction.
First, the private ASNs appearing in the AS path are removed.
Second, the aggregated AS paths are decomposed into multiple
corresponding paths. Furthermore, we also remove the repetitive ASes on AS paths resulting from AS path prepending.
Subsequently, we extract the key information from the specific
field, including the IP prefix, path information, timestamp,
and data source, where their particular meanings are listed
in Table III.
B. Feature Extraction for P/O Pairs
It is crucial to extract spatio-temporally stable features
that are robust to scene variations for the following model

construction and AD. The related work has demonstrated
that anomalous BGP data often exhibits significant temporal
transience and spatial locality [3]. Therefore, to the best of
our knowledge, we extract features of P/O pairs from the
perspectives of time, space, and data source in advance to
construct a spatial–temporal stability assessment model for
these pairs. We introduce the definitions of the three proposed
feature categories as follows.
Definition 1: To calculate the features of P/O pairs, we
define the observation matrix O ∈ Nc×d as follows:
2
3
o11 · · · o1d
6
.. 7
..
O = 4 ...
(1)
.
. 5
oc1

···

ocd

c×d

where oi j ∈ {0, 1} indicates that if observation point i observes
the target P/O pair during the jth time step, the value is 1;
otherwise, it is 0. We denote c as the number of observation
points and d as the length of the observation window. In
the following, we try to characterize the certainty of P/O
pairs from the perspectives of temporal persistence, spatial
consistency, and data sources.
1) Temporal Persistence: Temporal persistence represents
the duration for which an AS continuously announces a P/O
pair. The longer the temporal persistence, the more stable the
P/O pair is considered. Specifically, for a given P/O pair, the
calculation is performed using the temporal persistence vector
h ∈ {0, 1}1×d , which is defined as h = [h1 , h2 , . . . , hd ]. Here, the
element h j is calculated as: h j = max1≤i≤c oi j . This implies that
h j equals 1 if at least one observation point observes the pair
in the jth time step, and 0 otherwise. We use a weight vector
wt ∈ R1×d to represent the temporal weight coefficients within
the observation window. The detailed calculation method is as
follows:
h · wT
(2)
st = Pd t .
j=1 h j
Dividing by the denominator ensures that P/O pairs exhibiting
emerging stability are not assigned excessively low temporal
persistence scores due to the observation window size.
2) Spatial Consistency: Spatial consistency represents the
observed number of a P/O pair by the global vantage points.
The higher the frequency of observation, the more spatially
stable the P/O pair is considered. For a given P/O pair,
the calculation is performed using the spatial consistency

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

vector g ∈ Rc×1 . Here g is a column vector, where the ith
element represents the total number of observations for the ith
observation point across the entire time window. Specifically,
[g1 , g2 , . . . , gc ]T , where each element
Pgi is the sum of the ith
row of the observation matrix: gi = dj=1 oi j . We use a spatial
weight vector wr ∈ Rc×1 to represent the observation point
weights across different observation points
p
(3)
sr = gT · wr .
3) Data Source: For each P/O pair, we also record its
observed source. If one P/O pair can be followed by multiple
data sources simultaneously, it indicates that the existence of
the P/O pair is more stable and confident. We equip each P/O
pair with a data source vector k ∈ N1×3 . Here, ki ∈ {0, 1}
indicates membership in a particular dataset (where i = 1, 2,
and 3 correspond to RPKI, IRR, and BGP RIB, respectively).
If ki = 1, it denotes the specific source views the P/O pair,
while ki = 0 denotes absence. The weight vector wm ∈ R1×3
represents the degree of data reliability. Weights are assigned
using a decay function based on the data quality of each
source. The feature from the data source can be estimated
as follows:
sm = k · wTm .
(4)
Based on the above three considerations, a quantitative
uncertain degree of the spatio-temporal stability of P/O pairs
can be estimated as follows.
C. P/O Cloud Model
The cloud model theory [19] is a mathematical tool that
integrates probability theory and fuzzy mathematics to assess
randomness and fuzziness. In this article, we model the randomness and fuzziness in the network using the cloud model
to compute the uncertainty degree of each P/O pair.
Let a qualitative concept C be a concept on a quantitative
universe of discourse U. If x ∈ U is a random realization of
the concept C, then the certainty degree of x with respect to
C, µ(x) ∈ [0, 1], is a random number with a stable distribution:
µ(x) : U → [0, 1] ∀x ∈ U. The distribution of x on the
universe U is defined as a cloud model and x represents a
cloud drop belonging to the universe U. Deriving the core
parameters from cloud drops x ∈ U constitutes the cloud
construction process. Conversely, determining the certainty
degree of a cloud drop via the cloud model is referred to
as the cloud reasoning process. The entire cloud process
integrates probability theory and fuzzy set theory, thereby
effectively characterizing the fuzziness and randomness of the
concept [20].
Definition 2: A P/O cloud is a qualitative concept for
the stability of a P/O pair represented by a cloud model,
and it is an extension of a 1-D normal cloud. The cloud
model is represented by several known normal cloud drops
x̄i = (sti , sri , sm
i ), where the three elements of the vector
x̄i , respectively, represent the temporal persistence, spatial
consistency, and data source feature components of the cloud
drop x̄i .
For the P/O pair feature cloud, each cloud model comprises three components, represented as C((Ext , Exr , Exm ),

(Ent , Enr , Enm ), (Het , Her , Hem )). The construction process is
detailed below.
1) Expectation: Expectation (Ex) is the most typical sample value in the quantification of a qualitative concept. For a
t
r m
given set with a cloud drops, {(st1 , sr1 , sm
1 ), . . . , (sa , sa , sa )}, the
estimate value of the expectation Ext is calculated as follows:
Êxt = S̄ t

(5)

where S̄ t represents the mean of st , calculated as follows:
a

S̄ t =

1X t
si .
a

(6)

i=1

The calculation for the spatial consistency and data source
feature components, S̄ r and S̄ m , is similar to (6).
2) Entropy: Entropy (En) is determined by the randomness
and fuzziness of a qualitative concept. Thus, it is used to
measure the degree of dispersion of all cloud drops and also
reflects the range of values that the cloud drops accepted by
the concept can take. For the P/O pair cloud with a drops, we
estimate the value of Ent as follows:
r
a

π 1X t
si − S̄ t .
(7)
×
Ênt =
2 a
i=1

3) Hyper-Entropy: Hyper-entropy (He) is used to measure the uncertainty of entropy and describes the correlation
between fuzziness and randomness. Based on this concept, the
estimated hyper-entropy value for each feature component can
be calculated separately. The estimated hyper-entropy for the
temporal persistence component is
q
ˆ 2t
ˆ
Het = B2t − En
(8)
where Bt is thePsample variance of feature component t, and
B2t = 1/(a − 1) ai=1 (sti − S̄ t )2 .
In the cloud model theory, a multidimensional cloud model
is constructed based on P/O drops from three perspectives:
temporal persistence, spatial consistency, and data source reliability; this procedure is referred to as the cloud construction
process. Furthermore, the certainty degree of a P/O pair can be
computed using the membership degree of the corresponding
cloud drop within the established cloud model. Consequently,
in this article, the uncertainty of a P/O pair is defined as
follows.
Definition 3: Given the universe of discourse U = { x̄i | x̄i =
(sti , sri , sm
i ), i ∈ N}, the certainty degree for a cloud drop x̄i with
respect to the feature cloud C is calculated as follows:
2
3
(st −Ext )2
(sr −Exr )2
(sm −Exm )2
− i 0 2
− i 0 2
− i 0 2
e 2(Enr )
e 2(Enm ) 5 · WT .
(9)
ŷi = 4e 2(Ent )
In (9), W ∈ R1×3 is the weight vector for the three
dimensions. En0t represents a normally distributed random variable generated from a normal distribution N(Ent , He2t ), where
En0r and En0m are defined analogously. Each exponential term
effectively serves as a fuzzy membership function, mapping
the feature deviation to a certainty score ŷi ∈ [0, 1]. This
metric quantifies the similarity between the observation and

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

In the following description, the prefix q and origin ASN
ao represent a P/O pair stored in the DetectTrie, while the
route prefix and origin ASN from the update message are r
and au , respectively. In accordance with the RFC 6811 [21],
the following two operations are defined.
Cover(q, r): If the length of prefix q is less than or equal to
the length of route prefix r, and the prefix q and the address of
route prefix r are identical for all bits specified by the length of
prefix q, then the prefix r is said to be covered by the prefix q.
Match(q, r): A match occurs when route prefix r is covered
by prefix q, the length of route prefix r is less than or equal
to the maximum length specified for prefix q, and the route
origin ASN is equal to the origin AS in the P/O pair. This
can be expressed by the following equation:

Fig. 7. Framework of AD and update mechanism.

the “normal state cloud,” encapsulating the transformation
from quantitative values to qualitative concepts.
Furthermore, the degree of uncertainty for P/O pair i,
denoted as ûi , is estimated as follows:
ûi = 1 − ŷi .

5500214

(10)

If the calculated probability ûi for a P/O pair xi exceeds
a certain threshold, thpro , it denotes that the pair is unstable.
This P/O pair is incorrect when used in AD with a confidence
of ûi . Therefore, we remove it and exclude it from the AD.
D. AD and Model Update
We use the Trie data structure to store the related data and
carry out AD. Two Tries are organized to detect anomalies
and model update, i.e., ModelTrie and DetectTrie. ModelTrie
is used to store IP prefixes as keys, and at the corresponding
nodes, it also stores the origin AS, feature vector, and the
calculated uncertain degree. DetectTrie stores P/O pairs that
have a high degree of certainty for online detection. The two
trees have different roles in the proposed method and work
collaboratively to improve detection efficiency and accuracy,
with the specific framework shown in Fig. 7.
ModelTrie: This trie stores well-extracted feature vectors to
construct a cloud model and evaluates the uncertainty degree,
i.e., ûi , for all prefixes. When a new P/O pair appears, the
system evaluates its ûi in real-time within the ModelTrie based
on the cloud model.
DetectTrie: We use this trie for online AD. It stores P/O
pairs with an uncertainty degree, i.e., ûi below a certain
threshold. DetectTrie is used to determine whether a prefix
corresponds to a legitimate route rapidly and to provide an
interpretable report upon AD.
1) Anomaly Detection: In the detection phase, for each
incoming route update, the system utilizes prefix covering
and matching rules to evaluate the relationship between the
incoming route and the legitimate prefixes stored in the
DetectTrie. It verifies whether the incoming prefix is legitimate
and determines if it matches a legitimate ASN. If a mismatch
is found, CloudTrie marks this update message as an anomaly
and triggers further alerts, as well as generates an anomaly
report. Additionally, the uncertainty degree of the P/O pair, û,
is used to represent the level of uncertainty in the AD.

Match (q, r) = Cover (q, r) ∧ Cover (r, q) ∧ (ao == au ) . (11)
The online AD is carried out by the following process.
Valid: A prefix q is considered valid if and only if it
conforms to the known legitimate routes (via Cover(·) and
Match(·) conditions). This can be expressed by the formula
Valid (q) = Match (q, r) .

(12)

Invalid: If a prefix does not conform to any legitimate
routing rule (i.e., it is covered or mismatched), it will be
considered invalid and illegitimate. When route prefix r covers
prefix q, and prefix q covers route prefix r, but the ASN is not
equal to ao , and the match fails, it is considered a potential
prefix hijacking incident. This process can be expressed by the
formula
Hijack (q) = Cover (q, r) ∧ Cover (r, q) ∧ ¬Match (q, r) . (13)
When prefix q covers route prefix r, meaning route prefix
r is more specific than prefix q, and the announced ASN is
not equal to the origin AS, it is considered a potential subprefix hijacking incident. Sub-prefix hijacking is defined as a
malicious attacker carrying out route hijacking by constructing
the most specific BGP route message. It can be formalized as
Sub Hijack (q) = Cover (q, r) ∧ ¬Match (q, r) .

(14)

The membership degree ŷq of the P/O pair is used as the
certainty level for AD.
Not Found: When the announced prefix is not represented
in the current decision tree, no matching route is found. This
can be expressed by the formula
NotFound (q) = ¬Cover (q, r) .

(15)

This situation indicates that the prefix is newly emerged and
has not appeared in any data sources (RIB table, RPKI, and
IRR). Therefore, the prefix is marked as pending verification.
2) Offline Update: It is used to update ModelTrie by continuously extracting features related to temporal persistence,
spatial consistency, and data sources from streaming BGP
routing information. Update the cloud model and ModelTrie
according to the update frequency of routing data (IRR, RPKI,
and BGP RIB).

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

3) Online Update: It is used to update DetectTrie. In
dynamic network environments, the mapping relationships of
P/O pairs change dynamically. To ensure the accuracy of
P/O pairs within the DetectTrie and prevent overly frequent
updates, we apply lazy update mechanism, and set a threshold
thupdate designed as follows: when the number of newly added
P/O pairs exceeds a certain threshold thupdate (i.e., |{ri | ri .y >
thpro }| > thupdate ), the proposed method automatically updates
the DetectTrie based on the ModelTrie.
Through these update mechanisms, the ModelTrie and
DetectTrie can cooperate continuously to verify the prefix
and update the model, thereby enhancing the real-time performance and accuracy of detection.

TABLE IV
D ESCRIPTIONS OF C LOSED DATASET

E. Complexity Analysis
The complexity of CloudTrie primarily consists of two
parts: model construction and AD, which are analyzed separately below.
Model construction: Primarily involves data preprocessing,
feature extraction, and calculating key cloud model parameters. For data preprocessing, the raw routing data (RIB, RPKI,
and IRR) undergoes an initial preparation phase, which has
a time complexity of O(M), where M represents the total
number of entries in the original dataset. Feature extraction
breaks down as follows: temporal persistence calculation takes
O(1) for a single computation, leading to an overall O(M)
complexity when iterating through all M P/O pairs; spatial consistency calculation requires traversing C observation
points for each computation, resulting in an O(C) complexity
per calculation and an overall O(M · C) for all M P/O pairs;
data source calculation is constant time, O(1), per computation,
summing up to O(M) for all P/O pairs. Finally, for cloud
model calculation (forward cloud transformation), the normal
cloud parameters (Ex, En, He) are computed for each of the
three feature components (temporal, spatial, and membership
degree) of every P/O pair. Each feature’s parameter calculation
has a complexity of O(M), leading to an overall complexity
of O(3M), which simplifies to O(M).
Anomaly detection: This process primarily involves the
operation of node insertion and searching in Trie. Insertion and
search operations for each IP prefix have a time complexity
of O(L), where L is the prefix length (L ≤ 32 for IPv4).
Searching through either the ModelTrie or DetectTrie has a
time complexity of O(L).
Update mechanism: When the dynamic update threshold
is triggered, only local adjustments to the Trie structure are
required, resulting in a time complexity of O(P × L), where P
denotes the number of prefixes.
V. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
In this section, we carry out extensive experiments to validate our method compared with the state-of-the-art methods.
The experimental results suggest that CloudTrie can detect an
average of 117,647 route update messages per second while
maintaining low memory usage. In addition, CloudTrie can
detect all of events in the dataset, outperforming the other
methods.

A. Datasets Description
We used multisource datasets, including RPKI, IRR, and
RIB tables, to carry out the experiment. For the RIB and
BGP Updates, we selected the representative collection point
RRC00 from RIPE RIS. We employed the BGPdump tool to
parse the MRT-formatted files and extract key fields, including
Prefix, AS-PATH, and Peer. For the IRR data, we extracted autnum and route objects from the public databases of the five
Regional Internet Registries (RIPE, APNIC, ARIN, LACNIC,
and AFRINIC) to construct P/O pairs. For the RPKI data,
we utilized historical archives from RPKIviews to obtain
validated ROA objects, serving as the trusted routing baseline.
Subsequently, the prefixes from these three data sources were
unified into a binary format and inserted into trie structure
using a sliding window mechanism. Within this structure, each
AS node stores a P/O observation matrix along with data
source indicators. The experimental data in Sections V-E, V-F,
and V-G were tested using data from the second half of 2024
(from July to December), totally 3.1 TB. The closed experimental dataset in Section V-J contains 12 prefix hijacking
events, with specific details shown in Table IV. Each BGP
update message was labeled by matching the victim AS, prefix,
and attacker AS and the matched messages were annotated
as anomalous. This labeled dataset amounts to 220 GB,
comprising approximately 1.5 billion BGP update messages.
The open dataset in Section V-K was tested using data from
the second half of December 2024.
B. Implementation
The method and the baselines are implemented in Python
and run on a Linux operating system with an AMD EPYC
7K62, 48-core processor and 64GB of RAM. To ensure
fairness, both the proposed method and the compared methods
use the identical setup.
In real-world network management scenarios, the number
of alerts and false alarm are the most concerned metrics for
operations and maintenance personnel. Thus, we choose them
to evaluate the detection accuracy of each method.
We use the detection time, denoting the period from receiving an update message to producing a detection result, as the
evaluation metric in terms of time efficiency.

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

5500214

Fig. 8. Cloud model projection under any feature pairs.

TABLE V
D ESCRIPTION OF BASELINES

Fig. 9. Dynamic trend of cloud model parameters (2024).
TABLE VI
D ETAILS OF H YPERPARAMETERS BY THE G RID S EARCH

C. Baselines
In the experiments, we compare our method with the stateof-the-art methods, comprising Artemis, BEAM, BGPviewer,
and BGPvector, which can be used to detect prefix hijack.
The details of the baseline methods are listed in Table V. In
addition, the key hyperparameters of each method have been
optimized using grid search to maximize performance. The
details of these hyperparameters are listed in Table VI.
D. Key Questions
In the experiments, we will answer the following key
questions (KQs) about our method CloudTrie. KQ1: What does
this constructed P/O cloud model look like? KQ2: How do
the key parameters of CloudTrie change adaptively over time?
KQ3: Facing vicious injection, how robust is CloudTrie? KQ4:
How does Cloudtrie select the threshold in real deployment?
KQ5: How does CloudTrie behave in real-world anomaly
events? KQ6: How does CloudTrie behave in an open dataset
with a continuous data stream?
E. P/O Cloud Model (KQ1)
As shown in Fig. 8, we present the projection of cloud
model onto any two feature dimensions. Each cloud drop

represents the spatio-temporal features of a P/O pair, with its
color intensity indicating the degree of uncertainty of that P/O
drop (9). Fig. 8 shows a temporal expectation (Ext ) of 0.88 and
a spatial expectation (Exr ) of 1.5, suggesting that most of the
P/O pairs exhibit high spatio-temporal stability. The temporal
entropy (Ent ) is 0.18, while the spatial entropy (Enr ) is 1.8.
This indicates lower data volatility in the temporal dimension,
whereas the spatial dimension shows higher dispersion due
to variations in observation point distribution. Furthermore,
Het = 0.1 and Her = 0.8 denote good certainty for both
temporal and spatial parameters. The feature parameters across
these three dimensions vary, allowing the constructed cloud
model to analyze the stability of P/O pairs from different
perspectives.
F. Time Variation of CloudTrie (KQ2)
To validate the cloud model’s adaptability to dynamic
BGP routing changes, this experiment analyzes the temporal
evolution of the cloud model’s core parameters (Expectation
Ex, Entropy En, and Hyper-entropy He). This analysis aims
to evaluate the model’s dynamic adaptability. The experiment
employs a sliding time window mechanism (with a window
size of 5 days), and the results are presented in Fig. 9.
1) Expectation (Ex): The Ex value in the temporal persistence dimension remains stable throughout the observation period, with fluctuations significantly smaller than
those in traditional models. This indicates a high degree
of consistency in the temporal stability characteristics
of P/O pairs. Although the Ex value in the spatial
consistency dimension shows a periodic fluctuations
due to variations in observation point distribution, its

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

Fig. 10. Stability observation of P/O pairs.

standard deviation is still strictly maintained at a low
level. The results verify the multi-source data fusion
mechanism’s ability to suppress spatial noise.
2) Entropy (En): The En value across all 3-D remained
stable throughout the observation period, with the
most prominent decrease observed in the data source
dimension. This trend suggests that, over time, the
model progressively reduced inconsistencies among data
sources through dynamic adjustments, thereby enhancing the robustness of deterministic judgments.
3) Hyper-Entropy (He): The He values for all dimensions
were consistently constrained to an extremely low range.
Over time, significant changes were observed in both
spatial consistency and data source dimensions.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
effectively captures the intrinsic patterns of time-varying
routing data by continuously optimizing the statistical characteristics of the feature clouds, thereby ensuring the dynamic
adaptability of CloudTrie.
G. Robustness Analysis (KQ3)
To measure the robustness of the proposed method, we
observe three categories of P/O pairs (1000 samples for each
category): stable valid P/O pairs, newly added valid P/O pairs,
and invalid P/O pairs. Fig. 10 illustrates the variation of
the uncertainty degree ûi for these three categories during
December 2024. It can be observed that the uncertainty degree
of invalid P/O pairs consistently remains significantly higher
than that of both newly added valid P/O pairs and stable P/O
pairs. Meanwhile, the uncertainty of newly added valid P/O
pairs was slightly higher than that of stable P/O pairs initially,
before decreasing slightly and largely remaining stable below
0.2. It indicates that invalid P/O pairs consistently maintain a
high degree of uncertainty, while stable pairing relationships
maintain a low degree of uncertainty within their respective
periods, demonstrating good stability. Notably, this distinct
separation in uncertainty characteristics verifies the model’s
adversarial robustness against poisoning attacks. An intelligent adversary might attempt to manipulate the Cloud Model
parameters by injecting low-frequency, seemingly harmless
BGP updates that fall between the characteristics of Invalid
and New P/O pairs. However, since the Reverse Cloud Generator algorithm predominantly relies on high-quality cloud
drops generated from Stable Valid P/O pairs, these adversarial

Fig. 11.
lengths.

CloudTrie construction and detection speed with various prefix

Fig. 12. (a) P/O pairs confidence CCDF curve in January 2024. (b) Stabilize
the dynamic correlation between the number of P/O pairs and the uncertainty
threshold.

data points are statistically filtered out. Consequently, the
malicious updates fail to accumulate enough weight to shift the
Expectation, making it extremely difficult for attackers to alter
the model’s decision boundary. Fig. 11 shows the construction
and search times for the DetectTrie as prefix length varies.
This demonstrates that the proposed method is capable of
performing real-time AD across different prefix lengths.
The experimental results demonstrate that the cloud model
proposed in this article can effectively distinguish between
legitimate and illegitimate P/O pairs. Furthermore, it remains
robust to the negative influence of illegitimate P/O pairs.
H. Distribution of Uncertainty Degree (KQ4)
In this section, we collect all of the P/O pairs within an
observation window (the window size is set to five days)
and further calculate the distribution of uncertainty degree of
P/O pairs. Then, we collect the results and depict them in
Fig. 12. Additionally, we evaluated the cloud model within
a real-world network environment using a dataset of 300 k
P/O pairs, which incorporates nearly 3000 anomalous pairs
from the same temporal window. The evaluation outcomes are
illustrated in Fig. 13.
Fig. 12(a) displays the complementary cumulative distribution function (CCDF) of the uncertainty degree. When the
uncertainty degree is 0.4, the CCDF values of all curves drop
significantly. This indicates that if an uncertainty threshold of
0.4 is selected, 50% of the P/O pairs can be retained, and the
uncertainty degree of these P/O pairs is within 40%.
Fig. 12(b) uses RPKI’s P/O pairs as a baseline to show the
ratio of P/O pairs selected by CloudTrie to those in RPKI. As

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

5500214

Fig. 14. Comparison results of different AD methods under the open
environment.

Fig. 13. Performance of cloud model across varying threshold settings.

the threshold increases from 0 to 1, the number of stable P/O
pairs rises, then flattens out as the threshold approaches 1.
It can be observed that the P/O pairs chosen by CloudTrie
are two to ten times more numerous than RPKI’s P/O pairs. It
indicates that the selected P/O pairs can effectively supplement
the RPKI data source and provide an uncertainty degree for
each P/O pair.

sources and filter out stable P/O pairs, which in turn leads
to more accurate AD results. Instead, the other methods
neither detect all of events. This is because these methods
do not have sufficient accurate data to model their knowledge
system. Specifically, the method, like Artemis, which relies
on information repositories, may generate false alarms when
routing information fails to match, particularly if the repository
data is not comprehensive. Similarly, the machine learningbased approaches may experience a reduction in detection
accuracy and an increase in false alarms if their training data
is insufficient.

I. Sensitivity Analysis
The performance was assessed using false positive rate
(FPR) and false negative rate (FNR), as illustrated in Fig. 13.
The results demonstrate an inverse relationship: as the threshold is raised, the FPR diminishes, whereas the FNR increases.
This trend suggests that a higher threshold allows for the inclusion of more legitimate P/O pairs that exhibit some uncertainty.
Notably, at an uncertainty threshold of approximately 0.4,
almost all normal P/O pairs are added to Detecttrie. However,
this relaxation also permits a small number of anomalous P/O
pairs to enter the system as the threshold increases further.
Finally, we selected a threshold thpro of 0.4 for the experiment.
This setting ensures that 50% of the data is retained with a
high degree of certainty, while simultaneously maintaining low
FPR and FNR. Notably, the volume of this retained data is
nearly five times larger than that of the RPKI data. In this
field, minimizing the FNR is more crucial than reducing the
FPR. This means that network operators can take more time in
further anomaly mitigation rather than filtering out anomalies
after detecting anomalies.
In the real deployment, we apply a similar mechanism to
update the threshold when carrying out each time of online
detection.
J. Performance Comparison in Closed Datasets (KQ5)
In this section, we evaluate the accuracy of our proposed
method using a closed environment, comprising 12 labeled
real-world events. The experimental results are listed in
Table VII.
Compared to the other methods, CloudTrie demonstrates
its superior performance by detecting all of the anomaly
events with the lowest number of false positives. This efficacy
stems from its ability to integrate data from three distinct

K. Performance Comparison in Open Dataset (KQ6)
To further validate the robustness and adaptability of
CloudTrie in a real-world scenario, we performed AD with the
continuous BGP routing data during the period of the latter
half of December 2024. The comparative performance of our
proposed method against the baselines is presented in Fig. 14.
Fig. 14 reveals that CloudTrie exhibits a consistently low
number of alerts, with an average of 0.65 alerts per day and
a variance of 0.65, indicating stable performance. In contrast,
BGPvector and BGPviewer had the highest and second-highest
alert frequencies, respectively. BGPvector averaged 71.82
alerts per day with a variance of 399.97, while BGPviewer
averaged 5.88 alerts per day with a variance of 41.95.
We also record the memory and detection time for each
update message during their online detections, as shown in
Table VIII. We can observe that CloudTrie behaves best
in terms of detection time and takes up the second-lowest
memory usage. CloudTrie strategically utilizes only three
feature dimensions to construct the Cloud Model—despite the
potential for superior performance with higher dimensions—to
achieve an optimal balance between effectiveness and computational overhead. This stands in stark contrast to deep learning
baselines, which incur massive costs by requiring the extraction of 26-D features for every sliding window. Furthermore,
CloudTrie’s unsupervised paradigm fundamentally overcomes
the critical bottlenecks of supervised learning: specifically,
the scarcity of labeled BGP data, significant temporal discrepancies, and severe class imbalance. As highlighted by
BEAM, these data characteristics frequently drive deep models
toward gradient collapse and training failure, necessitating
extensive parameter optimization; in contrast, CloudTrie completely circumvents such risks. Finally, unlike the opaque

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

TABLE VII
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS U NDER THE C LOSED DATASET

TABLE VIII
M EMORY AND AVERAGE D ETECTION T IME IN O PEN T EST

(ûi = 0.195), indicating a high level of confidence in the
detection of this event.
VI. R ELATED W ORK
In recent years, researchers have extensively studied prefix
hijacking detection, broadly categorizing approaches into the
following three types.
A. Active Probing-Based Detection Methods [26], [27], [28]

Fig. 15. Analysis of Myanmar prefix hijacking incident.

“black-box” nature of deep learning models, CloudTrie
demonstrates superior interpretability.
L. Case Study
On February 5, 2021, Myanmar’s Ministry of Transport
and Communications issued a notice to the country’s mobile
network and ISPs, attempting to block Twitter and Instagram
traffic through prefix hijacking [25]. Specifically, AS136168
(Campana MYTHIC) began announcing 104.244.42.0/24 at
15:51 UTC on February 5, despite 104.244.42.0/24 legitimately belonging to AS13414 (Twitter). Our proposed method,
CloudTrie, successfully detect this event at the corresponding
time. The whole process is presented in Fig. 15.
In this event, we identify that two distinct ASes, namely
AS136168 and AS13414, were both announcing reachability to the same IP prefix, 104.244.42.0/24. Concurrently,
CloudTrie assigns a low uncertainty degree to this incident

This type of instrumentation works by injecting traffic into
the network and then analyzing its reception and stability to
determine the reachability of a specific IP address or prefix.
For instance, BGP Beacon [26] periodically announces and
withdraws special IP addresses. Beacon receivers monitor
these updates to gauge inter-domain network stability and
convergence. iSPY [27] actively sends probe traffic to target
prefixes to detect their reachability and path changes. If probe
results do not match the expected path, it might indicate a
prefix hijacking or other routing anomaly. To further reduce
FRRs, Schlamp et al. [28] utilize encrypted traffic based on
SSL/TLS to test the reachability of anomalous IP addresses.
By comparing public key changes before and after an anomalous event, they determine if it’s a benign occurrence. In order
to reduce the network overhead, Trinocular [29] applies an
adaptive probing mechanism. Although their good ability of
detecting anomalies, this type of methods aggravate the burden
of network.
B. Machine Learning-Based Methods [30], [31], [32]
They use algorithms to model network traffic or routing
data to identify anomalous patterns. For instance, Vanerio and
Casas [32] propose an ensemble learning-based AD framework that combines supervised and unsupervised learning.
This framework leverages multiple trained base classifiers
and integrates them using unsupervised learning, improving
detection accuracy and robustness [33]. The advantage of

WU et al.: CloudTrie: UNCERTAINTY-QUANTIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR PREFIX HIJACKING

these methods lies in their ability to learn complex network
behavior patterns automatically. However, machine learning
approaches typically require large amounts of labeled data for
training, and model performance heavily relies on data quality
and the effectiveness of feature engineering [34]. Additionally,
the “black-box” nature of deep learning models makes it
difficult to interpret detection results, thereby limiting their
trustworthiness in practical applications [35].
C. Information Repository-Based Methods [36]
These methods analyze BGP routing information according to an information repository comprising a number of
valid pieces of information. Artemis is widely used for
detecting prefix hijacking. The advantage lies in its strong
interpretability, offering clear logical explanations for each
detection decision. However, routing logic methods are highly
dependent on the reliability of the data. If the input data
sources are inaccurate or incomplete, detection results can be
significantly affected. Especially when dealing with partially
missing or inconsistent data, routing logic methods are prone
to generating false alarms.
Unlike other methods, this article proposes a novel BGP AD
approach fusing multiple uncertain information sources. Our
primary aim is to build a detection instrumentation system that
can collect more valid data from uncertain BGP data source to
achieve more accurate AD. Compared to the existing methods,
CloudTrie can detect hijacking behaviors more accurately,
while also providing interpretable results.
VII. C ONCLUSION
BGP route security is crucial for global Internet connectivity
[37]. This article introduces CloudTrie, an efficient AD method
that addresses the issue of uncertain information sources in
BGP prefix hijacking by integrating spatio-temporal stability
features and the cloud model. CloudTrie combines three BGP
related data sources—RPKI, IRR, and RIB—and leverages
a Trie tree for efficient storage and retrieval of prefix and
ASN information. It uses a cloud model to assess route
uncertainty degree in real time and incorporates an online
update mechanism to adapt to the time-varying nature of
BGP networks. The proposed method effectively handles the
uncertainty in routing data and provides a more accurate and
real-time AD. Experimental results demonstrate that CloudTrie
achieves robust, adaptive, and highly accurate AD. Notably,
CloudTrie provides uncertainty quantification for each generated alert. Our CloudTrie can be deployed by ISPs as
monitoring instruments that link with BGP collectors, enabling
network operators to more intelligently and quickly identify
potential abnormal behaviors. We believe CloudTrie lays the
foundation for more accurate and real-time AD in the global
BGP network.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

S. Murphy, BGP Security Vulnerabilities, document RFC 4272, IETF,
2006. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4272.html
Y. Chen et al., “Learning with semantics: Towards a semantics-aware
routing anomaly detection system,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 5143–5160.

[3]

5500214

J. Qiu, L. Gao, S. Ranjan, and A. Nucci, “Detecting bogus BGP
route information: Going beyond prefix hijacking,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Secur. Privacy Commun. Netw. Workshops (SecureComm), 2007,
pp. 381–390.
[4] M. Lad, D. Massey, D. Pei, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “PHAS: A
prefix hijack alert system,” in Proc. 15th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2006,
pp. 1–3.
[5] V. Roth and R. H. Katz, “Listen and whisper: Security mechanisms for
BGP,” in Proc. 1st Symp. Networked Syst. Design Implement. (NSDI),
Apr. 2004, pp. 1–14.
[6] Y. Zhai et al., “Bidirectional feature pyramid Siamese anomaly detection
network with cellular anomaly generation for container marking,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–17, 2025.
[7] J. Li, J. Cao, Z. Meng, R. Xie, and M. Xu, “RoLL: Real-time and
accurate route leak location with AS triplet features,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2023, pp. 5240–5246.
[8] B. Xu, S. Li, A. A. Razzaqi, Y. Guo, and L. Wang, “A novel
measurement information anomaly detection method for cooperative
localization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–18, 2021.
[9] T. Alfroy, T. Holterbach, T. Krenc, K. C. Claffy, and C. Pelsser, “The
next generation of BGP data collection platforms,” in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conf., Aug. 2024, pp. 794–812.
[10] O. Nordström and C. Dovrolis, “Beware of BGP attacks,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1–8, Apr. 2004.
[11] G. Baltra, T. Saluja, Y. Pradkin, and J. Heidemann, “Measuring partial
reachability in the public internet,” 2024, arXiv:2412.09711.
[12] B. Al-Musawi, P. Branch, and G. Armitage, “BGP anomaly detection
techniques: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 377–396, 1st Quart., 2017.
[13] R. Oliveira, D. Pei, W. Willinger, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “The (in)
completeness of the observed Internet AS-level structure,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 109–122, Feb. 2010.
[14] X. Zhao, D. Massey, M. Lad, and L. Zhang, “ON/OFF model: A
new tool to understand BGP update burst,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ.
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. USC/CS 04819, 2004.
[15] M. Lepinski and S. Kent, An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet
Routing, document RFC 6480, Feb. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://
www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6480
[16] M. Kang, W. Li, R. Van Rijswijk-Deij, T. Kwon, and T. Chung,
“IRRedicator: Pruning IRR with RPKI-valid BGP insights,” in Proc.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2024.
[17] E. Gregori, A. Improta, L. Lenzini, L. Rossi, and L. Sani, “On the
incompleteness of the AS-level graph: A novel methodology for BGP
route collector placement,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., Nov. 2012,
pp. 253–264.
[18] X. Zhao et al., “An analysis of BGP multiple origin AS (MOAS)
conflicts,” in Proc. 1st ACM SIGCOMM Workshop Internet Meas.
Workshop. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2001, pp. 31–35.
[19] D. Li, C. Y. Liu, and L. Y. Liu, “Study on the universality of the normal
cloud model,” Eng. Sci., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 28–34, 2004.
[20] J. Yang et al., “Review and prospect of research on the normal cloud
model,” Chin. J. Comput., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 724–744, 2018.
[21] P. Mohapatra, J. Scudder, D. Ward, R. Bush, and R. Austein, BGP Prefix
Origin Validation, document RFC 6811, 2013.
[22] P. Sermpezis et al., “ARTEMIS: Neutralizing BGP hijacking within a
minute,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 2471–2486, Dec.
2018.
[23] S. Peng et al., “A multi-view framework for BGP anomaly detection via
graph attention network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 214, Sep. 2022, Art. no.
109129.
[24] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “AP2Vec: An unsupervised approach for BGP
hijacking detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 2255–2268, Sep. 2022.
[25] MANRS. (2021). Did Someone Try to Hijack Twitter? Yes. [Online].
Available: https://manrs.org/2021/02/did-someone-try-to-hijack-twitteryes/
[26] Z. M. Mao, R. Bush, T. G. Griffin, and M. Roughan, “BGP beacons,”
in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2003, pp. 1–14.
[27] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. C. Hu, Z. M. Mao, and R. Bush, “ISPY: Detecting
IP prefix hijacking on my own,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 6,
pp. 1815–1828, Dec. 2010.
[28] J. Schlamp et al., “Investigating the nature of routing anomalies: Closing
in on subprefix hijacking attacks,” in Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Traffic
Monitor. Anal., Barcelona, Spain, Apr. 2015, pp. 173–187.

5500214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026

[29] L. Quan, J. Heidemann, and Y. Pradkin, “Trinocular: Understanding
internet reliability through adaptive probing,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
Commun. Rev., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 255–266, 2013.
[30] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach
to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
[31] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multiview
joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–9, 2023.
[32] J. Vanerio and P. Casas, “Ensemble-learning approaches for network
security and anomaly detection,” in Proc. Workshop Big Data Analytics
Mach. Learn. Data Commun. Netw., Aug. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[33] L. Chen et al., “Frequency-domain spectrum discrepancy-based fast
anomaly detection for IIoT sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–16, 2025.
[34] B. Yu, Z. Yang, Y. Yu, and G. Xiang, “From seen to unseen: Harnessing temporal dependencies and graph structures for zero-sample fault
diagnosis in industrial systems,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74,
pp. 1–13, 2025.
[35] Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Z. Wen, and H. Luo, “Unsupervised image anomaly
detection and localization in industry based on self-updated memory and
center clustering,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023.
[36] L. Guangling, Z. Yongsheng, T. Xiaochong, L. Kai, and D. Lu,
“Research on automatic generation and data organization method of
control points,” in Proc. 10th IAPR Workshop Pattern Recognit. Remote
Sens. (PRRS), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[37] K. Butler, T. R. Farley, P. McDaniel, and J. Rexford, “A survey of BGP
security issues and solutions,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 100–122,
Jan. 2010.
Zheng Wu received the Ph.D. degree from Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications (NUPT), Nanjing, China, in 2021.
He worked as a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Computer Network
Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is currently pursuing
a Lecturer with the College of Computer, NUPT. His research interests include
routing security, network traffic identification, and anomaly detection.
Shiyu Liu received the B.S. degree from Qufu Normal University, Rizhao,
China, in 2025. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China.
His current research interest is inter-domain routing security.
Ruixi Xie received the B.S. degree from Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 2025, where she is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree with Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
Her current research interest is inter-domain routing security.
Ming Gao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and technology from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2024.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing. His research interests
include IoT security, mobile computing, and privacy protection.
Dr. Gao was a recipient of the Best Paper Award Nomination from
SenSys’21 and SenSys’24 and ACM SIGMOBILE Research Highlight in
2022.

Zhan Wu received the M.S. degree from Southwest University, Chongqing,
China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree from Southeast University, Nanjing,
China, in 2022, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
Laboratory of Image Science and Technology, School of Computer Science
and Engineering.
His current research interests include medical image reconstruction and
deep learning (DL).

Lei Han is currently a Professor with the School of Computer, Nanjing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China. He has created
patents which are authorized by China, the USA, the U.K., Japan, South
Korea, and Germany. He has authored papers in research related international
conferences and journals, such as IEEE TPDS, GLOBECOM, MOBISYS,
and ICCN. His research interests include computer networks and data center
systems.

Xiaobai Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen
University–Carnegie Mellon University Joint Institute of Engineering (JIE),
Guangzhou, China, in 2019.
He is currently a Professor with Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Nanjing, China. His research interests include computer
architecture, artificial intelligence algorithm design and optimization, machine
learning systems, and digital circuits design.

Fu Xiao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology from Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China, in 2007.
He is currently a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. He has authored
papers in research-related international conferences, including UbiCOMP,
INFOCOM, ICNP, ICC, and IPCCC. He has authored IEEE/ACM T RANS ACTIONS ON N ETWORKING , IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN
C OMMUNICATIONS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTERS, IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , ACM TECS, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY. His research interests include computer networks, datacenters, and the Internet of Things.
Dr. Xiao is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Association
for Computing Machinery.