IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

1503

Clustering Diffusion Model With Frequency-Signal
Modulation for Variational Graph Autoencoders
Junwei Cheng , Ke Liang , Pengxing Feng , Weixiong Liu, Yong Tang , and Chaobo He

Abstract—Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have been widely
used for node clustering, with existing methods mainly focusing
on enhancing the expressiveness of their latent space. Recently,
the integration of diffusion models with VAEs has provided new
opportunities to achieve this objective. However, the mechanism
by which the diffusion model improves performance remains unclear. To bridge this gap, we conduct an empirical analysis from
the perspective of graph spectral theory, revealing that the signal
modulation induced by diffusion models closely aligns with the lowfrequency spectral characteristics of VAEs, which in turn explains
their effectiveness. Nevertheless, further experiments highlight that
diffusion models exhibit limitations in modulating high-frequency
signals, which diverge from the spectral characteristics of VAEs.
Moreover, existing diffusion methods fail to enable the latent space
to adequately capture and reflect cluster-specific characteristics. To
address these challenges, we propose a novel plug-and-play method,
FVD, to improve the performance of VAE-based methods in node
clustering tasks. Specifically, we incorporate the graph wavelet
transform as a secondary signal modulator, enabling independent
adjustments of specific frequency bands to better align with the
spectral characteristics of VAEs. Additionally, we introduce the
Student’s t-distribution as a conditional constraint in the reverse
process of FVD, deriving a more compact variational lower bound.
This enhancement preserves fine-grained node information while
focusing on clustering details, effectively mitigating the cluster collapse phenomenon. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate that integrating FVD with existing methods achieves competitive performance improvements in most cases.
Index Terms—Variational graph autoencoder, node clustering,
diffusion model, graph signal.

Received 1 May 2025; revised 15 September 2025; accepted 22 September
2025. Date of publication 25 September 2025; date of current version 9 January
2026. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62477016, Grant 62077045, and Grant 62506371, and in
part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under
Grant 2024A1515011758 and Grant 2024A1515140144. Recommended for
acceptance by J. Wang. (Junwei Cheng and Ke Liang contributed equally to
this work). (Corresponding authors: Yong Tang; Chaobo He.)
Junwei Cheng, Weixiong Liu, Yong Tang, and Chaobo He are with the
School of Computer Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou
510631, China (e-mail: jung@m.scnu.edu.cn; weixiongliu@m.scnu.edu.cn;
ytang@m.scnu.edu.cn; hechaobo@m.scnu.edu.cn).
Ke Liang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail:
liangke22@nudt.edu.cn).
Pengxing Feng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (e-mail:
pengxfeng2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk).
The code of FVD is available at https://github.com/Roiko97/FVD.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3614385, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3614385

I. INTRODUCTION
ODE clustering (also known as community detection) is a
fundamental task in the field of graph machine learning. It
aims to partition nodes into distinct clusters while ensuring high
intra-cluster compactness and clear inter-cluster separation [1].
Identifying cluster structures within networks facilitates a deeper
understanding of node relationships, which support applications
such as anomaly detection [2], [3] and drug discovery [4],
[5]. High-performance node clustering methods largely relies
on specially designed optimization functions. In this context,
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [6], as generative methods,
offer a natural optimization objective well suited for this task.
The probabilistic framework of traditional VAEs is illustrated
in Fig. 1(a). Building upon this framework, existing VAE-based
methods can be classified into two main groups. The first group
extends the inference and/or generation processes by incorporating higher-order structural information, such as modularity [7],
motifs [8] and k-core structures [9]. The second group introduces
constraints to modify the optimization function [10], [11], [12].
In general, these methods primarily aim to improve the representational capacity of the latent space. Notably, recent studies have
proposed combining Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM) [13] (pipeline in Fig. 1(b)) with VAEs, which opens
up new pathways to achieve this objective. For example, [14]
propose to apply DDPM across multiple VAEs to support user
recommendation. [15] design a sandwich-structured method
that integrates variational autoencoder and DDPM for graph
augmentation. Likewise, [16] incorporate DDPM into the latent space to guide the aggregation process of neighborhood
information for anomaly detection.
Although these studies suggest that DDPM can effectively
enhance the representational capacity of the latent space in
variational graph autoencoder-based methods, the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. Against this backdrop, two questions arise: What mechanism enables DDPM to improve the
expressiveness of the latent space in VAEs? Can this mechanism
help the latent space better reflect cluster characteristics?
Essentially, noise can be regarded as a high-frequency signal
within the graph spectrum. Consequently, the pipeline of DDPM
can be understood as modifying specific frequency components
in the graph, thereby altering the amplitude in the spectrum [17],
[18]. This natural and intuitive connection motivates us to explore how DDPM affects latent representations from the spectral
perspective. To this end, we begin with an empirical study
(detailed in Section III-A) using a traditional VAE-based
method, VGAE, to explore the spectral characteristics of VAEs.

N

0162-8828 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 1. (a) is the probabilistic framework of VAEs. (b) presents the pipelines
of DDPM. (c) highlights the spectral characteristics of VAEs for low-frequency
signals, while intentionally suppressing high-frequency components during
signal modulation is needed. (d) depicts the signal modulation results of DDPM,
indicating a deviation from the LGH pattern in the high-frequency band. (e)
outlines the detrimental effects of DDPM on intra-cluster compactness and
inter-cluster separation.

Our observations reveal that VGAE prioritizes low-frequency
signals, indicating a clear inclination towards preserving their
features, while high-frequency signals receive relatively less
emphasis. Based on this, we summarize a general mathematical
pattern, called LGH, for VAEs from the spectral perspective, as
shown in Fig. 1(c): after modulation, the integral of amplitude
difference function in the Low-frequency band should be
Greater than zero, while the integral in High-frequency band
should be less than zero.
Within the constraints of the LGH pattern, we adopt two
more comprehensive experimental designs to discuss the two
questions raised earlier. Specifically, we design the second empirical experiment to evaluate how well the signal modulation
results produced by DDPM align with the LGH pattern (detailed
in Section III-B). Additionally, we conduct a third experiment
to assess the impact of DDPM on clustering characteristics
(detailed in Section III-C).
r Finding (1): We observe that the signal modulation results
of DDPM are generally consistent with the signal characteristics required by VAEs, which explains why DDPM
enhances the expressiveness of the latent space. However,
VAEs exhibit a progressively diminishing response to frequency signals as the frequency increases from low to high.
This behavior indicates that amplifying low-frequency signals or suppressing high-frequency signals can lead to
performance gains, or vice versa. However, as visualized
in Fig. 1(d), DDPM amplifies signals across the entire
frequency band, which differs from the requirement of
VAEs for high-frequency signals.
r Finding (2): A well-structured cluster should exhibit
high intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation. However, DDPM amplifies signals across all frequency bands, which may lead to the loss of key structural information related to clustering. This may lead to
node escape or the formation of ambiguous clusters, a
phenomenon we term as cluster collapse. Specifically, as
outlined in Fig. 1(e), after signal modulation, we observe
that intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation may adjust in the opposite direction of the expected
results.

According to the aforementioned findings and analysis,
we propose a cluster-dri V en Diffusion model that integrates Frequency signal modulation (FVD). As a plug-and-play
method, it improves the performance of existing VAE-based
methods without modifying their core structures. Specifically,
we introduce graph wavelet transform as an adapter for the
DDPM to reduce its coupling with the latent space. Meanwhile,
secondary signal modulation through graph wavelet transform
ensures that the modulated signals conform to the LGH pattern.
To address cluster collapse, inspired by [12], we incorporate the
Student’s t-distribution [19] as a conditional constraint into reverse process of DDPM. At each reverse diffusion step, noise removal occurs under the guidance of cluster information, thus preventing the misinterpretation of boundary and intra-cluster differences as noise. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
r Analysis: We investigate the spectral behavior of VAEs
and propose the LGH pattern to characterize it. Building
on this foundation, we explain how DDPM enhances the
representational capacity of the latent space in VAEs, while
also elucidating its limitations.
r Method: (1) We propose a plug-and play method FVD,
which integrates graph wavelet transform module as an
adapter to ensure modulated signals conform to the LGH
pattern, while independent secondary signal modulation
addresses the bottleneck caused by the strong coupling
between DDPM and the latent space. (2) We develop a
conditional diffusion module to mitigate cluster collapse by
designing a novel reverse process and deriving a variational
lower bound, effectively preserving cluster boundaries and
intra-cluster differences. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first application of a conditional diffusion method to
node clustering with VAEs.
r Experiments: We apply FVD to eight representative VAEbased methods for node clustering. Experimental results on
five benchmark datasets demonstrate that integrating FVD
enables these methods to achieve competitive performance
improvements while maintaining their original module
structures unchanged.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Node Clustering
An undirected graph G = (A, X) comprises interactions
among N nodes, where A ∈ RN ×N represents the adjacency
matrix and X ∈ RN ×M denotes the attribute matrix. For any
pair of nodes u and v, if there is a interaction between them,
Au,v = 1, otherwise, Au,v = 0. Each node is associated with
an M −dimensional attribute vector that represents its inherent
features.
The graph clustering task utilizes node information to partition them into k disjoint clusters C = {C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck } in an
unsupervised manner, where Ck is the k-th cluster.
B. Variational Autoencoder
VAE-based methods primarily consist of inference, generation and the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), as illustrated
in the Fig. 1(a). Specifically, for an input sample x, the true

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

posterior distribution p(z) is unknown. To approximate p(z),
a common approach is to introduce the variational distribution
q(z|x) ∼ N (μ, σ 2 ) to infer z, and the observation distribution
p(x|z) ∼ Bernoulli(x) to generate x. By maximizing ELBO,
the inference and generation processes progressively capture the
structural and distributional characteristics of the data, thereby
approximating the true representation distribution. Without loss
of generality, the ELBO is derived using Bayes’ theorem as
follows [6]:

log p(x) ≥ q(z | x) log p(x | z)dz − KL(q(z | x)p(z))

=

z

1
q(z | x) log p(x | z)dz − (μ2 + σ 2 − log σ 2 − 1)
2
z
(1)

where the first term can be directly computed via binary crossentropy, KL represents the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and
p(z) ∼ N (0, 1). Finally, the learned node representations z are
clustered using either K-means or an argmax-based strategy. For
more details, please refer to Section VI-A.
C. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
The DDPM pipeline, as shown in Fig. 1(b), which consists
of two main processes. Given an input sample x0 ∼ p(x), the
forward process involves gradually injecting Gaussian noise into
the sample via a Markov chain until its structure is completely
lost. Formally, let T denote the total number of steps. For any
noisy sample
generated at step t, its distribution is p(xt |xt−1 ) =
√
N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I), where t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } and βt is
a hyperparameter that controls the noise scale at step t. As
T → +∞, xT approaches N (0, 1) [13]. In the reverse process, noise is progressively removed, ultimately recovering the
original sample x0 . Mathematically, given a noisy sample xt ,
the denoising process is defined iteratively by qθ (xt−1 |xt ) =
N (xt−1 ; μθ (xt , t), σθ (xt , t)), where θ is learned via a neural
network. With the maximizing of variational lower bound (VLB)
on log-likelihood, DDPM identifies and removes noise to generate a new sample. Without loss of generality, the VLB is
derived using Bayes’ theorem and the reparameterization trick
as follows:
T
t=1 p(xt |xt−1 )
(2)
log p(x) ≥ Eq(x1 ,...,xT |x0 ) log

qθ (xT ) Tt=1 qθ (xt−1 |xt )
D. Graph Spectrum Theory
Graph spectrum theory is a fundamental concept in graph
signal processing. It relies on the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of the graph Laplacian matrix L = D − A to modulate node
signals, where D is node degree matrix. L̂ = D−1/2 LD−1/2
is the symmetric normalized graph Laplacian matrix. Through
eigendecomposition, it can be decomposed into the product of
three matrices, i.e., L̂ = UT ΛU, where U = [u1 , u2 , . . . , uN ]
is an orthonormal eigenmatrix, and Λ = diag[λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λN ]
is a diagonal matrix. For each λi ∈ [0, 2] arranged in ascending
order, there is a corresponding eigenvector ui .
In graph signal processing, low-frequency signals F− represent smooth information among nodes and correspond to

1505

eigenvectors associated with eigenvalues ranging from λ1 to
λN/2 (λN/2 ≈ 1). In contrast, high-frequency signals F+ represent non-smooth information among nodes and are generally
considered noise. They correspond to eigenvectors associated
with eigenvalues ranging from λ(N/2)+1 to λN (λN ≈ 2) [20],
[21]. Amplitude A quantifies the strength of each frequency
signal, and is derived by applying the Fourier transform [22],
i.e., A = UT z.
III. EMPIRICAL STUDY
In our empirical study, we mainly explore three questions:
(Q1) What characteristics do the VAEs exhibit for frequency
signals? (Q2) What mechanism enables DDPM to enhance the
expressiveness of the latent space in VAEs? Furthermore, (Q3)
Can this mechanism help the latent space better reflect cluster
characteristics?
A. (Q1) What Characteristics Do the VAEs Exhibit for
Frequency Signals?
Experimental design: Given a symmetric normalized graph
Laplacian matrix L̂, it can be rewritten via eigenvalue decomposition as follows:
L̂ =
(λuuT )1 + · · ·+ (λuuT )N/2 +(λuuT )N/2+1 + · · · + (λuuT )N


 


F−

F+

(3)
To verify the characteristics of VAEs for different frequency signals, we discard signals in two directions at ratios
of {0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%}. Fig. 2(a) illustrates this
process. Specifically, we progressively discard signals from
λ = 0 toward λ = 1 according to the specified ratios, while
retaining the remaining components unchanged. For example,
discarding the corresponding frequency signal at a rate of 5%,
the reorganized L̂ is as follows:
L̂ := (λuuT )N ×5%+1 + · · · + (λuuT )N/2 + F+

(4)

Similarly, we perform the same procedure at λ = 2 → λ = 1.
Given the foundational role of VGAE in VAEs, we select it
as a representative method and conduct experiments on the
Cora dataset. Specifically, we replace the symmetric normalized
adjacency matrix in the inference phase with the reorganized L̂
as the input for graph convolution. This design is motivated
by the fact that signal propagation in graph convolution essentially corresponds to spectral filtering via the graph Laplacian.
Therefore, using reorganized L̂ can be regarded as applying a
spectral modulation kernel, enabling us to explore how the model
responds to different spectral configurations and to analyze its
frequency characteristics. We evaluate its performance on node
clustering tasks using Accuracy (ACC), Normalized Mutual
Information (NMI), Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), and F1-macro
(F1).
Results and analysis: Fig. 3 presents the performance results
of VGAE when signals are randomly removed at various ratios
in two different directions. We find that even removing a small
portion of the lowest-frequency signals significantly degrades

1506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 2. (a) is the first empirical study, designed to illustrate the frequency characteristics of VAEs. (b) corresponds to the second empirical study, focusing on the
modulation effects of DDPM on frequency signals. (c) explore the third empirical study, which aims to evaluate the impact of DDPM on intra-cluster compactness
and inter-cluster separation.

Fig. 3.

VGAE performance changes under different signal removal rates.

VGAE performance. As shown in Fig. 3(a), all evaluated metrics
decline noticeably, among which key clustering metrics NMI
and ARI approaching zero. In contrast, discarding a small portion of the highest-frequency signals can yield substantial performance gains. As depicted in Fig. 3(b), applying any removal
rate above 0% leads to measurable improvements compared to
retaining all signals.
From the spectral perspective, low-frequency components
mainly capture node similarity, while high-frequency components emphasize differences. Since clustering naturally relies on
aggregating similar nodes, suppressing low-frequency signals
undermines the similarity characteristics essential for effective
clustering. Meanwhile, removing the high-frequency signals
reduces their distinguishing differences. Both adjustments can
lead to pronounced changes in the observed outcomes. Moreover, frequency signals near λ = 1 often carry information about
cluster boundaries [23], with the left side generally exhibiting
smoother boundary details compared to the right. This is because low-frequency signals tend to capture globally smooth
structures, while high-frequency components reflect sharp local variations. In contrast, transitions near cluster boundaries
typically exhibit intermediate variations. Therefore, removing
these smoother details may disrupt the structural integrity of the
clusters, causing their boundaries to blur and stack. Conversely,
filtering out less smooth boundary information can help reveal
the boundaries more clearly.
Based on the above results and findings, we describe the
spectral characteristics of VAEs as follows: (A1) The latent
representation of VAEs tends to capture low-frequency
information while attenuating high-frequency components:
Based on this characteristic, we summarize a general
pattern LGH, for VAEs from the spectral perspective: after
modulation, the integral of amplitude difference function in
the Low-frequency band should be Greater than zero, while
the integral in High-frequency band should be less than zero.

Mathematically, the LGH pattern is defined as:
 2
 1
Φ(A)dA > 0 >
Φ(A)dA
0

(5)

1

where Φ(A) = A − A0 is amplitude difference function and
A0 is the initial amplitude. Note that this pattern only constrains
the amplification and attenuation of the overall signal in the low
and high frequency bands, without imposing further constraints
on the internal details of these bands.
B. (Q2) What Mechanism Enables DDPM to Enhance the
Expressiveness of the Latent Space in VAEs?
Experimental design: Given that the processing of noise by
DDPM can be viewed as the modification of specific frequency
components, we explore its underlying mechanism in the latent
space from the spectral perspective. We choose node2vec [24]
to generate the input representation z0 for DDPM instead of
adopting the output from VAEs. The main reason is that prior
work [25] often employs node2vec to generate missing node
attributes. Following this strategy helps reduce input-specific
dependencies (e.g., VAE outputs) and thereby minimizes potential bias when studying the spectral characteristics of DDPM.
Fig. 2(b) shows this process. Specifically, we train DDPM for
200 epochs on the Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed datasets, respectively. Once trained, new samples ẑ0 are inferred by sampling
noisy data from zT and iteratively denoising. Finally, we map
the representations z0 and ẑ0 to the spectral domain using
Fourier transform to observe the amplification and attenuation
of amplitudes across different frequency bands by DDPM.
Results and analysis: Fig. 4 shows the amplitude magnification ratio across different frequency bands before and after
applying DDPM, computed as (Aẑ0 − Az0 )/Az0 . We observe
that DDPM can be viewed as a signal modulator that amplifies
the most signal across the entire frequency band. Specifically, we

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

1507

Fig. 4. Amplification ratio of signal amplitude before and after DDPM modulation. After applying DDPM, 92.95%, 92.31% and 92.39% of the nodes in Cora,
Citeseer and Pubmed, respectively, exhibit increased signal amplitudes.

TABLE I
EVALUATING THE INFLUENCE OF DDPM ON INTRA-CLUSTER COMPACTNESS
AND INTER-CLUSTER SEPARATION. BOTH  AND  REPRESENT POSITIVE
RESULTS.

observe that 92.95%, 92.31% and 92.39% of the nodes in Cora,
Citeseer and Pubmed, respectively, experience an increase in
their signal amplitude after DDPM modulation. Furthermore,
the amplification effect in the low-frequency range is more
pronounced compared to the high-frequency range, which is
consistent with the spectral characteristics of VAEs in the lowfrequency band described in (A1). Notably, a representative
study [26] in graph signal processing demonstrates that fully
leveraging the implicit structural information in signals can significantly enhance the expressiveness of latent representations.
Inspired by this finding, and in conjunction with the spectral
characteristics exhibited by VAEs, we propose that (A2) DDPM
enhances the latent space expressiveness of VAEs mainly by
amplifying low-frequency signals.
However, DDPM does not fully follow the LGH pattern
for high-frequency signals. Specifically, the modulation of
frequency signals by DDPM not only amplifies low-frequency
signals but also enhances high-frequency signals, sometimes
even emphasizing the highest frequency components (as shown
in Fig. 4(c)), which contradicts spectral characteristics of VAEs
for high-frequency signals. Misalignment in signals can impair
the reconstruction capability of VAEs during decoding, a phenomenon also observed in spectral analysis of DDPM within the
vision domain [27]. Therefore, we need to consider how to adjust
the frequency modulation results of DDPM to ensure alignment
with the LGH pattern. This will be discussed in Section IV-D.
C. (Q3) Can This Mechanism Help the Latent Space Better
Reflect Cluster Characteristics?
Experimental design: Based on the node representations z0
and ẑ0 obtained in (Q2), we compute the intra-cluster compactness Hintra and inter-cluster separation Hinter as follows:
Hintra =

1 
zi − μk 2
c1 ,c2 ,···ck Nk
i∈c
max

(6)

k

Hinter =

min

i,j∈C,i=j

μi − μj 

(7)

where Nk is the number of nodes in the cluster k, and μ is the
cluster center. Hintra quantifies the interaction density within a
cluster, where a smaller value indicates greater internal cohesion.
Hinter measures the separation between communities, where a
larger value indicates clearer segregation between communities.
Fig. 2(c) visualizes the above calculation.
Results and analysis: Table I presents the results of the calculations for Hintra and Hinter . We observe that, in most cases, the
representation after frequency modulation using DDPM leads
to slight dispersion of nodes within clusters and a reduction in
inter-cluster distance. We propose two possible explanations for
this. First, the significant amplification of low-frequency signals
by DDPM indicates its focus on capturing individual details
during the reverse process. While this may enhance fine-grained
details, it can also lead to the loss of key structural information
related to clusters. Building on this, DDPM amplifies highfrequency components that reflect non-smooth information. This
amplification may cause nodes to cross cluster boundaries (as
shown in Fig. 2(c)), resulting in node escape or even cluster
stacking. We refer to this phenomenon as cluster collapse. To
this end, we argue that (A3) the modulation of signals by
DDPM does not enable the latent space to reflect clustering
characteristics well. This motivates us to explore an approach
for improving DDPM that prevents the loss of cluster structural
features during the reverse diffusion process, thereby alleviating
cluster collapse. This will be discussed in Section IV-C.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Overview
Two key findings from empirical experiments deserve attention and are summarized as follows:
r DDPM functions as a signal modulator that is capable of
modulating the frequency signals within the latent space of
VAEs. However, its modulation of high-frequency signals
contravenes the LGH pattern, thereby limiting the expressiveness of the latent space in VAEs.
r DDPM exhibits a tendency to focus on fine-grained details,
yet this often neglects cluster information with localized
characteristics. With the amplification of high-frequency
signals, the differences among nodes are further emphasized, making clusters more likely to collapse.
For the first problem, a straightforward approach is to repeatedly adjust the parameters in DDPM (e.g., diffusion step, noise
scale, etc. [13]) to minimize noise during the reverse diffusion
process, thus attenuating high-frequency signals. However, this
black-box approach leads to modulated results that lack controllability. Even when some degree of control is achieved, the input

1508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. The framework of FVD. Starting with graph information G, the inference component of VAE projects this data into a latent space to learn the node
embedding z. The conditional diffusion module then processes z by iteratively adding and removing noise, modulating its frequency signals to better capture
clustering structures. Following this, the graph wavelet transform applies independent secondary signal modulation, aligning the final frequency signals with the
LGH pattern. Finally, the generation component of the VAE reconstructs the original graph structure.

to DDPM is dependent on the output of encoder, which in turn is
determined by the design of model. This strong coupling results
in the inevitability of extensive manual tuning, which limits the
generalizability of the model. As for the second issue, existing
methods [11], [28] attempt to address the inherent limitations
of VAEs to mitigate cluster collapse. However, these methods
cannot be directly extended to DDPM. Moreover, for DDPM
variants such as conditional diffusion models, the focus has predominantly been on the visual domain, with limited exploration
in graph-related tasks. To the best of our knowledge, no work
has yet applied conditional diffusion methods to graph clustering
tasks.
To address the aforementioned issues, and based on the
conclusions drawn from our empirical study, we propose
a frequency-signal modulated cluster-driven diffusion model
(FVD). As a plug-and-play method, FVD enhances the performance of existing VAE frameworks without modifying their core
structures. Specifically,
r To ensure that signal modulation by DDPM aligns with the
LGH pattern while minimizing strong coupling with the
integrated method, we introduce the graph wavelet transform for independent secondary modulation. Building on
the amplification of low-frequency signals by DDPM, the
graph wavelet transform enable fine-tuning within this frequency band while effectively suppressing high-frequency
components, thereby ensuring alignment with the spectral
characteristics of VAEs.
r To address the issue of cluster collapse, we introduce
the Student’s t-distribution as a constraint within the reverse diffusion process. At each denoising step, DDPM
not only captures fine-grained details but also emphasizes
the preservation of local cluster information. Additionally,
with the attenuation of high-frequency signals, inherent
differences at cluster boundaries and within clusters are
preserved, rather than being mistakenly removed as noise.
Fig. 5 presents the framework of FVD. Given graph information G, the inference component of VAE maps this data
into the latent space to learn the node embedding z. Within
the conditional diffusion module, the latent representation z
undergoes iterative noise addition and denoising, modulating its
frequency signals to capture clustering structure information.
Subsequently, graph wavelet transform performs independent

secondary signal modulation, ensuring that the final frequency
signals follow the LGH pattern. Finally, the generation component of VAE reconstructs the original graph. The model is trained
by iteratively optimizing the ELBO and VLB to complete the
graph clustering task. In the next section, we will provide a
step-by-step introduction to the FVD pipeline.
B. Inference Component of VAEs
Consider a node x randomly drawn from the sample space. In
general, x is usually considered to follow a Gaussian distribution
to infer the latent representation z [29]. Formally, the representation z obtained by the reparameterization trick can be written
as:
z = μ + σ

(8)

where  is sampled from N (0, 1). Without loss of generality,
let f (x) denote the node-related information associated with x.
The parameters μ and σ are then computed by two-layer Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN):
μ = COVφμ (COVφ (f (x)), f (x))

(9)

σ = COVφσ (COVφ (f (x)), f (x))

(10)

where φμ , φσ and φ are learnable parameters of GCN. COV
denotes convolution operation.
C. Cluster-Driven Conditional Diffusion Modules
Forward process: Vanilla DDPM progressively adds Gaussian
noise to the node x through a Markov chain during forward
process, gradually destroying its structure. At each step, DDPM
generates a sequence of perturbed sample {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT },
with the perturbations becoming more obvious. The toy image in
the Fig. 1(b) shows illustrates this process. The forward process
of our conditional diffusion module adopts the same strategy.
Specifically, given a node representation z0 = z obtained from
the output of VAEs, the distribution of a sequence of perturbed
samples {z1 , z2 , . . . , zT } is expressed as p(z1 , z2 , . . . , zT |z0 ).
According to the Markov chain, this distribution can be rewritten
as:
T

p(z1:T |z0 ) =

p(zt |zt−1 ) ∼ N (zt |
t=1

1 − βt zt−1 , βt I) (11)

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

where βt ∈ (0, 1) controls the scale of the Gaussian noise added
at each step t.
Based on (11), the properties of Gaussian distribution and the
reparameterization trick, we derive the conclusion that the perturbation distribution at any given step can be fully determined
by z0 and βt . Specifically, we can obtain the distribution of zt and
zt−1 via (11) and further rewrite them via the reparameterization
trick as:
√
√
(12)
zt = αt zt−1 + 1 − αt t−1
√
zt−1 = αt−1 zt−2 + 1 − αt−2 t−2
(13)
where αt = 1 − βt .
By substituting (13) into (12), we can rewrite (12) as follows:
√
√ √
zt = αt ( αt−1 zt−2 + 1 − αt−1 t−2 ) + 1 − αt t−1
√
√
√
= αt αt−1 zt−2 + αt − αt αt−1 t−2 + 1 − αt t−1
√
√
∵ αt − αt αt−1 t−2 + 1 − αt t−1 ∼ N (0, 1 − αt αt−1 )
√
∴ zt = αt αt−1 zt−2 + 1 − αt αt−1 
(14)
By iteratively applying the above equation until t = 0, we
obtain:
√
√
(15)
zt = α t z0 + 1 − α t 

where αt = Tt=1 αi .
Overall, during the forward process, given the initial representation input z0 and noise schedule βt , the distribution of the
any perturbation representation zt can be expressed as:
√
(16)
q(zt |z0 ) ∼ N (zt | αt z0 , 1 − αt )
To regulate the noise added in z1:T , we follow [14] to use a
linear noise schedule for 1 − αt , i.e.,
1 − αt = ζ · αmin +

t−1
(αmax − αmin )
T −1

(17)

where ζ is a parameter that controls the noise scale, and αmin <
αmax ∈ (0, 1) are the lower and upper bounds of the added noise.
Reverse process: Vanilla DDPM gradually removes noise
from the sample xT via a Markov chain during the reverse
process, ultimately reconstructing the original data. However,
as discussed in Section III-C, DDPM tends to overlook cluster
information with localized characteristics, while inadvertently
emphasizing node differences. In this context, the vanilla reverse
diffusion approach tends to lead to cluster collapse. To mitigate
this issue, we introduce the Student’s t-distribution as a constraint in the reverse diffusion process to guide data recovery.
While existing VAE-based clustering methods [11], [12], [29]
employ Gaussian mixture models (GMM) to enable end-to-end
clustering, each component in a GMM requires learning multiple
parameters and is also prone to cluster collapse during pretraining. In contrast, the Student’s t-distribution, with its heavy-tailed
nature, is more robust to local structural outliers commonly
observed in graph. This property allows it to better capture
local and boundary cluster structures, thereby facilitating the
preservation of cluster information during the reverse process.
Formally, according to a Markov chain, the sample distribution

1509

in the reverse process is:
T

qϕ (z0:T ) = q(zT )

qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c)

(18)

t=1

where ϕ is learnable parameter in any neural networks, and
clustering constraint c is a learnable parameter, initialized by
the cluster centers obtained from applying K-means to the
node2vec-generated representations.
Assuming that zt and c are independent, the conditional
distribution in the above equation can be further approximated
as:
qϕ (zt−1 |zt ) ∼ N (zt−1 |μϕ (zt , t), σϕ (zt , t))

(19)

qϕ (zt−1 |c) ∼ N (zt−1 |0, σ̃(c, zt ))

(20)

It is worth noting that as T → +∞, the distribution zT will
approximate the standard Gaussian distribution. To this end, the
reverse diffusion process can be interpreted as a gradual adjustment of the mean and variance of this standard Gaussian. In this
context, in (20), we assume that, under the cluster constraint
c, the distribution of zt remains Gaussian, with its variance
determined by the Student’s t-distribution:
σ̃(c, zt ) =

(1 + zt − Θi 2 )−1
2 −1
i (1 + zt − Θi  )

(21)

where Θi is the cluster center of the i-th cluster and is initialized
by K-means.
D. Graph Wavelet Transform
Graph wavelet transform allows independent manipulation of
different frequency components, enabling effective amplification or attenuation of specific frequency components [30], [31].
Building on the advantages of graph wavelet transform observed
in related studies [23], [32], we adopt it as a secondary frequency
modulation method to ensure that the final frequency-modulated
signal adheres to the LGH pattern. This strategy ensures that the
frequency signals modulated by DDPM remain stable in the
low-frequency range while further attenuating high-frequency
components. Similar to graph Fourier transform [33], components with smaller eigenvalues in graph wavelet transform correspond to low-frequency signals, while those with larger eigenvalues correspond to high-frequency signals. Mathematically,
the normalized Laplacian matrix is symmetric and semi-positive
definite. According to the theory of graph signal processing [34],
its eigenvectors can be used as the basis for the graph wavelet
transform. Specifically, given a signal-modulated representation
z, the graph wavelet transform is defined as [35]:
ẑ = Ψ(λ)z = Ugs (λ)UT z

(22)

where gs (λ) = diag(exp(sλ1 ), exp(sλ2 ), . . . , exp(sλN )) is a
scaling matrix with heat kernel scaled by parameter s.
Notably, computing (22) results in the same computational
burden as calculating the graph Fourier transform. Specifically,
as discussed in Section II-D, computing the eigenvector U
typically requires O(N 3 ) time complexity, which becomes prohibitive for large graphs. Fortunately, existing research [35] has

1510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

demonstrated that the graph wavelet transform can be efficiently
approximated using Chebyshev polynomials, reducing the time
complexity to a linear relationship with the number of edges in
the graph. Consequently, Ψ(λ) can be rewritten as:
Ψ(λ) ≈

K


θi Polyi (L̂)

incorporated into the forward process does not fundamentally
affect the distribution of the final representation zT .
Since FVD follows Markov chains in both the forward and
reverse processes, the above equation can be simplified to:
p(zt |zt−1 , z0 , c) = p(zt |zt−1 , c)

(23)

i=0

where Poly0 (L̂) = I, Poly1 (L̂) = L̂, and Polyi (L̂) =
2L̂Polyi−1 (L̂) − Polyi−2 (L̂). θ is the filter coefficient and
K is the order of the polynomial.

According to the independence assumption, (26) can be further approximated as:

Given the representation z after graph wavelet transform,
the generation component of the VAEs reconstruct the original
graph as follows:
p(Âx = 1|ẑ) = (ẑ ẑ T )
where

(24)

is a non-linear function, such as sigmoid function.

F. Optimization
VAEs optimization: To ensure that the prior distribution assumed by the VAEs gradually approximates the true posterior
distribution, the training objective is to maximize the ELBO. For
unconditional VAEs, the ELBO can be further rewritten via (1)
as:
L

LELBO =

N

N

1 
(l)
Aij log Âij
L
i=1 j=1
l=1

p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c)
p(zt , z0 , c)

⎧
√
p(zt |zt−1 ) ∼ N (z√
⎪
t | αt zt−1 , 1 − αt )
⎪
⎨
p(zt |z0 ) ∼ N (zt | αt z√0 , 1 − αt )
p(z
⎪
t−1 |z0 ) ∼ N (zt−1 | αt−1 z0 , 1 − αt−1 )
⎪
⎩
q(zt−1 |c) ∼ N (zt−1 |0, σ̃)

(30)

Based on the probability density function of the Gaussian
distribution, (29) can be expanded as:

√
1 (zt − αt zt−1 )2
p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c) ∝ exp −
2
1−α
√

√
(z0 − αt z0 )2
(zt−1 − αt−1 z0 )2
(zt−1 )2
−
+
+
1 − αt−1
σ̃
1 − αt



αt
1
1
1
2
+
+
∝ exp −
zt−1
2
1 − αt
1 − αt−1
σ̃
 √


√
−2 αt zt
−2 αt−1 z0
+
+
zt−1 + Δ
(31)
1 − αt
1 − αt−1

√
√
−2 αt zt
−2 αt−1 z0
1−αt + 1−αt−1
μ̂ = −
αt
2( 1−α
+ 1−α1t−1 + σ̃1 )
t

(25)

where L is the number of samples from Monte Carlo
Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes estimator [6], and Ẑ =
[ẑ1 , ẑ2 , . . . , ẑN ]. For details on the ELBO of conditional VAEs,
refer to [12].
FVD optimization: To optimize FVD, the training objective
is to maximize the VLB on the log-likelihood. However, due
to the introduction of a cluster-driven constraint in the reverse
process, the standard VLB (i.e., (2)) is insufficient for training
FVD. Below, we will derive the new VLB for FVD.
Given the input representation z0 , the t−th step representation
zt and the constraint c, the (t − 1)−th step representation zt−1
can be derived via Bayes’s theorem:
p(zt−1 |zt , z0 , c) =

(29)

where Δ is a constant term.
Based on (31), the μ̂ of p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c) is:

(l)

+ (1 − Aij ) log(1 − Âij )
− KL(q(Ẑ | f (G))p(Ẑ))

p(zt |zt−1 )p(zt−1 |z0 )q(zt−1 |c)
p(zt |z0 )

p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c) =
where

E. Generation Component of VAEs

(28)

(26)

where joint probability distribution can be rewritten as:
p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c) = p(zt |zt−1 , z0 , c)p(zt−1 |z0 , c)p(z0 |c)p(c)
(27)
It is worth noting that the constraint c is implicitly introduced
in the forward distribution to simplify the computation of the
final VLB. In practice, whether the constraint c is explicitly

(32)

The above equation can be expanded in terms of zt and z0 as:
√
αt (1 − αt−1 )σ̃
zt
μ̂ =
σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )
√
(1 − αt )σ̃ αt−1
z0
+
(33)
σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )
Similar, the σ̂ of p(zt−1 , zt , z0 , c) is:
σ̂ =

σ̃(1 − αt−1 )
(1 − αt )
σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )

Overall, the VLB can be written via (2) as:
T
t=1 p(zt |zt−1 , c)
log p(x) = Eq(z1:T |z0 ) log

qϕ (zT ) Tt=1 qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c)

T

p(zt |zt−1 , c)
= E − log qϕ (zT ) +
log
qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c)
t=2
+ log

p(z1 |z0 , c)
qϕ (z0 |z1 , c)

(34)

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS


= E − log qϕ (zT ) +

T


log

p(zt−1 |zt , z0 , c)
qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c)

log

p(zt−1 |zt , z0 , c)
qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c)

t=2

+

1511

Algorithm 1: The Procedure of Integrating FVD into VAEBased Methods.

T

p(zt |z0 , c)
p(zt−1 |z0 , c)
t=2

+ log


p(z1 |z0 , c)
qϕ (z0 |z1 , c)

= E − log qϕ (zT ) +

T

t=2

+ log

p(zT |z0 , c)
p(z1 |z0 , c)

+ log

p(z1 |z0 , c)
qϕ (z0 |z1 , c)


= E log

T
p(zT |z0 , c) 
p(zt−1 |zt , z0 , c)
+
log
qϕ (zT )
qϕ (zt−1|zt ,c )
t−2

Since 0 < αt < 1 and α
t−1 > αt (equivalently α1 > α2 >
· · · > αT > 0 with αt = ts=1 αs ), we have (1 − αt )(1 −
αt−1 ) > 0. Hence

− log qϕ (z0 |z1 , c)]
≥ LV LB = Eq(z1 |z0 ) log qϕ (z0 |z1 , c)




σ̃(1 − αt ) < σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )

L1

− Eq(z2:T |z0 ) DKL (p(zt−1 |zt , z0 , c)||qϕ (zt−1 |zt , c))



Lt

(35)
where
Lt = Eq(z2:T |z0 )
=

1
||μϕ (zt , t, c) − μ̂||2
2σ̂

σ̂αt−1
||z̃ϕ (zt , t, c) − z0 ||2
2(1 − αt−1 )2

(36)

which constrains z̃ϕ (zt , t, c) to accurately predict z0 .
As outlined in [14], [36], L1 is calculated as follows:
L1 = ||z̃ϕ (z1 , 1, c) − z0 ||2

(37)

Remark: LV LB (derived for FVD) yields a tighter variational
lower bound than DDPM objective L̂ [14], i.e., LV LB ≥ L̂.
Given


1
αt−1
αt
2
L̂ = ||z̃ϕ (z1 , 1) − z0 || −
−
2 1 − αt−1
1 − αt

2
(38)
×||z̃ϕ (zt , t) − z0 ||
Assume that || · || is consistent with L1 , and thus, a comparison of the coefficients between the two is required. The
coefficient of L̂ is rewritten as:
αt−1
αt
αt−1 (1 − αt )
−
=
1 − αt−1
1 − αt
(1 − αt−1 )(1 − αt )

(39)

The corresponding coefficient in Lt can be written as:
1
(1 − αt )σ̃αt−1
1 − αt−1 σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )

(40)

(41)

which implies
σ̃
σ̃
1
≤
=
σ̃(1 − αt ) + (1 − αt )(1 − αt−1 )
σ̃(1 − αt )
1 − αt
(42)
(39) ∼ (42) together imply that the per-step coefficient of
LV LB is no larger than that of L̂. Since both objectives subtract
these terms under the same norm assume, it follows that LV LB ≥
L̂.
Total optimization function: For VAEs integrated with FVD,
the overall optimization objective comprises two components:
the optimization objective of the integrated method (including
ELBO) and the optimization objective of FVD (i.e., VLB):
L = LELBO + γLV LB

(43)

where γ is a hyperparameter used to control the contribution of
different optimization objectives.
Finally, clusters are derived based on the partitioning pattern
of the integrated methods. For methods specifically designed for
clustering tasks, cluster structures are identified in an end-to-end
manner. In contrast, for general-purpose methods not explicitly
tailored for clustering, K-means is typically employed to partition cluster structures. We outline the complete procedure of integrating FVD into existing VAE-based methods in Algorithm 1.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Setup
Datasets: We use Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, ACM and Blogcatalog as benchmark datasets to conduct our experiments, and
the detailed data are shown in Table II.
Baselines: FVD is designed to address the limitations of
integrating DDPM into VAE-based methods. To this end, we

1512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE II
THE STATISTIC OF DATASETS. Avg.C DENOTES THE AVERAGE CLUSTERING
COEFFICIENT.

integrate FVD into a variety of representative and state-of-the-art
VAE-based methods to conduct node clustering experiments.
These methods include methods specifically designed for node
clustering tasks, such as VGAECD [12], GM-VGAE [37], CVGAE [11] and VGAER [7], as well as general-purpose methods not explicitly tailored for clustering, including VGAE [6],
VGNAE [38], DGVAE [39] and RWR-VGAE [40]. Detailed
descriptions of these methods are provided in Section VI.
Parameter setting and evaluation metrics: FVD is a plugand-play method, meaning it can be seamlessly integrated into
any VAE-based approach without requiring modifications to the
original module. Therefore, all baseline methods either adopt the
parameter settings described in their papers or, if they use different datasets, fine-tune them based on existing settings. The parameter settings for FVD need to focus on two modules. For the
cluster-driven conditional diffusion module, the diffusion step T
is optimized within the range [50, 100, 300, 500], with T = 100
being effective for most scenarios. To improve generalization,
we apply a dropout layer during the reverse process of FVD, with
the dropout ratio searched within the range {0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}.
For γ in the total optimization function, the optimal value is
determined by searching within the range {10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 ,
10−5 }. For the graph wavelet transform module, we fix the
parameter K to 2, and set θ to [1, -0.5] with reference to [31].
Detailed parameter settings used in our experiments are provided
in Appendix A, available online. All experiments are performed
on a PC running 64-bit Windows 10, equipped with a 3.40 GHz
Intel Core i7-6700 CPU and 64 GB of RAM. Each method is
run three times (with the random seed fixed during the first run),
and the mean and standard deviation of the performance are
reported in Section 2. For the remaining experimental sections,
results are reported using a fixed random seed. Additionally, the
node clustering performance of all methods is evaluated using
four widely adopted metrics: ACC, NMI, ARI and F1.
B. Node Clustering Performance
We apply FVD to various VAE-based methods, and the node
clustering results are summarized in Table III. We have the
following observations and analysis:
(1) Comprehensive experiments reveal that FVD effectively
enhances the expressiveness of the latent space in VAEs, driving
improved clustering performance: The performance comparison
of all VAE-based methods before and after integrating FVD
shows that FVD enables these methods to achieve more competitive results in node clustering tasks. On an overall scale,
methods integrated with FVD achieve average performance
improvements of 2.9, 2.15, 3.19 and 2.76 points in ACC, NMI,

ARI and F1, respectively. In some cases, the improvements are
even more pronounced, reaching 5.18, 4.16, 7.32 and 5.09 points
for the same metrics. In addition to these improvements, the
integration of FVD further improves the robustness of the methods, as demonstrated by significantly lower standard deviations
across a majority of performance metrics. For example, after
integrating FVD, VGAE experiences approximately 2, 3 and 3
points reductions in standard deviation for ACC, NMI and ARI,
respectively. Similarly, CVGAE maintains stable performance
post-integration, with no observable fluctuations in its overall
results. These findings suggest that FVD not only boosts overall
performance but also enhances stability in clustering tasks. In
general, the experiments demonstrate that the combination of
graph wavelet transform and cluster-driven conditional diffusion
substantially enhances the performance of VAE-based methods.
(2) FVD demonstrates a stronger affinity for methods explicitly designed to address clustering tasks: We analyze the impact
of integrating FVD into methods specifically tailored for clustering tasks, and the results highlight significant enhancements
in their ability to capture cluster structures. Specifically, on an
overall scale, methods combined with FVD achieve average
performance improvements of 3.85, 2.4, 3.73 and 3.4 points
in ACC, NMI, ARI and F1, respectively. Notably, GM-VGAE
exhibits remarkable gains on the ACM dataset, with improvements of 19.6, 13.7, 25.7 and 18.4 points across the same
metrics. Similarly, VGAECD benefits significantly from FVD
integration, achieving competitive boosts of 8.4, 7.3, 12.5 and
7.9 points. The affinity of FVD for clustering-oriented methods
can be attributed to the complementary strengths of the Student’s
t-distribution and the Gaussian mixture distribution. Unlike the
Gaussian distribution, the Student’s t-distribution demonstrates
heightened sensitivity to cluster boundary nodes, enabling it
to capture critical boundary information that Gaussian mixture
models often overlook. During the reverse process in FVD, this
sensitivity facilitates the recovery of previously neglected cluster boundary details while concurrently preserving fine-grained
node information.
(3) FVD shows flexibility across a variety of common scenarios: Our experiments also integrate FVD into methods not
originally designed for node clustering. Although the degree
of improvement is smaller compared to methods explicitly designed for clustering, these methods still benefit from the signal
modulation capabilities of FVD. Specifically, after two rounds of
signal modulation and the incorporation of cluster information,
these methods achieve average performance improvements of
1.95, 1.89, 2.65, and 2.12 points in ACC, NMI, ARI and F1,
respectively. On specific datasets, the improvements are even
more pronounced, with competitive gains of 3.68, 3.15, 4.15
and 3.9 points across these metrics. We attribute these results to
the discovery of the LGH pattern and the design of the guided
VLB. The noise addition and removal processes in the diffusion
module can be interpreted as frequency signal processing, where
aligning the signal modulation results with the LGH pattern
allows existing methods to benefit from frequency-adjusted node
representations. Moreover, the cluster-driven VLB enhances the
expressiveness of the latent space, enabling it to encode cluster
information more effectively. This process implicitly embeds

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

1513

TABLE III
NODE CLUSTERING RESULTS (%): MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION (BOLD: BEST). THE ABBREVIATION FOR RWR-VGAE IS RWR-,
AND FOR GM-VGAE, IT IS GM-.

process. In this case, the Student’s t-distribution facilitates the
preservation of local variations and mitigates cluster collapse.
C. Ablation Experiments and Motivation Analysis

Fig. 6.

Visualization of the degree distributions for all datasets.

cluster structures into the node representations, further boosting
their performance in node clustering tasks.
(4) FVD performs better on graphs with strong cluster patterns and broad degree distributions: To further explore the
conditions under which FVD is most effective, we analyze the
relationship between the structural properties of the graph and
the performance gains obtained by integrating FVD. Fig. 6
and Table II respectively present the degree distributions and
average clustering coefficients of all datasets. We observed that
the most significant performance improvements occur on the
ACM, while the gains on Pubmed are comparatively limited.
By examining the degree distributions and average clustering
coefficients, we conclude a consistent pattern: FVD tends to
yield more substantial improvements on datasets with higher average clustering coefficients and broader degree distributions. In
contrast, its benefits are less pronounced on datasets with lower
clustering coefficients and more narrow degree structures. A
possible explanation is that the presence of clear local structural
patterns and well-defined cluster boundaries allows FVD to effectively leverage this information to guide the reverse diffusion

We conduct ablation experiments to explore and validate the
two motivations behind FVD.
1) Cluster-driven conditional diffusion module facilitates
the latent space in capturing and reflecting cluster structure
information: To validate the this motivation, we expand the
experiments presented in the Section III-C. Specifically, we
measure intra-cluster compactness and inter-cluster separation
after introducing the cluster-driven conditional diffusion module. The results, summarized in Table V, show significant
improvements in both metrics compared to the initial distances,
confirming ability of the module to enhance cluster cohesion and
separation. Furthermore, a comparison with the DDPM results
in Table I indicates that our conditional diffusion module offers
a more effective mechanism for the latent space to reflect cluster
structure information.
Table IV compares the performance of various baseline methods with and without the cluster-driven conditional diffusion
module (i.e., Wavelet: × and Conditional: /×). The results
reveal that, in most cases, incorporating the conditional diffusion
module leads to noticeable performance gains. For methods not
specifically designed for clustering tasks, these improvements
are sometimes significant. For example, VGAE on the Citeseer
dataset shows remarkable increases in ACC, NMI, ARI and
F1 by 7.12, 2.75, 6.76 and 5.32 points, respectively. Even for
clustering-specific methods, such as VGAECD on the same
dataset, the module provides consistent benefits, with improvements of 1.9, 0.97, 1.31 and 0.52 points in ACC, NMI, ARI and
F1, respectively. These findings underscore the versatility and
adaptability of the cluster-driven conditional diffusion module
across different types of methods. They also validate the rationale and effectiveness of our first motivation.
2) Graph wavelet transform, as a secondary signal
modulation, complements the diffusion model in enhancing

1514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IV
ABLATION EXPERIMENTS. ALL PERFORMANCE RESULTS (%) ARE REPORTED USING THE SAME RANDOM NUMBER SEED. WHEN BOTH THE CLUSTER-DRIVEN
CONDITIONAL DIFFUSION MODULE AND THE GRAPH WAVELET TRANSFORM ARE INCLUDED, THE CONFIGURATION CORRESPONDS TO OUR PROPOSED FVD
METHOD. CONVERSELY, WHEN NEITHER IS INCLUDED, IT CORRESPONDS TO THE VANILLA DDPM.

Fig. 7. Amplification ratio of signal amplitude before and after graph wavelet transform modulation. After applying graph wavelet transform, 18.17%, 23.08%
and 8.44% of the nodes in Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed, respectively, exhibit increased signal amplitudes.

TABLE V
EVALUATING THE INFLUENCE OF CLUSTER-DRIVEN CONDITIONAL DIFFUSION
ON INTRA-CLUSTER COMPACTNESS AND INTER-CLUSTER SEPARATION. BOTH
 AND  REPRESENT POSITIVE RESULTS.

the latent space expressiveness: To validate this motivation,
we extend the experiments in Section III-B by analyzing the
impact of the graph wavelet transform on signal amplitudes.
The changes are visualized in Fig. 7, which shows that while
vanilla DDPM amplifies signals across the frequency spectrum,
the graph wavelet transform suppresses high-frequency
components while maintaining meaningful amplification in
the low-frequency range. Specifically, after applying the graph
wavelet transform, only 18.17%, 23.08% and 8.44% of the
nodes in Cora, Citeseer and Pubmed, respectively, exhibit
increased signal amplitude, which is primarily concentrated in
the low-frequency range. Importantly, the amplitude variations
observed before and after applying this transform align with
the LGH pattern, underscoring the efficacy of the graph wavelet
transform in enhancing signal processing.

The ablation experiments summarized in Table IV compare
the performance of various baseline methods before and after
applying the graph wavelet transform (i.e., Conditional:  and
Wavelet: /×). The results indicate that baseline methods integrated with FVD generally demonstrate competitive performance improvements. For example, on the Cora dataset, VGAE
achieves notable gains of 7.9, 5.31, 5.63 and 8.31 points in ACC,
NMI, ARI and F1, respectively. Similarly, GM-VGAE, which
is specifically designed for clustering tasks, shows significant
enhancements on the same dataset, with increases of 5.76,
10.43, 11.14 and 2.63 points in these metrics. These findings
highlight that the graph wavelet transform effectively amplifies
low-frequency signals while suppressing high-frequency components, aligning with spectral characteristics of VAEs. However, in certain cases, relying solely on the conditional diffusion
module still achieves considerable performance gains. This variation can be attributed to differences in how individual methods
affect signal amplitudes, potentially leading to blurred clustering boundaries. Specifically, methods that inherently suppress
high-frequency signals or struggle to capture cluster boundaries
may experience diminished benefits from the wavelet transform,
as it could inadvertently lead to the loss of critical boundary
information. Overall, although the full integration of FVD may
not always produce optimal results, methods enhanced with this

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

plug-in consistently achieve competitive performance compared
to their original implementations.
D. Effectiveness Analysis Between FVD and DDPM
Table IV also shows the performance improvements achieved
by FVD and vanilla DDPM across various VAE-based methods.
Specifically, Conditional:  and Wavelet:  represent the configuration using FVD, whereas Conditional: × and Wavelet: ×
correspond to the vanilla DDPM setup.
We observe that integrating FVD yields more substantial
performance improvements compared to DDPM integration. On
average, ACC, NMI, F1 and ARI improve by 3.61, 3.53, 4.28
and 3.4 points, respectively. For certain methods, these enhancements are even more pronounced, with gains of 20.23, 12.94,
23.28 and 20.29 points across the four metrics. The competitive
performance of FVD can be attributed to its cluster-driven conditional diffusion, coupled with a frequency modulation strategy
aligned with the LGH pattern. Unlike DDPM, which primarily
focuses on refining node representations, FVD is specifically
designed to meet the unique demands of node clustering by
effectively capturing and enhancing cluster-specific structural
information. However, in some cases, FVD achieves nearoptimal performance improvements or, occasionally, exhibits
minor drawbacks. These outcomes likely arise from the design
sensitivities of certain models to signals in specific frequency
bands. For instance, VGAER replaces node attributes with a
modularity matrix for inference and generation. From a graph
signal processing perspective, this approach results in lower
signal amplitudes near λ = 1, because node attribute information is excluded, leaving only topology data. While topology
data reflects the overall graph structure, it is less effective at
delineating cluster boundaries. Consequently, the secondary signal modulation introduced by FVD may inadvertently diminish
the clarity of these boundaries, thereby increasing the risk of
cluster collapse.
E. Hyperparameter Analysis of γ in Joint Training
We recognize that integrating diffusion model into variational
autoencoder frameworks often requires some parameter tuning [14], particularly to balance the contributions of VLB and
ELBO. This challenge arises from the inherent differences and
interdependence of their optimization objectives. Specifically,
the diffusion model focuses on capturing fine-grained information from the node representations output by the variational
autoencoder, while the variational autoencoder reconstructing
the original graph structure as accurately as possible through the
new node representations output by diffusion model [41]. Additionally, the slower convergence of diffusion model compared to
variational autoencoders further complicates the the balancing
process [42], [43]. Without careful parameter adjustment, the
training process may become dominated by one model, leading
to suboptimal overall performance. To investigate this issue,
we use VGAE as a representative example and conduct experiments on the Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, ACM and Blogcatalog.
Specifically, we expand the range of γ to explore its impact,
evaluating values {100 , 10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 }. The

1515

results, visualized in Fig. 8, reveal that without a balancing
parameter between VLB and ELBO, VGAE fails to achieve
effective training. Furthermore, overly small γ may hinder the
training of FVD on complex datasets (e.g., Pubmed), degrading
the overall performance of VGAE. Analyzing Fig. 8 alongside
the parameter settings in Appendix A, available online, we find
that γ ∈ {10−3 , 10−4 } generally works well for most methods
across diverse datasets. For methods requiring pre-training,
multiple attempts to adjust γ may be necessary to achieve
optimal performance. Nevertheless, the choice of γ is relatively
straightforward, as suitable values are typically confined to the
range {10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 }.
F. Dropout Rate Analysis in Reverse Process
During the reverse process of FVD, noise is gradually removed to inference the original samples. In this process, the
dropout layer serves as a regularization mechanism, ensuring
robustness in the cluster task. To determine the suitable range
of dropout rates, we use VGAE as a case study and analyze its
performance across multiple datasets. The experimental results,
shown in Fig. 9, evaluate VGAE with dropout rates ranging
from 0% to 50%. While the default dropout rate for VGAE (as
specified in Appendix A), available online is set to 0%, our
observations reveal that optimal performance is often achieved
within the range of 5% to 25%, as illustrated in Fig. 9(b) and
(e) Notably, excessively high dropout rates suppress critical
structural information, leading to ineffective method training,
as shown in Fig. 9(c). These findings suggest that smaller
dropout rates are sufficient for most scenarios. However, for
methods requiring pre-training, careful tuning the dropout rate
is necessary.
G. Analysis of the Trade-Off Between Efficiency and
Performance
The time complexity of FVD primarily consists of two
components: the cluster-driven conditional diffusion module
and the graph wavelet transform. The diffusion module has a
complexity of O(T N M ). The graph wavelet transform, when
implemented using Chebyshev polynomial approximation, has
a linear complexity of O(KE), where E is the number of edges.
To more intuitively demonstrate the runtime efficiency of FVD,
we compare the training time of the vanilla VGAE and VGAE
integrated with FVD over 100 epochs. The results are shown in
Fig. 10(a). Across all datasets, the time cost of VGAE+FVD is
only slightly higher than that of the original VGAE, indicating
that FVD enhances performance while keeping computational
costs manageable. A key reason for the low overhead is our
use of Chebyshev approximation to compute the graph wavelet
transform, which avoids costly eigenvalue decomposition and
wavelet basis construction.
To further compare the time overhead and performance benefits of FVD with full graph wavelet transform (denoted as
FVDEigen. ) versus the standard Chebyshev-approximated FVD,
we conduct additional experiments and statistical analyses. As
shown in Fig. 10(b), we first compare the preprocessing time
required by the two implementations across different datasets.

1516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 8.

Exploring the influence of γ on VGAE-FVD joint training performance.

Fig. 9.

Impact of different dropout rates on VGAE performance, where we set dropout rates ∈ {0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45%, 50%}.

It can be observed that on large-scale datasets such as Pubmed,
the computational cost of eigendecomposition increases significantly, which makes FVDEigen. not suitable for large graphs.
Next, we evaluate the performance improvements brought by
FVDEigen. and standard FVD when integrated into VGAE, as
summarized in Table VI. While FVDEigen. generally achieves
slightly higher performance gains, the additional time overhead
becomes non-negligible, particularly on large graphs. Considering that the standard FVD achieves competitive improvements
with minimal computational cost, we recommend it for achieving a practical trade-off between efficiency and effectiveness.
Furthermore, FVD can be viewed as signal modulators, expanding the toolbox of graph signal processing. Existing graph
signal processing methods typically fall into two categories:
frequency response function design [44], [45], [46] and graph

augmentation [21], [47]. However, the former often suffers from
limited generalization capabilities, while the latter significantly
increases training time and memory overhead. In contrast, FVD,
as a plug-and-play method, strikes an effective balance between
improving performance and maintaining training efficiency.
H. Discussion of Limitations
While FVD delivers substantial improvements across various
VAE-based methods, several limitations need to explanation.
Specifically, during the integration of FVD with CVGAE, we
had to repeatedly adjust certain parameters within FVD. This
issue arises because methods like CVGAE often require pretraining of specific modules, which can hinder the subsequent
effective training of FVD. Similar issues arise in methods that

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

Fig. 10.

Runtime comparison.

TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE (%) COMPARISON OF VGAE+FVD USING
CHEBYSHEV-APPROXIMATED VS. EIGENVALUE-BASED WAVELET TRANSFORMS

rely on pre-training Gaussian mixture distributions, though these
methods generally require only minor parameter adjustments.
Notably, even vanilla DDPM encounters similar challenges in
such scenarios. Additionally, we observe that FVD yields relatively modest performance improvements for certain methods
and, in some instances, even minor performance declines. We
attribute this to the differing impacts of different methods on
signal amplitude, which may lead to blurred cluster boundary
information. Specifically, some methods inherently suppress
high-frequency signals or lack the capacity to accurately capture
cluster boundaries. Consequently, the signal modulation introduced by the graph wavelet transform may inadvertently result
in the loss of cluster boundary information.
VI. RELATED WORKS
A. Varational Autoencoder-Based Node Clustering
Graph machine learning has become a key interdisciplinary
field for modeling complex relational data. For example, [8]
represents a important effort at the intersection of drug discovery and graph learning, exploring molecular generation from

1517

the perspective of graph motifs and significantly promoting
the use of graph-based methods in real-world biomedical applications. [48] leverages large language models to efficiently
and accurately construct cross-disciplinary knowledge graphs,
effectively addressing the heavy reliance on manual intervention
in existing methods. This significantly enhances the automation of knowledge extraction and integration, providing strong
technical support for multidisciplinary knowledge fusion. [49]
and [50] have also contributed to advancing research in graph
machine learning. On this basis, node clustering plays a central
role in understanding the structural organization of graphs. In
recent years, VAEs have garnered widespread interest in node
clustering tasks due to their strong ability to model complex
data distributions. As mentioned before, existing VAE methods
can be roughly divided into two categories: (1) extends the inference and/or generation processes by incorporating additional
sample information, and (2) introduces constraints to modify the
optimization function.
For the first category, VGAE as a representative method
for unsupervised learning, has gradually become an important
method for node clustering due to its competitive performance,
interpretability and scalability. In recent years, numerous related
variants have been developed to address specific challenges in
graph representation and node clustering. For example, [38]
observes that vanilla VGAE struggles to effectively encode
isolated nodes. To address this, they propose incorporating
L2 normalization to generate more robust node embeddings.
[40] introduces random walk-based regularization on the node
representation, which effectively strengthens its capability to
capture latent graph structures. [51] explore the use of Gaussian
distributions in Wasserstein space as potential representations
for nodes. Their method not only captures the graph structure
but also incorporates node uncertainties, proving effective for
handling real-world graphs with complex and irregular structures. Building on this foundation, [52] employs Wasserstein
regularization directly on the latent space distribution to enhance
the quality of node embeddings. Modularity is an effective
metric for evaluating the quality of cluster partitions [53]. To
leverage this, [7] introduce a modularity matrix during the
inference process and reconstruct it during generation, aiming
to enhance the accuracy of cluster partitions. [39] establishes
a theoretical connection between variational Bayesian methods
and graph partitioning by interpreting the reconstruction term
in ELBO as a spectrally relaxed balanced graph cut. In addition
to the aforementioned methods, related studies [9], [54], [55]
summarize or provide new insights into node clustering tasks.
Notably, these methods are not explicitly designed for node
clustering, and thus often requiring downstream partitioning
techniques, such as K-means, to identify cluster structures.
In contrast to the first category, methods in the second category
are typically capable of performing end-to-end node clustering.
Among them, one of the most representative approaches is
proposed by [12], who first integrate Gaussian mixture models
into the graph variational Bayesian framework. Each Gaussian
distribution represents a cluster, enabling iterative optimization
through a novel ELBO formulation to achieve end-to-end clustering. Expanding on this idea, [56] designs a simplified graph

1518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

convolutional encoder aimed at improving the convergence
speed of VGAECD. Through the incorporation of dual variational objectives, their method achieves significant advancements in computational efficiency. Building on the contributions
of these two works, a growing number of end-to-end node
clustering methods have been developed, which incorporate
Gaussian mixture models as a key component. For example,
GM-VGAE [37] incorporates a Gaussian mixture model along
with adversarial regularization to represent the prior distribution
within the variational graph Bayesian framework. [11] observes
that existing VAE methods fail to account for the differences
between inference and generation models after incorporating
clustering inductive bias. Moreover, they are poor at solving the
problems of posterior collapse and attribute drift. To address
these limitations, they integrate contrastive learning with the
variational Bayesian framework and propose a more compact
optimization objective to mitigate or resolve these challenges.
Related studies [57], [58], [59], [60] have all contributed to
advancing this research direction. For example, [61] proposes a
attribute graph augmented clustering framework that explicitly
models node relationships in both the topology and attribute
spaces, thereby effectively improving clustering performance.
Compared to methods that rely solely on explicit graph information, this approach further uncovers implicit correlations in the
attribute space and provides new insights for model design. Notably, methods that integrate Gaussian mixture models typically
require pre-training to initialize their parameters. Poorly chosen
initial parameters can negatively impact the overall performance
of these methods. Therefore, when integrating such methods
with FVD, careful attention must be paid to tuning certain
parameters in the FVD to ensure optimal results. Moreover,
building on the concept of message invariance, [62] develops the
topological compensation framework, which converts out-ofbatch message passing into in-batch propagation. Demonstrated
efficiency gains on million-node and billion-edge graphs mark
a key step toward scalable graph machine learning, and this line
of work has also inspired subsequent applications of variational
autoencoder-based methods to large-scale graphs.
Beyond performance improvements, the structural consistency of representation spaces has also attracted increasing
attention. Notably, DURA [63], as a representative work, introduces a duality-induced regularizer to address the limitations
of inner-product-based attribute matching, ensuring that nodes
with similar attributes are embedded closely. Inspired by this
perspective, although FVD is not explicitly designed for attribute
matching, its frequency-aware signal modulation may implicitly
encourage more structured latent spaces, potentially enhancing
the consistency of representations in downstream tasks such as
node clustering.
B. Application of Diffusion Model on Graph
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model [13] is a generative
method that is widely applied in images, videos and texts,
since it can learn the underlying data distribution and generate
high-quality samples [64], [65]. In recent years, diffusion models
have achieved remarkable success in the field of vision. Among

them, several studies combining diffusion models with VAEs
have been proposed for image generation tasks [66]. Given
the advantages of these methods over traditional generative
models, research on diffusion models has gradually expanded
and found applications in graph-based tasks. For example, [14]
integrates diffusion models with the autoencoder framework to
address the challenges of high resource costs in large-scale item
prediction and temporal changes in user preferences within recommendation systems. [67] combines a graph diffusion model
with a cross-modal contrastive learning paradigm to tackle
the challenge of data sparsity in multi-modal recommendation
tasks. [15] proposes integrating variational autoencoders with
conditional diffusion models to improve the embeddings of
historical neighbor nodes in continuous-time graphs. To better
capture both local and global structures in topology and attribute
spaces, [68] combines graph diffusion with contrastive learning
and adaptive embedding fusion, yielding state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks. Beyond the aforementioned
methods, graph diffusion-based methods have also been applied
to various graph tasks and applications, including anomaly
detection [16], graph generation [69], [70], [71], protein structure and sequence generation [72], and link prediction [73].
It is worth noting that FVD fundamentally differs from these
methods. Specifically, FVD is explicitly designed for node
clustering and integrates principles from graph signal processing
to align with the spectral characteristics of VAEs. To the best of
our knowledge, no existing approach has attempted to apply
conditional diffusion methods to VAEs for node clustering from
the spectrum perspective.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper explores why DDPM can enhance the expressiveness of the latent space in VAEs from the perspective of
graph signal processing. Based on this insight, we conduct
empirical studies and identify two key limitations of DDPM:
inadequate high-frequency signal modulation and limited ability
to effectively capture and reflect cluster characteristics in the
latent space. To overcome these challenges, we propose FVD,
a plug-and-play method that integrates a graph wavelet transform module and cluster-driven conditional diffusion modules.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that baseline methods
enhanced with FVD achieve competitive performance in node
clustering tasks, while maintaining manageable computational
overhead.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Su et al., “A comprehensive survey on community detection with
deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 4682–4702, Apr. 2024.
[2] Z. Hu et al., “Unsupervised multi-view outlier detection via optimal
graph filtering,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process.,
Hyderabad, India, 2025, pp. 1–5.
[3] L. Zheng, J. R. Birge, H. Wu, Y. Zhang, and J. He, “Cluster aware graph
anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Sydney, NSW, Australia,
2025, pp. 1771–1782.
[4] M. Xu, L. Yu, Y. Song, C. Shi, S. Ermon, and J. Tang, “Geodiff: A geometric
diffusion model for molecular conformation generation,” in Proc. 10th Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 14163–14181.

CHENG et al.: CLUSTERING DIFFUSION MODEL WITH FREQUENCY-SIGNAL MODULATION FOR VARIATIONAL GRAPH AUTOENCODERS

[5] W. Jin, R. Barzilay, and T. S. Jaakkola, “Junction tree variational autoencoder for molecular graph generation,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 2328–2337.
[6] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” 2016,
arXiv:1611.07308.
[7] C. Qiu, Z. Huang, W. Xu, and H. Li, “VGAER: Graph neural network
reconstruction based community detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, pp. 1-9.
[8] Z. Geng et al., “De novo molecular generation via connection-aware motif
mining,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Kigali, Rwanda,
2023, pp. 1476–1497.
[9] R. Fei, Y. Wan, B. Hu, A. Li, and Q. Li, “A novel network core structure extraction algorithm utilized variational autoencoder for community
detection,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 222, 2023, Art. no. 119775.
[10] C. He, J. Cheng, G. Chen, Q. Guan, X. Fei, and Y. Tang, “Detecting communities with multiple topics in attributed networks via self-supervised
adaptive graph convolutional network,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 105, 2024, Art.
no. 102254.
[11] N. Mrabah, M. Bouguessa, and R. Ksantini, “A contrastive variational
graph auto-encoder for node clustering,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 149, 2024,
Art. no. 110209.
[12] J. J. Choong, X. Liu, and T. Murata, “Learning community structure with
variational autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Singapore,
2018, pp. 69–78.
[13] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[14] W. Wang, Y. Xu, F. Feng, X. Lin, X. He, and T. Chua, “Diffusion
recommender model,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop.
Inf. Retrieval, Taipei, Taiwan, 2023, pp. 832–841.
[15] Y. Tian, A. Jiang, Q. Huang, J. Guo, and Y. Qi, “Latent diffusion-based
data augmentation for continuous-time dynamic graph model,” in Proc.
30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Barcelona, Spain,
2024, pp. 2900–2911.
[16] X. Li, C. Xiao, Z. Feng, S. Pang, W. Tai, and F. Zhou, “Controlled graph
neural networks with denoising diffusion for anomaly detection,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 237, no. Part B, 2024, Art. no. 121533.
[17] E. Isufi, F. Gama, D. I. Shuman, and S. Segarra, “Graph filters for signal
processing and machine learning on graphs,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 72, pp. 4745–4781, 2024.
[18] A. Ortega, P. Frossard, J. Kovacevic, J. M. F. Moura, and P. Vandergheynst,
“Graph signal processing: Overview, challenges, and applications,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 808–828, May 2018.
[19] D. Bo, X. Wang, C. Shi, M. Zhu, E. Lu, and P. Cui, “Structural
deep clustering network,” in Proc. Web Conf., Taipei, Taiwan, 2020,
pp. 1400–1410.
[20] L. Stankovic, D. P. Mandic, M. Dakovic, M. Brajovic, B. S. Dees, and T.
Constantinides, “Graph signal processing - Part I: Graphs, graph spectra,
and spectral clustering,” 2019, arXiv: 1907.03467.
[21] N. Liu, X. Wang, D. Bo, C. Shi, and J. Pei, “Revisiting graph contrastive
learning from the perspective of graph spectrum,” in Proc. Annu. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., New Orleans, LA, USA, 2022, Art. no. 215.
[22] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2017, pp. 2713–2726.
[23] H. Chang et al., “Spectral graph attention network with fast eigenapproximation,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Virtual
Event, Queensland, Australia, 2021, pp. 2905–2909.
[24] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 855–864.
[25] M. Liu et al., “Deep temporal graph clustering,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024, pp. 43859–43876.
[26] M. Ye et al., “State sequences prediction via fourier transform for representation learning,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., New
Orleans, LA, USA, 2023, pp. 67565–67588.
[27] Y. Lee, J. Kim, H. Go, M. Jeong, S. Oh, and S. Choi, “Multi-architecture
multi-expert diffusion models,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024,
pp. 13427–13 436.
[28] N. Mrabah, M. Bouguessa, M. F. Touati, and R. Ksantini, “Rethinking
graph auto-encoder models for attributed graph clustering,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9037–9053, Sep. 2023.
[29] J. Cheng, C. He, K. Han, G. Chen, W. Liang, and Y. Tang, “Unveiling
community structures in static networks through graph variational bayes
with evolution information,” Neurocomputing, vol. 576, 2024, Art. no.
127349.

1519

[30] B. Xu, H. Shen, Q. Cao, Y. Qiu, and X. Cheng, “Graph wavelet neural
network,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, New Orleans,
LA, USA, 2019, pp. 7420–7432.
[31] L. Stankovic, D. P. Mandic, M. Dakovic, M. Brajovic, B. Scalzo, and
A. G. Constantinides, “Graph signal processing - Part II: Processing and
analyzing signals on graphs,” 1909, arXiv: 1909.10325.
[32] R. Liu, R. Yin, Y. Liu, and W. Wang, “ASWT-SGNN: Adaptive spectral wavelet transform-based self-supervised graph neural network,”
in Proc. 38th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Vancouver, Canada, 2024,
pp. 13990–13998.
[33] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. F. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on graphs:
Graph fourier transform,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2013, pp. 6167–6170.
[34] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst,
“The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending highdimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May 2013.
[35] D. K. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval, “Wavelets on graphs
via spectral graph theory,” Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal., vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 129–150, 2011.
[36] D. Liang, R. G. Krishnan, M. D. Hoffman, and T. Jebara, “Variational
autoencoders for collaborative filtering,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
Lyon, France, 2018, pp. 689–698.
[37] G. Niknam, S. Molaei, H. Zare, D. Clifton, and S. Pan, “Graph representation learning based on deep generative Gaussian mixture models,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 523, pp. 157–169, 2023.
[38] S. Ahn and M. H. Kim, “Variational graph normalized autoencoders,” in
Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Virtual Event, Queensland, Australia, 2021, pp. 2827–2831.
[39] J. Li et al., “Dirichlet graph variational autoencoder,” in Proc. Annu. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Art. no. 443.
[40] P. VaibhavHuang and R. E. Frederking, “RWR-GAE: Random walk regularization for graph auto encoders,” 2019, arXiv: 1908.04003.
[41] X. Hou, K. Sun, L. Shen, and G. Qiu, “Improving variational autoencoder
with deep feature consistent and generative adversarial training,” Neurocomputing, vol. 341, pp. 183–194, 2019.
[42] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B.
Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential
equations,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 240–
275.
[43] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8162–8171.
[44] S. Li, D. Kim, and Q. Wang, “Beyond low-pass filters: Adaptive feature
propagation on graphs,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
Discov. Databases, Bilbao, Spain, 2021, pp. 450–465.
[45] S. Zheng, Z. Zhu, Z. Liu, Y. Li, and Y. Zhao, “Node-oriented spectral
filtering for graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 388–402, Jan. 2024.
[46] D. Bo, X. Wang, C. Shi, and H. Shen, “Beyond low-frequency information
in graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2021, pp. 3950–3957.
[47] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “Specae: Spectral autoencoder
for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., Beijing, China, 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
[48] H. Chen, X. Shen, Q. Lv, J. Wang, X. Ni, and J. Ye, “SAC-KG: Exploiting
large language models as skilled automatic constructors for domain knowledge graph,” in Proc. 62nd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
Bangkok, Thailand, 2024, pp. 4345–4360.
[49] Z. Zhao, Z. Yang, C. Li, Q. Zeng, W. Guan, and M. Zhou, “Dual feature
interaction-based graph convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9019–9030, Sep. 2023.
[50] M. Gong, H. Zhou, A. K. Qin, W. Liu, and Z. Zhao, “Self-paced cotraining of graph neural networks for semi-supervised node classification,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9234–9247,
Nov. 2023.
[51] D. Zhu, P. Cui, D. Wang, and W. Zhu, “Deep variational network embedding in wasserstein space,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, London, U.K., 2018, pp. 2827–2836.
[52] H. Liang and J. Gao, “Wasserstein adversarially regularized graph autoencoder,” Neurocomputing, vol. 541, 2023, Art. no. 126235.
[53] T. Chakraborty, A. Dalmia, A. Mukherjee, and N. Ganguly, “Metrics
for community analysis: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 50, no. 4,
pp. 54:1–54:37, 2017.
[54] Y. Cho, “Decoupled variational graph autoencoder for link prediction,” in
Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 839–849.

1520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

[55] X. Guo and L. Zhao, “A systematic survey on deep generative models for
graph generation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5,
pp. 5370–5390, May 2023.
[56] J. J. Choong, X. Liu, and T. Murata, “Optimizing variational graph autoencoder for community detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 5353–5358.
[57] X. Sun, W. Zhang, Z. Wang, and W. Lu, “Variational graph embedding for
community detection,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process., 2022,
pp. 685–697.
[58] C. He, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, X. Fei, H. Li, and Y. Tang, “A deep conditional generative approach for constrained community detection,” in
Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Birmingham, U.K., 2023,
pp. 3928–3932.
[59] K. Na, J. Lee, and E. Kim, “Augmented ELBO regularization for enhanced
clustering in variational autoencoders,” Neurocomputing, vol. 614, 2025,
Art. no. 128795.
[60] J. Guo, W. Fan, M. Amayri, and N. Bouguila, “Deep clustering analysis via
variational autoencoder with gamma mixture latent embeddings,” Neural
Netw., vol. 183, 2025, Art. no. 106979.
[61] L. Zhang, Z. Wu, H. Yang, W. Zhang, and P. Zhou, “Feature graph
augmented network representation for community detection,” IEEE Trans.
Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 7516–7527, Dec. 2024.
[62] Z. Shi, J. Wang, Z. Zhuang, X. Liang, B. Li, and F. Wu, “Accurate and
scalable graph neural networks via message invariance,” in Proc. 13th
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Singapore, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=UqrFPhcmFp
[63] J. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Shi, J. Cai, S. Ji, and F. Wu, “Duality-induced
regularizer for semantic matching knowledge graph embeddings,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 1652–1667, Feb. 2023.
[64] L. Yang et al., “Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods
and applications,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 105:1–105:39,
2024.
[65] H. Cao et al., “A survey on generative diffusion models,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 2814–2830, Jul. 2024.
[66] G. D. Maggiora, L. A. Croquevielle, N. Deshpande, H. Horsley, T. Heinis,
and A. Yakimovich, “Conditional variational diffusion models,” in Proc.
12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024, pp. 3883938870.
[67] Y. Jiang, L. Xia, W. Wei, D. Luo, K. Lin, and C. Huang, “DiffMM: Multimodal diffusion model for recommendation,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2024, pp. 7591–7599.
[68] L. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Wu, W. Zhang, H. Yang, and P. Zhou, “Graph diffusion
enhanced contrastive representation learning on topology and feature space
for community detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
early access, Jun. 17, 2025.
[69] M. Simonovsky and N. Komodakis, “GraphVAE: Towards generation of
small graphs using variational autoencoders,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Artif.
Neural Netw., Rhodes, Greece, 2018, pp. 412–422.
[70] G. Minello, A. Bicciato, L. Rossi, A. Torsello, and L. Cosmo, “Generating
graphs via spectral diffusion,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Singapore, 2025, pp. 18077–18096.
[71] T. Luo, Z. Mo, and S. J. Pan, “Fast graph generation via spectral diffusion,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 3496–3508,
May 2024.
[72] B. L. Trippe et al., “Diffusion probabilistic modeling of protein backbones
in 3D for the motif-scaffolding problem,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, Kigali, Rwanda, 2023, pp. 7798–7827.
[73] Y. Tian, Y. Qi, and F. Guo, “FreeDyG: Frequency enhanced continuoustime dynamic graph model for link prediction,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, Vienna, Austria, 2024, pp. 9725–9744.

Junwei Cheng received the BS degree from the
School of Computer Science, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Zhongshan Institute, in 2020. He is currently working toward the PhD
degree with the School of Computer Science, South
China Normal University, China. His research interest
includes graph data mining. He has published several
papers in highly regarded journals and conferences
such as IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, AAAI, SIGIR, etc.

Ke Liang received the BSc degree from Beihang University, the MSc degree from the Pennsylvania State
University, and the PhD degree from the National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT), China.
He is now a lecturer with the College of Computer
Science and Technology, NUDT. His current research
interests include graph learning, knowledge representation, and multi-view clustering. He has published
more than 40 papers in highly regarded journals and
conferences such as IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, NeurIPS, etc. He serves as the Area
Chair/Senior Program Committee Member of ICLR, CVPR, IJCAI, ACM MM,
ECML-PKDD, etc.

Pengxing Feng received the BEng degree in automotive engineering from the China Agricultural
University, and the master’s degree in automotive
engineering from the Tongji University, in 2020 and
2023, respectively. He is currently working toward the
PhD degree on electrical engineering with the City
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
His main research interests include statistical signal
processing and adaptive signal processing.

Weixiong Liu received the BS degree from the
Lanzhou University of Technology, China, in 2023.
He is currently working toward the master’s degree
with the School of Computer Science, South China
Normal University. His research interest includes
focuses on graph data mining.

Yong Tang received the BS and MS degrees in
computer science from Wuhan University, China, in
1985 and 1990, respectively, and the PhD degree
in computer science from the University of Science
and Technology of China, China, in 2001. He is
currently a professor with the School of Computer
Science, South China Normal University, China. His
research interests include Big Data and collaborative
computing. He has published more than 100 papers
on international journals and conferences.

Chaobo He is currently a professor and PhD supervisor with the School of Computer Science, South
China Normal University, and is also an outstanding
member of the China Computer Federation (CCF).
His research interests include graph data mining and
intelligent education. He has published more than
70 peer-reviewed papers on many international journals and conferences, including IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
IEEE Transactions on Big Data, Information Fusion,
Neural Networks, AAAI, WWW, SIGIR, CIKM and DASFAA.