This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

1

Deep Learning for Video Anomaly
Detection: A Review
Peng Wu , Chengyu Pan, Yuting Yan, Guansong Pang , Member, IEEE, Qingsen Yan , Member, IEEE,
Peng Wang , Member, IEEE, and Yanning Zhang , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to discover
behaviors or events deviating from the normality in videos. As
a long-standing task in the field of computer vision, VAD has
witnessed much good progress. In the era of deep learning, with
the explosion of architectures of continuously growing capability
and capacity, a great variety of deep learning-based methods
are constantly emerging for the VAD task, greatly improving the
generalization ability of detection algorithms and broadening the
application scenarios. Therefore, such a multitude of methods
and a large body of literature make a comprehensive survey a
pressing necessity. In this article, we present an extensive and
comprehensive research review, covering the spectrum of five
different categories, namely, semi-supervised, weakly supervised,
fully supervised, unsupervised, and open-set supervised VAD, and
we also delve into the latest VAD works based on pretrained
large models and open-world learning, remedying the limitations
of past reviews in terms of only focusing on semi-supervised
VAD and small model-based methods. For the VAD task with
different levels of supervision, we construct a well-organized
taxonomy, profoundly discuss the characteristics of different
types of methods, and show their performance comparisons. In
addition, this review involves the public datasets, open-source
codes, and evaluation metrics covering all the aforementioned
VAD tasks. Finally, we provide several important research directions for the VAD community. Additional details of the survey
are available on the project homepage: https://github.com/RocNg/DeepVAD
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, large models,
video anomaly detection (VAD), video understanding.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NOMALY represents something that deviates from what
is standard, normal, or expected. There are myriads of
normalities, and anomalies are considerably scarce. However,
when anomalies do appear, they often have a negative impact.
Anomaly detection aims to discover these rare anomalies built

A

Received 20 April 2025; revised 21 September 2025; accepted 19 December
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62306240 and Grant U23B2013 and in
part by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2023TQ0272.
The work of Guansong Pang was supported in part by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under its MTC Young Individual
Research Grant (YIRG) Grant M24N8c0103; in part by the Ministry of Education, Singapore, through its Tier-1 Academic Research Fund under Grant
24-SIS-SMU-008; and in part by the Lee Kong Chian Fellowship under Grant
T050273. (Chengyu Pan and Yuting Yan contributed equally to this work.)
(Corresponding author: Guansong Pang.)
Peng Wu, Chengyu Pan, Yuting Yan, Qingsen Yan, Peng Wang, and Yanning
Zhang are with the School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710129, China (e-mail: xdwupeng@gmail.com;
pancy5519@gmail.com; xgdyanyuting@gmail.com; qingsenyan@gmail.com;
peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn; ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn).
Guansong Pang is with the School of Computing and Information Systems,
Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065 (e-mail: pangguansong@gmail.com).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647892, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3647892

on top of machine learning, thereby reducing the cost of manual judgment. Anomaly detection has widespread application
across various fields [1], such as financial fraud detection,
network intrusion detection, industrial defect detection [2], and
human violence detection. Among these, video anomaly detection (VAD) occupies an important place, in which anomaly
indicates the abnormal events in the temporal or spatial dimensions. VAD not only plays a vital role in many fields, such
as intelligent security and autonomous driving [3]. Owing to
its significant potential for applications across different fields,
VAD has attracted considerable attention from both industry
and academia.
In the pre-deep learning era, the routine way is to separate feature extraction and classifier design, which forms
a two-stage process, and then combine them together during the inference stage. First, there is a feature extraction
process to convert the original high-dimensional raw videos
into compact handcrafted features based on prior knowledge
of experts. For example, commonly used features mainly
include trajectory [4], histogram of flow (HOF) [5], 3-D
gradient [6], mixture of dynamic textures (MDT) [7], and so
on. Second, these expressed features are fed into the traditional machine learning algorithms for abnormal classification
learning, where well-known algorithms include but are not
limited to sparse reconstruction [5], [8], K-nearest neighbor
(KNN) [9], and MDT [7]. Although handcrafted features lack
robustness and are difficult to use for capturing effective
behavior expressions in the face of complex scenarios and
optimizing traditional algorithms is challenging, these pioneering works deeply enlighten subsequent deep learning-based
works.
The rise of deep learning has made traditional machine
learning algorithms fall out of favor over the last decade.
With the rapid development of computer hardware and the
massive data in the Internet era, we have witnessed great
progress in developing deep learning-based methods for VAD
in recent years: for example, ConvAE [10], the first work using
deep autoencoders based on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for capturing the regularities in videos; FuturePred
[11], the first work making use of U-Net for forecasting future
anomalies; and DeepMIL [12], the first endeavor exploring
deep multiple instance learning (MIL) framework for realworld anomalies. In order to more intuitively manifest the
research enthusiasm for the VAD task in the era of deep
learning, we conduct a statistical survey on the number of
publications related to VAD over the past decade (the era
driven by the rise of deep learning-based methods) through
Google Scholar and IEEE Xplore. We select five related
topics, i.e., VAD, abnormal event detection, abnormal behavior
detection, anomalous event detection, and anomalous behavior
detection, and showcase the publication statistics in Fig. 1. It is
not hard to see that the number of related publications counted

2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE I
A NALYSIS AND C OMPARISON OF R ELATED R EVIEWS

Fig. 1. Publications on VAD. Left: Google Scholar. Right: IEEE Xplore.

Fig. 2. Performance development for semi-supervised/weakly supervised
VAD tasks.

from both sources exhibits a steady and rapid growth trend,
demonstrating that VAD has garnered widespread attention.
Moreover, we also demonstrate the detection performance
trends of annual state-of-the-art methods on commonly used
datasets under two common supervised manners and present
performance trends in Fig. 2. The detection performance shows
a steady upward trend across all datasets, without displaying
any performance bottleneck. This indicates the evolving capability of deep learning methods under developing architectures
and also showcases the ongoing exploration enthusiasm of
deep learning methods for the VAD task.
The above statistics clearly demonstrate that deep learningdriven VAD is a hot area of current research. Therefore, there
is an urgent necessity for a systematic taxonomy and comprehensive summary of existing works, to facilitate newcomers
as a guide and provide references for existing researchers.
Based on this, we first collect some high-profile reviews on
VAD in the past few years, which are shown in Table I.
Ramachandra et al. [13] mainly focused on semi-supervised
VAD in the single scenario, lacking in discussions of crossscenes. Santhosh et al. [14] reviewed VAD methods focusing
on entities in road traffic scenarios. Their reviews lack sufficient in-depth analysis and center on pre-2020 methodologies,
resulting in the neglect of recent advances. Nayak et al. [15]
comprehensively surveyed on deep learning-based methods for
semi-supervised VAD but did not take into account weakly
supervised VAD methods. The follow-up work of Tran et al.
[16] introduced a review of the emerging weakly supervised
VAD, but the focus is not only on videos but also on
image anomaly detection, resulting in a lack of systematic
organization of the VAD task. Both Chandrakala et al. [17]

and Liu et al. [18] constructed an organized taxonomy
covering a variety of VAD tasks, e.g., unsupervised VAD,
semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised VAD, and fully
supervised VAD, and also surveyed deep learning-based methods for most supervised VAD tasks. However, they restrict
their scope to the conventional closed-set scenario and fail to
cover the latest research in the open-set supervised VAD, without introducing a brand-new pipeline based on pretrained large
models and interpretable learning. More recently, Liu et al.
[19], [20] presented two surveys on VAD: NSVAD and
P2VAD, which mainly focus on networking system deployment and privacy-preserving techniques, respectively. While
these works provide valuable insights from specific perspectives, they are limited to addressing one specific challenge in
VAD, offering less comprehensive analysis of the VAD task
itself.
To address this gap comprehensively, we present a thorough survey of VAD works in the deep learning era. Our
survey covers several key aspects to provide a comprehensive
analysis of VAD studies. To be specific, we perform an
in-depth investigation into the development trends of VAD
task in the era of deep learning and then propose a unified
framework that integrates different VAD tasks together, filling
the gaps in the existing reviews in terms of taxonomy. We
then collect the most comprehensive open sources, including
benchmark datasets, evaluation metrics, open-source codes,
and performance comparisons, to help researchers in this
field avoid detours and improve efficiency. Furthermore, we
systematically categorize various VAD tasks, dividing existing works into different categories and establishing a clear
and structured taxonomy system to provide a coherent and
organized overview of various VAD paradigms. In addition to
this taxonomy, we conduct a comprehensive analysis of each
paradigm. Furthermore, throughout this survey, we spotlight
influential works that have significantly contributed to the
research advancement.
The main contributions of this survey are summarized in
the following three aspects.
1) We provide a comprehensive review of VAD, covering five tasks based on different supervision signals,
i.e., semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised VAD,
fully supervised VAD, unsupervised VAD, and open-set
supervised VAD. The research focus has expanded from
traditional single-task semi-supervised VAD to a broader
range of multiple VAD tasks.
2) Staying abreast of the research trends, we review the
latest studies on open-set supervised VAD. Moreover,
we also revisit the most recent VAD methods based
on pretrained large models and interpretable learning.
The emergence of these methods elevates both the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

3

Fig. 3. Comparisons of five supervised VAD tasks. (a) Semi-supervised VAD. (b) Weakly supervised VAD. (c) Fully supervised VAD. (d) Unsupervised VAD.
(e) Open-set supervised VAD.
TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF F IVE D IFFERENT VAD TASKS

performance and application prospects of VAD. To our
knowledge, this is the first comprehensive survey of
open-set supervised VAD, pretrained large model-based
VAD, and interpretable VAD methods.
3) For different tasks, we systematically review existing
deep learning-based methods, and more importantly,
we introduce a unified taxonomy framework categorizing the methods from various VAD paradigms based
on various aspects, including model input, architecture, methodology, model refinement, and output. This
meticulous scientific taxonomy enables a comprehensive
understanding of the field.
The rest of this survey is structured as follows. Section II
introduces an overview of the research background of VAD,
e.g., the definition of different VAD tasks, benchmark datasets,
and evaluation metrics. Sections III–VII present the semisupervised, weakly supervised, fully supervised, unsupervised,
and open-set supervised VAD methods, respectively. Section VIII provides a perspective on future development trends
of VAD. Section IX draws meaningful conclusions for this
survey.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Notation and Taxonomy
We demonstrate five different VAD tasks in Fig. 3 and
also clearly showcase characteristics and comparisons of these
tasks in Table II. The general VAD problem is presented as
follows. Suppose that we are given a set of training samples
N+A
N
X = {xi }i=1
and corresponding labels Y, where Xn = {xi }i=1
N+A
is the set of normal samples and Xa = {xi }i=N+1 is the set
of abnormal samples. Each sample xi is accompanied by a
corresponding supervision label yi in Y. During the training
phase, the detection model Φ(θ) takes X as input and generates
anomaly predictions; it is then optimized according to the
following objective:
l = L (Φ (θ, X ) , X or Y)

(1)

where L(·) is employed to quantify the discrepancy between
the predictions and the ground-truth labels or original samples.
During inference, the detection model is expected to locate the
abnormal behaviors or events in videos based on the generated
anomaly predictions. Depending on the input to L, VAD can
be categorized into one of the following five tasks.
Semi-supervised VAD assumes that only normal samples
are available during the training stage, that is, Xa = ∅. This
task aims to learn the normal patterns based on the training
samples and consider the test samples that fall outside the
learned patterns as anomalies. For pros and cons, only normal
samples are required for training, and hence, there is no need to
painstakingly collect scarce abnormal samples. However, any
unseen test sample may be recognized as abnormal, leading
to a higher false positive rate.
Weakly supervised VAD has more sufficient training samples and supervision signals than semi-supervised VAD. Both
normal and abnormal samples are provided during the training
stage, but the precise location stamps of anomalies in these
untrimmed videos are unknown. In other words, only coarse
video-level labels are available (i.e., inexact supervision).
N+A
Formally, Y = {0, 1}i=1
, where yi = 0 indicates that xi is
normal and yi = 1 indicates that xi is abnormal. For pros
and cons, compared to fully supervised annotations, it can
significantly reduce labeling costs. However, it places higher
demands on algorithm design and may lead to arbitrary or
suboptimal predictions.
Fully supervised VAD, as its name implies, comprises the
complete supervision signals, meaning that each abnormal
sample has precise annotations of anomalies. This task can be
viewed as a standard video or frame classification problem.
Due to the scarcity of abnormal behaviors and intensive
manual labeling in reality, there has been little research on
the fully supervised VAD task. It is noteworthy that video
violence detection can be regarded as a fully supervised VAD;
hence, we denote violence detection as a fully supervised
VAD task. Formally, each video xi in Xa is accompanied by a
corresponding supervision label yi = {(t sj , tej )}Uj i , where t sj and tej

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Taxonomy of semi-supervised VAD. We provide a hierarchical taxonomy that organizes existing deep semi-supervised VAD models by model input,
methodology, network architecture, refinement strategy, and model output into a systematic framework.

denote the start and end time of the jth violence event and Ui
indicates the total number of anomalies present in the video.
For pros and cons, in contrast to weakly supervised VAD,
with full supervised information, the detection performance
of the algorithms is remarkable. However, the corresponding
drawback is the high requirement for intensive manual
annotations.
Unsupervised VAD aims to discover anomalies directly
from fully unlabeled videos in an unsupervised manner. Thus,
unsupervised VAD no longer requires labeling normal and
abnormal videos to build the training set. It can be expressed
formally as follows: X = Xtest and Y = ∅, in which
Xtest denotes the set of test samples. For pros and cons, no
time-consuming effort is needed to collect training samples,
avoiding the heavy labeling burden. Besides, this assumption
also expands the application fields of VAD, implying that
the detection system can continuously retrain without human
intervention. Unfortunately, due to the lack of labels, the
detection performance is relatively poor, leading to a higher
rate of false positives and false negatives.
Open-set supervised VAD is devised to discover unseen
anomalies that are not presented in the training set. Unlike
semi-supervised VAD, open-set supervised VAD includes
abnormal samples in the training set, which are referred
to as seen anomalies. Specifically, for each xi in Xa , its
corresponding label yi ∈ Cbase , here Cbase represents the
set of base (seen) anomaly categories and Cbase ⊂ C, with
C = Cbase ∪Cnovel . Here, Cnovel and C represent the sets of novel
anomaly categories unseen during training and all anomaly
categories, respectively. Given a testing sample xtest , its label
ytest may be either ∈ Cbase or ∈ Cnovel . For pros and cons,
compared to the two most common tasks, i.e., semi-supervised
VAD and weakly supervised VAD, open-set supervised VAD
not only reduces false positives but also avoids being limited
to closed-set scenarios, thus demonstrating high practical
value. However, due to the lack of prior knowledge, its
robustness becomes a challenge. Therefore, it relies on
learning specialized classifiers, loss functions, or generating
unknown classes to detect unseen anomalies.

metrics [21], as well as the latest sentence-level and reasoningbased metrics [22], [23], [24]. Due to space limitations, the
detailed descriptions of more related benchmark datasets and
evaluation metrics are showcased on the project website:
https://github.com/Roc-Ng/DeepVAD. Moreover, work [25],
which encompasses over 30 benchmarks for VAD, provides
a comprehensive analysis of VAD-specific datasets.

B. Datasets and Metrics
We showcase some representative VAD datasets with
detailed information in the Supplementary Materials. We provide a more systematic overview of evaluation metrics across
different levels, including frame-level metrics, pixel-level

A. Model Input
Existing semi-supervised VAD methods typically use the
raw video or its intuitive representations as the model input.
Depending on the modality, these can be categorized as
follows: RGB images, optical flow, skeleton, and hybrid

III. S EMI -S UPERVISED VAD
Based on our in-depth investigation of past surveys, we
found that previous surveys mostly lack a scientific taxonomy,
in which many surveys simply categorize semi-supervised
VAD works into different groups based on usage approaches,
such as reconstruction-based, distance-based, and probabilitybased approaches, and some surveys classify works according
to inputs, such as image-based, optical flow-based, and
patch-based approaches. It is particularly apparent that existing
classification reviews are relatively simplistic and superficial,
thus making it challenging to cover all methods comprehensively and effectively. To address this issue, we establish
a comprehensive taxonomy, encompassing model input,
methodology, architecture, model refinement, and model
output. The detailed illustration is presented in Fig. 4.
As aforementioned, only normal samples are available
for training in the semi-supervised VAD task, rendering
the supervised classification paradigm inapplicable. Common
approaches involve leveraging the intrinsic information of the
training samples to learn deep neural networks (DNNs) for
solving a pretext task. For instance, normality reconstruction is
a classic pretext task [10]. During this process, several critical
aspects need consideration: selection of sample information
(model input), design of pretext tasks (methodology), utilization of deep networks (network architecture), improvement
of methods (refinement), and expression of anomaly results
(model output). These key elements collectively contribute
to the effectiveness of semi-supervised VAD solutions. In
the following, we introduce existing deep learning-based
VAD methods systematically according to the aforementioned
taxonomy.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

5

inputs, where the first three represent appearance, motion, and
body posture.

3) Skeleton: In recent years, with the remarkable success
of deep learning technologies in the field of pose estimation, VAD methods based on skeleton input have emerged.
Skeleton input solely focuses on the human body, making it
more specialized than object-level RGB input. It demonstrates
impressive performance in human-centric VAD, marking it
as a significant research interest in recent years within the
VAD domain. Morais et al. [51] first endeavored to learn
the normal patterns of human movements using a dynamic
skeleton, where the pose estimation is utilized to independently
detect skeletons in each video frame. Then, GEPC [52],
MTTP [53], NormalGraph [54], HSTGCNN [55], TSIF [56],
STGCAE-LSTM [57], STGformer [58], STG-NF [59],
MoPRL [60], MoCoDAD [61], and TrajREC [62] are specialized in human-related VAD with the skeleton input.
4) Hybrid: The hybrid input from different modalities often
proves more advantageous for the VAD task compared to the
unimodal input due to their complementary nature. In existing
deep learning-driven VAD methods, hybrid input is a common
practice. Typical hybrid input includes frame-level RGB combined with optical flow [11], patch-level RGB combined with
optical flow [32], and object-level RGB combined with optical
flow [38]. More recently, several studies have explored hybrid
input based on RGB combined with skeleton [63].

1) RGB: RGB images are the most common input
for conventional vision tasks driven by deep learning
techniques, and this holds true for the VAD task as well.
Unlike other modalities, RGB images do not require additional
processing steps such as optical flow calculations or pose
estimation algorithms. In the deep learning era, various deep
models can be employed to extract compact and high-level
visual features from these high-dimensional raw data. Utilizing
these high-level features enables the design of more effective
subsequent detection methods. Moreover, depending on the
input size, RGB image-based input can be categorized into
three principal groups: frame level, patch level, and object
level.
Frame-level RGB captures the whole scene: background
(often irrelevant) and foreground (likely anomaly regions).
The conventional approach typically uses multiple consecutive
video frames as a single input to capture temporal context
within the video, as seen in methods like ConvAE [10],
ConvLSTM-AE [26], and STAE [27]. On the other hand,
several research studies focus on using single-frame RGB as
input, aiming to detect anomalies at the spatial level, such as
AnomalyGAN [28] and AMC [29].
Patch-level RGB input involves segmenting the framelevel RGB input spatially or spatiotemporally, which focuses
on local regions, effectively separating the foreground from
the background and differentiating between various individual entities. The primary advantage of patch-level input is
its ability to significantly reduce the interference from the
dominant background, which is usually less relevant to the
anomalies. This segmentation helps in isolating areas that
are more likely to contain anomalies, thereby enhancing the
detection accuracy. For example, AMDN [30], [31], DeepOC
[32], and Deep-cascade [33] took spatiotemporal patches as
the input, and S2 -VAE [34] and GM-VAE [35] only employed
an image patch from a single video frame as the model input.
Object-level RGB input has emerged in recent years
alongside the advancement of object detection approaches,
which focuses exclusively on foreground objects. Compared
to patch-level input, it entirely disregards background information and neglects to consider the relationship between objects
and backgrounds. As a result, it demonstrates impressive
performance in identifying anomalous events within complex
scenes. Hinami et al. [36] first proposed an object-centric
approach FRCN based on object inputs, a follow-up work
ObjectAE [37] introduced to train object-centric autoencoders
on detected objects, and subsequently, a series of works
focusing on object-level inputs emerged, e.g., HF2 -VAD [38],
HSNBM [39], BDPN [40], ER-VAD [41], and HSC [42].
2) Optical Flow: A video is not merely a sequence of
stacked RGB images; it encapsulates the temporal dimension
and crucial temporal context. Therefore, extracting temporal
context is vital for understanding video content, with motion
information playing an irreplaceable role. Optical flow represents the motion information between consecutive video
frames and is commonly used as a model input for the VAD
task. It typically does not appear alone but is paired with the
corresponding RGB image as input in the two-stream network.
Therefore, it also encompasses frame [11], [43], [44], [45],
[46], [47], patch [32], [48], [49], and object [38], [41], [47],
[50] levels.

B. Methodology
Through extensive research on existing works, we categorize three major approaches for learning the normal paradigm:
self-supervised learning, one-class learning, and interpretable
learning.
1) Self-Supervised Learning: Self-supervised learning
primarily leverages auxiliary tasks (pretext tasks) to
derive supervisory signals directly from unsupervised data.
Essentially, self-supervised learning operates without external
labeled data, as these labels are generated from the input
data itself. For the semi-supervised VAD task, which lacks
explicit supervisory signals, self-supervised learning naturally becomes essential for learning normal representations
and constructing the normal paradigm/pattern based on these
auxiliary tasks. Consequently, self-supervised learning-based
methods consistently dominate the leading position in the
semi-supervised VAD task. Throughout this process, a significant research focus and challenge lies in designing effective
pretext tasks derived from the data itself. Here, we compile the
common design principles of auxiliary tasks used in existing
self-supervised learning-based methods.
Reconstruction is currently the most commonly used pretext
task for self-supervised learning-based methods in the field
of semi-supervised VAD [10], [26], [29], [34], [60], [64],
[65], [66]. The main process involves inputting normal data
into the network, performing encoding–decoding operations,
and generating reconstructed data, encouraging the network to
produce reconstructions that closely match the original input
data. The objective can be expressed as
lrec = L (Φ (θ, x) , x) .

(2)

For convenience, in the following, unless otherwise specified, x represents normal data, which could be a normal
video, a normal video frame, a normal feature, or similar.
This loss quantifies reconstruction error, and the larger the
reconstruction error, the higher the probability that the data
is considered anomalous. However, due to the high capacity
of DNNs, reconstruction-based methods cannot guarantee that

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

larger reconstruction errors for abnormal events necessarily
happen.
Prediction fully leverages the temporal coherence inherent
in videos, which is also a commonly used pretext task.
This pretext task is based on the assumption that normal
events are predictable, while abnormal ones are unpredictable.
Specifically, the prediction pretext task takes historical data as
input and, through encoding–decoding operations within the
network, outputs the predicted data for the current moment.
The network is compelled to make the predicted data similar
to the actual current data. We define the optimization objective
for prediction as
lpre = L (Φ (θ, {It−∆t , . . . , It−1 }) , It )

(3)

where It is the actual data at the current time step t and
It−∆t:t−1 represents the historical data from time step t − ∆t to
t − 1. FuturePred [11], as a future frame prediction framework,
provided a new solution for VAD. Then, many researchers
[38], [45], [58], [67], [68], [69], [70], [71], [72], [73] proposed
other prediction-based methods. It alleviates, to some extent,
the problem in reconstruction-based methods, where abnormal
events can also be well reconstructed.
Visual cloze test is inspired by the cloze test in natural
language processing [74], [75], [76]. It mainly involves training multiple DNNs to infer deliberately erased data from
incomplete video sequences, where the prediction task can be
considered a special case of visual cloze test task, i.e., the
erased data happen to be the last frame in the video sequence.
We define the objective function for completing erased data at
the tth time stamp as
˚
 
(t)
= L Φ θ, I1 , . . . , It−1 , It+1 , . . . , It .
(4)
lvct
Similar to the prediction task, it also leverages the temporal
relationships in the video, but the difference lies in this task
can learn better high-level semantics and temporal context.
Jigsaw puzzles have recently been applied as a pretext task
in semi-supervised VAD [77], [78], [79]. The main process
involves creating jigsaw puzzles by performing temporal, spatial, or spatiotemporal shuffling, and then designing networks
to predict the relative or absolute permutation in time, space,
or both. The optimization function is as follows:
X

ljig =
L ti , tˆi
(5)
i

where ti and tˆi denote the ground-truth and predicted positions
of the ith data in the original sequence, respectively. Unlike
the previous pretext tasks, which involve high-quality image
generation, jigsaw puzzles are cast as a multilabel classification, enhancing computational efficiency and learning more
contextual details.
Contrastive learning is a key approach in self-supervised
learning, where the goal is to learn useful representations by
distinguishing between similar and dissimilar pairs. For semisupervised VAD, two samples are regarded as a positive pair
if they originate from the same sample, and otherwise as a
negative sample pair [80]. We show the contrastive loss as
follows:
ı 
X
exp sim xi , xi+ τ
ı 
lcon =
− log P
(6)
−
τ
k exp sim xi , xk
i
where xi and xi+ are the positive pair and xi and xk− are the
negative pair. sim(·, ·) is the similarity function (e.g., cosine

similarity). Wang et al. [81] introduced a cluster attention contrast framework for VAD, which is built on top of contrastive
learning. During the inference stage, the highest similarity
between the test sample and its variants is regarded as the
regularity score. Lu et al. [82] further proposed a learnable
locality-sensitive hashing with contrastive learning strategy
for VAD.
Denoising [83], [84] is very similar to reconstruction, with
the main difference being that noise η is added to the input
data, and the network is encouraged to achieve a denoising
effect for the reconstructed data. The benefit is that it can
enhance the robustness of network for VAD. The optimization
objective is expressed as
lden = L (Φ (θ, x + η) , x) .

(7)

Deep sparse coding is encouraged by the success of traditional sparse reconstruction-based VAD methods [5], and
upgraded versions leverage DNNs for semi-supervised VAD.
Unlike the aforementioned reconstruction or prediction tasks,
sparse coding typically uses extracted high-level representations rather than raw video image data as input. By learning
from a large amount of normal representations, a dictionary
of normal patterns is constructed. The total objective is listed
as
lspa = kx − Bzk22 + kzk1 .
(8)
Different normal events can be reconstructed through the dictionary B multiplied by the sparse coefficient z. For anomalies,
it is hard to reconstruct them using the linear combination of
elements from the normal dictionary with a sparse coefficient.
To overcome the time-consuming inference and low-level
handcrafted features of traditional sparse reconstruction-based
methods, deep sparse coding-based methods have emerged
[44], [85], [86], [87], simultaneously leveraging the powerful
representation capabilities of DNNs and sparse representation
techniques to improve detection performance and efficiency.
Patch inpainting involves the process of reconstructing
missing or corrupted regions by inferring the missing parts
from the available data. This technique mainly leverages the
spatial and temporal context to predict the content of the
missing regions, ensuring that the reconstructed regions blend
seamlessly with the surrounding regions. The optimization
objective for patch inpainting can be defined to minimize the
difference between the original and the reconstructed patches,

lpat = L Φ (θ, x M) , x M̄ .
(9)
M denotes a mask, where the value of 0 in the mask indicates
that the position needs to be inpainted, while a value of
1 indicates that the position does not need to be inpainted,
and M̄ is a reversed M. Different from prediction and visual
cloze test, patch inpainting takes into account the spatial or
spatiotemporal context. Zavrtanik et al. [88] regarded anomaly
detection as a reconstruction-by-inpainting task, further randomly removed partial image regions, and reconstructed the
image from partial inpaintings. Then, Ristea et al. [89] and
Madan et al. [90] presented a novel self-supervised predictive
architectural building block, a plug-and-play design that can
easily be incorporated into various anomaly detection methods.
More recently, a self-distilled masked autoencoder [91] was
proposed to inpaint original frames.
Multiple task can ease the dilemma of the single pretext
task, i.e., a single task may not be well aligned with the VAD
task, thus leading to suboptimal performance. Recently, several

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

7

works attempted to train VAD models jointly on multiple
pretext tasks. For example, various studies exploited different
self-supervised task compositions, involving reconstruction
and prediction [27], [39], [51], [92], prediction and denoising
[93], [94], prediction and jigsaw puzzles [95], and prediction
and constrastive learning [82]. A few works [78], [79], [96],
[97] strove to develop more sophisticated multiple tasks from
different perspectives.
2) One-Class Learning: One-class learning primarily
focuses on samples from the normal class. Compared to
self-supervised learning methods, it does not require the strenuous effort of designing feasible pretext tasks. It is generally
divided into three categories: one-class classifier, Gaussian
classifier, and adversarial classifier from discriminators of
generative adversarial networks (GANs).
One-class classifier basically includes one-class support vector machine (OC-SVM) [98], support vector data description
(SVDD) [99], and other extensions, e.g., basic/generalized
one-class discriminative subspace classifier (BODS and
GODS) [100]. Specifically, OC-SVM is modeled as an
extension of the SVM objective by learning a max-margin
hyperplane that separates the normal from the abnormal in
a dataset, which is learned by minimizing the following
objective:
X
1
min kwk22 − b + C ξi
w,b,ξ≥0 2
s.t. wT xi ≥ b − ξi ∀xi ∈ Xn
(10)

decides whether the output of G follows the normal distribution or not. Therefore, an adversarial classifier can be jointly
learned by optimizing the following objective:


min max E xi ∼pt log (D (xi ))
G
D


+ E x̃i ∼pt +Nσ log (1 − D (G ( x̃i )))
(13)

where ξi is the nonnegative slack, w and b denote the
hyperplane, and C is the slack penalty. AMDN [30] is a typical
OC-SVM-based VAD method, which obtains low-dimensional
representations through the autoencoder, and then uses
OC-SVM to classify all normal representations. Another
popular variant of one-class classifiers is (Deep) SVDD [101],
[102] that, instead of modeling data to belong to an open
half-space (as in OC-SVM), assumes the normal samples
inhabit a bounded set, and the optimization seeks the centroid
c of a hypersphere of minimum radius R > 0 that contains all
normal samples. Mathematically, the objective reads
X
1
ξi
min R2 + C
c,R,ξ≥0 2
s.t. kxi − ck22 ≤ R2 − ξi ∀xi ∈ Xn
(11)
where, as in OC-SVM, ξi models the slack. Based on this,
Wu et al. [32] proposed an end-to-end deep one-class classifier, i.e., DeepOC, for VAD, avoiding the shortcomings of
complicated two-stage training of AMDN.
Gaussian classifier-based methods [33], [35], [103] assume
that, in practical applications, the data typically follow a
Gaussian distribution. By using training samples, it learns
the Gaussian distribution (mean µ and variance Σ) of the
normal pattern. During the testing phase, samples that deviate
significantly from the mean are considered anomalies. The
abnormal score is presented as


1
1
T −1
(x
(x
p (xi ) =
exp
−
−
µ)
Σ
−
µ)
. (12)
i
i
k
1
2
(2π) 2 |Σ| 2
Adversarial classifier uses adversarial training between the
generator G and discriminator D to learn the distribution of
normal samples. G is aware of normal data distribution, as the
normal samples are accessible to it. Therefore, D explicitly

where xi is drawn from a normal data distribution pt and x̃i
is the sample xi with added noise, which is sampled from a
normal distribution Nσ . The final abnormal score of an input
sample x is given as D(G(x)). For instance, Sabokrou et al.
[104], [105], [106] developed a conventional adversarial
network that contains two subnetworks, where the discriminator works as the one-class classifier, while the refiner supports
it by enhancing the normal samples and distorting the anomalies. To mitigate the instability caused by adversarial training,
Zaigham Zaheer et al. [107], [108] proposed stabilizing adversarial classifiers by transforming the role of discriminator to
distinguish good and bad quality reconstructions as well as
introducing pseudo-anomaly examples.
3) Interpretable Learning: While self-supervised and
one-class learning methods perform well on standard VAD
benchmarks, their reliance on end-to-end complex neural
networks limits interpretability and generalization. To address
this, explainable VAD aims not only to detect anomalies
but also to provide reasons, which is essential for trust and
transparency in real-world scenarios. The explainable VAD can
be categorized into two types: scene decomposition-based and
vision–language model (VLM) reasoning-based approaches.
Scene decomposition-based methods aim to disentangle the
components of a scene to provide interpretable cues. For
example, Hinami et al. [36] leveraged a multitask detector to extract generic knowledge of entities, actions, and
attributes and then employed an environment-specific detector
for anomaly recounting. Reiss and Hoshen [50] adopted both
explicit (e.g., pose and velocity) and implicit semantic features
for explainable decision-making. Doshi and Yilmaz [109]
further utilized scene graphs to monitor individual and interactive behavior for contextual explanations. Singh et al. [110]
developed a detector-independent model based on high-level
visual features that can not only detect but also spatially
localize anomalies with interpretable outputs.
VLM reasoning-based methods exploit the powerful inference capability of large language models (LLMs) and VLMs
to provide human-understandable justifications. For example,
Yang et al. [111] proposed the first rule-based reasoning
framework for semi-supervised VAD by prompting LLMs to
interpret abnormal events. VLAVAD [112] leveraged VLMs
to enhance the interpretability of VAD through semantic
feature reasoning instead of visual feature classification. More
recently, SlowFastVAD [113] integrated a fast DNN-based
detector with a slow VLM-based detector, by employing a
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)-driven reasoning process for a small number of ambiguous segments, it effectively
balances inference speed and detection accuracy.
C. Network Architecture
1) Autoencoder: It consists of two vital structures, namely,
encoder and decoder, in which the encoder compresses the
input sample into a latent space representation, significantly
reducing the dimensionality of the sample. The decoder
restores the input sample from the latent space representation, increasing the dimensionality of the sample back to

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

the original input size. Due to its inherent image restoration and high-level representation extraction capabilities, an
autoencoder is widely used in image restoration-based pretext
tasks for self-supervised learning methods, such as reconstruction [10], prediction [27], and inpainting [91]. Moreover,
an autoencoder is also used to extract features for one-class
learning-based methods [32], where the extracted features
are used for optimizing subsequent one-class classifiers.
Autoencoder structures are highly flexible and can be based
on various different base networks, such as 2-D CNN [10],
3-D CNN [27], recurrent neural network (RNN) [87], gated
recurrent unit (GRU) [51], long short-term memory (LSTM)
[26], [128], graph convolutional network (GCN) [54], [57],
and Transformer [75], [91].
2) Generative Adversarial Network: GAN has been widely
adopted in various applications, including VAD, due to its
powerful generative capabilities. The key idea is to use the
generator and discriminator to identify abnormal samples that
deviate from the learned normal distribution. Specifically,
GAN, like autoencoder, is mainly applied to image restorationbased pretext tasks [11], [129], [130], [131], [132], where
the generator creates restored images and the discriminator
is discarded once the training is finished. On the contrary, several one-class learning-based methods [104], [107]
leverage the discriminator to assess the likelihood that a
new sample is real (normal) or generated (anomalous).
Low likelihood scores indicate anomalies, thereby achieving
end-to-end one-class classifiers.
3) Diffusion: Diffusion models have achieved state-of-theart performance across a wide range of generative tasks
and have become a promising research topic. Unlike traditional generative models like GAN or autoencoder, diffusion
models generate samples by reversing a diffusion process
that gradually destroys sample structure. This reverse process
reconstructs the sample from noise in a step-by-step manner,
leading to high-quality results. Therefore, diffusion models
also appear in the image restoration-based pretext tasks.
Flaborea et al. [61] and Yan et al. [124] introduced novel
diffusion-based methods to predict the features using the
skeleton and RGB frame, respectively, for VAD. Building
on the preceding two methods, MA-PDM [133] introduced
a unified framework that couples patch-level diffusion with
dual appearance/motion conditioning, injecting fine-grained
local information into the diffusion process to better capture
anomalies.
D. Model Refinement
1) Pseudo Anomalies: In semi-supervised learning, there is
usually a scarcity of real anomalous samples. To compensate
for this lack, several research studies opt to generate pseudo
anomalies. Current approaches include: perturbing normal
samples, i.e., applying random perturbations to normal video
samples, such as adding noise, shuffling frame sequences, or
adding extra patches [134], [135], [136], [137]; leveraging
generative models, i.e., using GAN or diffusion to generate
samples similar to normal ones but with anomalous features
[108], [138]; and simulating specific anomalous behaviors, i.e.,
manually introducing extra anomalous samples at the imagelevel or feature level [118], [125]. As a result, training with
pseudo-anomalous samples allows the detection model to learn
a variety of anomalous patterns and helps the model learn a
broader range of anomalous features, improving its robustness
and generalization abilities in real-world applications [139].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

2) Memory Bank: Memory banks [120], [121], [122],
[140], [141], [142] are used to store feature representations of
normal video samples, which serve as a reference baseline and
can be dynamically updated to adapt to new normal patterns,
thereby enabling the model to better capture normal patterns
and simultaneously improving the ability to adapt to changing
environments. In specific implementations, memory banks can
be combined with different network architectures, such as
autoencoder-based reconstruction (or prediction) [114], [116],
[117], [119] and contrastive learning [143].
It is worth noting that refinement strategies are designed as
independent modules, which can be flexibly combined with
different methodologies and network architectures rather than
being restricted to specific counterparts. For instance, memory
bank mechanisms can be integrated not only with sparse
coding but also with prediction-based methods.
E. Model Output
1) Frame-Level Detection: In frame-level output, each
frame of the video is classified as normal or abnormal. This
output format provides an overall view of which frames in the
video contain anomalies. Such output is simple and straightforward, easy to implement and understand, and particularly
effective for detecting anomalies over a broad time range.
2) Pixel-Level Detection: In pixel-level output, not only is
it identified which frames contain anomalies, but also which
specific pixel regions within those frames are abnormal [144].
This output format provides more granular information about
the anomalies. Pixel-level output offers precise locations and
extents of anomalies, providing more detailed information for
further analysis of the nature and cause of the anomalies.
3) Sentence-Level Description:
Beyond identifying
whether and where anomalies occur, sentence-level output
provides natural language descriptions explaining the detected
anomalies. Powered by LLMs and VLMs, this output offers
reasoning about abnormal events, enabling the model to not
only highlight anomalies but also to articulate why a specific
event is considered anomalous [113].
F. Performance Comparison
Fig. 5 presents a concise chronology of semi-supervised
VAD methods. Besides, Table III provides a performance
summary observed in representative semi-supervised VAD
methods.
IV. W EAKLY S UPERVISED VAD
Compared to semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised
VAD is a newer research direction, and therefore, existing
reviews lack a comprehensive and in-depth introduction. As
shown in Table I, Chandrakala et al. [17] and Liu et al.
[18] mention the weakly supervised VAD task. However, the
former only briefly describes several achievements from 2018
to 2020, while the latter, although encompassing recent works,
lacks a scientific taxonomy and simply categorizes them into
single-modal and multimodal based on the different modalities.
Given this context, we survey related works from 2018 to the
present, including the latest methods based on pretrained large
models, and we classify existing works from four aspects:
model input, methodology, refinement strategy, and model
output. The taxonomy of weakly supervised VAD is illustrated
in Fig. 6.
Compared to semi-supervised VAD, weakly supervised
VAD explicitly defines anomalies during the training process,

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

9

Fig. 5. Chronology of representative semi-supervised VAD research.
TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF S EMI -S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 6. Taxonomy of weakly supervised VAD. We provide a hierarchical taxonomy that organizes existing deep weakly supervised VAD models by model
input, methodology, refinement strategy, and model output into a systematic framework.

giving the detection algorithm a clear direction. However, in
contrast to fully supervised VAD, the coarse weak supervision

signals introduce uncertainty into the detection process. Most
existing methods utilize the MIL mechanism to optimize the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

model. This process can be viewed as selecting the hardest
regions (video clips) that appear most abnormal from normal
bags (normal videos) and the regions most likely to be abnormal from abnormal bags (abnormal videos). Then, the goal
is to maximize the predicted confidence difference between
them (with the confidence for the hardest normal regions
approaching 0 and the confidence for the most abnormal
regions approaching 1), which can be regarded as a binary
classification optimization. By gradually mining all normal and
abnormal regions based on their different characteristics, the
anomaly confidence of abnormal regions increases, while that
of normal regions decreases. Unfortunately, due to the lack
of strong supervision signals, detection models tend to adopt
speculative strategies during the optimization process, often
resulting in ambiguous or inaccurate anomaly localization.
A. Model Input
Unlike semi-supervised VAD methods, recent weakly
supervised VAD methods choose to use features extracted
by pretrained models (e.g., CNN or Transformer-based representations of RGB, optical flow, or skeleton sequences) as
input to the network backbone of anomaly detectors, instead of
directly feeding the raw video frames. This approach alleviates
the problem posed by the large scale of existing weakly
supervised VAD datasets, the diverse and complex scenes,
and the weak supervision signals. Using pretrained features as
input allows the effective utilization of off-the-shelf models’
learned knowledge of appearance and motion, significantly
reduces the complexity of the detection model, and enables
efficient training. However, it should be noted that in both
semi-supervised and weakly supervised VAD, the original
input source is still raw video; the main difference lies in
whether feature extraction is separated as a preprocessing step
or integrated into the end-to-end training.
1) RGB: RGB is the most common model input. The
general approach divides a long video into multiple segments
and uses pretrained visual models to extract global features
from each segment. As deep models continue to evolve and
improve, the visual models used have also been upgraded,
progressing from the initial C3D [12], [145], [146] to I3D
[147], [148], [149], [150], [151], 3D-ResNet [152], [153],
TSN [154], [155], [156], and more recently, to the popular
Swin Transformer [157], [158] and CLIP [159], [160]. This
continuous upgrade in visual models has led to a gradual
improvement in detection performance.
2) Optical Flow: Similar to RGB, the same approach is
applied to optical flow input to obtain corresponding global
features. However, due to the time-consuming nature of optical
flow extraction, it is less commonly used in existing methods.
Common pretrained models for optical flow include I3D [161]
and TSN [155].
3) Audio: For multimodal datasets (e.g., XD-Violence) containing audio signals, audio also holds significant perceptual
information. Unlike RGB images, audio is 1-D and is typically
processed as follows: audios are resampled, computed the
spectrograms, and created log mel spectrograms. Then, these
features are framed into nonoverlapping examples. Finally,
these examples are then fed into a pretrained audio model,
such as VGGish [162], to extract features [163], [164].
4) Text: More recently, several researchers [165], [166],
[167], [168] attempt to incorporate text descriptions related to
videos to aid in VAD. These texts may be manually annotated
or generated by large models. The text data are typically

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

converted into features using the text encoder and then fed
into the subsequent detection network.
5) Hybrid: Common hybrid inputs include RGB combined
with optical flow [161], RGB combined with audio [169],
[170], [171], RGB combined with optical flow and audio
[172], and, more recently, RGB combined with text [173].
B. Methodology
Based on existing methods, we divide them into three
different groups: one-stage MIL, two-stage self-learning, and
VLM-based interpretable learning.
1) One-Stage MIL: The one-stage MIL [12], [174], [175],
[176] is the most commonly used approach for weakly
supervised VAD. The basic idea is to first divide long videos
into multiple segments and then use an MIL mechanism to
select the most representative samples from these segments.
This includes selecting hard examples from normal videos
that look most like anomalies and the most likely abnormal
examples from the abnormal videos. The model is then optimized by lowering the anomaly confidence of hard examples
and increasing the confidence of the most likely abnormal
examples. Ultimately, the confidence of model in predicting
normal samples gradually decreases, while its confidence
in predicting abnormal samples gradually increases, thereby
achieving anomaly detection. The advantage of this method
lies in its simplicity and ease of implementation. The MIL
objective is showcased as
X


lmil =
max 0, 1 − max Φ θ, xia + max Φ θ, xin
(14)
i

where xa and xn denote an abnormal video and a normal video,
respectively.
Additionally, TopK [148] extends MIL by selecting the
top K segments with the highest prediction scores from each
video, rather than just the highest scoring segment, for training.
Therefore, MIL can be seen as a special case of TopK. For
these TopK segments, compute their average prediction score
as the predicted probability ŷ
0
1
K
X
1
ŷ = σ @
Φ (θ, xi )A
(15)
K
i∈topk

where σ is the sigmoid activation function. The cross-entropy
loss between ŷ and the label y is used to optimize the model

ltopk = − y log (ŷ) + (1 − y) log (1 − ŷ) .
(16)
The one-stage MIL mechanism leads to models that tend to
focus only on the most significant anomalies while ignoring
less obvious ones.
2) Two-Stage Self-Training: In contrast, improved
two-stage self-learning is more complex but also more
effective. This method employs a two-stage training
process. First, a preliminary model is pretrained using the
one-stage MIL. During this phase, the model learns the basic
principles of VAD. Then, using the pretrained model as an
initial parameter, a self-learning mechanism is introduced to
adaptively train the model further, enhancing its ability to
recognize anomalies. Specifically, during the self-learning
phase, the predictions of model from the pretraining stage
are used to automatically select high-confidence abnormal
regions. These regions are then treated as pseudo-labeled
data to retrain the model. The effectiveness of two-stage
self-training mainly arises from the progressive refinement

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

11

of supervision signals. Initially, the model is trained with
weak supervision, allowing it to capture coarse anomalous
patterns. In the second stage, leveraging the predictions as
pseudo-labels, the model receives more targeted guidance
focusing on regions with high anomaly probability [158].
This iterative pseudo-labeling and retraining process helps
the model to capture subtle and accurate abnormal events
that are difficult to detect with only weak labels. As a result,
two-stage self-training can significantly improve detection
performance, especially in complex scenes with noisy or
incomplete supervision. GCN-Clean [155], MIST [177], MSL
[158], CUPL [178], and TPWNG [179] are typical two-stage
self-training works.
The two-stage self-learning method based on improved MIL
excels in weakly supervised VAD, but it also comes with
some drawbacks, such as high computational complexity: the
two-stage training process requires more computational
resources and time. Both pretraining and self-learning phases
involve multiple iterations of training, leading to high computational costs. Depending on initial model quality, the
self-learning stage relies on the initial model generated during
pretraining. If the quality of the initial model is poor, erroneous predictions may be treated as pseudo-labels, affecting
subsequent training effectiveness.
3) VLM-Based Interpretable Learning: In recent years,
VLMs have demonstrated remarkable potential and versatility
across various vision tasks, giving rise to a novel paradigm,
i.e., VLM-based interpretable learning, which enhances the
interpretability of VAD from two perspectives.
1) Category-Level Interpretability: Unlike traditional
methods that merely generate binary predictions
(abnormal/normal), VLM-based approaches can
explicitly predict the semantic category of anomalies by
aligning visual content with language representations.
However, most of these methods still rely on MIL or
self-training schemes to guide anomaly localization
and model optimization. For instance, VadCLIP [180]
was the first to adopt an aligned paradigm based on
CLIP to support both coarse-grained and fine-grained
VAD. TPWNG [179] further extended VadCLIP by
incorporating a two-stage self-training strategy within
the CLIP-aligned framework.
2) Semantic-Level Interpretability: This approach focuses
on leveraging LLMs and VLMs to generate natural
language descriptions that explain detected anomalies.
It typically involves four key steps.
a) Extracting high-level visual semantics from video
frames using a visual encoder.
b) Mapping these features into the language space via
VLMs to enable cross-modal alignment.
c) Constructing natural language prompts to guide
reasoning within LLMs.
d) Generating explanatory descriptions of anomalies
using LLMs.
These methods generally move beyond MIL and selftraining strategies, instead relying on the intrinsic reasoning
capabilities of VLMs to perform training-free anomaly detection and generate interpretable explanations. However, they
often suffer from slower inference speeds and suboptimal
detection performance in specific VAD scenarios. Representative works include HAWK [181], VERA [182], CUVA [23],
VADor [183], and LAVAD [184]. Notably, although some
methods, such as LAVAD [184], are essentially a trainingfree unsupervised approach, we list them under the weakly
supervised category for consistency in benchmark usage and
comparative evaluation.
C. Refinement Strategy
Refinement strategies primarily focus on input features,
method design, and other aspects to compensate for the
shortcomings of weak supervision signals. We compile several
commonly used refinement strategies and provide a detailed
introduction in this section.
1) Temporal Modeling: Temporal modeling is essential
for capturing the critical context information in videos.
Unlike actions, anomalous events are complex combinations
of scenes, entities, actions, and other elements, which require
rich contextual information for accurate reasoning. Existing
temporal modeling methods can be broadly categorized into
local relationship modeling and global relationship modeling.
Local modeling is typically used for online detection [186],
whereas global modeling is mainly used for offline detection
[185]. Techniques such as temporal convolutional networks
[148], [194], dilated convolution [185], GCN [188], [195],
conditional random field [196], and Transformers [158], [191],
[197], [198], [199] are frequently employed to capture these
temporal relationships effectively.
2) Spatiotemporal Modeling: Furthermore, spatiotemporal
modeling can simultaneously capture spatial relationships,
highlighting anomalous spatial locations and effectively reducing noise from irrelevant backgrounds. This can be achieved
by segmenting video frames into multiple patches or using
existing object detectors to capture foreground objects. Then,
methods like self-attention [46], [153], [187], [200] are used
to learn the relationships between these patches or objects.
Compared to temporal modeling, spatiotemporal modeling
involves a higher computational load due to the increased
number of entities being analyzed.
3) MIL-Based Refinement: The traditional MIL mechanism
focuses only on the segments with the highest anomaly scores,
which leads to a series of issues, such as ignoring event
continuity, the fixed length K-value not adapting to different
video scenarios, and bias toward abnormal snippets with
simple contexts. Several advanced strategies [201], [202]
aim to address the limitations. By incorporating unbiased MIL [190], prior information from text [167], [192],
magnitude-level MIL [189], continuity-aware refinement
[203], and adaptive K-values [204], the detection performance
can be significantly improved.
4) Feature Metric Learning: While MIL-based classification ensures the interclass separability of features, this
separability at the video level alone is insufficient for accurate
anomaly detection. In contrast, enhancing the discriminative
power of features through clustering similar features and
isolating different ones should complement and even augment
the separability achieved by MIL-based classification. Specifically, the basic principle of feature metric learning is to make
similar features compact and different features distant in the
feature space to improve discrimination. Several works [150],
[165], [167], [186], [197], [205], [206] exploited feature metric
learning to enhance the feature discrimination.
5) Knowledge Distillation: It aims to transfer knowledge
from the enriched branch to the barren branch to alleviate the
semantic gap, which is mainly applied for modality-missing
[207] or modality-enhancing [171] scenarios.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE IV
Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF W EAKLY S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 7. Chronology for representative weakly supervised VAD research.

6) Vision–Language Models: VLMs enhance anomaly
detection not only by incorporating language-informed visual
representations, e.g., CLIP-TSA [208] and cross-modal semantic alignment, but also by LLMs to generate explanatory
captions that improve detection performance, as demonstrated
in TEVAD [166], UCA [173], and VAD-Instruct50k [22].
Moreover, they can directly exploit the prior knowledge
encoded in LLMs and VLMs [184].
D. Model Output
Similar to semi-supervised VAD, the model output in
weakly supervised VAD typically includes frame-level detection, pixel-level detection [209], [210], and sentence-level
description.
E. Performance Comparison
As depicted in Fig. 7, several significant research works
have emerged in the field’s chronology. Moreover, we present
an elaborate performance comparison of existing research, as
detailed in Table IV.
V. F ULLY S UPERVISED VAD
Fully supervised VAD refers to the task of detecting video
anomalies under the condition that the dataset has detailed
frame-level or video-level annotations. Here, we consider
video violence detection as a fully supervised VAD task.
A. Approach Categorization
Video violence detection typically takes the appearance,
motion, skeleton, audio, or a combination of these as the

input. It can be categorized based on the type of input into
the following types.
Appearance input mainly consists of raw RGB images,
directly showcasing the visual effect of video frames. This
helps the model better understand anomalies that can be
directly detected from a visual perspective. Many methods
[211], [212], [220], [221] used RGB features extracted from
raw images using pretrained models as the model input.
Motion input mainly includes optical flow, optical flow
acceleration, and frame differences. These inputs directly
showcase the motion state of objects, helping to identify
anomalies from the motion perspective that might be difficult
to detect visually. Dong et al. [211] and Peixoto et al. [222]
used optical flow and optical flow acceleration as input, while
Sudhakaran and Lanz [213] and Hanson et al. [214] employed
frame differences as model input.
Skeleton input can intuitively display the pose state of
humans, allowing the model to exclude background interference and focus on human actions. This enables more intuitive
and vivid recognition of violent behavior. Su et al. [215] and
Singh et al. [223] conducted violence detection by studying
the interaction relationships between skeletal points.
Audio input can provide additional information to aid in
identifying violent events [222]. This is because certain violent
incidents inevitably involve changes in sound; such variations
help us better detect violent events, especially when RGB
images may not be effectively detected due to issues like
occlusion.
Hybrid input combines the strengths of different modalities
to better detect violent events. Cheng et al. [216] utilized
RGB images and optical flow as input, while Shang et al.
[224] combined RGB images with audio as input. Garcia-Cobo
and SanMiguel [218] fed skeleton and frame differences into
detection models.
B. Performance Comparison
We present the performance comparison of existing fully
supervised VAD research in Table V.
VI. U NSUPERVISED VAD
Despite the great popularity of supervised VAD, supervised
methods still have shortcomings in practical applications.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

13

TABLE V
Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF F ULLY S UPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

On the one hand, we cannot clearly define what constitutes
normal behavior of real-life human activities in many cases,
e.g., running in a sports ground is normal, but running in
a library is forbidden. On the other hand, it is impractical
to know every possible normal event in advance, especially
for scientific research. Therefore, unsupervised VAD is of
significant research value [235].
A. Approach Categorization
Through an in-depth investigation, we roughly classify
the current unsupervised VAD methods into three categories:
pseudo label, change detection, and others.
Pseudo-label-based paradigm is described as follows.
Wang et al. [228] proposed a two-stage training approach
where an autoencoder is first trained with an adaptive reconstruction loss threshold to estimate normal events from unlabeled videos. These estimated normal events are then used as
pseudo-labels to train an OC-SVM, refining the normality
model to exclude anomalies and improve detection performance. Pang et al. [229] introduced a self-training deep
ordinal regression method, starting with initial detection using
classical one-class algorithms to generate pseudo-labels for
anomalous and normal frames. An end-to-end anomaly score
learner is then trained iteratively using a self-training strategy
that optimizes the detector with newly generated pseudolabels. Zaheer et al. [236] proposed an unsupervised generative
cooperative learning approach, leveraging the low-frequency
nature of anomalies for cross-supervision between a generator
and a discriminator, each learning from the pseudo-labels of
the other. Al-lahham et al. [237] presented a coarse-to-fine
pseudo-label generation framework using hierarchical divisive
clustering for coarse pseudo-labels at the video level and
statistical hypothesis testing for fine pseudo-labels at the
segment level, training the anomaly detector with the obtained
pseudo-labels.
Change detection-based paradigm can be summarized as
follows. Del Giorno et al. [225] performed change detection in video frames using a simple logistic regression
classifier to measure deviations between the data, making
comparisons time-independent by randomly ordering frames.
Ionescu et al. [226] proposed a change detection framework
based on the unmasking technique, determining abnormal
events by observing changes in classifier accuracy between
consecutive events. Liu et al. [227] linked the heuristic
unmasking procedure to multiple classifier two-sample tests in
statistical machine learning, aiming to improve the unmasking method. Hu et al. [230] introduced a method based on
masked autoencoders [238], where the rare and unusual nature
of anomalies leads to poor prediction of changing events,
allowing for anomaly detection and scoring in unlabeled
videos.

Other paradigm includes the following methods. Li et al.
[239] proposed a clustering technique, where an autoencoder
is trained on a subset of normal data and iterates between
hypothetical normal candidates based on clustering and representation learning. The reconstruction error is used as a
scoring function to assess normality. Lin et al. [231] introduced a causal inference framework to reduce the effect of
noisy pseudo-labeling, combining long-term temporal context
with local image context for anomaly detection. Yu et al.
[232] highlighted the effectiveness of deep reconstruction for
unsupervised VAD, revealing a normality advantage where
normal events have lower reconstruction loss. They integrated
a novel self-paced refinement scheme into localization-based
reconstruction for unsupervised VAD.
B. Performance Comparison
We present the performance comparison of existing unsupervised VAD research in Table VI.
VII. O PEN -S ET S UPERVISED VAD
Open-set supervised VAD is a challenging task where the
goal is to detect anomalous events in videos that are unseen
during the training phase. Unlike traditional (closed-set) VAD,
where the types of anomalies are known and well-defined,
open-set VAD must handle unforeseen and unknown anomalies. This is crucial for real-world applications, as it is
impractical to anticipate and annotate every possible anomaly
during training. Therefore, research on open-set VAD has
garnered significant attention. However, existing review works
lack an investigation into open-set VAD. Based on this, we
conduct an in-depth survey and make a systematic taxonomy
of existing open-set VAD works. To our knowledge, this
is the first review that includes a detailed introduction to
open-set supervised VAD. In this section, we broadly categorize open-set supervised VAD into two types based on different
research directions: open-set VAD and few-set VAD.
A. Open-Set VAD
Open-set VAD is a vital area of research that addresses
the limitations of traditional anomaly detection methods by
focusing on the detection of unknown anomalies. MLEP [240],
as the first work on open-set supervised VAD, addressed
the challenge of detecting anomalies in videos when only
a few anomalous examples are available for training. It
emphasizes learning a margin that separates normal and
anomalous samples in the feature space. This helps in
distinguishing anomalies even when only a few examples
are available. The follow-up work [241] introduced a new
benchmark, namely, UBnormal, specifically designed for
open-set VAD. It aims to provide a comprehensive evaluation

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE VI
Q UANTITATIVE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF U NSUPERVISED M ETHODS ON P UBLIC DATASETS

framework for testing and comparing various VAD methods
under open-set conditions. Zhu et al. [242] broke through
the closed-set detection limitations and developed novel techniques that can generalize to previously unseen anomalies
and effectively distinguish them from normal events. Specifically, a normalizing flow model is introduced to create
pseudo-anomaly features. Recently, Wu et al. [160] extended
open-set VAD to the more challenging open-vocabulary VAD,
aiming to both detect and recognize anomaly categories.
Centered around VLMs, this task is achieved by matching
videos with corresponding textual labels. Additionally, large
generative models and language models are utilized to generate
pseudo-anomalous samples. There are other methods for the
open-set setting, such as [243] and [244], but they are focused
on image-level anomaly detection. Through various innovative
approaches, such as margin learning, the development of
benchmarks, generalization strategies, and the integration of
language-vision models, researchers are pushing the boundaries of what is possible in VAD. These advancements are
paving the way for more robust, flexible, and practical VAD
systems suitable for a wide range of real-world applications.
B. Few-Shot VAD
The goal of few-shot VAD is to detect anomalies in
a previously unseen scene with only a few frames. Compared to open-set VAD, the main difference lies in that
a few real frames of unseen anomalies are provided.
This task is first introduced by Lu et al. [245], and
a meta-learning-based model is proposed to tackle this
problem. During the test stage, the model needs to be
fine-tuned via a few provided samples from the new scene. In
order to avoid extra fine-tuning processes before deployment,
Hu et al. [246] and Huang et al. [247] adopted the metricbased adaptive network and variational network, respectively,
both leveraging a few normal samples as the reference
during the test stage without any fine-tuning. Furthermore,
Aich et al. [248] presented a novel zxVAD framework, a
significant advancement by enabling anomaly detection across
domains without requiring target domain adaptation. In this
work, a novel untrained CNN-based anomaly synthesis module
crafts pseudo-abnormal examples by adding foreign objects in
normal video frames in a training-free manner. This contrasts
with the above few-shot adaptive methods, which require a
few labeled data from the target domain for fine-tuning. The
former focuses on domain-invariant feature extraction and
unsupervised learning, ensuring robustness and generalizability, while the latter relies on few-shot learning to adapt models
to new domains with minimal labeled data. More recently,
Jain et al. [249] proposed an extended version utilizing weakly

supervised learning to achieve cross-domain generalization.
By incorporating external datasets from diverse domains, the
model trained in a weakly supervised manner is enabled to
generalize across domains.
VIII. F UTURE O PPORTUNITIES
A. Creating Comprehensive Benchmarks
The current VAD benchmarks have various limitations in
terms of data size, modality, and capturing views. Thus, an
important future direction is to extend benchmarks along these
dimensions for providing more realistic VAD test platforms.
1) Large-Scale: Currently, in VAD, particularly in semisupervised settings, the available datasets are of limited scale.
Small-scale benchmarks tend to overestimate model accuracy,
while performance in real-world scenarios remains significantly limited. Therefore, expanding the scale and diversity
of VAD datasets is a critical direction for future research to
ensure both robustness and real-world applicability.
2) Multimodal: Currently, there is limited research on
multimodal VAD. Just as humans perceive the world through
multiple senses, such as vision, hearing, and smell, effectively
utilizing various modalities of information in the face of
multisource heterogeneous data can enhance the performance
of anomaly detection. For example, using audio information
can better detect anomalies such as screams and panic, while
using infrared information can identify abnormal situations in
dark environments.
3) Egocentric, Multiview, and 3-D: Egocentric VAD
involves using data captured from wearable devices or
body-mounted cameras to simulate how individuals perceive
their environment and identify abnormal events, such as
detecting falls or aggressive behavior in real time. Creating
multiview benchmarks that leverage data from viewpoints
allows for a comprehensive environment analysis, enabling the
detection of anomalies that may not be visible from a single
perspective. The 3-D perspectives from depth information
or point clouds can offer more detailed spatial information,
enabling models to better understand the structure and context
of the environment, which also brings multimodal signals.
However, deploying VAD in practice faces key challenges:
large and diverse data complicates storage and annotation,
real-time labeling is labor-intensive and constrained by ethical
and legal issues, hardware limits and costs affect reliability,
and dynamic environments demand advanced algorithms to
integrate heterogeneous and 3-D sensor data.
B. Toward Open-World Task
The current research focuses on the closed-set VAD, which
is restricted to detecting only those anomalies that are defined

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

15

and annotated during training. In applications like urban
surveillance, the inability to adapt to unforeseen anomalies
limits the practicality and effectiveness of closed-set VAD
models. Therefore, moving toward the open-world VAD task,
handling the uncertainty and variability of real-world situations, is a feasible future trend. To accomplish this task,
several key approaches and their combination can be taken
into account.
1) Self-Supervised Learning: Leveraging unlabeled data to
learn discriminative representations that can distinguish
between normal and abnormal events.
2) Open-Vocabulary Learning: Developing models that
can adapt to new anomalies with large models [160],
pseudo-anomaly synthesis, or minimal labeled examples.
3) Incremental Learning: continuously updating models
with new data and anomaly types without forgetting
previously learned information. Open-world VAD must
handle concept drift, where the definition of normal and
abnormal can change over time due to social, seasonal,
or environmental factors. This requires models to be
robust against distribution shifts and to learn continuously with minimal human intervention.

2) Algorithm: Combining algorithms from different
domains can be helpful for enhanced reasoning,
including: knowledge graphs, i.e., utilize knowledge
graphs to incorporate contextual information and
relationships between entities; intent prediction, i.e., use
intent prediction algorithms to anticipate future actions
and detect deviations from expected behaviors [123],
[126]; LLMs’ reasoning, i.e., the textual descriptions
of detected anomalies using large LLMs can also be
used for the explanation. These descriptions can explain
what the model perceives as abnormal and why [22].
3) Output: Various aspects such as the spatiotemporal
changes and patterns in the video may be synthesized
to explain anomalies [193]. In practical applications,
decision transparency and user trust are crucial, especially for emergency-triggering anomalies. Generating
accurate, human-understandable explanations is challenging in complex or crowded scenes, and interpretable
models need to balance explanation detail with real-time
detection to support timely interventions.
We provide further perspectives in the Supplementary
Materials, including privacy-preserving VAD [205], [235],
hallucination in VLMs, spatial–temporal reasoning [23], [24],
and long-video understanding [22], to present a broader view
of future directions.

C. Embracing Pretrained Large Models
Pretrained large models have shown remarkable success
in various computer vision tasks, and these models can be
leveraged in VAD to enhance the understanding and detection
of anomalies by integrating semantic context and improving
feature representations. Here are several feasible directions.
1) Feature Extraction: Pretrained weights of large models,
which have been trained on large-scale datasets, provide
a strong foundation for feature extraction and reduce the
need for extensive training from scratch [208].
2) Semantic Understanding: Language–vision models can
be utilized to understand and incorporate contextual
information from video scenes. For instance, text
descriptions associated with video frames can provide
additional context that helps in identifying anomalies. In
the same way, leverage the language capabilities of these
models to generate or understand textual descriptions of
anomalies, aiding in both the detection and interpretation
of the anomalies [22].
3) Zero-Shot Learning: It exploits the zero-shot learning
capabilities of language–vision models to detect anomalies without requiring explicit examples during training.
This is particularly useful in open-set VAD scenarios
where new types of anomalies can occur [250]. The
deployment of large pretrained models in real-time VAD
faces challenges such as computational efficiency, high
memory consumption, and the need for fast adaptation
to environment-specific data.
D. Exploiting Interpretable VAD
Interpretable VAD focuses on creating models that not only
detect anomalies but also provide understandable explanations
for their predictions. This is crucial for gaining trust in the
system, especially in high-stakes applications like surveillance,
healthcare, and autonomous vehicles. Here are several feasible
directions from three different layers of a VAD system.
1) Input: Instead of directly inputting raw video data into
the model, leverage existing technologies to extract key
information, such as foreground objects, position coordinates, motion trajectories, and crowd relationships.

IX. C ONCLUSION
We present a comprehensive survey of VAD approaches in
the deep learning era. Unlike previous reviews mainly focusing on semi-supervised VAD, we provide a taxonomy that
systematically divides the existing works into five categories
by their supervision signals, e.g., semi-supervised, weakly
supervised, unsupervised, fully supervised, and open-set supervised VAD. For each category, we further refine the categories
based on model differences, e.g., model input and output,
methodology, refinement strategy, and architecture, and we
demonstrate the performance comparison of various methods.
Finally, we discuss several promising research directions for
deep learning-based VAD in the future.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129,
no. 4, pp. 1038–1059, Apr. 2021.
Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.
Z. Chen, Y. Tian, W. Zeng, and T. Huang, “Detecting abnormal
behaviors in surveillance videos based on fuzzy clustering and multiple
auto-encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jun.
2015, pp. 1–6.
Y. Cong, J. Yuan, and J. Liu, “Sparse reconstruction cost for abnormal
event detection,” in Proc. CVPR, Jun. 2011, pp. 3449–3456.
C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 FPS
in MATLAB,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013,
pp. 2720–2727.
W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly detection and
localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 18–32, Jan. 2014.
C. Lu, J. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Jia, “Fast abnormal event detection,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 127, no. 8, pp. 993–1011, Aug. 2019.
V. Saligrama and Z. Chen, “Video anomaly detection based on local
statistical aggregates,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2012, pp. 2112–2119.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
16

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and
L. S. Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016,
pp. 733–742.
W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame
prediction for anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 6536–6545.
W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “A survey of singlescene video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 2293–2312, May 2022.
K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, and P. P. Roy, “Anomaly detection in
road traffic using visual surveillance: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1–26, Nov. 2021.
R. Nayak, U. C. Pati, and S. K. Das, “A comprehensive review on
deep learning-based methods for video anomaly detection,” Image Vis.
Comput., vol. 106, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 104078.
T. M. Tran, T. N. Vu, N. D. Vo, T. V. Nguyen, and K. Nguyen,
“Anomaly analysis in images and videos: A comprehensive review,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1–37, Jul. 2023.
S. Chandrakala, K. Deepak, and G. Revathy, “Anomaly detection in surveillance videos: A thematic taxonomy of deep models,
review and performance analysis,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 3319–3368, Apr. 2023.
Y. Liu et al., “Generalized video anomaly event detection: Systematic
taxonomy and comparison of deep models,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1–38, Jul. 2024.
J. Liu et al., “Networking systems for video anomaly detection: A
tutorial and survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1–37,
Oct. 2025.
Y. Liu et al., “Privacy-preserving video anomaly detection: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Sep. 3, 2025, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3600252.
B. Ramachandra and M. J. Jones, “Street scene: A new dataset and
evaluation protocol for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020, pp. 2558–2567.
H. Zhang et al., “Holmes-VAU: Towards long-term video anomaly
understanding at any granularity,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 13843–13853.
H. Du et al., “Uncovering what, why and how: A comprehensive
benchmark for causation understanding of video anomaly,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 18793–18803.
L. Zhu, Q. Chen, X. Shen, and X. Cun, “VAU-R1: Advancing
video anomaly understanding via reinforcement fine-tuning,” 2025,
arXiv:2505.23504.
R. Nayak, U. C. Pati, and S. K. Das, “A comprehensive review
of datasets for detection and localization of video anomalies: A
step towards data-centric artificial intelligence-based video anomaly
detection,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 21, pp. 59617–59674,
Dec. 2023.
W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Remembering history with convolutional
LSTM for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia
Expo (ICME), Jul. 2017, pp. 439–444.
Y. Zhao, B. Deng, C. Shen, Y. Liu, H. Lu, and X.-S. Hua, “Spatiotemporal AutoEncoder for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. 25th
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017, pp. 1933–1941.
M. Ravanbakhsh, M. Nabi, E. Sangineto, L. Marcenaro, C. Regazzoni,
and N. Sebe, “Abnormal event detection in videos using generative
adversarial nets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep.
2017, pp. 1577–1581.
T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence
with appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283.
D. Xu, E. Ricci, Y. Yan, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Learning deep representations of appearance and motion for anomalous event detection,”
in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2015, pp. 8.1–8.12.
D. Xu, Y. Yan, E. Ricci, and N. Sebe, “Detecting anomalous events
in videos by learning deep representations of appearance and motion,”
Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 156, pp. 117–127, Mar. 2017.
P. Wu, J. Liu, and F. Shen, “A deep one-class neural network for
anomalous event detection in complex scenes,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2609–2622, Jul. 2020.

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]

[47]

[48]
[49]

[50]
[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, and R. Klette, “Deep-cascade:
Cascading 3D deep neural networks for fast anomaly detection and
localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26,
no. 4, pp. 1992–2004, Apr. 2017.
T. Wang et al., “Generative neural networks for anomaly detection in
crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1390–1399, May 2019.
Y. Fan, G. Wen, D. Li, S. Qiu, M. D. Levine, and F. Xiao, “Video
anomaly detection and localization via Gaussian mixture fully convolutional variational autoencoder,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
vol. 195, Jun. 2020, Art. no. 102920.
R. Hinami, T. Mei, and S. Satoh, “Joint detection and recounting of
abnormal events by learning deep generic knowledge,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 3639–3647.
R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Objectcentric auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event
detection in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
Z. Liu, Y. Nie, C. Long, Q. Zhang, and G. Li, “A hybrid video anomaly
detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and
flow-guided frame prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 13568–13577.
Q. Bao, F. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Jiao, X. Liu, and L. Li, “Hierarchical
scene normality-binding modeling for anomaly detection in surveillance videos,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
pp. 6103–6112.
C. Chen et al., “Comprehensive regularization in a bi-directional
predictive network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2022,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 230–238.
C. Sun, Y. Jia, and Y. Wu, “Evidential reasoning for video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
pp. 2106–2114.
S. Sun and X. Gong, “Hierarchical semantic contrast for scene-aware
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22846–22856.
W. Luo, W. Liu, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction network
for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 7505–7520, Nov. 2022.
P. Wu, J. Liu, M. Li, Y. Sun, and F. Shen, “Fast sparse coding networks
for anomaly detection in videos,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 107, Nov.
2020, Art. no. 107515.
R. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Gao, and Z. Hao, “Appearance-motion
memory consistency network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021, pp. 938–946.
Y. Liu, J. Liu, X. Zhu, D. Wei, X. Huang, and L. Song,
“Learning task-specific representation for video anomaly detection with
spatial–temporal attention,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 2190–2194.
X. Huang, C. Zhao, and Z. Wu, “A video anomaly detection framework
based on appearance-motion semantics representation consistency,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun.
2023, pp. 1–5.
N. Li, F. Chang, and C. Liu, “Spatial–temporal cascade autoencoder for
video anomaly detection in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 23, pp. 203–215, 2021.
B. Ramachandra, M. J. Jones, and R. R. Vatsavai, “Learning a distance
function with a Siamese network to localize anomalies in videos,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Mar. 2020,
pp. 2598–2607.
T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “An attribute-based method for video anomaly
detection,” 2022, arXiv:2212.00789.
R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
“Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
2019, pp. 11996–12004.
A. Markovitz, G. Sharir, I. Friedman, L. Zelnik-Manor, and S. Avidan, “Graph embedded pose clustering for anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2020,
pp. 10539–10547.
R. Rodrigues, N. Bhargava, R. Velmurugan, and S. Chaudhuri, “Multitimescale trajectory prediction for abnormal human activity detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020,
pp. 2615–2623.
W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Normal graph: Spatial temporal graph
convolutional networks based prediction network for skeleton based
video anomaly detection,” Neurocomputing, vol. 444, pp. 332–337, Jul.
2021.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]

[68]
[69]
[70]

[71]
[72]

[73]
[74]
[75]

[76]

X. Zeng, Y. Jiang, W. Ding, H. Li, Y. Hao, and Z. Qiu, “A hierarchical spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for anomaly
detection in videos,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33,
no. 1, pp. 200–212, Jan. 2023.
Y. Yang, Z. Fu, and S. M. Naqvi, “A two-stream information fusion
approach to abnormal event detection in video,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022,
pp. 5787–5791.
N. Li, F. Chang, and C. Liu, “Human-related anomalous event detection
via spatial–temporal graph convolutional autoencoder with embedded long short-term memory network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 490,
pp. 482–494, Jun. 2022.
C. Huang et al., “Hierarchical graph embedded pose regularity learning
via spatio-temporal transformer for abnormal behavior detection,” in
Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 307–315.
O. Hirschorn and S. Avidan, “Normalizing flows for human pose
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2023, pp. 13499–13508.
S. Yu et al., “Regularity learning via explicit distribution modeling for
skeletal video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 6661–6673, Aug. 2024.
A. Flaborea, L. Collorone, G. M. D’Amely Di Melendugno,
S. D’Arrigo, B. Prenkaj, and F. Galasso, “Multimodal motion conditioned diffusion model for skeleton-based video anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023,
pp. 10284–10295.
A. Stergiou, B. De Weerdt, and N. Deligiannis, “Holistic representation learning for multitask trajectory anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024,
pp. 6715–6725.
R. Pi, P. Wu, X. He, and Y. Peng, “EOGT: Video anomaly detection
with enhanced object information and global temporal dependency,”
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 20, no. 10,
pp. 1–21, Oct. 2024.
Y. Chang, Z. Tu, W. Xie, and J. Yuan, “Clustering driven deep
autoencoder for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2020, pp. 329–345.
Z. Fang, J. Liang, J. T. Zhou, Y. Xiao, and F. Yang, “Anomaly detection
with bidirectional consistency in videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1079–1092, Mar. 2022.
C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for
unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022.
J. T. Zhou, L. Zhang, Z. Fang, J. Du, X. Peng, and Y. Xiao, “Attentiondriven loss for anomaly detection in video surveillance,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 4639–4647, Dec.
2020.
Y. Zhang, X. Nie, R. He, M. Chen, and Y. Yin, “Normality learning
in multispace for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3694–3706, Sep. 2021.
X. Wang et al., “Robust unsupervised video anomaly detection by
multipath frame prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2301–2312, Jun. 2022.
J. Yu, Y. Lee, K. C. Yow, M. Jeon, and W. Pedrycz, “Abnormal
event detection and localization via adversarial event prediction,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3572–3586, Aug.
2022.
W. Zhou, Y. Li, and C. Zhao, “Object-guided and motion-refined
attention network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
K. Cheng, X. Zeng, Y. Liu, M. Zhao, C. Pang, and X. Hu,
“Spatial–temporal graph convolutional network boosted flow-frame
prediction for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICASSP - IEEE Int.
Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5.
Y. Liu et al., “AMP-Net: Appearance-motion prototype network
assisted automatic video anomaly detection system,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2843–2855, Feb. 2024.
G. Yu et al., “Cloze test helps: Effective video anomaly detection via
learning to complete video events,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 583–591.
Z. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wu, P. Wu, and X. Liu, “Video event restoration based on keyframes for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 14592–14601.
G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Video anomaly
detection via visual cloze tests,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 4955–4969, 2023.

17

[77]

G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Qin, D. Zhang, X. Bao, and D. Huang,
“Video anomaly detection by solving decoupled spatio-temporal jigsaw
puzzles,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022, pp. 494–511.
[78] C. Shi, C. Sun, Y. Wu, and Y. Jia, “Video anomaly detection via
sequentially learning multiple pretext tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 10296–10306.
[79] A. Barbalau et al., “SSMTL++: Revisiting self-supervised multi-task
learning for video anomaly detection,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 229, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103656.
[80] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.
[81] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020,
pp. 2463–2471.
[82] Y. Lu, C. Cao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Learnable locality-sensitive
hashing for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 963–976, Feb. 2023.
[83] C. Sun, Y. Jia, H. Song, and Y. Wu, “Adversarial 3D convolutional
auto-encoder for abnormal event detection in videos,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 23, pp. 3292–3305, 2021.
[84] D. Chen, L. Yue, X. Chang, M. Xu, and T. Jia, “NM-GAN:
Noise-modulated generative adversarial network for video anomaly
detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 116, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 107969.
[85] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based
anomaly detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
[86] J. T. Zhou, J. Du, H. Zhu, X. Peng, Y. Liu, and R. S. M. Goh,
“AnomalyNet: An anomaly detection network for video surveillance,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 2537–2550,
Oct. 2019.
[87] W. Luo et al., “Video anomaly detection with sparse coding inspired
deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1070–1084, Mar. 2021.
[88] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[89] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
[90] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer
block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024.
[91] N.-C. Ristea, F.-A. Croitoru, R. T. Ionescu, M. Popescu, F. S. Khan,
and M. Shah, “Self-distilled masked auto-encoders are efficient video
anomaly detectors,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 15984–15995.
[92] M. Ye, X. Peng, W. Gan, W. Wu, and Y. Qiao, “AnoPCN: Video
anomaly detection via deep predictive coding network,” in Proc. 27th
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 1805–1813.
[93] Y. Liu, J. Liu, J. Lin, M. Zhao, and L. Song, “Appearance-motion
united auto-encoder framework for video anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2498–2502,
May 2022.
[94] Y. Liu, J. Liu, M. Zhao, D. Yang, X. Zhu, and L. Song, “Learning
appearance-motion normality for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[95] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial networks for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023.
[96] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu,
and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and
multi-task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 12742–12752.
[97] M. Zhang et al., “Multi-scale video anomaly detection by multi-grained
spatio-temporal representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17385–17394.
[98] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional
distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul.
2001.
[99] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,”
Mach. Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2003.
[100] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative
subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
18

[101] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[102] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. J. Franks, M. Kloft, and
K. Müller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc. ICLR,
2020, pp. 1–25.
[103] M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, Z. Moayed, and R. Klette, “Deepanomaly: Fully convolutional neural network for fast anomaly detection
in crowded scenes,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 172,
pp. 88–97, Jul. 2018.
[104] M. Sabokrou, M. Khalooei, M. Fathy, and E. Adeli, “Adversarially
learned one-class classifier for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3379–3388.
[105] M. Sabokrou et al., “AVID: Adversarial visual irregularity detection,”
in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 488–505.
[106] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end oneclass classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021.
[107] M. Zaigham Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is
gold: Redefining the adversarially learned one-class classifier training
paradigm,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14171–14181.
[108] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.I. Lee, “Stabilizing adversarially learned one-class novelty detection
using pseudo anomalies,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31,
pp. 5963–5975, 2022.
[109] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “Towards interpretable video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2654–2663.
[110] A. Singh, M. J. Jones, and E. G. Learned-Miller, “EVAL: Explainable
video anomaly localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 18717–18726.
[111] Y. Yang, K. Lee, B. Dariush, Y. Cao, and S.-Y. Lo, “Follow the rules:
Reasoning for video anomaly detection with large language models,”
in Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 304–322.
[112] C. Li and Y. Jiang, “VLAVAD: Vision-language models assisted unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2024, pp. 1–15.
[113] Z. Ding et al., “SlowFastVAD: Video anomaly detection via integrating
simple detector and RAG-enhanced vision-language model,” 2025,
arXiv:2504.10320.
[114] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[115] S. Lee, H. G. Kim, and Y. M. Ro, “BMAN: Bidirectional multiscale aggregation networks for abnormal event detection,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 2395–2408, 2020.
[116] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality for
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
[117] H. Lv, C. Chen, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Learning normal
dynamics in videos with meta prototype network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 15425–15434.
[118] M. I. Georgescu, R. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and M. Shah, “A
background-agnostic framework with adversarial training for abnormal
event detection in video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 4505–4523, Sep. 2021.
[119] Z. Yang, P. Wu, J. Liu, and X. Liu, “Dynamic local aggregation network
with adaptive clusterer for anomaly detection,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022,
pp. 404–421.
[120] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, and C. Wu, “Effective video abnormal
event detection by learning a consistency-aware high-level feature
extractor,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022,
pp. 6337–6346.
[121] C. Sun, C. Shi, Y. Jia, and Y. Wu, “Learning event-relevant factors
for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 2384–2392.
[122] W. Liu, H. Chang, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Diversity-measurable
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12147–12156.
[123] C. Cao, Y. Lu, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “A new comprehensive benchmark for semi-supervised video anomaly detection and anticipation,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 20392–20401.
[124] C. Yan, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Pang, and W. Wang, “Feature prediction
diffusion model for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2023, pp. 5527–5537.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[125] Z. Liu, X.-M. Wu, D. Zheng, K.-Y. Lin, and W.-S. Zheng, “Generating
anomalies for video anomaly detection with prompt-based feature
mapping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 24500–24510.
[126] C. Cao, H. Zhang, Y. Lu, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Scene-dependent
prediction in latent space for video anomaly detection and anticipation,”
in Proc. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47, Jan. 2024,
pp. 224–239.
[127] H. Hu, W. Du, P. Liao, B. Wang, and S. Fan, “Noise-resistant video
anomaly detection via RGB error-guided multiscale predictive coding
and dynamic memory,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 19109–19119.
[128] J. Ryan Medel and A. Savakis, “Anomaly detection in video using
predictive convolutional long short-term memory networks,” 2016,
arXiv:1612.00390.
[129] M. Ravanbakhsh, E. Sangineto, M. Nabi, and N. Sebe, “Training
adversarial discriminators for cross-channel abnormal event detection
in crowds,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
Jan. 2019, pp. 1896–1904.
[130] H. Vu, T. D. Nguyen, T. Le, W. Luo, and D. Phung, “Robust anomaly
detection in videos using multilevel representations,” in Proc. AAAI,
2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 5216–5223.
[131] H. Song, C. Sun, X. Wu, M. Chen, and Y. Jia, “Learning normal patterns via adversarial attention-based autoencoder for abnormal
event detection in videos,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 22, no. 8,
pp. 2138–2148, Aug. 2020.
[132] X. Feng, D. Song, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Ni, and H.-F. Chen,
“Convolutional transformer based dual discriminator generative adversarial networks for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACMMM, 2021,
pp. 5546–5554.
[133] H. Zhou et al., “Video anomaly detection with motion and appearance
guided patch diffusion model,” in Proc. AAAI, 2025, vol. 39, no. 10,
pp. 10761–10769.
[134] P. Wu, W. Wang, F. Chang, C. Liu, and B. Wang, “DSS-Net: Dynamic
self-supervised network for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 2124–2136, 2024.
[135] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, and S.-I. Lee, “Limiting reconstruction capability of autoencoders using moving backward pseudo anomalies,” in
Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Robots (UR), Jul. 2022, pp. 248–251.
[136] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, J.-Y. Lee, and S.-I. Lee, “Learning not to
reconstruct anomalies,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2021.
[137] M. Astrid, M. Z. Zaheer, and S.-I. Lee, “PseudoBound: Limiting the
anomaly reconstruction capability of one-class classifiers using pseudo
anomalies,” Neurocomputing, vol. 534, pp. 147–160, May 2023.
[138] M. Pourreza, B. Mohammadi, M. Khaki, S. Bouindour, H. Snoussi,
and M. Sabokrou, “G2D: Generate to detect anomaly,” in Proc. IEEE
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 2003–2012.
[139] R. Delussu, L. Putzu, and G. Fumera, “Synthetic data for video
surveillance applications of computer vision: A review,” Int. J. Comput.
Vis., vol. 132, no. 10, pp. 4473–4509, Oct. 2024.
[140] J. Leng, M. Tan, X. Gao, W. Lu, and Z. Xu, “Anomaly warning:
Learning and memorizing future semantic patterns for unsupervised
ex-ante potential anomaly prediction,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 6746–6754.
[141] Y. Liu et al., “Stochastic video normality network for abnormal event
detection in surveillance videos,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 280, Nov.
2023, Art. no. 110986.
[142] L. Wang, J. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Shi, and G. Hua, “Memory-augmented
appearance-motion network for video anomaly detection,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 138, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109335.
[143] C. Cao, Y. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Context recovery and knowledge
retrieval: A novel two-stream framework for video anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 1810–1825, 2024.
[144] C. Huang et al., “Pixel-level anomaly detection via uncertainty-aware
prototypical transformer,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
Oct. 2022, pp. 521–530.
[145] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[146] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “CLAWS: Clustering assisted weakly supervised learning with normalcy suppression
for anomalous event detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020,
pp. 358–376.
[147] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 6299–6308.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

19

[148] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2020, pp. 322–339.
[149] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Selfsupervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745.
[150] Y. Zhou, Y. Qu, X. Xu, F. Shen, J. Song, and H. Shen,
“BatchNorm-based weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” 2023,
arXiv:2311.15367.
[151] S. AlMarri, M. Z. Zaheer, and K. Nandakumar, “A multi-head
approach with shuffled segments for weakly-supervised video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. Workshops (WACVW), Jan. 2024, pp. 132–142.
[152] K. Hara, H. Kataoka, and Y. Satoh, “Can spatiotemporal 3D CNNs
retrace the history of 2D CNNs and ImageNet?,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6546–6555.
[153] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Long-short temporal co-teaching for weakly
supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2023, pp. 2711–2716.
[154] L. Wang et al., “Temporal segment networks: Towards good practices
for deep action recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016,
pp. 20–36.
[155] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph
convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1237–1246.
[156] N. Li, J.-X. Zhong, X. Shu, and H. Guo, “Weakly-supervised anomaly
detection in video surveillance via graph convolutional label noise
cleaning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 481, pp. 154–167, Apr. 2022.
[157] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002.
[158] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with
transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp. 1395–1403.
[159] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139,
2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[160] P. Wu et al., “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 18297–18307.
[161] B. Wan, Y. Fang, X. Xia, and J. Mei, “Weakly supervised video
anomaly detection via center-guided discriminative learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[162] S. Hershey et al., “CNN architectures for large-scale audio
classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), Mar. 2017, pp. 131–135.
[163] W.-F. Pang, Q.-H. He, Y.-J. Hu, and Y.-X. Li, “Violence detection
in videos based on fusing visual and audio information,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021,
pp. 2260–2264.
[164] X. Peng et al., “Learning weakly supervised audio-visual violence
detection in hyperbolic space,” 2023, arXiv:2305.18797.
[165] Y. Pu, X. Wu, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Learning prompt-enhanced
context features for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 4923–4936, 2024.
[166] W. Chen, K. T. Ma, Z. Jian Yew, M. Hur, and D. A.-A. Khoo, “TEVAD:
Improved video anomaly detection with captions,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2023,
pp. 5549–5559.
[167] C. Tao et al., “Learn suspected anomalies from event prompts for video
anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2403.01169.
[168] P. Wu, J. Liu, X. He, Y. Peng, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Toward video
anomaly retrieval from video anomaly detection: New benchmarks and
model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2213–2225, 2024.
[169] D.-L. Wei, C.-G. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liu, X.-G. Zhu, and X.-H. Zeng,
“Look, listen and pay more attention: Fusing multi-modal information
for video violence detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 1980–1984.
[170] D. Wei, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, J. Liu, and X. Zeng, “MSAF: Multimodal
supervise-attention enhanced fusion for video anomaly detection,”
IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 2178–2182, 2022.
[171] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware contrastive instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised
audio-visual violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 6278–6287.

[172] P. Wu, X. Liu, and J. Liu, “Weakly supervised audio-visual violence
detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 1674–1685, 2023.
[173] T. Yuan et al., “Towards surveillance video-and-language understanding: New dataset, baselines, and challenges,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 22052–22061.
[174] Y. Zhu and S. Newsam, “Motion-aware feature for improved video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. BMVC, 2019, pp. 270–281.
[175] J. Zhang, L. Qing, and J. Miao, “Temporal convolutional network
with complementary inner bag loss for weakly supervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019,
pp. 4030–4034.
[176] Y. Liu, J. Liu, M. Zhao, S. Li, and L. Song, “Collaborative normality learning framework for weakly supervised video anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 5,
pp. 2508–2512, May 2022.
[177] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance
self-training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14009–14018.
[178] C. Zhang et al., “Exploiting completeness and uncertainty of pseudo
labels for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 16271–16280.
[179] Z. Yang, J. Liu, and P. Wu, “Text prompt with normality guidance for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 18899–18908.
[180] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2024, vol. 38,
no. 6, pp. 6074–6082.
[181] Q. Chen et al., “HAWK: Learning to understand open-world
video anomalies,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
pp. 139751–139785.
[182] M. Ye, W. Liu, and P. He, “VERA: Explainable video anomaly
detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025,
pp. 8679–8688.
[183] H. Lv and Q. Sun, “Video anomaly detection and explanation via large
language models,” 2024, arXiv:2401.05702.
[184] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci,
“Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 18527–18536.
[185] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro,
“Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal
feature magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4975–4986.
[186] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature
discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021.
[187] G. Li, G. Cai, X. Zeng, and R. Zhao, “Scale-aware spatio-temporal
relation learning for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. ECCV, 2022,
pp. 333–350.
[188] M. Cho, M. Kim, S. Hwang, C. Park, K. Lee, and S. Lee, “Look around
for anomalies: Weakly-supervised anomaly detection via contextmotion relational learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 12137–12146.
[189] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Fok, X. Qi, and Y.-C. Wu,
“MGFN: Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for weaklysupervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2023, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 387–395.
[190] H. Lv, Z. Yue, Q. Sun, B. Luo, Z. Cui, and H. Zhang, “Unbiased multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 8022–8031.
[191] H. Zhou, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Dual memory units with uncertainty
regulation for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI, 2023, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 3769–3777.
[192] J. Chen, L. Li, L. Su, Z.-J. Zha, and Q. Huang, “Prompt-enhanced multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2024, pp. 18319–18329.
[193] P. Wu et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection and localization with spatio-temporal prompts,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2024, pp. 9301–9310.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
20

[194] T. Liu, C. Zhang, K.-M. Lam, and J. Kong, “Decouple and
resolve: Transformer-based models for online anomaly detection from
weakly labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 15–28, 2023.
[195] S. Chang, Y. Li, S. Shen, J. Feng, and Z. Zhou, “Contrastive attention for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24,
pp. 4067–4076, 2022.
[196] D. Purwanto, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang, “Dance with self-attention:
A new look of conditional random fields on anomaly detection in
videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 173–183.
[197] C. Huang et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection via
self-guided temporal discriminative transformer,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 3197–3210, May 2024.
[198] C. Zhang, G. Li, Q. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Su, and Q. Huang,
“Weakly supervised anomaly detection in videos considering the openness of events,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 21687–21699, Nov. 2022.
[199] C. Zhang et al., “Dynamic erasing network with adaptive temporal
modeling for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 16706–16720, Sep. 2025.
[200] H. Ye, K. Xu, X. Jiang, and T. Sun, “Learning spatio-temporal relations
with multi-scale integrated perception for video anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr.
2024, pp. 4020–4024.
[201] S. Lin, H. Yang, X. Tang, T. Shi, and L. Chen, “Social MIL: Interactionaware for crowd anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv.
Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[202] S. Park, H. Kim, M. Kim, D. Kim, and K. Sohn, “Normality
guided multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2664–2673.
[203] Y. Gong, C. Wang, X. Dai, S. Yu, L. Xiang, and J. Wu, “Multiscale continuity-aware refinement network for weakly supervised video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo.
(ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[204] H. Sapkota and Q. Yu, “Bayesian nonparametric submodular video
partition for robust anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 3212–3221.
[205] J. Fioresi, I. R. Dave, and M. Shah, “TeD-SPAD: Temporal distinctiveness for self-supervised privacy-preservation for video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct.
2023, pp. 13552–13563.
[206] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering aided
weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance
videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 14085–14098, Oct. 2024.
[207] T. Liu, K.-M. Lam, and J. Kong, “Distilling privileged knowledge for
anomalous event detection from weakly labeled videos,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1–15, Sep. 2024.
[208] H. K. Joo, K. Vo, K. Yamazaki, and N. Le, “CLIP-TSA: Clipassisted temporal self-attention for weakly-supervised video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Oct. 2023,
pp. 3230–3234.
[209] K. Liu and H. Ma, “Exploring background-bias for anomaly detection
in surveillance videos,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct.
2019, pp. 1490–1499.
[210] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in
surveillance video,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021,
pp. 1172–1178.
[211] Z. Dong, J. Qin, and Y. Wang, “Multi-stream deep networks for person
to person violence detection in videos,” in Proc. 7th Chin. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. (CCPR), Nov. 2016, pp. 517–531.
[212] P. Zhou, Q. Ding, H. Luo, and X. Hou, “Violent interaction detection
in video based on deep learning,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 844, Jun.
2017, Art. no. 012044.
[213] S. Sudhakaran and O. Lanz, “Learning to detect violent videos using
convolutional long short-term memory,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Int. Conf.
Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[214] A. Hanson, K. Pnvr, S. Krishnagopal, and L. S. Davis, “Bidirectional
convolutional LSTM for the detection of violence in videos,” in Proc.
ECCV Workshop, 2019, pp. 280–295.
[215] Y. Su, G. Lin, J. Zhu, and Q. Wu, “Human interaction learning on 3D
skeleton point clouds for video violence recognition,” in Proc. 16th
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2020, pp. 74–90.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[216] M. Cheng, K. Cai, and M. Li, “RWF-2000: An open large scale
video database for violence detection,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 4183–4190.
[217] J. Su, P. Her, E. Clemens, E. Yaz, S. Schneider, and H. Medeiros,
“Violence detection using 3D convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
18th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Nov.
2022, pp. 1–8.
[218] G. Garcia-Cobo and J. C. SanMiguel, “Human skeletons and change
detection for efficient violence detection in surveillance videos,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 233, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103739.
[219] P. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Dong, W. Lei, W. Zhang, and Z. Lin, “A
framework for detecting fighting behavior based on key points of
human skeletal posture,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 248,
Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104123.
[220] B. Peixoto, B. Lavi, J. P. P. Martin, S. Avila, Z. Dias, and A. Rocha,
“Toward subjective violence detection in videos,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019,
pp. 8276–8280.
[221] M. Perez, A. C. Kot, and A. Rocha, “Detection of real-world fights in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
Process. (ICASSP), May 2019, pp. 2662–2666.
[222] B. Peixoto, B. Lavi, P. Bestagini, Z. Dias, and A. Rocha, “Multimodal
violence detection in videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 2957–2961.
[223] A. Singh, D. Patil, and S. N. Omkar, “Eye in the sky: Real-time
drone surveillance system (DSS) for violent individuals identification
using ScatterNet hybrid deep learning network,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2018,
pp. 1710–17108.
[224] Y. Shang, X. Wu, and R. Liu, “Multimodal violent video recognition
based on mutual distillation,” in Proc. PRCV, 2022, pp. 623–637.
[225] A. Del Giorno, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “A discriminative
framework for anomaly detection in large videos,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Oct. 2016, pp. 334–349.
[226] R. T. Ionescu, S. Smeureanu, B. Alexe, and M. Popescu, “Unmasking
the abnormal events in video,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2895–2903.
[227] Y. Liu, C. Li, and B. Póczos, “Classifier two sample test for video
anomaly Detections,” in Proc. BMVC, 2018, p. 71.
[228] S. Wang, Y. Zeng, Q. Liu, C. Zhu, E. Zhu, and J. Yin, “Detecting
abnormality without knowing normality: A two-stage approach for
unsupervised video abnormal event detection,” in Proc. 26th ACM Int.
Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2018, pp. 636–644.
[229] G. Pang, C. Yan, C. Shen, A. Van Den Hengel, and X. Bai, “Self-trained
deep ordinal regression for end-to-end video anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2020, pp. 12173–12182.
[230] J. Hu, G. Yu, S. Wang, E. Zhu, Z. Cai, and X. Zhu, “Detecting
anomalous events from unlabeled videos via temporal masked autoencoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul.
2022, pp. 1–6.
[231] X. Lin, Y. Chen, G. Li, and Y. Yu, “A causal inference look at
unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell. (AAAI), 2022, pp. 1620–1629.
[232] G. Yu, S. Wang, Z. Cai, X. Liu, C. Xu, and C. Wu, “Deep anomaly
discovery from unlabeled videos via normality advantage and selfpaced refinement,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13987–13998.
[233] H. Shi, L. Wang, S. Zhou, G. Hua, and W. Tang, “Learning anomalies
with normality prior for unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in
Proc. ECCV. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 163–180.
[234] C. Tao, C. Wang, S. Lin, S. Cai, D. Li, and J. Qian, “Feature reconstruction with disruption for unsupervised video anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 10160–10173, 2024.
[235] A. Al-Lahham, M. Z. Zaheer, N. Tastan, and K. Nandakumar,
“Collaborative learning of anomalies with privacy (CLAP) for
unsupervised video anomaly detection: A new baseline,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024,
pp. 12416–12425.
[236] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. H. Khan, M. Segu, F. Yu, and
S.-I. Lee, “Generative cooperative learning for unsupervised video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 14744–14754.
[237] A. Al-Lahham, N. Tastan, M. Z. Zaheer, and K. Nandakumar, “A
coarse-to-fine pseudo-labeling (C2FPL) framework for unsupervised
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl.
Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 6779–6788.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
WU et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION: A REVIEW

21

[238] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[239] T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Liu, and W.-Y. Lin, “Deep unsupervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
Jan. 2021, pp. 3635–3644.
[240] W. Liu, W. Luo, Z. Li, P. Zhao, and S. Gao, “Margin learning embedded
prediction for video anomaly detection with a few anomalies,” in Proc.
28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 3023–3030.
[241] A. Acsintoae et al., “UBnormal: New benchmark for supervised openset video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 20143–20153.
[242] Y. Zhu, W. Bao, and Q. Yu, “Towards open set video anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Oct. 2022,
pp. 395–412.
[243] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7388–7398.
[244] J. Zhu, C. Ding, Y. Tian, and G. Pang, “Anomaly heterogeneity learning
for open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 17616–17626.
[245] Y. Lu, F. Yu, M. K. K. Reddy, and Y. Wang, “Few-shot scene-adaptive
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 12350, 2020,
pp. 125–141.
[246] Y. Hu, X. Huang, and X. Luo, “Adaptive anomaly detection network for
unseen scene without fine-tuning,” in Proc. PRCV, 2021, pp. 311–323.
[247] X. Huang, Y. Hu, X. Luo, J. Han, B. Zhang, and X. Cao, “Boosting
variational inference with margin learning for few-shot scene-adaptive
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33,
no. 6, pp. 2813–2825, Jun. 2023.
[248] A. Aich, K.-C. Peng, and A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, “Cross-domain
video anomaly detection without target domain adaptation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
pp. 2579–2591.
[249] Y. Jain, A. Dabouei, and M. Xu, “Cross-domain learning for video
anomaly detection with limited supervision,” in Proc. ECCV, 2024,
pp. 468–484.
[250] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Objectagnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc.
ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–33.

Yuting Yan received the B.E. degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in
2025, where he is currently pursuing the master’s
degree in computer science and technology.
His current research interests include event-based
vision and multimodal video anomaly detection.

Guansong Pang (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, in
2019.
He was a Research Fellow with Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He is currently a
tenure-track Assistant Professor with the School
of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore
Management University, Singapore. His research
focuses on recognizing and generalizing to abnormal/unknown/unseen data for learning trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI)
systems in open environments.

Qingsen Yan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an, China, in 2019.
He was a joint-training Ph.D. Student with
The University of Adelaide in 2018, where he
was a Research Fellow with Australian Institute
for Machine Learning (AIML). He is currently a
Professor with the School of Computer Science,
Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research
interests include high dynamic range imaging, deep
learning, medical image analysis, and computer
vision.

Peng Wu received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2017 and 2022,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an. He has authored over
40 papers in the top-tier journals and conferences, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE
P ROCESSING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EU RAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS , IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA, IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), ACM International Conference on
Multimedia (ACM MM), and AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI). His current research interests include video anomaly detection and
vision–language models.

Peng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in electrical engineering and automation and
the Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2004
and 2011, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China. He has authored/coauthored more than 100 papers in top-tier journals
and conferences, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLI GENCE, International Journal of Computer Vision, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON I MAGE P ROCESSING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS
AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA , IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), and AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI). His current research interests include computer vision, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence.

Chengyu Pan received the B.S. degree from Jilin
University, Changchun, China, in 2023, where he is
currently pursuing the master’s degree in computer
science and technology with Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China.
His current research interests include video
anomaly detection and deep learning.

Yanning Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an, China, in 1993 and 1996, respectively.
She is currently a Professor with the School of
Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University. She has authored/co-authored more than 200
papers in international journals, conferences, and
Chinese key journals. Her research interests include
signal and image processing, computer vision, and
pattern recognition.