3164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Distributed Cooperative Defense Against DDoS
Attacks in Edge-Cloud Computing Networks:
A Game-Theoretic Approach
Yifei Wu , Fan Yang, Qian Ma , Member, IEEE, Guocheng Liao , Member, IEEE,
and Xu Chen , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—As a promising computing paradigm, edge-cloud
computing network integrates the ubiquitous computing
resources on the cloud and edge servers to provide high-quality
services, but is susceptible to complicated distributed denial-ofservice (DDoS) attacks. Although some works have studied edge
DDoS mitigation, the cooperative defense among cloud and edge
servers considering the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack strategy
is yet to be explored. In this paper, we model the interactions
between the DDoS attacker and defenders as a two-stage dynamic
game and propose a distributed cooperative defense scheme.
In Stage I, the DDoS attacker strategically launches different
amounts of malicious traffic to different edge servers to maximize
the total filtering cost. In Stage II, edge servers under attack
(i.e., defenders) filter their traffic on the cloud and other edge
servers cooperatively to minimize the total filtering cost. The
defenders’ problem in Stage II is NP-hard and we solve the
problem by modeling defenders’ behaviors as a selfish filtering
game. We prove that the selfish filtering game admits a unique
Nash equilibrium (NE) with guaranteed social efficiency, and
design both a centralized algorithm and a distributed algorithm
to calculate the NE. For the attacker’s problem in Stage I, we
first analyze a special case where each edge server has the same
amount of normal traffic, and design a low-complexity algorithm
to calculate the optimal attack strategy. We then analyze the
general case where edge servers have different amounts of normal
traffic, for which we derive the approximate optimal solution.
Simulation results show that the DDoS attacker tends to launch
attacks to all edge servers to reduce their cooperative defense
capability, and our proposed distributed cooperative defense

Received 8 July 2025; revised 5 November 2025 and 30 December
2025; accepted 22 January 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING Editor Y. Sun. Date of publication 3 February 2026; date of
current version 10 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372481 and
Grant 62202512, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program
under Grant 202305063000008-2023A005 and Grant 20231121163344001,
in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under
Grant 2023B1515120058 and Grant 2024A1515011173, in part by Guangdong Science and Technology Program under Grant 2024B0101020007,
in part by Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Program under
Grant 2024A04J6367, and in part by the Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams under Grant 2017ZT07X355.
(Corresponding author: Qian Ma.)
Yifei Wu, Fan Yang, and Qian Ma are with the School of Intelligent Systems
Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107,
China (e-mail: wuyf255@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; yangf275@mail2.sysu.edu.cn;
maqian25@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Guocheng Liao is with the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Zhuhai 519082, China (e-mail: liaogch6@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Xu Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
chenxu35@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TON.2026.3659868, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3659868

mechanism can effectively reduce the total filtering cost compared
with existing benchmark defense mechanisms.
Index Terms—Edge-cloud computing networks, DDoS attacks,
cooperative defense, game analysis.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE edge-cloud computing network [1], [2], [3] emerges
as a novel promising computing paradigm that provides
computing services with ultra-low latency and high computing
capability. By integrating and allocating the ubiquitous computing resources from cloud and edge servers properly, the
edge-cloud computing network can provide a high quality of
experience for various applications like autonomous driving,
smart healthcare, smart factory, and virtual reality. Due to its
great market and application value, the edge-cloud computing
network has attracted significant attention from researchers
and industry. For example, Google proposes Google Distributed Cloud Edge, Microsoft launches Azure Edge Zones,
and Huawei provides IoTEdge.
The distinguishing features, e.g., the geographical distribution and the heterogeneous computing resources of edge
servers, make the edge-cloud computing network vulnerable to the distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [4].
Specifically, the DDoS attacker sends malicious traffic to the
network to exhaust edge servers’ limited computing resources
and prevent the edge-cloud computing network from offering high-quality computing services [5], [6], [7]. To defend
against DDoS attacks, edge servers under attack, which we
call defenders, need to filter the suspicious (including both
normal and malicious) traffic to eliminate the malicious traffic.
This reduces the available computing resources to execute
users’ tasks and causes significant economic losses. In 2022,
Huawei [8] reported 104,922 attacks exceeding 100 Gbps in
networks of cloud and heterogeneous edge servers, which is
a 1.5-fold increase compared with 2021. Furthermore, Zayo
reported that organizations without adequate protection suffer
from an average cost of $200,000 per DDoS attack [9].
To mitigate DDoS attacks, researchers have proposed
defense approaches including DDoS mitigation hardware,
cloud scrubbing services, and edge DDoS mitigation. The
hardware-based DDoS mitigation approach installs the firewall
and intrusion prevention system, which is costly to deploy
and upgrade. Furthermore, application-level DDoS attacks can
evade firewall detection [10]. The cloud scrubbing service,
offered by large cloud providers such as Cloudflare and
Ali Cloud, filters victim’s suspicious traffic to eliminate

2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

Fig. 1. DDoS attack and defense in the edge-cloud computing network.

Fig. 2. Two-stage dynamic game.

malicious traffic and redirect normal traffic back to the
victim [11]. However, detouring all victims’ traffic to cloud
for scrubbing may incur high transmission latency. In recent
years, researchers have proposed edge DDoS mitigation [12]
where edge servers launch virtual DDoS defense instances
based on network function virtualization (NFV) [13] and
software defined network (SDN) [14]. However, edge DDoS
mitigation may suffer from performance degradation when
the attacker launches massive DDoS attacks to all edge
servers simultaneously [15]. Consequently, there is a critical
need to design effective DDoS defense mechanisms to deal
with the complicated DDoS attacks in edge-cloud computing
networks.
Although edge-cloud computing networks have attracted
wide attention, few research studies the interactions between
the DDoS attacker and defenders in edge-cloud computing
networks, which is the premise for designing effective DDoS
defense mechanisms. As shown in Fig. 1, the edge-cloud
computing network connects the cloud and heterogeneous
edge servers, and the DDoS attacker can compromise some
end devices and control them to send malicious traffic to edge
servers. We model the interactions between the DDoS attacker
and edge servers under attack (i.e., defenders) as a two-stage
dynamic game as shown in Fig. 2. In Stage I, the DDoS
attacker strategically launches different amounts of malicious
traffic to different edge servers in the network. In Stage II,
defenders decide their traffic filtering strategies, i.e., how to
filter their traffic using the traffic scrubbing/filtering services
on the cloud and edge servers. Analyzing the two-stage
dynamic game is challenging since the edge-cloud computing
network potentially involves a large number of heterogeneous
edge servers, which makes the DDoS attack strategy quite

3165

complicated. Furthermore, the strategies of the DDoS attacker
and defenders are coupled in a non-trivial way. This motivates
us to answer the first key question in edge-cloud computing
networks:
Key Question 1: How do the DDoS attacker and defenders
strategically interact in the edge-cloud computing network?
To cope with the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack, we
propose a cooperative defense scheme for the edge-cloud
computing network, which fully utilizes the heterogeneous
traffic scrubbing/filtering capabilities of the connected cloud
and edge servers. Specifically, edge servers under attack, i.e.,
defenders, can transfer part of their traffic to other edge servers
and the cloud to help them filter traffic. Note that each edge
server has limited computing resources, and filtering a large
amount of traffic on a single edge server may cause congestion
which leads to filtering latency. Additionally, transferring massive traffic from edge servers to the cloud for scrubbing may
incur transmission latency. Since the latency of traffic filtering
directly affects users’ experiences, we model the filtering cost
as a function of the filtering latency [15], [16]. The goal
of the cooperative defense scheme is to optimize defenders’
filtering strategies to minimize the total filtering cost in the
network, which is NP-hard. We solve this problem in a
distributed manner by modeling defenders’ filtering behaviors
as a selfish filtering game where each defender decides its
filtering strategy to minimize its own filtering cost. Analyzing the equilibrium of the game is challenging considering
the filtering congestion on heterogeneous edge servers. This
leads to the second key question in edge-cloud computing
networks:
Key Question 2: How can the edge-cloud computing network defend against DDoS attacks effectively by fully utilizing
the heterogeneous traffic scrubbing/filtering capabilities in the
network?
In this paper, we study the distributed cooperative defense
scheme to mitigate the strategic DDoS attacks in potentially
large-scale edge-cloud computing networks effectively and
efficiently. We summarize the main contributions of our work
as follows.
• Novel Distributed Cooperative Defense Framework
Against Strategic DDoS Attacks: To the best of our
knowledge, we propose the first distributed cooperative
defense scheme against strategic DDoS attacks in potentially large-scale edge-cloud computing networks. It aims
to mitigate DDoS attacks effectively and efficiently by
fully utilizing the heterogeneous traffic scrubbing/filtering
capabilities of the cloud and edge servers in the network.
• Defenders’ Selfish Filtering Game: Minimizing the total
filtering cost in the network is NP-hard, and we solve it
by modeling a selfish filtering game where each defender
minimizes its own filtering cost. Analyzing the equilibrium is challenging due to edge servers’ heterogeneity
and congestion. We prove that the game admits a unique
Nash equilibrium, under which defenders fall into three
types and the filtering latency on each edge server is the
same. We design a distributed algorithm to calculate the
equilibrium filtering strategy without knowing the global

3166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

information of the network, and prove that the derived
NE has guaranteed social efficiency.
• DDoS Attacker’s Strategic Attack Optimization: For
the attacker’s optimization problem, we first analyze a
special case where edge servers have the same normal
traffic. We show that launching the same amount of
malicious traffic to edge servers of the same type at
equilibrium is an optimal attack strategy, and we design
a low-complexity algorithm to derive it. For the general
case where edge servers have different normal traffic, we
show that the attack strategy under which edge servers’
total traffic ranking remains the same as the normal
traffic ranking is an optimal solution, and we design an
algorithm to derive the approximate optimal solution.
• Simulation Results and Practical Insights: Simulation
results show that the DDoS attacker tends to launch
attacks to all edge servers to reduce their cooperative
defense capability, and our proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism can effectively reduce the
total filtering cost compared with existing benchmark
defense mechanisms. Our distributed cooperative defense
scheme captures the strategic attacks of the attacker, the
heterogeneity of edge servers, and the cooperation among
the cloud and edge servers, which makes our derived
insights and results more practically significant.
We organize the rest of this paper as follows. We review
related literature in Section II and introduce the system
model in Section III. We analyze defenders’ traffic filtering
behaviors in Section IV and analyze the attack behavior of
the attacker in Section V. We provide simulation results in
Section VI and conclude our work in Section VII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
There have been extensive studies on defense mechanisms
against attacks in networks. In this section, we discuss the
related works regarding game analysis of attack-defense interactions and cooperative defense against DDoS attacks.
A. Game Analysis of Attack-Defense Interactions
Game theory has been widely used to analyze the interactions between the attacker and the defender in the field of
cyber security. Chen et al. [7] develop a Stackelberg gamebased collaborative framework for IoT DDoS defense, where
the attacker allocates resources across multiple control points
to attack only a single victim. Wahab et al. [17] and Li et al.
[18] model Bayesian Stackelberg games between the Advance
Persistence Threat (APT) attacker and the cloud/edge defender
to deal with the unknown types of attacks, where the attacker
only attacks one target or attacks all targets at the same time.
Xiao et al. [19] use prospect theory to model the interactions
between an APT attacker and a cloud defender with bounded
rationality. Zhou et al. [20] propose a defender-led signaling
game to model the interactions between the defender of the
IoT network and the DDoS attacker who can only choose
to attack or not attack. Liu et al. [21] propose a Bayesian
Q-learning game to model the interactions between a cooperative sensor–edgeVM pair and a DDoS attacker under

incomplete information, where the attacker targets only a
single defender.
We can see that most existing works greatly simplify the
attacker’s action. For example, the attacker can only decide
whether to attack, or the attacker can only attack one target, or
the attacker can only attack all targets with the same strategy.
In practice, however, launching different degrees of attacks
to different targets strategically can compromise the system
more effectively. In this paper, we model such strategic attack
behavior of the DDoS attacker in the edge-cloud computing
network with heterogeneous edge servers.
B. Cooperative Defense Against DDoS Attacks
There have been some works studying cooperative defense
against DDoS attacks. You et al. [11] investigate the scheduling of DDoS flows through an online auction mechanism,
utilizing the scrubbing centers. Li et al. [12] design a cooperative defense framework which coordinates container-carried
defense resources among edge servers through online combinatorial auction to mitigate the application-level DDoS attacks.
Myneni et al. [22] propose a distributed defense solution
against DDoS attacks, which is deployed at both customer
and provider edges, employing neural network techniques.
Feng et al. [23] propose a reinforcement learning-based collaborative DDoS detection method and design a lightweight
unsupervised classifier based on statistics at the edge of IoT.
He et al. [16] propose a collaborative edge DDoS mitigation
scheme where edge servers can transfer their requests to adjacent edge servers to mitigate DDoS attacks. Deng et al. [24]
develop a graph neural network (GNN)-based collaborative
deep reinforcement learning model to generate the resource
provisioning and mitigating strategy for DDoS attacks in
mobile edge computing-enabled vehicular ad hoc networks.
Huang et al. [25] propose a risk-aware task-offloading framework for edge DDoS mitigation which first evaluates the trust
level of edge nodes, then clusters them through a weighted
K-means algorithm, and dispatches user tasks to the safest
and most capable nodes. Xu et al. [26] focus on bandwidthlayer DDoS defense in mobile edge computing and propose
a evolutionary-game model for user–bandwidth allocation.
Zhou et al. [27] study stealthy low-rate DDoS defense and
propose a deep reinforcement learning-based approach.
However, previous studies usually focus on edge and cloud
DDoS defenses independently, rather than exploring their
integration. They do not consider the congestion effect of
edge filtering and ignore the traffic scrubbing service on the
cloud. Note that filtering massive malicious traffic on one edge
server may result in congestion and incur high filtering latency,
potentially leading to denial of service. In this case, redirecting
a portion of suspicious traffic from congested edge servers to
a cloud scrubbing center may alleviate the latency issue and
effectively mitigate DDoS attacks.
In this paper, we propose a distributed cooperative defense
scheme, which fully utilizes the heterogeneous traffic scrubbing/filtering capabilities of cloud and edge servers, to mitigate
the strategic DDoS attacks in potentially large-scale edgecloud computing networks. Our analysis can guide the

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

edge-cloud computing network to tackle the DDoS attack
problem effectively and efficiently.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
In this section, we introduce the system model. As shown
in Fig. 1, we consider an edge-cloud computing network
which integrates the computing resources of a cloud and a
set V = {1, 2, . . . , V } of heterogeneous edge servers and
provides computing services with ultra-low latency to end
devices. End devices send computing requests (i.e., normal
traffic) such as autonomous driving tasks to these edge
servers. However, the edge-cloud computing network faces
DDoS attack threats. We consider application-level DDoS
attacks [12], where the attacker can compromise some end
devices and control them to strategically launch malicious
application-level DDoS attacks to edge servers, aiming to
exhaust edge servers’ limited computing resources and prevent
the edge-cloud computing network from offering high-quality
computing services. To mitigate DDoS attacks effectively,
edge servers under attack (i.e., defenders) can filter their
suspicious traffic (including both the normal and malicious
traffic) through traffic scrubbing on the cloud and traffic
filtering on edge servers in the network cooperatively, to
eliminate the malicious traffic. We model the interactions of
the DDoS attacker and defenders as a two-stage dynamic
game as shown in Fig. 2. In the rest of the section, we first
model defenders’ cooperative defense problem in Stage II,
and then model the DDoS attacker’s attack problem in
Stage I.
A. Defenders’ Cooperative Defense Problem
The edge-cloud computing network can design the cooperative traffic filtering strategies to minimize the total filtering cost
in the network, i.e., the traffic filtering costs of all edge servers
under attack. We define the defender set D = {1, 2, · · · , D}
as the set of edge servers that are under DDoS attack.
We can see that D ⊆ V. For a defender i ∈ D, its
suspicious traffic includes the normal traffic λi (in bits) sent by
benign end devices and the malicious traffic ai (in bits) sent
by compromised end devices. Since application-level DDoS
attacks can exhaust a large amount of computing resources
by sending only a few requests, defenders should filter all
suspicious traffic to mitigate DDoS attacks effectively. Under
our proposed cooperative defense scheme for the edge-cloud
computing network, defender i can filter a proportion xik
of its suspicious traffic on each edge server k ∈ V and a
proportion xic of its suspicious traffic on the cloud. We denote
xi = {xic , xik , ∀k ∈ V} as the filtering strategy of defender i,
and denote x = {xi , ∀i ∈ D} as all defenders’ filtering
strategies. We further denote a = {ai , ∀i ∈ V} as the DDoS
attacker’s attack strategy. In the following, we first model each
defender’s filtering cost, which includes the filtering cost on
edge servers and the filtering cost on the cloud. We then model
the total filtering cost minimization problem of the edge-cloud
computing network.
1) Defender’s Filtering Cost: For each defender, filtering
its suspicious traffic on edge servers and on the cloud both
incur filtering costs.

3167

a) Filtering Cost on Edge Servers: Since the latency
of traffic filtering directly affects end devices’ experiences,
we model the filtering cost as a function of the filtering latency. When defender i filters part of its traffic on edge server k ∈ V, the filtering latency is
mainly due to edge server k’s limited computing resources
for traffic filtering and the congestion effect caused by
resource sharing among defenders who filter traffic on edge
server k.1 We denote the traffic filtering capability of edge
server k as fk (in bits/second), i.e., the amount of traffic that
edge server k can filter per second [2], [28].2 In this case, the
traffic filtering latency on edge server k is
P
(λi + ai )xik
,
(1)
Fk (x; a) = i∈D
fk
P
where
i∈D (λi + ai )xik is the total amount of suspicious
traffic that defenders filter on edge server k. We model the
filtering cost on edge servers as the weighted filtering latency
on chosen edge servers [30], which is
X
Cie (x; a) =
xik Fk (x; a).
(2)
k∈V

b) Filtering Cost on the Cloud: When a defender transfers part of its traffic to the cloud for traffic scrubbing, the
latency mainly comes from transmission delay. Note that since
the cloud scrubbing center usually has sufficient computing
resources, the latency of traffic scrubbing is negligible.3 For
defender i, we model its filtering cost on the cloud as the
transmission latency, which is
Cic (xic ; ai ) = wc (λi + ai )xic ,

(3)

where wc (in seconds/bit) is a coefficient representing the
transmission latency for transferring a unit of traffic to the
cloud [32], [33].
We define the filtering cost of defender i as the sum of the
filtering costs on edge servers and cloud, which is
Ci (xi , x−i ; a) = Cie (x; a) + Cic (xic ; ai ).

(4)

Here x−i = {xj , ∀j ∈ D \ {i}} represents the filtering
strategies of all other defenders except defender i.
2) Total Filtering Cost Minimization Problem: To mitigate
the DDoS attacks effectively, the goal of the edge-cloud
computing network is to minimize the total filtering cost in
the network, i.e., the traffic filtering costs of all edge servers
under attack. We model the total filtering cost minimization
problem as follows,
X
min
Ci (x; a)
x

s.t.

i∈D

X

xik + xic = 1, ∀i ∈ D,

k∈V

xik , xic ≥ 0, ∀k ∈ V, i ∈ D.

(5)

1 We consider edge servers connected through high-speed links, and the
latency of transferring traffic among edge servers is negligible compared with
the latency of traffic filtering [28].
2 For example, Huawei’s AntiDDoS1900 measures its traffic filtering capability by the amount of traffic that it can filter per second [29].
3 For example, Ali Cloud [31] can filter suspicious traffic of Tbps level.

3168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

The first constraint indicates that each defender should filter
all its suspicious traffic. The second constraint restricts that the
proportion of traffic to filter on an edge server or the cloud
should be non-negative. We later solve the total filtering cost
minimization problem in Section IV.

cost (in Section IV-A). We analyze the properties of the Nash
equilibrium (in Section IV-B) and design both centralized and
distributed algorithms to derive the NE (in Section IV-C).
We use the NE as the defense strategy of the edge-cloud computing network, and prove that the derived NE has guaranteed
performance regarding the total filtering cost (in Section IV-D).

B. DDoS Attacker’s Attack Problem
The DDoS attacker strategically launches different amounts
of malicious traffic to different edge servers, aiming to exhaust
the limited computing resources of heterogeneous edge servers
and prevent the edge-cloud computing network from offering
high-quality computing services. Recall that we denote ai
as the amount of malicious traffic that the DDoS attacker
launches to edge server i ∈ V, and denote a = {ai , ∀i ∈ V} as
the DDoS attacker’s attack strategy. Since the DDoS attacker
usually has limited resource for attack, we assume that the
total amount of malicious traffic that the attacker can launch to
the edge-cloud
computing network has an upper bound amax ,
P
i.e., i∈V ai ≤ amax . We model the objective of the DDoS
attacker as maximizing the total filtering cost of the edge-cloud
computing network, i.e.,
X
Ua (a; x) =
Ci (x; a).
(6)
i∈D

Then we formulate the optimization problem of the DDoS
attacker as follows,

A. Selfish Filtering Game Formulation
We formulate the selfish filtering game among defenders as
follows.
Game 1: (Selfish Filtering Game among Defenders)
• Players: the set D of defenders.
• Strategies: Each defender i ∈ D decides its traffic
filtering strategy xi .
• Objectives: Each defender i ∈ D aims to minimize its
own traffic filtering cost Ci (xi , x−i ) calculated in (4).
We first define the best response of each defender i ∈ D
in the selfish filtering game. Given other defenders’ strategies
x−i , the best response of defender i ∈ D is
BRi (x−i ) = arg min Ci (xi , x−i )
xi
X
s.t.
xik + xic = 1,
k∈V

xik , xic ≥ 0, ∀k ∈ V.

(8)

The first constraint indicates that the total amount of
malicious traffic launched to the edge-cloud computing network must be within the budget. The second constraint
restricts that the amount of malicious traffic launched
to each edge server must be non-negative. We further
denote
the feasiblePregion of the attack strategy as A =

(a1 , a2 , . . . , aV )| i∈V ai ≤ amax , ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ V .
We later solve the two-stage dynamic game between the
DDoS attacker and defenders by backward induction. We
first solve the defenders’ cooperative defense problem in
Section IV, and then solve the DDoS attacker’s attack problem
in Section V.

The Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game is a
strategy profile under which each defender plays its best
response. We next formally define the Nash equilibrium of
Game 1.
Definition 1: (Nash Equilibrium of Game 1) A strategy
profile x∗ = {x∗i , ∀i ∈ D} is a Nash equilibrium of the selfish
filtering game if each defender i ∈ D plays its best response
under x∗ , i.e., x∗i = BRi (x∗−i ), ∀i ∈ D.
Under the Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game,
no defender will change its defense strategy unilaterally.
Calculating the NE through solving the best response of each
defender is challenging since the best responses of defenders
are coupled with each other in a non-trivial way and do not
have closed-form solutions. The heterogeneity and congestion
effect of edge servers further complicate the equilibrium
analysis. We next analyze the properties of the NE which
provide insights of defenders’ equilibrium behaviors and guide
us to calculate the NE.

IV. D ISTRIBUTED C OOPERATIVE D EFENSE M ECHANISM

B. Nash Equilibrium of the Game

In this section, we aim to design an effective and efficient
cooperative defense mechanism for the edge-cloud computing
network. We first prove that the total filtering cost minimization problem (5) is NP-hard.
Theorem 1: The total filtering cost minimization problem in
the edge-cloud computing network is NP-hard.
Proof: See Appendix A in the supplementary material. 
We later solve the total filtering cost minimization problem
in a distributed manner by modeling defenders’ traffic filtering
behaviors as a selfish filtering game where each defender
decides its traffic filtering strategy to minimize its own filtering

Since we use the NE of the selfish filtering game as the
defense strategy for the edge-cloud computing network, we
first prove the existence of the NE before analyzing the
properties of the NE.
Lemma 1: The Nash equilibrium of the selfish filtering game
always exists.
Proof: See Appendix B in the supplementary material. 
The main idea is to prove that the selfish filtering game
is a concave game, and hence the NE exists [34]. We next
analyze some properties of the NE, based on which we prove
the uniqueness of the NE.

max Ua (a; x)
a
X
s.t.
ai ≤ amax ,
i∈V

ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ V.

(7)

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

1) Properties of the NE: We characterize the properties of
the NE of the selfish filtering game, including the necessary
and sufficient condition of the NE, the traffic filtering latency
on each edge server at equilibrium, and the relationship
between the proportion of traffic that a defender filters on
an edge server and the traffic filtering capability of the edge
server.
We first characterize the necessary and sufficient condition
of the Nash equilibrium by analyzing the KKT conditions of
each defender’s optimization problem (8).
Lemma 2: Under the Nash equilibrium x∗ of the selfish
filtering game, the equilibrium filtering strategy x∗iu ∈ x∗i of
each defender i ∈ D satisfies

∂Ci (x∗ )


, if x∗iu > 0,
∗ = xmin
∗ ∈x∗
∂Ci (x )
∂x∗ij
i
ij
∂Ci (x∗ )

∂x∗iu 
, if x∗iu = 0.
≥ min
∗
x∗
∂x∗ij
ij ∈xi
Proof: See Appendix C in the supplementary material. 
Lemma 2 indicates that at equilibrium, defender i filters
a proportion of its traffic on an edge server or cloud
(i.e.,
∗
i (x )
x∗iu > 0) only if the marginal filtering cost ∂C∂x
is the
∗
iu
minimum among all other edge servers or cloud. We denote the
minimum marginal filtering cost ∗of defender i at equilibrium
i (x )
. When defender i filters a
as βi , i.e., βi , minx∗ij ∈x∗i ∂C∂x
∗
ij
proportion of its traffic on the cloud, we have
βi =

∂Ci (x∗ )
= wc (λi + ai ), if x∗ic > 0.
∂x∗ic

(9)

When defender i filters a proportion of its traffic on edge server
k ∈ V, we have:
βi =

x∗ik (λi + ai )
∂Ci (x∗ )
=
+ Fk (x∗ ), if x∗ik > 0. (10)
∂x∗ik
fk

Based on Lemma 2 and (9) (10), we obtain an important
property of the NE regarding the traffic filtering latency
Fk (x∗ ) on each edge server k ∈ V.
Theorem 2: Under the NE x∗ of the selfish filtering game,
the traffic filtering latency on each edge server is the same,
i.e., F1 (x∗ ) = F2 (x∗ ) = · · · = FV (x∗ ) = F (x∗ ) = F ∗ .
Proof: See Appendix D in the supplementary material. 
Intuitively, if an edge server has a lower filtering latency,
defenders will switch their traffic from other edge servers
with higher filtering latencies to the lower one, leading to
uniform filtering latency among edge servers. This indicates
that our proposed distributed cooperative defense scheme
achieves load-balanced traffic filtering among heterogeneous
edge servers.
Based on Lemma 2 and Theorem 2, we further obtain a
relationship between the proportion of traffic that a defender
filters on an edge server and the traffic filtering capability of
the edge server in the following lemma.
Lemma 3: Under the NE x∗ of the selfish filtering game,
the proportion x∗ik of traffic that defender i filters on each edge
server k ∈ V is proportional∗ to edge server k’s traffic filtering
x
x∗
= fijj , ∀k, j ∈ V.
capability fk , i.e., fik
k
Proof: See Appendix E in the supplementary material. 

3169

Lemma 3 indicates that if a defender filters part of its traffic
on an edge server, then it filters its traffic on all edge servers
in the network, and the traffic filtered on each edge server is
proportional to the edge server’s traffic filtering capability.
2) The Uniqueness of the NE: To establish the uniqueness
of the NE for the selfish filtering game, we first characterize
a one-to-one mapping between the filtering latency F ∗ at
equilibrium and the NE x∗ . We then prove the uniqueness of
the NE by proving the uniqueness of the equilibrium filtering
latency F ∗ .
Recall that given the NE x∗ , we can calculate the equilibrium filtering latency F (x∗ ) on each edge server according
to Eq. (1). In the following theorem, we prove that given the
traffic filtering latency F ∗ at equilibrium, we can calculate the
NE x∗ . We first sort defenders in set D by their total amount
of normal and malicious traffic (i.e., λi + ai , ∀i ∈ D) in an
ascending order. We denote the ranking of defender i as ri .
Then defenders fall into at most three types at equilibrium,
depending on two critical rankings ī and j̄.4
Theorem 3: Given the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ on
an edge server, we can calculate the equilibrium filtering
strategy x∗ , under which defenders fall into one of the
following three types.
• Type I (cloud-only): x∗ic = 1, x∗ik = 0, ∀k ∈ V, if 0 <
ri < ī.
∗
i )−F
fk , ∀k ∈
• Type II (mixed-filtering):
x∗ik = wc (λλi +a
i +ai
P
V, x∗ic = 1 − k∈V x∗ik , if ī ≤ ri < j̄.
• Type III (edge-only): x∗ik = P fk fk , ∀k ∈ V, x∗ic = 0, if
k∈V
j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D.
We calculate the critical ranking ī as follows.
• If there exist a defender i with ranking ri and a defender
1
< Fw∗c ≤
j with ranking rj = ri − 1 that satisfy λi +a
i
1
λj +aj , then ī = ri .
• Otherwise, ī = 1.
We calculate the critical ranking j̄ as follows.
• If the defender
s with the smallest traffic satisfies
wc − P 1 f
1
k∈V k
≤
, then j̄ = 1.
λs +as
F∗
• If the defender m with the largest traffic satisfies
1
λm +am >

1
k∈V fk

wc − P

, then j̄ = D + 1.
• If there exist a defender i with ranking ri and a defender j
1
with ranking rj = ri − 1 that satisfy λi +a
≤
i
F∗

1
k∈V fk
∗
F

wc − P

1
< λj +a
, then j̄ = ri .
j
Proof: See Appendix F in the supplementary material. 
Theorem 3 shows that at equilibrium, we can classify
defenders into at most three types, including the defenders
who only filter traffic on the cloud, the defenders who filter
traffic on both the cloud and edge servers, and the defenders
who only filter traffic on edge servers. Furthermore, if we
know the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ on each edge server,
we can write the closed-form solution of the NE x∗ . Note
that given the NE x∗ , we can also calculate the equilibrium
filtering latency F (x∗ ) according to Eq. (1). Hence, there
4 Intuitively, the critical rankings ī and j̄ represent traffic-determined
thresholds that categorize defenders into three types based on the comparison
between the marginal filtering cost on an edge server and that on the cloud.
See Appendix F in the supplementary material for detailed explanations.

3170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

is a one-to-one mapping between the equilibrium filtering
latency F ∗ and the NE x∗ . We next prove the uniqueness
of the NE by proving the uniqueness of F ∗ .
Theorem 4: The selfish filtering game admits a unique Nash
equilibrium.
Proof: See Appendix G in the supplementary material. 
Although the NE is unique, writing a closed-form solution
for the NE is challenging since we do not have the closedform solution for F ∗ . We next design algorithms to derive the
NE x∗ based on the properties of the NE.
C. Algorithms to Calculate the NE
In this subsection, we first design a centralized algorithm
with polynomial complexity to derive the NE. We then design
a distributed algorithm which does not require the global
information of the network to calculate the NE.
1) A Centralized Algorithm to Calculate the NE: According
to the NE analysis, there is only one pair (ī, j̄) and its
corresponding F ∗ that satisfy the relationships in Theorem 3.
Based on this result, we design a centralized algorithm, which
first derives the equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ , and then
calculates the NE x∗ according to Theorem 3.
To derive F ∗ , we explore its relationship with the two
critical rankings ī and j̄. Specifically, given F ∗ , we can
calculate x∗ according to Theorem 3, where the derived x∗
should also satisfy the relationship in Eq. (1). In other words,
we have
F∗ =

j̄−1
X

[wc (λi + ai ) − F ∗ ] +

ri =ī

D
X
λ + ai
Pi
.
k∈V fk

ri =j̄
∗

Then we can calculate F as a function of the two critical
rankings ī and j̄ as follows
Pj̄−1
PD
(λ + ai )wc + ri =j̄ P 1 fk (λi + ai )
ri =ī i
k∈V
∗
. (11)
F =
j̄ − ī + 1
Recall that the two critical rankings ī and j̄, which are
integers in the range from 1 to D + 1, also depend on
F ∗ as stated in Theorem 3. Therefore, to derive F ∗ , we
can first enumerate the feasible pair (ī, j̄) under which we
calculate F ∗ according to (11), we then check whether the
pair (ī, j̄) and the corresponding F ∗ satisfy the relationships in
Theorem 3. Since F ∗ is unique, there is only one pair
(ī, j̄) and its corresponding F ∗ that satisfy the relationships
in Theorem 3.
We show the centralized algorithm to calculate the NE in
Algorithm 1. We first sort defenders by their total amount
of normal and malicious traffic, i.e., λi + ai , ∀i ∈ D, in
an ascending order to obtain the ranking of each defender
(Line 1 in Algorithm 1). We then enumerate the possible
pairs of critical rankings (ī, j̄) (Lines 2-3 in Algorithm 1).
For each pair, we calculate the equilibrium filtering
latency F ∗ by Eq. (11) (Line 4 in Algorithm 1), and check
whether the critical ranking pair (ī, j̄) and the corresponding F ∗ satisfy the relationship in Theorem 3 (Lines 5-9 in
Algorithm 1). If the pair (ī, j̄) and the corresponding F ∗
satisfy the relationships in Theorem 3, we can use the

Algorithm 1 A Centralized Algorithm to Calculate the NE
1: Sort defenders in an ascending order according to λi +
ai , ∀i ∈ D;
2: for ī = 1: D do
3:
for j̄ = ī: D + 1 do
4:
Calculate F ∗ by Eq. (11);
5:
if (ī, j̄) and F ∗ satisfy Theorem 3 then
6:
break;
7:
else
8:
continue;
9:
end if
10:
end for
11: end for
12: Calculate x∗ by Theorem 3.

derived F ∗ to calculate the NE. If not, we keep on searching
for the next possible critical ranking pair.
We prove the convergence and the complexity of
Algorithm 1 in the following lemma.
Lemma 4: Algorithm 1 derives the NE of the selfish filtering
game with complexity O(D2 ).
Proof: See Appendix H in the supplementary material. 
Since Algorithm 1 can find the NE with low complexity,
it can respond to the DDoS attacks efficiently. In practice,
however, edge-cloud computing networks can be large networks, and it is impractical for each edge server to obtain the
global information, especially when some edge servers are
under heavy attack. We next design a distributed algorithm
that calculates the equilibrium defense strategy based on each
defender’s local information.
2) A Distributed Algorithm to Calculate the NE: We aim to
design a distributed algorithm for each defender to derive its
equilibrium filtering strategy without knowing other defenders’
filtering strategies and information, which is of significant
practical importance in large-scale edge-cloud computing networks. The design of the distributed algorithm depends on the
property of the selfish filtering game being a concave game.
Specifically, when a concave game admits a unique NE, the
best response update process can converge to the NE starting
from any feasible strategy profile [34]. Since calculating the
NE x∗ is equivalent to calculating the equilibrium filtering
latency F ∗ , the main idea of the distributed algorithm is to let
defenders take turns to update the equilibrium filtering latency,
considering the effect of their best responses.
We show the distributed algorithm for each defender to
calculate its equilibrium filtering strategy in Algorithm 2.
Edge servers first announce their filtering capabilities (Line 1
in Algorithm 2). Then defenders send an initial parameter
Ei0 = Pλi +aifk to the network operator of the edge-cloud
k∈V
computing network by proportionally filtering all their traffic
on all edge servers (Line 2 in Algorithm 2). The network
operator sorts defenders by Ei0 , ∀i ∈ D, and calculates the
initial filtering latency F 0 and announces to defenders (Line 3
in Algorithm 2). Then defenders take turns to update the
filtering latency. In each iteration t, defender i calculates
the increase of its filtering latency after it plays its best

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

, which we denote as Eit as follows
response xBR,t
i
Eit =

xBR,t
(λi + ai )
ik
.
fk

D. Analysis of PoA
(12)

We define Zit = wc (λi + ai ) − (F t − Eit−1 ). By substituting
the best response (calculated by Lemma 2) into (12), defender
i can update Eit in iteration t as


0,
if Zit ≤ 0,



t

 Zi
P
Zit
,
if 2(λi +a
k∈V fk < 1,
(13)
Eit =
i)
2



P
λi + ai
Zit
P

, if 2(λi +ai )

k∈V fk ≥ 1.
k∈V fk
See Appendix I in the supplementary material for the detailed
derivation of Eit . After defender i updates its effect Eit on
the filtering latency, the network operator updates the filtering
latency by aggregating all defenders’ effects as follows
t

F =

ri
X
rj =1

Ejt +

D
X

Ejt−1 ,

3171

(14)

rj =ri +1

where defenders ranking from 1 to ri have updated their
effects and the others do not. After F t converges, each
defender calculates its equilibrium filtering strategy and filters
suspicious traffic (Line 13 in Algorithm 2).
Algorithm 2 A Distributed Algorithm to Calculate the NE
1: Each edge server k ∈ V announces its filtering capability
fk ;
λ +a
2: Each defender i ∈ D sends Ei0 = P i if to the network
k∈V k
operator;
3: The network operator sorts defenders by Ei0 , ∀i ∈ D in
P
0
an ascending order, and announces F 0 =
i∈D Ei to
defenders;
4: Set t = 0 and F −1 = −∞;
5: while F t − F t−1 ≥  do
6:
t = t + 1;
7:
F t = F t−1 ;
8:
for defender i with ranking ri = 1: D do
9:
Defender i updates Eit according to (13) and
sends to the network operator;
10:
The network operator updates F t according to (14)
and announces F t to defenders;
11:
end for
12:
end while
t
13: Each defender i ∈ D calculates x∗
i based on F by
Theorem 3.
We show Algorithm 2’s convergence and complexity in each
iteration in the following lemma.
Lemma 5: Algorithm 2 derives the NE of the selfish filtering
game. The computation and communication complexity of
each iteration in Algorithm 2 is O(D).
Proof: See Appendix I in the supplementary material. 
Lemma 5 indicates that the distributed update process
converges to the NE in a finite number of iterations. We later
show in experiments the fast convergence of our distributed
algorithm even when the number of defenders is large.

Since we use the equilibrium filtering strategy profile x∗
of the selfish filtering game as the defense strategy for the
edge-cloud computing network, we evaluate the effectiveness
of the derived NE x∗ regarding its performance on solving the
total filtering cost minimization problem (5). Specifically, we
analyze the price of anarchy (PoA) [35] of the selfish filtering
game. In the following, we first formally define the PoA. We
then prove that the PoA of the selfish filtering game always has
an upper bound, indicating that the derived NE has guaranteed
performance regarding the total filtering cost.
The PoA is the ratio between the total filtering cost under
the NE and the minimum total filtering cost. We denote
the optimal solution to the total filtering cost minimization
problem (5) as xopt . Then we can calculate the PoA of the
selfish filtering game as
P
∗
i∈D Ci (x )
P
.
PoA =
opt )
i∈D Ci (x

(15)

It is obvious to see that PoA ≥ 1, and a smaller PoA indicates
a better performance of our derived NE x∗ .
We next prove that the PoA is always upper bounded.
Theorem 5: The PoA of the selfish filtering game has an
upper bound. Specifically, 1 ≤ PoA < 2if wc ≤ P 2 fk and
k∈V
1 ≤ PoA < Dif wc > P 2 fk .
k∈V
Proof: See Appendix J in the supplementary material. 
Theorem 5 shows that the PoA always has an upper bound.
When the cloud latency coefficient wc is small, the PoA is
always smaller than 2. And when wc is large, the PoA is
always smaller than the number of defenders D. Note that
only in exceptional cases where there is significant variation
(e.g., in hundredfold) in edge servers’ filtering capabilities
and defenders’ traffic, the PoA may approach the upper
bound D.5 In more general cases where the heterogeneities
of edge servers’ filtering capabilities or defenders’ traffic are
smooth, the PoA is much smaller than the upper bound D. We
further analyze the PoA when defenders have equal traffic.
Lemma 6: When defenders have the same amount of traffic,
the PoA of the selfish filtering game is smaller than 2, i.e.,
1 ≤ PoA < 2if λi + ai = λj + aj , ∀i, j ∈ D.
Proof: See Appendix L in the supplementary material. 
Lemma 6 implies that when the traffic of all defenders is
equal, the performance of our proposed distributed cooperative
defense mechanism is close to the social optimal solution.
Later in our simulations, we show that our proposed distributed
cooperative defense mechanism can effectively reduce the total
filtering cost of the edge-cloud computing network compared
with existing benchmark defense mechanisms.
In this section, we have solved the defenders’ cooperative
defense problem in Stage II of the two-stage dynamic game,
based on which we solve the DDoS attacker’s attack problem
in Stage I in the next section.
5 See Appendix K in the supplementary material for an unusual example
demonstrating this phenomenon.

3172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

V. O PTIMAL DD O S ATTACK S TRATEGY
In Stage I of the two-stage dynamic game, the DDoS
attacker strategically launches different amounts of malicious
traffic ai on different edge servers i ∈ V. As shown in
problem (7), the DDoS attacker aims to maximize the total
filtering cost of the edge-cloud computing network, considering defenders’ equilibrium filtering strategies.6 Recall that
under an attack strategy a, defenders fall into at most three
types at the NE of the selfish filtering game as discussed in
Theorem 3, and hence we can reformulate the DDoS attacker’s
objective function in (6) as
Ua (a; x∗ )
X
=

wc (λi + ai ) +

0<ri (a)<ī(a)

X

F ∗ (a)

j̄(a)≤ri (a)≤D

#

"
+

X

wc (λi + ai )x∗ic +

X

x∗ik F ∗ (a)

i∈D

.

k∈V

ī(a)≤ri (a)<j̄(a)

(16)
In this case, we can formulate the DDoS attacker’s attack
problem as follows.
max Ua (a; x∗ ).
a∈A

original problem (17), i.e., optimizing the objective function
over the feasible region A, into sub-problems that optimize
the objective function over subsets of A under fixed pairs
of (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
Specifically, we show that each fixed pair (ī, j̄) maps to a
subset A(ī, j̄) ⊂ A of attack strategies, and the union of all
subsets A(ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}
constitutes the original feasible region A. Recall that an attack
strategy a can map to the NE x∗ of defenders and the corresponding pair (ī, j̄) according to Theorem 3. Given a fixed pair
(ī, j̄) where ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D} and j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1},
we can write the subset A(ī, j̄) of the attack strategies that
maps to the pair (ī, j̄) as follows.
(
X
A(ī, j̄) = a | ai ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ D;
ai ≤ amax ;

(17)

Recall that A is the feasible region of the attack strategy a
defined in Section III-B. Solving problem (17) is challenging
since the objective function in Eq. (16) depends on the attack
strategy a in a non-trivial way. Specifically, we can calculate
F ∗ (a) according to Eq. (11), and calculate ī(a) and j̄(a)
according to Theorem 3 which do not have closed-form
solutions. Furthermore, defenders’ rankings ri (a), ∀i ∈ V also
change with the attack strategy a, which further complicates
the problem.
To solve problem (17), we first analyze a special case where
all edge servers have the same amount of normal traffic. We
then analyze the general case where edge servers have different
amounts of normal traffic.
A. Optimal Attack Strategy When Edge Servers Have Equal
Normal Traffic
We consider a special case where each edge server has the
same amount of normal traffic, i.e., λi = λ, ∀i ∈ V. This
case happens when the network operator of the edge-cloud
computing network uses load balance algorithms to distribute
the same amount of requests to each edge server [36]. In
this case, we first decompose problem (17) into sub-problems
under fixed (ī, j̄) pairs. We then analyze the property of each
sub-problem under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), based on which we
design a low-complexity algorithm to derive the optimal attack
strategy.
1) Decomposition of Problem (17): The key challenge to
solve problem (17) comes from the complicated relationship
between the attack strategy a and the two critical rankings
ī(a) and j̄(a). We tackle this challenge by decomposing the
6 Considering defenders’ cooperative defense mechanism, the attack strategy
that only attacking the weakest edge servers is suboptimal, since other edge
servers which are not attacked can help filter the malicious traffic.

wc
1
≥ ∗
, ∀0 < ri < ī;
λi + ai
F (a)
wc − P 1 fk
1
wc
k∈V
>
, ∀ī ≤ ri < j̄;
>
F ∗ (a)
λi + ai
F ∗ (a)
)
wc − P 1 fk
1
k∈V
, ∀j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D ,
(18)
≤
λi + ai
F ∗ (a)
where F ∗ (a) is calculated by (11). We next prove that the
union of all subsets A(ī, j̄) constitutes the original feasible
region A.
Lemma 7: The feasible region A of the DDoS attacker’s
attack strategy is the union of all subsets A(ī, j̄), i.e., A =
∪(ī,j̄) A(ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
Proof: See Appendix M in the supplementary material. 
According to Lemma 7, we can decompose the original
problem (17) into sub-problems over subsets A(ī, j̄) under
fixed pairs (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī + 1, . . . , D + 1}.
Under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), we can rewrite the DDoS attacker’s
objective function in (16) as follows.
X
X
Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ ) =
wc (λi + ai ) +
F ∗ (a)
0<ri (a)<ī

j̄≤ri (a)≤D

"
+

X

wc (λi + ai )x∗ic +

ī≤ri (a)<j̄

#
X

x∗ik F ∗ (a)

k∈V

(19)
Then the sub-problem under the fixed pair (ī, j̄) pair is
max Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ ).

(20)

a∈A(ī,j̄)

To solve problem (17), we can first solve the sub-problem
(20) for each fixed pair (ī, j̄), ∀ī ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}, j̄ ∈ {ī, ī +
1, . . . , D + 1}, and then choose among the optimal solutions
to the sub-problems.
2) Property of Each Sub-Problem: For each sub-problem
under a fixed pair (ī, j̄), we first analyze its property in the
special case, based on which we derive its optimal solution.
We first show that for each sub-problem, an optimal attack
strategy is to launch the same amount of malicious traffic to
edge servers of the same type at equilibrium (characterized in
Theorem 3).

.

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

Lemma 8: For the sub-problem (20) under a fixed pair (ī, j̄)
in the special case where all edge servers have the same
amount of normal traffic, the DDoS attacker can reach its
optimal solution by launching the same amount of malicious
traffic to defenders of the same type at equilibrium.
Proof: See Appendix N the supplementary material.

Based on Lemma 8, we denote the amount of malicious
traffic launched to the three types (i.e., cloud-only, mixedfiltering, and edge-only) of defenders as ac , am , and ae ,
respectively. In other words, we have ai = ac , ∀0 < ri <
ī, ai = am , ∀ī ≤ ri < j̄, and ai = ae , ∀j̄ ≤ ri ≤ D. We
denote aspe , (ac , am , ae ). In this case, we can rewrite the
DDoS attacker’s objective function in Eq. (19) under a fixed
pair (ī, j̄) as follows
(ī,j̄)
Ua,spe
(aspe )

= (ī − 1)wc (λ + ac ) + (V − j̄ + 1)F ∗ (aspe )


[wc (λ + am ) − F ∗ (aspe )]2
.
+ (j̄ − ī) wc (λ + am ) −
λ + am
We rewrite the sub-problem under a fixed pair (ī, j̄) in
problem (20) as follows
(ī,j̄)
max Ua,spe
(aspe )

3173

We then prove the optimality of the attack strategy derived
by Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the
Optimal Attack Strategy for the Special Case
1: Set Aspe = ∅;
2: for ī = 1: V do
3:
for j̄ = ī: V + 1 do
(ī,j̄)
4:
Calculate aspe by solving (21) using SQP;
(ī,j̄)
5:
Aspe = Aspe ∪ {aspe };
6:
end for
7:
end for
∗
8: Set a∗
spe = arg maxaspe ∈Aspe Ua (aspe ; x ).
Lemma 9: Algorithm 3 derives the optimal solution to
problem (17) for the special case where all edge servers have
the same amount of normal traffic.
Proof: See Appendix O in the supplementary material. 
Algorithm 3 can derive the optimal attack strategy in
low complexity. Specifically, Algorithm 3 contains V (V2+3)
loops. In each loop, SQP can solve the sub-problem (21) in
R-quadratic convergence rate.

aspe

s.t. (ī − 1)ac + (j̄ − ī)am + (V − j̄ + 1)ae ≤ amax ,
B. Optimal Attack Strategy When Edge Servers Have
Different Normal Traffic

ac , ae , am ≥ 0,
F ∗ (aspe ) =

(j̄ − ī)wc (λ+am )+(V − j̄ +1) Pλ+aefk
k∈V

j̄ − ī + 1

,

1
wc
,
≥ ∗
λc + ac
F (aspe )
wc − P 1 fk
1
k∈V
≤
, if j̄ 6= V + 1,
λe + ae
F ∗ (aspe )
ae = 0, if j̄ = V + 1,
P 1

wc −
wc
1
k∈V fk
>
>
, if ī 6= j̄,
F ∗ (aspe )
λm + am
F ∗ (aspe )
am = 0, if ī = j̄.
(21)
Problem (21) is a convex quadratic problem with linear
constraints, and we can use Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) [37] to derive its optimal solution with a fast
convergence speed. After solving the sub-problem for each
fixed pair (ī, j̄), we next solve the original problem (17).
3) A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the Optimal
Attack Strategy: The key idea to solve problem (17) for the
special case is to derive the optimal solutions to the subproblems under all feasible pairs (ī, j̄), and then choose the
one that can optimize the DDoS attacker’s objective function.
We show the algorithm to derive the optimal attack strategy
for the DDoS attacker in Algorithm 3. We first enumerate
all possible (ī, j̄) pairs (Lines 2-3). For each pair (ī, j̄), we
(ī,j̄)
(ī,j̄) (ī,j̄) (ī,j̄)
calculate the optimal solution aspe = (ae , ac , am ) to
the sub-problem (21) by SQP (Line 4). We derive the optimal
solution a∗spe = (a∗e , a∗c , a∗m ) to problem (17) by choosing
(ī,j̄)
among {aspe , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , V }, j̄ ∈ {ī, . . . , V + 1}} that can
maximize the attacker’s objective function Ua (aspe ; x∗ ).

In this subsection, we solve the DDoS attacker’s optimization problem (17) and derive the optimal attack strategy for
the general case where edge servers have different amounts
of normal traffic. Solving problem (17) for the general case
is much more challenging than that for the special case.
The reason is that even under a fixed critical ranking pair
(ī, j̄), the ranking ri (a) of each defender i changes with the
attack strategy a. In this case, the calculations of the subset
(ī,j̄)
A(ī, j̄) in Eq. (18) and the objective function Ua (a; x∗ ) in
Eq. (19) under a fixed pair (ī, j̄) have many possible outcomes. Therefore, we can not simply decompose the original
problem (17) into sub-problems under each pair (ī, j̄).
In the following, we first show a property of the optimal solution, based on which we design an algorithm to
solve problem (17).
The key challenge to solve problem (17) for the general case
is mainly due to the change of each defender’s ranking ri (a)
with the attack strategy even under a fixed pair (ī, j̄). We next
show that there exists an optimal solution a∗ to problem (17)
under which the ranking of each defender sorted by the total
traffic is the same as the ranking of each defender sorted by
the normal traffic.
Lemma 10: There exists an optimal attack strategy a∗ under
which λj + a∗j ≤ λk + a∗k if λj ≤ λk , ∀j, k ∈ V.
Proof: See Appendix P in the supplementary material. 
Lemma 10 indicates that we can optimize over the set of
attack strategies under which the ranking of each defender
sorted by its total traffic is the same as the ranking sorted by
its normal traffic. In this case, each defender’s ranking ri does
not change with the attack strategy a and we can decompose

3174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

problem (17) into sub-problems under each fixed pair (ī, j̄)
as follows
max
a∈A(ī,j̄)

s.t.

Ua(ī,j̄) (a; x∗ )
λj + aj ≤ λk + ak , ∀j, k ∈ V where λj ≤ λk .
(22)

Problem (22) is a non-linear problem with linear constraints.
However, it’s hard to analyze its convexity since its Hessian
matrix is very complex. We can use SQP to calculate its KKT
points as the approximate optimal solution. After deriving the
approximate optimal solutions to the sub-problems under all
feasible pairs (ī, j̄), we can choose the one that maximizes the
DDoS attacker’s objective function.
We show the algorithm to derive the approximate optimal
attack strategy for the DDoS attacker in Algorithm 4. We
first enumerate all possible (ī, j̄) pairs (Lines 2-3). For each
pair (ī, j̄), we calculate the approximate optimal solution
(ī,j̄)
(ī,j̄) (ī,j̄)
(ī,j̄)
agen = (a1 , a2 , · · · , aV ) to the sub-problem (20) by
SQP (Line 4). We derive the approximate optimal solution
a∗gen = (a∗1 , a∗2 , · · · , a∗V ) to problem (17) by choosing among
(ī,j̄)
{agen , ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , V }, j̄ ∈ {ī, . . . , V + 1}} that can
maximize the attacker’s objective function Ua (agen ; x∗ ).
Algorithm 4 A Low-Complexity Algorithm to Derive the
Approximate Optimal Attack Strategy for the General Case
1: Set Agen = ∅;
2: for ī = 1: V do
3:
for j̄ = ī: V + 1 do
(ī,j̄)
4:
Calculate agen by solving (22) using SQP;
(ī,j̄)
5:
Agen = Agen ∪ {agen };
6:
end for
7: end for
∗
8: Set a∗
gen = arg maxagen ∈Agen Ua (agen ; x ).
We then discuss the optimality of the attack strategy derived
by Algorithm 4.
Lemma 11: Algorithm 4 derives an approximate optimal
solution to problem (17) by finding the optimal KKT points
of all sub-problems (22).
Proof: See Appendix Q in the supplementary material. 
Algorithm 4 can derive the approximate optimal attack
strategy in low complexity. Specifically, Algorithm 4 contains
V (V +3)
loops. In each loop, SQP can converge to the KKT
2
point of sub-problem (22) in R-superlinear convergence rate.
In this section, we have solved the DDoS attacker’s attack
problem for both the special case and the general case. We
conduct extensive simulations to evaluate the effectiveness of
our derived attack strategy later in the next section.
VI. S IMULATION R ESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed
distributed cooperative defense mechanism. We conduct simulations to answer the following questions:
Q1: How does our proposed distributed cooperative defense
mechanism compare to other baseline defense methods?

Fig. 3.
of wc .

Comparison of different defense methods under different values

Q2: How do the network parameters affect the performance
of our proposed defense mechanism?
Q3: How does our derived attack strategy compare to other
baseline attack methods?
Q4: How does the DDoS attacker strategically behave to
compromise the edge-cloud computing network?
We compare with the following baseline defense methods
and baseline attack methods.
Baseline Defense Methods:
• Non-cooperative Partial Filtering (NCP) [12]: each
defender can only partially filter its traffic on itself and
on the cloud.
• Non-cooperative Non-partial Filtering (NCNP): each
defender can only filter its traffic either on itself or on
the cloud.
• Greedy Partial Filtering (GP): each defender can partially
filter its traffic on any computing node to minimize its
own cost in order.
• Greedy Non-partial Filtering (GNP): each defender can
filter its total traffic on one computing node to minimize
its own cost in order.
Baseline Attack Methods:
• Times Attack: the amount of malicious traffic is k times
of the normal traffic, and we set parameter k the same for
all defenders, i.e., k = Pamaxλi and ai = kλi , ∀i ∈ V.
i∈V
• Uniform Attack [38]: the DDoS attacker launches the
same amount of malicious traffic to each defender.
• Random Attack: the DDoS attacker launches a random
amount of traffic to each defender.
In the following, we first verify the effectiveness of
our proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism
(i.e., Q1 and Q2). Then we evaluate the performance of our
derived attack strategy (i.e., Q3 and Q4).
A. Effectiveness of Proposed Defense Mechanism
In this subsection, we first compare our proposed defense
mechanism with other baseline defense methods (Q1). Then
we show the impact of network parameters on the performance
of our defense mechanism (Q2).
1) Comparison With Baseline Defense Methods (Q1):
We compare our proposed distributed cooperative defense
mechanism with four baseline defense methods. Specifically,
we consider an edge-cloud computing network with V = 10
edge servers, where the amount of suspicious traffic of each
edge server (i.e., λi + ai ) follows a uniform distribution in

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

Fig. 4. Comparison of different defense methods under different values
of ftotal .

P
[1000, 2000] bits. We denote ftotal , k∈V fk . Letting the
filtering capability fk of each edge server k ∈ V follow a
uniform distribution in [0, 200] bits/second and varying wc in
[0, 0.05] seconds/bit, we get the simulation results in Fig. 3.
Fixing wc = 0.05 seconds/bit and varying ftotal in [0,5000]
bits/second, we get the simulation results in Fig. 4.
We show the comparison of defense mechanisms under
different values of wc in Fig. 3. We can see that when
wc is small, the NCP method can achieve the lowest total
filtering cost, while our defense mechanism (i.e., the NE)
achieves the second lowest total filtering cost. This is due
to the limited advantage offered by edge filtering compared
with the cloud scrubbing service when wc is small. When
wc is large, our mechanism achieves the lowest total filtering
cost among all defense mechanisms. That is because our
defense mechanism can leverage all edge servers’ filtering
capabilities (compared with non-cooperative algorithms) and
schedule each defender’s strategies better (compared with
greedy algorithms). We can also see that the total filtering
cost of our mechanism remains unchanged when wc is larger
than a threshold. The reason is that in this case, filtering all
the traffic on edge servers has a lower cost, and defenders will
not filter their traffic on the cloud.
We show the comparison of defense mechanisms under
different values of ftotal in Fig. 4. Note that the filtering
capability of each edge server is a random non-negative value,
but the total filtering capability is fixed. We consider the
impact of the total filtering capability because the equilibrium
filtering latency F ∗ depends on the total filtering capability
rather than the filtering capability of an edge server according
to Theorem 3 and Eq. (11). Similar to Fig. 3, we can see
that our defense mechanism achieves the lowest total filtering
cost when the edge filtering capability is sufficient. This validates the effectiveness of our distributed cooperative defense
mechanism which fully utilizes the traffic scrubbing/filtering
capabilities on heterogeneous cloud and edge servers. Besides,
the total filtering costs of the non-cooperative and non-partial
algorithms are zigzag curves. The reason is that the filtering
capability of each edge server is random under each value of
ftotal , which makes these algorithms have unstable outcomes.
2) Impact of Parameters on Defense Mechanism (Q2):
We show the defense strategy under our proposed defense
mechanism, and verify the impact of network parameters on
the performance of our defense mechanism.7
7 The “defender index” in figures represents defenders sorted in ascending
order of their total suspicious traffic (i.e., λi + ai ).

3175

Fig. 5. Equilibrium filtering strategy.

Fig. 6. Complexity of Algorithm 2 under different numbers of defenders.

We show the equilibrium filtering strategies under our
proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism in Fig. 5.
We consider an edge-cloud computing network with 5 edge
servers whose total suspicious traffic (in bits) are 100, 500,
1000, 1500 and 2000, respectively, and the filtering capability
(in bits/second) of the edge servers are 50, 50, 100, 100 and
200, respectively. We set wc = 0.01 s/bit. In this case, we can
calculate by Algorithm 1 that the equilibrium filtering latency
is F ∗ = 8.5. Fig. 5 shows that at equilibrium, defender 1
and defender 2 are Type I (cloud-only) defenders, because the
marginal filtering cost on the cloud is lower than the marginal
filtering cost on edge servers. Defender 3 is a Type II (mixedfiltering) defender since the marginal filtering cost on the cloud
is equal to that on edge servers. Defender 4 and defender 5 are
Type III (edge-only) defenders, because filtering on the cloud
for them has a greater marginal filtering cost than filtering only
on edge servers. The simulation results are consistent with our
theoretical analysis in Theorem 3.
To show the scalability of our proposed distributed cooperative defense mechanism, we plot the number of iterations
of Algorithm 2 under different numbers of defenders D
in Fig. 6. For a fixed number of defenders, we conduct
10 simulations (where in each simulation, each defender’s
amount of suspicious traffic follows a uniform distribution in
[1000, 2000]). We set the filtering capability of each defender
as 200 bits/s and wc = 0.0001 s/bit. We set the tolerance
of the algorithm as  = 10−6 . We can see from Fig. 6
that while the number of iterations exhibits some variation,
the average number of iterations is always smaller than D,
indicating that our defense mechanism can respond to the
DDoS attack quickly. This is consistent with our complexity
of the Algorithm 2. The fluctuations of the curve are due to
the shifting distance between the equilibrium filtering latency
F ∗ and the initial point, which is influenced by changes in the
critical pair (ī, j̄).

3176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 7. Defenders’ filtering costs under different values of wc .

Fig. 9. Comparison of different attack methods under different values of wc .

Fig. 8. Defenders’ filtering costs under different values of ftotal .

Fig. 10. Comparison of different attack methods under different values
of ftotal .

We then verify the impact of the network operators, i.e.,
wc and ftotal , on the equilibrium defense strategies. Specifically, we consider an edge-cloud computing network with
V = 10 edge servers whose amount of suspicious traffic
(i.e., λi + ai ) is 200, 400, · · · , 2000 bits, respectively. We fix
ftotal = 700 bits/second and vary wc , and get Fig. 7. We fix
wc = 0.005 seconds/bit and vary ftotal , and get Fig. 8.8
Fig. 7 shows defenders’ filtering costs under different values
of wc . We can see that as wc increases, defenders’ filtering
costs of all defenders increase. Furthermore, more defenders
filter their traffic on edge servers at equilibrium, and fewer
defenders filter their traffic on the cloud due to the large cloud
filtering costs. For example, when wc = 0.001 s/bit, defenders
indexed from 7 to 10 are all mixed-filtering defenders. When
wc = 0.009 s/bit, defenders indexed from 7 to 10 all change
to be edge-only defenders. An interesting phenomenon is that
under a fixed wc , the filtering cost of mixed-filtering defender
is larger than the filtering cost of edge-only defender. The
reason is that at equilibrium, the defenders with more traffic
filter more traffic on edge servers and defenders with less
traffic are forced to filter their traffic on the cloud due to
congestion on edge servers. For mixed-filtering defenders, their
filtering costs are larger since the filtering cost on the cloud
is large.
Fig. 8 shows defenders’ filtering costs under different values
of ftotal . We can see that as the total filtering capability ftotal
increases, more defenders filter their traffic on edge servers at
equilibrium, and defenders’ filtering costs decrease. The reason is that when edge servers have larger filtering capabilities,
the congestion effect due to resource sharing among defenders
is effectively alleviated, and the traffic filtering latency on edge
servers is smaller.

Both Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 demonstrate the superiority of
our defense mechanism compared with solely utilizing cloud
scrubbing. Furthermore, our defense mechanism proves advantageous for heavy-traffic defenders.

8 To show the type of each defender at equilibrium, we use circle, star
and square to represent defenders of Type I (cloud-only), Type II (mixedfiltering), and Type III (edge-only). The solid line represents each defender’s
filtering cost under our defense mechanism, and the dotted line represents
each defender’s filtering cost if it only filters traffic on the cloud.

B. Performance of Derived Attack Strategy
In this subsection, we first compare our derived attack
strategy with other baseline attack methods. Then we show
the attacker’s strategic attack strategies in different cases.
1) Comparison With Baseline Attack Methods (Q3): To justify that our attack strategy can model the attacker’s strategic
behaviors better, we compare our attack strategy derived by
Algorithm 4 with three baseline attack methods. We consider
an edge-cloud computing network with V = 10 edge servers
whose amount of normal traffic (i.e., λi ) follows a uniform
distribution in [500, 1500] bits. The total amount of malicious
traffic that the DDoS attacker can launch to the edge-cloud
computing network is amax = 5000 bits. Fig. 9 shows the
comparison of different attack methods under different values
of wc when ftotal = 1000 bits/s. Fig. 10 shows the comparison
of different attack methods under different values ftotal when
wc = 0.01 s/bit. Both figures show that under our attack
strategy, the DDoS attacker achieves the largest utility, where
the utility increase can be up to 27.7%. The reason is that our
attack strategy optimization problem allows the DDoS attacker
to strategically launch different amounts of malicious traffic
to different edge servers, and further considers the defense
strategy of the edge-cloud computing network. Note that when
wc or ftotal increases to a certain value, all defenders choose
to be edge-only defenders at equilibrium and filter all their
traffic proportionally on edge servers. In this case, different
attack methods achieve the same performance due to the same
equilibrium filtering latency F ∗ .
2) Attacker’s Strategic Attack Behaviors (Q4): We show the
DDoS attacker’s optimal attack strategy for both the special
case and the general case.

WU et al.: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE DEFENSE AGAINST DDoS ATTACKS IN CLOUD COMPUTING NETWORKS

Fig. 11. Optimal attack strategy in special case.

Fig. 12. Approximate optimal attack strategy in general case.

Fig. 11 shows the DDoS attacker’s optimal attack strategy
for the special case. We consider an edge-cloud computing
network with 10 edge servers that have equal normal traffic
of 1000 bits. We assume that the total amount of malicious
traffic (in bits) that the DDoS attacker can launch to the
edge-cloud computing network is amax = 4000 bits. We set
wc = 0.01 s/bit and ftotal = 200 bits/s. In this case, the DDoS
attacker’s optimal attack strategy derived by Algorithm 3
is a∗c = 0, a∗m = 400, a∗e = 0. In other words, all defenders
choose to be mixed-filtering defenders at equilibrium, and
the DDoS attacker evenly distributes its malicious traffic to
each defender. Based on Lemma 6, the PoA is less than 2
when defenders’ total suspicious traffic is equal. This indicates
that our defense mechanism can achieve effective defense
performance.
Fig. 12 shows the approximate optimal attack strategy
derived by Algorithm 4 for the general case. We consider an
edge-cloud computing network with 10 edge servers whose
normal traffic follows a uniform distribution in [500, 1500]. We
set amax = 5000 bits, wc = 0.001 s/bit, and ftotal = 5000
bits/s. We can see from the Fig. 12 that defenders indexed
from 1 to 4 have the same amount of total traffic under
attack, and defenders indexed 9 and 10 also have identical
total traffic. In comparison with the original normal traffic, the
total traffic of each defender under attack becomes closer, as
evidenced by a decrease in standard deviation from 285.97 to
141.96. Experiments under different parameter settings show
that the standard deviation of the total traffic is lower than
that of the normal traffic. As discussed in Section IV-D, the
PoA is small when edge servers’ total traffic does not exhibit
significant variations. Therefore, our defense mechanism can
still effectively mitigate the strategic DDoS attacks in general
cases.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we design a distributed cooperative defense
mechanism for edge-cloud computing networks considering

3177

the DDoS attacker’s strategic attack behavior. We model the
interactions between the DDoS attacker and defenders as a
two-stage dynamic game. We solve the total filtering cost
minimization problem in Stage II by modeling defenders’
traffic filtering behaviors as a selfish filtering game, for which
we prove the uniqueness of the Nash equilibrium. By utilizing
the property that the equilibrium filtering latency on each edge
server is the same, we design a distributed algorithm for each
defender to derive its equilibrium filtering strategy without
knowing the global information. We further prove that the PoA
of the derived NE has an upper bound, indicating guaranteed
social efficiency. For the DDoS attacker’s optimal attack problem in Stage I, we design low-complexity algorithms to derive
the optimal attack strategies. Simulation results show that the
DDoS attacker tends to attack all edge servers to reduce their
cooperative defense capability, and our defense mechanism
can achieve a better defense performance compared with
existing benchmark mechanisms. For future work, it would be
interesting to study defense mechanisms under more general
attacker models (e.g., boundedly rational, heuristic, or adaptive
attackers) and dynamic system parameters.
R EFERENCES
[1]

X. Ren, C. Qiu, Z. Chen, X. Wang, D. Niyato, and W. Wang,
“CompCube: A space-time-request resource trading framework for edgecloud service market,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 3252–3264, Sep. 2023.
[2] Q. Ma, Y. Qin, C. Zhu, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Joint resource trading
and task scheduling in edge-cloud computing networks,” IEEE Trans.
Netw., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 994–1008, Jun. 2025.
[3] Q. Ma, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Efficient service selection and pricing in edge-cloud computing markets,” IEEE Trans. Netw.,
vol. 34, pp. 471–485, Aug. 2026, doi: 10.1109/TON.2025.3599685.
[4] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms
against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart., 2013.
[5] X. Li et al., “Determinacy-oriented task offloading scheduling against
DoS attack for TSN-based edge computing architecture,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7449–7458, May 2024.
[6] X. Xia et al., “EdgeShield: Enabling collaborative DDoS mitigation at the edge,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 14502–14513, Dec. 2024.
[7] X. Chen, L. Xiao, W. Feng, N. Ge, and X. Wang, “DDoS defense for
IoT: A Stackelberg game model-enabled collaborative framework,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9659–9674, Jun. 2022.
[8] (2023). Global DDoS Attack Status and Trend Analysis in 2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://e.huawei.com/cn/material/networking/
security/333e0bdd9694437e80aac4b436781fe3
[9] (2023). Protecting Your Bus. From Cyber Attacks. [Online]. Available:
https://go.zayo.com/zayo-ddos-protection-ebook/
[10] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “DDoS attacks at the application layer: Challenges and research perspectives for safeguarding
Web applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 661–685, 1st Quart., 2019.
[11] W. You, L. Jiao, J. Li, and R. Zhou, “Scheduling DDoS cloud scrubbing
in ISP networks via randomized online auctions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 1658–1667.
[12] H. Li et al., “A cooperative defense framework against application-level
DDoS attacks on mobile edge computing services,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Jan. 2023.
[13] I. Fajjari, N. Aitsaadi, G. Pujolle, and H. Zimmermann, “VNE-AC: Virtual network embedding algorithm based on ant colony Metaheuristic,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[14] K. Kalkan, L. Altay, G. Gür, and F. Alagöz, “JESS: Joint entropy-based
DDoS defense scheme in SDN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 36,
no. 10, pp. 2358–2372, Oct. 2018.
[15] R. Zhou, Y. Zeng, L. Jiao, Y. Zhong, and L. Song, “Online and predictive
coordinated cloud-edge scrubbing for DDoS mitigation,” IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9208–9223, Oct. 2024.

3178

[16] Q. He et al., “A game-theoretical approach for mitigating edge DDoS
attack,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 2333–2348, Jul. 2022.
[17] O. A. Wahab, J. Bentahar, H. Otrok, and A. Mourad, “Resource-aware
detection and defense system against multi-type attacks in the cloud:
Repeated Bayesian Stackelberg game,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 605–622, Mar. 2021.
[18] H. Li, J. Wu, H. Xu, G. Li, and M. Guizani, “Explainable intelligencedriven defense mechanism against advanced persistent threats: A joint
edge game and AI approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 757–775, Mar. 2022.
[19] L. Xiao, D. Xu, C. Xie, N. B. Mandayam, and H. V. Poor, “Cloud
storage defense against advanced persistent threats: A prospect theoretic
study,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 534–544,
Mar. 2017.
[20] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, and S. Yu, “An SDN-enabled proactive defense
framework for DDoS mitigation in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 5366–5380, 2021.
[21] J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Shen, G. Yue, S. Yu, and M. Li, “A Bayesian
Q-learning game for dependable task offloading against DDoS attacks
in sensor edge cloud,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 9,
pp. 7546–7561, May 2021.
[22] S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, D. Huang, and A. Alshamrani,
“SmartDefense: A distributed deep defense against DDoS attacks
with edge computing,” Comput. Netw., vol. 209, May 2022, Art. no.
108874.
[23] Y. Feng, W. Zhang, S. Yin, H. Tang, Y. Xiang, and Y. Zhang, “A
collaborative stealthy DDoS detection method based on reinforcement
learning at the edge of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 10, no. 20, pp. 17934–17948, Oct. 2023.
[24] Y. Deng et al., “Resource provisioning for mitigating edge DDoS
attacks in MEC-enabled SDVN,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 23,
pp. 24264–24280, Dec. 2022.
[25] H. Huang, B. Sun, and L. Hu, “A task offloading approach based on risk
assessment to mitigate edge DDoS attacks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140,
May 2024, Art. no. 103789.
[26] Y. Xu, S. Zhang, C. Lyu, J. Liu, Y. Shen, and S. Norio, “Mitigating
distributed DoS attacks on bandwidth allocation for federated learning
in mobile edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1941–1960, May 2025.
[27] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Z. Ouyang, and Z. Chen, “Resource-efficient lowrate DDoS mitigation with moving target defense in edge clouds,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 168–186,
Feb. 2025.
[28] Z. Chen, Q. Ma, L. Gao, and X. Chen, “Price competition in multiserver edge computing networks under SAA and SIQ models,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 754–768, Jan. 2024.
[29] (2024).
Huawei
HiSecEngine
AntiDDoS1900
DDoS
Protection
System
Datasheet-V600R23C10–Huawei
Enterprise.
[Online].
Available:
https://e.huawei.com/eu/material/enterprise/
df5547163f8e4743b9f21363afcc3fa1
[30] T. Roughgarden and É. Tardos, “How bad is selfish routing?,” J. ACM,
vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 236–259, Mar. 2002.
[31] Alibaba. Anti-DDoS: Intelligent DDoS Protection Service. Accessed:
Jan. 20, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.alibabacloud.com/en/
product/ddos? p lc=1
[32] X. Chen, W. Feng, Y. Luo, M. Shen, N. Ge, and X. Wang, “Defending
against link flooding attacks in Internet of Things: A Bayesian game
approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 117–128, Jan.
2022.
[33] X. Chen, L. Jiao, W. Li, and X. Fu, “Efficient multi-user computation
offloading for mobile-edge cloud computing,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2795–2808, Oct. 2016.
[34] J. B. Rosen, “Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave
N-Person games,” Econometrica, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 520–534, Jul. 1965.
[35] T. Roughgarden, Selfish Routing and the Price of Anarchy. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[36] M. Shreedhar and G. Varghese, “Efficient fair queuing using deficit
round-robin,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 375–385, Jun.
1996.
[37] U. M. G. Palomares and O. L. Mangasarian, “Superlinearly convergent quasi-Newton algorithms for nonlinearly constrained optimization
problems,” Math. Program., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Dec. 1976.
[38] J. Yao, G. Ding, and T. Zhu, “Detection of non-uniform Byzantine
attacks in collaborative spectrum sensing,” in Proc. IET Int. Conf. Inf.
Commun. Technol. (IETICT), Apr. 2013, pp. 446–451.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Yifei Wu received the B.E. degree from Central
China Normal University in 2023. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University.
His research interests include edge and cloud computing, network economics, and online learning.

Fan Yang received the M.S. degree from the School
of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University (SYSU), Shenzhen, China, in 2025. His
primary research interests include edge computing,
game theory, and online learning.

Qian Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Information Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, in 2017. From
2018 to 2019, she was a Post-Doctoral Research
Associate with Northeastern University. She is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University. Her research interests include network
optimization and economics. She was a recipient of
the Best Paper Award from the IEEE International Symposium on Modeling
and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) in 2021,
and the Best Student Paper Award from the IEEE International Symposium
on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks
(WiOpt) in 2015.
Guocheng Liao (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016 and the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Information
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
in 2021. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University. His current research interests include
data privacy, game theory, and mechanism design.
He received the 2017 IEEE GLOBECOM ComSoc
Young Professional Best Paper Award.
Xu Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in information engineering from The Chinese
University of Hong Kong in 2012. He was a PostDoctoral Research Associate with Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA, from 2012 to 2014,
and a Humboldt Scholar Fellow with the Institute
of Computer Science, University of Göttingen, Germany, from 2014 to 2016. He is currently a Full
Professor with Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China, and the Vice Director of the National and
Local Joint Engineering Laboratory. He received the
prestigious Humboldt Research Fellowship awarded by the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation of Germany, the 2014 Hong Kong Young Scientist
Runner-Up Award, the 2017 IEEE Communication Society Asia–Pacific
Outstanding Young Researcher Award, the 2017 IEEE ComSoc Young Professional Best Paper Award, the Honorable Mention Award of 2010 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), the
Best Paper Runner-Up Award of 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM), and the Best Paper Award of 2017
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). He is an Area
Editor of IEEE O PEN J OURNAL OF THE C OMMUNICATIONS S OCIETY and
an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICA TIONS , IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, and IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN
C OMMUNICATIONS Series on Network Softwarization and Enablers.