4562

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

DRL-Based Weakly Supervised Traffic Anomaly
Detection for IoT Networks
Ziteng Wang , Yiheng Ruan, Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiaoxuan Fan , Student Member, IEEE,
Shenghao Liu , Wei Feng, and Deng Zhang

Abstract—With the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT)
devices, IoT systems face increasingly severe threats from largescale cyberattacks during network communications. To effectively
recognize potential network threats and ensure the security of
IoT, network traffic anomaly detection has been widely studied.
Due to the high cost of manual labeling in real-world scenarios,
only limited network traffic data is explicitly labeled as abnormal
or normal. However, most existing anomaly detection methods
struggle to enhance detection accuracy with minimal supervision
and perform ineffectively at identifying potential unknown anomalies in unlabeled data. To address these limitations, this paper
proposes WADE, a Weakly supervised Anomaly DEtection method
based on Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). WADE enables
simultaneous identification of known and unknown anomaly traffic
with limited labeled data. Specifically, it incorporates a Dueling Qnetwork architecture and introduces a novel reward optimization
mechanism that: 1) strengthens feature extraction from unlabeled
data and 2) elevates decision accuracy via dynamic reward adaptation. Extensive experiments on IoT traffic datasets demonstrate
that WADE outperforms four peer weakly supervised methods,
achieving performance improvements of 12.2% in Area Under
the Precision-Recall Curve (AUC-PR) and 6.6% in Area Under
the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC), which
validate the effectiveness of WADE in safeguarding IoT systems.
Received 4 June 2025; revised 11 November 2025; accepted 30 November
2025. Date of publication 4 December 2025; date of current version 24 December
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFE0138600, in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20153, Grant
62272182, Grant 62472442, and Grant 62202181, in part by the Hubei Provincial
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 2023AFB998, in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology under Grant YCJJ20251306, Grant YCJJ20252330,
and Grant 2025JYCXJJ060, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant JCYJ20220530161004009, in part by the Chongqing Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant CSTB2024NSCQMSX0812, and in
part by the Scientific and Technological Research Program of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission under Grant KJZDK202401604. Recommended
for acceptance by Dr. Jiong Jin. (Ziteng Wang and Yiheng Ruan are co-first
authors.) (Corresponding author: Xianjun Deng.)
Ziteng Wang, Yiheng Ruan, and Xiaoxuan Fan are with the Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big
Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wzt@hust.edu.cn;
ruanyiheng@hust.edu.cn; fxxdx@hust.edu.cn).
Xianjun Deng and Shenghao Liu are with the Hubei Key Laboratory of
Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data
Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the Shenzhen
Huazhong University of Science and Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen
518057, China (e-mail: dengxj615@hust.edu.cn; liushenghao@hust.edu.cn).
Wei Feng and Deng Zhang are with the Network and Industrial Control Information Security Technology Department, China Nuclear Power
Operation Technology Company, Ltd., Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail:
fengwei01@cnnp.com.cn; zhangdeng@cnnp.com.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3640175

Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), network traffic,
anomaly detection, deep reinforcement learning, weakly supervised
learning.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITH the rapid advancement of network technologies
and widespread adoption of connected devices, Internet
of Things (IoT) has been increasingly integrated into diverse
domains, such as smart city, healthcare and manufacturing,
demonstrating immense market potential. By 2025, global IoT
device count is projected to reach 75 billion [1], while IoT market
size is anticipated to attain $76.97 billion. In IoT networks, the
deployment of large-scale devices and the complexity of network communications lead to generate massive data traffic. Consequently, the risk of cyber-attacks, such as denial-of-service,
on IoT systems is escalating, posing a growing threat to IoT
security [2].
Although security solutions such as encryption algorithms,
authentication protocols and firewalls can mitigate threats to
some extent, IoT networks remain vulnerable to numerous malicious activities. Anomaly detection (AD) is a critical field
in data mining that aims to identify deviant samples within a
general data distribution [3]. Within IoT network scenarios, traffic anomaly detection facilitates the recognition of anomalous
behaviors and potential threats, thereby enhancing the security
and stability of networks [4].
In real-world scenarios, network traffic data often exhibits
a static nature and encompasses multiple characteristics (features). Given the large-scale deployment and inherent resource
limitations of IoT devices, only limited traffic data is typically
labeled as normal or abnormal. These labeled abnormal data with
specific classes (types) is regarded as known anomalies. On the
other hand, extensive unlabeled data encompasses both known
classes of anomalies and previously unseen classes of anomalies,
referred as unknown anomalies [5]. Recently, Deep Learning
(DL) algorithms have emerged as pivotal tools in cybersecurity
applications, offering advanced solutions for network traffic
anomaly detection. DL can automatically extract data features
without extensive and laborious feature selection [6], which
is well-suited for handling high-dimensional and large-scale
network traffic. Therefore, we focus on DL-based anomaly
detection to identify known and unknown anomaly traffic, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
Considering the anomaly detection task involving large-scale
unlabeled data (consisting mostly of normal data) and limited

W

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

Fig. 1. An illustration of IoT network anomaly detection, where 0 and 1
respectively represent labels for normal and abnormal traffic, n represents no
labels. The network attacks generate abnormal traffic affecting network security.
Through DL empowered AD system, both known and unknown anomalies are
identified to safeguard the security of network communication.

labeled anomalies that only cover partial classes of anomalies,
it is consequently hard to employ supervised learning methods
like [7], [8], [9] that rely on comprehensive labeled data for training anomaly detection models. Unsupervised learning methods
like [10], [11], [12] train anomaly detection models without
using labeled data, which can detect diverse anomalies (different
classes of anomalies) since they are not constrained by labeled
data [13]. However, the detection accuracy of these methods
decreases as the false positive rate increases, rendering them
inadequate to meet specific requirements. Semi-/weakly supervised learning methods utilize only limited labeled anomalies
and can provide valuable information for training [14], which
are thus more relevant to this study. These methods offer significant advantages in reducing computational costs and enhancing
efficiency, demonstrating the scalability for large-scale datasets.
However, current semi-supervised learning methods still have
certain problems. Typically, methods in [15], [16] are primarily
designed to detect only known anomalies, failing to identify
unknown anomalies that are absent from the training set. In
contrast, methods in [3], [17], [18] can detect both known and
unknown anomalies. However, during training phase, they neglect to explore potential anomalies in unlabeled data, resulting
the decrease in accuracy of unknown anomaly detection.
To address the aforementioned issues of semi-supervised
methods based on deep learning, DPLAN [13] leverages the
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) framework to learn
anomalies in both labeled and unlabeled data. DRL autonomously learns normal and abnormal traffic patterns from
massive data without extensive manual annotation, making it
ideal for large-scale network traffic analysis. Moreover, DRL
adapts to dynamic network environments through real-time
decision-making, improving detection accuracy for both known
and unknown anomalies. However, the Deep Q-Network (DQN)
used in the agent of DPLAN struggles to effectively model
state-instance relationships. For network traffic anomaly detection, different traffic states have varying importance in identifying anomalies, while DQN’s direct learning of Q-values
fails to separate state values from action advantages, potentially

4563

ignoring critical state features. Additionally, DQN struggles
in high-dimensional state spaces, limiting its ability to extract
action-relevant information from complex states. Furthermore,
the combined reward function in DPLAN cannot fully explore
unknown anomalies in unlabeled data, for which the reward
mechanism fails to provide optimal training rewards.
Motivated by these challenges and inspired by [13], this
paper further proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised anomaly
detection method (WADE) to fully explore unlabeled data and
identify unknown anomaly traffic for IoT networks. Firstly,
Dueling Q-network (Dueling DQN) is adopted [19] as network
architecture of the agent, enhancing its modeling capacity and
learning efficiency by accurately capturing relationships between states and actions under anomaly conditions. Secondly,
a novel reward optimization mechanism is designed to enhance
learning from unlabeled data. In this mechanism, Variational
Auto-Encoder (VAE) [20] is adopted to design intrinsic reward
function, which improves detection performance for unlabeled
data without supervision. Then an external reward function that
balances internal factors (from unlabeled data) and external
factors (from labeled data) is designed, which encourages the
agent to learn known anomalies while amplifying rewards for
potential correct detections in unlabeled data. Furthermore, we
employ Magnify Saltatory Reward (MSR) algorithm [21] for
anomaly detection, and thus design a MSR reward optimizer
that continuously monitors changes in rewards. The optimizer
dynamically adjusts current reward by magnifying or decreasing
it under real-time conditions.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
r A Dueling DQN-based anomaly detection framework is
proposed to identify both known and unknown abnormal
network traffic patterns in partially labeled data.
r A reward optimization mechanism that fully explores unlabeled data is designed, which consists of VAE-based
intrinsic reward function, external reward function and
MSR reward optimizer.
r Extensive experiments on real-world IoT traffic datasets
demonstrate that WADE outperforms four weakly supervised methods, achieving average improvements of 12.2%
in AUC-PR and 6.6% in AUC-ROC.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II introduces the research background and comprehensively reviews
various DL-based traffic anomaly detection methods. Section III
describes the tailed DRL for traffic anomaly detection task.
Section IV presents the details of WADE. Section V presents
experimental results. Section VI concludes this paper.
II. RESEARCH BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
A. IoT Network Traffic Data
IoT network traffic data refers to the packets, protocol interactions and connection behaviors generated by IoT devices during
network communication. The accidental operational patterns
of devices make anomalous traffic indicating potential security
threats. This characteristic has established IoT traffic data as
a foundation for cybersecurity research [22]. Table I provides

4564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE I
IOT NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASETS AND ATTACK TYPES

detailed descriptions of representative IoT network traffic
datasets with their attack types.
B. Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Workflow
1) Data Preprocessing: Network traffic data contains both
numerical and categorical features, where the preprocessing is
required to support AD task. For categorical features, one-hot
encoding is typically employed to convert them into numerical form by creating binary columns. For numerical features,
Min-Max/Z-Score normalization is required to eliminate scale
differences. The former scales features to [0,1] range, which
is effective for bounded distributions with limited anomalies.
The latter standardizes features to achieve zero mean and unit
variance, exhibiting enhanced robustness against anomalies.
2) Anomaly Detection: During training, anomaly detection
models learn to distinguish feature patterns between normal
and anomalous traffic by optimizing network parameters. Then,
anomaly scores are calculated to evaluate the anomaly degrees.
In practical applications, the trained models execute real-time
analysis of incoming network traffic to identify potential anomalies [28].
3) Performance Evaluation: Multiple metrics are required
for comprehensive evaluation, mainly comprising:
r Accuracy: quantifies the ratio of correctly predicted instances, representing the overall classification efficiency.
r Precision: evaluates the capability to correctly identify true
positive samples while considering false alarm rates.
r Recall: assesses the ability to detect all positive instances,
reflecting the effectiveness in identifying anomalies.
r F1-score: provides a harmonic mean of precision and recall, offering balanced performance evaluation particularly
for attack detection scenarios.
r AUC-ROC: assesses the model discrimination capability
across all possible thresholds using the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve.
r AUC-PR: assesses performance via the area under the
precision-recall curve, particularly valuable for imbalanced datasets where anomalies are rare.

C. Anomaly Detection Model Architecture
Considering different model architectures, network traffic
anomaly detection studies are categorized into forecastingbased, reconstruction-based and hybrid approaches, summarized in Table II.
1) Forecasting-Based Models: These methods train predictive models that comprehensively capture traffic patterns.
Researchers have employed Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM)-based temporal models for traffic
anomaly detection. Bakhsh et al. [29] integrate Feedforward
Neural Networks (FFNN), LSTM and Random Neural Networks (RandNN), where FFNN handles complex traffic patterns, LSTM captures long-term dependencies and RandNN
provides dynamic adaptability. Wang et al. [30] propose an
attention-weighted model combining bidirectional LSTM and
self-attention mechanism, which captures packet transmission
relationships by constructing a perceptual node collection graph.
Moreover, multiple enhancement strategies of traditional LSTM
are recently studied. Zou et al. [31] design a feature-attended
multi-flow LSTM that employs an innovative feature grouping
algorithm. Wang et al. [32] propose a spatial-temporal knowledge distillation framework that integrates spatial-temporal
residual networks and focal loss function, effectively addressing
model complexity and class imbalance issues by stacking CNN
and LSTM modules.
The Graph Neural Networks (GNN)-based methods also attracted great attention recently. Caville et al. [33] leverage edge
features and graph topological structure in self-supervised process for GNN-based anomaly detection. Duan et al. [34] propose
the dynamic line GNN using semi-supervised paradigm, significantly enhancing performance through spatiotemporal graph
modeling and message aggregation. Furthermore, to achieve
lightweight AD for IoT network, Zhou et al. [35] design a graph
representation learning model combining GNN and knowledge
distillation. Based on Graph Attention Network (GAT) and MLP,
it extracts structural and traffic features from graph and traffic
data respectively, improving knowledge transfer efficiency and
classification accuracy.
2) Reconstruction-Based Models: These methods detect
anomalies by comparing the inputs with their reconstructed
outputs. Autoencoder (AE) and its improved variants show
remarkable efficacy in unsupervised anomaly detection by learning normal data distributions through encoding-decoding, while
producing significant reconstruction errors for anomalous inputs. Lanvin et al. [36] introduce a novel p-value statistical analysis of reconstruction errors, enabling both accurate anomaly
detection and interpretable feature localization. Then, to address
the challenge of threshold setting in AE, Tang et al. [37] design
an adaptive reconstruction error threshold algorithm that dynamically optimizes thresholds by jointly modeling training data
distribution and anomaly priors. In addition, Zhang et al. [38]
propose a Linear Autoencoder (LAE) by directly removing
the activation function from AE, and introduces adversarial
methods from image domain into network intrusion detection.
Alrayes et al. [39] emphasis on the effectiveness of the Denoising
Autoencoder (DAE) for identifying and mitigating intrusions.

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

4565

TABLE II
A COMPARISON OF TRAFFIC AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT MODEL ARCHITECTURES

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) and its variants have
shown remarkable effectiveness in addressing data imbalance
issues. Wang et al. [40] employ conditional tabular GAN to
generate minority class samples, significantly improving multiclass detection accuracy through enhanced data diversity and
particularly excelling in detecting rare attack types. Changala
et al. [41] integrate Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for
feature selection, enabling dimensionality reduction while extracting fundamental traffic patterns. It then leverages GAN to
learn the distribution of normal traffic and generate synthetic
samples for anomaly detection. AE-WGAN [42] creatively combines advantages of denoising autoencoders and wasserstein
GAN, achieving superior performance.
3) Hybrid Models: These methods integrate multiple DL
paradigms to significantly improve model performance and
adaptability. Yang et al. [43] innovatively combine 1D-CNN
and BERT, effectively addressing the challenge of extracting
complex payload dependencies. Latif et al. [44] transform network data into image formats for CNN-driven feature analysis,
employs GA for hyperparameter optimization and ultimately
utilizes ensemble techniques. Similarly, ENIDS [45] adopts
two-layer ensemble architecture, where the base layer comprises
CNN, LSTM and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) as base learners,
the top layer employs DNN for meta-learning. Furthermore,
Kunang et al. [46] utilize multiple autoencoder variants for
unsupervised feature extraction, achieving near 100% ACC.
Zhong et al. [47] design DNN and contrastive learning-based
framework integrating GAN and deep K-Nearest Neighbor
(KNN), which can implicitly defend against adversarial attacks
and detect fine-grained unknown attacks.

D. Anomaly Detection Learning Strategy
This section reviews different anomaly detection learning
strategies including continual learning, online learning and DRL
for dynamic IoT environments, summarized in Table III.
1) Continual Learning (CL): For dynamic IoT environments, CL-based methods enable anomaly detection systems to
continuously evolve through progressive knowledge accumulation and adaptation to emerging threats. Memory replay represents a crucial direction in CL studies. Channappayya et al. [48]
propose the augmented memory replay framework innovatively integrating class-balanced reservoir sampling (CBRS) and
perturbation-assisted parameter approximation (PAPA). CBRS
addresses class imbalance issues, while PAPA reduces training
time and enhances practical deployment. For privacy preserving, SPIDER [49] combines gradient projection memory with
semi-supervised continual learning, attaining performance comparable to fully supervised approaches using merely 20% labeled
data.
To address the concept drift issue in IoT networks, Amalapuram et al. [50] conduct a comparison of elastic weight consolidation and gradient episodic memory across various learning
environments. Experimental results reveal that a hybrid strategy enhanced by experience forgetting-aware memory filling,
achieves optimal performance in domain incremental learning
scenarios. Zhang et al. [51] propose the strategic CL that incorporates a dynamic memory buffer and strategic forgetting
mechanism. By selecting representative drifting samples and
eliminating outdated knowledge, it enables continuous adaptation to novel network threats.

4566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE III
A COMPARISON OF TRAFFIC AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT LEARNING STRATEGIES

Jin et al. [52] propose a federated learning-based intrusion
detection framework, utilizing class gradient balance loss to
reduce the learning of new classes and sample label smoothing
loss to enhance the model memory for old classes. It then
employ relay client fusing sample reconstruction to mitigate the
spread of catastrophic forgetting globally without compromising
data privacy. Latest research [53] leverages a learning-based
feature extractor that dynamically updates representations and a
novelty detector leveraging PCA reconstruction mechanism to
identify emerging attacks, achieving efficient continual learning
for streaming data.
2) Online Learning (OL): Online learning contributes to
real-time anomaly detection in dynamic environments through
model adaptation. Odiathevar et al. [54] propose a offline-online
framework where the offline model establishes benchmark features of normal traffic and online component dynamically adjusts detection threshold. Then, Wahab et al. [55] propose an
integrated detection-adaptation framework that employs PCAbased feature variance analysis for concept drift detection.
The system dynamically optimizes its online DNN architecture
through a hedge weighting mechanism, reducing in false positives while maintaining stable long-term detection accuracy.
Gelenbe et al. [56] propose a novel distributed intrusion detection algorithm that features online self-supervised federated
learning capabilities and employs the Dense Random Neural
Networks (DRNN). Moreover, Zhang et al. [28] propose an online intrusion detection system that integrats the pseudo-label autoencoder with customized contrastive loss function, effectively
achieving autonomous evolution of features and novel attacks
detection. Nakip et al. [57] present an online self-supervised

framework that leverages deep stochastic neural networks to enable autonomous learning, completely eliminating dependency
on pre-training and manual annotation. It demonstrates potential
for real-time monitoring in resource-limited scenarios. Latest
research [58] introduces a novel drift-adaptive ensemble learning framework comprising three stages (preprocessing, base
model learning and online ensemble), specifically combining
four online learning methods and optimizing key parameters
through particle swarm optimization.
3) Deep Reinforcement Learning: DRL has demonstrated
human-level capability, making it increasingly important for
anomaly detection [72]. In term of DQN and its variants, Dong
et al. [59] develop a semi-supervised framework combining
autoencoder with double DQN. Specifically, the current network
is responsible for feature reconstruction and classification, while
the target network leverages K-Means clustering for auxiliary
predictions. DC-IDS [60] further focuses on two sub-tasks
(known traffic fine-grained classification and unknown attacks
identification) and applies conditional VAE-enhanced DQN for
reconstructing traffic features. Furthermore, Shen et al. [61]
propose a zero-day attacks detection system for social IoT, which
first processes the traffic samples and computes similarity scores.
Then the LSTM-based DQN is adopted to optimize the heuristic
learning network strategy by maximizing cumulative rewards.
For other structures, Mouyart et al. [62] integrate conditional tabular GAN with multi-agent reinforcement learning,
utilizing generated synthetic samples to balance the dataset.
Similarly, Louati et al. also [63] employ a distributed multiagent reinforcement learning framework, which harnesses
collaborative inter-agent communication, parallelized data

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

4567

TABLE IV
A COMPARISON OF TABULAR AD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT LEARNING PARADIGMS

preprocessing and cloud-based computational resources. Then,
Strickland et al. [64] propose to train models using synthetic
data generated by GAN. Experimental results demonstrate that
DRL-based models achieve superior detection performance of
minority classes when trained on GAN-generated data rather
than imbalanced real-world datasets. Furthermore, He et al. [65]
introduce a universal state representation and adaptive reward
mechanism, achieving cross-dataset generalization. The system
converts raw traffic into standardized environmental states, ensuring dimensional independence.
E. Tabular Anomaly Detection
Given the structural similarities between tabular and network
traffic data, AD techniques for tabular can be effectively adapted
for network traffic data. Therefore, this section reviews the
advanced tabular AD methods, as summarized in Table IV.
For unsupervised learning paradigm, Qiu et al. [10] design
two coupled loss functions to extract learning signals from
noisy datasets and utilize iterative block coordinate updates to
optimize model parameters and label inferences, demonstrating strong generalization capabilities across tabular, image and
video AD tasks. SLAD [11] utilizes scale-annotated data to train
models and introduces a data-driven supervision mechanism to
derive anomaly scores directly from loss values. To overcome
data augmentation challenges for contrastive learning-based tabular AD, Tao et al. [67] leverages semantic information from column names to generate effective augmented views. Yin et al. [68]
adapt masked modeling paradigms from vision/language domains to tabular data and propose MCM, which incorporates
learnable masking strategy to determine input-specific masking
patterns and employs ensemble learning with the diversity loss
to capture multiple correlations in training data. Ye et al. [69]
address the data entanglement issue in reconstruction-based
methods by introducing decomposed representation learning. It
remaps data into a designed constrained space to capture latent
common normal patterns and identify anomalous patterns. Kloft
et al. [66] introduce the adaptive central representation, which

adapts to a set of interrelated training data distributions, enabling
automatic zero-shot generalization to unseen anomaly detection
tasks. Furthermore, Tsai et al. [70] leverage large language
models (LLMs) for unsupervised tabular anomaly detection. By
converting tabular data into textual formats, fine-tuned LLMs
process serialized input and calculate anomaly scores based on
negative log-likelihood.
For semi-/weakly supervised learning paradigm, DevNet [73],
PReNet [17], EDAE [3] DPLAN [13], FEAWAD [18] and DualMGAN [14] are latest methods. DevNet assumes a gaussian
prior on anomaly scores and generates reference score samples
accordingly. The deviation loss ensures normal data clusters
around reference scores while maintaining significant separation from labeled anomaly scores. PReNet extends DevNet by
employing relation neural network to minimize the three-way
prediction loss. It learns both pairwise relation features and
anomaly scores of randomly selected instance pairs. FEAWAD
improves on DevNet by integrating AE to encode inputs. It
uses hidden representation, reconstruction residual vector and
reconstruction errors to enhance scores learning. EDAE determines the anomaly threshold by estimating score distribution
and employs an empirical distribution-based batch sampling
strategy to enhance robustness against data contamination. DualMGAN detects both discrete anomalies and partially identified
group anomalies. It utilizes multiple generative adversarial active learning to construct reference distribution and multiple generative adversarial over-sampling to balance minority classes.
DPLAN employs DQN to detect both known and unknown
anomalies by interactively exploiting labeled anomalies and actively exploring unlabeled data for rare anomalies. Additionally,
Dong et al. [71] propose nearest neighbor gaussian mix-up for
data augmentation, which generates additional pseudo-anomaly
samples, facilitating the detection of novel anomalies.
F. Research Limitations
Despite the effectiveness of the above methods, several research limitations remain: 1) Some forecasting-based models

4568

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Overview of DRL-based anomaly detection, which describes the process of interaction between the agent and the environment.

struggle to accurately capture rapidly changing traffic patterns,
while reconstruction-based models face challenges in threshold
optimization and training stability. Hybrid models are hindered
in practical applications by their complex structure and high
computational costs. 2) Continual learning and online learning
methods struggle to maintain adaptability against large-scale
traffic and complex cyber threats. DQN-based methods still need
improvements in state-action estimation and complex feature
extraction. 3) Unsupervised methods may suffer significant performance degradation when processing high-noise and highdimensional traffic. Meanwhile, semi-supervised approaches
show limited effectiveness in detecting unknown attacks due
to inadequate exploration in unlabeled anomalies.
Therefore, we proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised
network traffic anomaly detection method that adopts Dueling
DQN to enhance the state-action value estimation and feature
extraction, while designing novel reward mechanism to fully
explore potential anomalies in unlabeled data.
III. DRL TAILORED FOR ANOMALY DETECTION
A. Problem Formulation
IoT network traffic data D is characterized by a N dimensional feature space. During training, D comprises largescale unlabeled dataset Du and limited labeled known anomaly
dataset Da , where Du encompasses unknown normal data and
few unknown anomalies. This study aims to train a anomaly
scoring function ϕ : D → R that evaluates anomaly degrees of
data instances including both known and unknown anomalies,
where higher anomaly scores indicate higher anomaly degrees.
B. DRL-Based Anomaly Detection Framework
To identify both known and unknown attacks, we propose
a DRL framework, comprising the environment, agent, action,
state and reward specifically designed for anomaly detection.
Based on the problem formulation, the core objective is to design
the anomaly detection agent capable of effectively exploiting Da
to learn known anomalies, while actively exploring potential
unlabeled known/unknown anomalies in Du .

Fig. 2 illustrates the DRL-based anomaly detection approach,
where the environment E contains anomaly-biased sampling
function g, external reward function h, intrinsic reward function
f and MSR reward optimizer M . The agent A is driven to
automatically interact with E through the optimization reward
rt∗ . To this end, we transform anomaly detection task into a
DRL problem by defining the following key components. For
reference, Table V summarizes the symbols used in associated
mathematical descriptions.
r State space (s): The state space s for a network traffic
instance in D at time step t contains all features (excluding
label-related attributes) from the instance, including both
categorical and numerical features that covers information
such as bytes per IP, session time per IP, service type, etc.
Formally, the state is represented as s = {v 1 , v 2 , . . ., v N }
where N denotes the number of features in traffic instance
and v i corresponds to the value of the i-th feature.
r Action space (a): The action a is the decision or choice
made by the agent in response to the current state s of the
environment. For network traffic anomaly detection tasks,
the action space a = {a0 , a1 } represents the binary classification decision for a given state s, where a0 corresponds
to a normal classification and a1 indicates an anomalous
classification.
r Agent (A): The agent A is the decision-making entity that
aims to learn an optimal policy for mapping states to actions by maximizing the cumulative rewards. For network
traffic anomaly detection, A is implemented by a neural
network to determine an optimal action out of {a0 , a1 }
for the current traffic state s. During training, it updates
the network parameters to refine its policy selection. The
trained network is ultimately used to evaluate the anomaly
scores of the testing set.
r Simulation Environment (E): The environment E in
anomaly detection tasks serves to emulate real-world network traffic data D and interacts automatically with the
agent A. It contains the sampling function g and the reward
function r.
r Sampling Function (g): The sampling function g determines the next state st+1 from D based on the current state

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

TABLE V
MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS AND DESCRIPTIONS

4569

final reward rt∗ . The random sampled mini-batch from R
is adopted to train A.
By making this transformation, the reward function drive A
to automatically and interactively learn known anomalies from
Da and learn unknown anomalies in Du . The workflow of the
DRL-based anomaly detection is as follows:
1) At each time step t, A receives st sampled by g and
executes an action at to maximize the cumulative reward
it can obtain. The reward is elaborated in steps 3)–5).
2) Within E, g selects the next state st+1 to A, contingent
upon at that A has executed on st . To effectively leverage
both Da and Du , g is designed to return as many possible
unlabeled anomalies while at the same time equivalently
presenting labeled anomalies to A.
3) f generates an unsupervised reward rti that encourages A
to identify unlabeled anomalies within Du .
4) h confers a positive reward rte if it detects anomalies from
Da or identifies anomalies/normals correctly in Du . This
mechanism enables A to learn known anomalies while
enhancing its ability to detect unknown anomalies.
5) The combined reward rt , calculated as the aggregate of
intrinsic and extrinsic rewards, undergoes optimization.
Subsequently, A receives the optimized reward rt∗ .
The agent engages in iterative training, adhering to steps
(1)–(5) throughout multiple episodes with each episode comprising a predefined number of states. The agent is trained to
optimize cumulative rewards, enabling it to adaptively identify
known/unknown anomalies.
IV. PROPOSED WADE
A. Dueling DQN-Based Anomaly Detection Agent A

st and executed action at . In network traffic anomaly detection, g is designed to bias towards anomalies to enhance
the learning for abnormal patterns and better detect known
and unknown anomalies.
r Reward Function (r): For anomaly detection, the reward
function r provides crucial feedback (positive/negative
reward) based on the agent’s correct/incorrect classification of s. This feedback mechanism in return drives A
to optimize network parameters and decision-making, ultimately improving its discrimination capability between
benign and malicious traffic data. Specifically, the intrinsic reward function f drives A to simultaneously learn
known/unknown anomalies in Du , where the positive reward is provided when discovering novel anomaly state s.
The external reward h encourages A to automatically learn
labeled anomalies from Da , while amplifying learning for
Du based on ri . h assigns positive rewards for correct
identification of both normal and anomalous instances,
while imposing negative rewards for misclassification. The
MSR reward optimizer M aims to optimize the final reward
received by A.
r Reply Memory (R): The reply memory R stores a set of
interactive information at each step t, including the next
state st+1 , the current state st , the current action at and the

The anomaly detection agent A aims to learn an optimal anomaly detection-oriented action-value function. Following [74], the action-value function is approximated as:

∗

Q (s, a) = max E Rt =
π

T

t =t


γ

t −t

rt |st = s, at = a, π ,

(1)
which is the maximum expected return when A takes the action
at for each state st following the policy π, with the return defined
as the sum of rewards rt discounted by a factor γ at each time
step t.
Given the varying importance of different states in anomaly
detection, learning discriminative features of anomalies is particularly crucial in class-imbalanced scenarios. Dueling DQN [19]
can effectively assess the contribution of different actions under
anomalous states, thereby strengthening the learning of critical
anomaly features. Thus, this study adopts Dueling DQN to
learn Q∗ (s, a) and maximize the expected return for anomaly
detection. Dueling DQN employs a deep neural network where
the lower layers are convolutional (consistent with the original
DQN [74]), followed by two streams of fully-connected layers
subsequently. Particularly, it decomposes Q-value function into
state and advantage functions, accurately capturing the associations between states and actions under anomaly conditions, with

4570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

reward rti for each state st is calculated using the reconstruction
error as follows:

the Q-value function defined as:
Q(s, a; θ, α, β) = V (s; θ, β)


1 

+ A(s, a; θ, α) −
A(s, a ; θ, α) ,
|A| 

(2)

a

where V (s; θ, β) and A(s, a; θ, α) respectively represent a scalar
and a vector of the two streams, and |A| denotes dimension of the
vector. In addition, θ represents parameters of the convolutional
layers, while α and β are parameters of the two streams of fullyconnected layers.
The network then learns parameters θ, α and β by iteratively
minimizing the following loss:


Lj (θj , αj , βj ) = E(s,a,r,s ) (yj − Q(s, a; θj , αj , βj ))2 ,
(3a)
yj = r + γ max
Q̂(s , a ; θj− , αj− , βj− ),

a

(3b)

where (s, a, r, s ) is a random mini-batch sampled from the reply
memory. a is the taken action for s . Parameters θj , αj and βj
belong to the main Q-network, while θj− , αj− and βj− denote
parameters of the target Q-network.
At each step, the action at ∈ [a0 , a1 ] is selected as which
maximizing Q(st , a; θj , αj , βj ) for current state st . When
evaluating the test set, data instances (or states) with large
Q∗ (s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ ) values (i.e., high anomaly scores) are supposed to be anomaly-biased data, where θ∗ , α∗ and β ∗ are parameters of the trained Q-network.
B. The Reward Optimization Mechanism
To address the challenges of difficult data annotation and the
prevalence of diverse unknown attacks in real-world network
environments, we design the reward optimization mechanism
comprising VAE-based intrinsic reward function f , external
reward function h and MSR reward optimizer M . f encourages
A to explore potential anomalies in Du , while h drives A to
interactively learn Da to achieve high true positive detection
and strengthens the awareness of potential anomalies in Du . M
refines the total reward to optimize the decision-making.
1) VAE-Based Intrinsic Reward Function: VAE [20] learns
latent data distribution by encoding inputs as parameters (mean
and variance) of the latent space. The reconstruction error,
which measures the discrepancy between input samples and
their reconstructed outputs, serves as an effective indicator for
anomaly detection. Specifically, normal samples typically yield
small reconstruction errors, while anomalous instances generally produce significantly larger errors.
Consequently, to discover potential anomalies in unlabeled
data, the reconstruction error (or loss) of VAE is utilized as the
foundation for f . Specifically, we train the VAE model using
Du with the follow loss function:
1
Lvae = M SE(xrecon , x) − (1 + log σ 2 − μ2 − σ 2 ), (4)
2
where μ and σ 2 denote the mean and variance of the samples,
xrecon represents the reconstructed output. Then, the intrinsic

rti = f (st ) = M SE(st_recon , st ).

(5)

Particularly, rti is scaled into the range [0,1] through activation
function (Sigmoid) in the decoder network, which ensures a
balanced relationship between the reward values of f and h.
Thus, the agent will receive large rti when st is supposed as
potential anomaly, regardless of the specific action at taken.
2) External Reward Function: h comprehensively learns potential unlabeled anomalies and labeled anomalies from Du and
Da respectively. For each state st , h produces corresponding
reward rte based on the taken action (a0 or a1 ) and the intrinsic
reward rti from f , which is defined as:
⎧
1,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨−1,
rte = h(st , at , rti ) =
⎪
lt − lt ,
⎪
⎪
⎩
lt − l t ,

if at = a1 and st ∈ Da
if at = a0 and st ∈ Da
, (6)
if at = a1 and st ∈ Du
if at = a0 and st ∈ Du

where lt = rti and lt = 1 − rti respectively represents anomaly
and normality degree of the current data instance. For Da ,
positive and negative rewards (1 and -1) are assigned when
the agent correctly or incorrectly identifies anomalies. For Du ,
which contains both unknown normal and abnormal data, the
difference between the normality and anomaly degree (lt and
lt ) is utilized to compute the rewards associated with the taken
action at . By doing this, the model receives positive rewards
through potential correctly identification of both normal and
abnormal instances in Du .
Overall, h maximizes rewards by encouraging the agent to
effectively exploit in Da and enhance the exploration in Du
based on f . Compared to the strategy described in [13], which
maintains neutrality (provides no reward) in Du , our design
performs better (as discussed in Section V-D).
3) MSR Reward Optimizer: To fully learn both Da and Du ,
the total reward is designed as rt = rti + rte . However, [21]
reveals a phenomenon in DRL that the reward in last step
rt−1 significantly deviates from the current reward rt defined
as reward saltation. It is categorized as positive saltation or
negative saltation when current reward is better or worse. Such
reward saltation occurring in DRL-based anomaly detection may
result policy collapse and influence detection performance. To
address this, we adopt the Magnify Saltatory Reward (MSR)
algorithm [21] to dynamically refine the total reward rt by
amplifying it during positive saltation while reducing it during
negative saltation.
To determine when to optimize the reward, a parameter ρ is
introduced to quantify the magnitude of change between rt and
rt−1 , which is defined as follows:
ρ=

rt − rt−1
,
min(|rt + σ| , |rt−1 + σ|)

(7)

where σ is a number that approaches zero. In addition, to ensure
an appropriate magnification of rt , a monotonically increasing

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

bounded function k is designed as follows:
k(x) = arctan x ∗

π 1
∗
2 η



x = ρ + sgn(rt − rt−1 ),

,

(8a)
(8b)

where η is a certain number as the threshold. When x > η or
x < −η, the current reward rt is optimized as:
rt∗ = rt + (k(x) − λ) ∗ |rt | .

(9)

C. Anomaly Biased Sampling Function g
Considering how to select st+1 , the anomaly-biased sampling
function in [13] is employed as follows:
(10a)
st+1 = ga (Da ) ∼ U (Da ),
⎧
⎨arg min d(st , s; θe ) if at = a1
e
s∈S
,
st+1 = gu (st , at ; θ ) =
⎩arg max d(st , s; θe ) if at = a0
s∈S

(10b)
u

where S ⊂ D is a random subsample, |S| and the other parameters align with those described in [13]. To empower balanced
exploitation and exploration across the entire data, both ga and
gu have probability 50% being adopted.
This study focuses on the scenarios with a limited number
and imbalanced distributions of anomalies. While the adopted
anomaly-biased sampling function g essentially drives the selection of data instances surrounding anomalies as st+1 , thereby
enhancing the learning of limited anomalies. It also guides A to
make optimal decisions, while facilitating continuous learning
and strategy optimization through iterative interactions with E.
After selecting, st+1 together with st , at and rt∗ are added into
the reply memory R.
D. Algorithms Details
Algorithm 1 outlines the detailed training procedure of
WADE. Specially, steps 1-3 initialize the size of replay memory
and parameters of the main and target Q-network that are trained
with n_episodes episodes, with each episode including n_steps
steps. Steps 7-8 describes the process to select the action at ,
where -greedy [74] exploration is adopted. In steps 9-10, two
sampling functions are used to select st+1 . In steps 11-14,
the final reward is computed through reward functions and
optimizer. Besides, steps 15-16 store experience in the reply
memory and select the mini-batch. The other steps perform the
updating process of the Q-network.
After training, the anomaly scores for testing set are calculated
as: score = arg maxa Q(s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ ) through the trained
Q-network based on (2). Specifically, higher anomaly scores
generally correspond to greater anomaly degrees.
V. EXPERIMENT
A. Datasets and Metrics
1) Datasets: We adopt UNSW-NB15 and NSL-KDD (in
Section II-A) to evaluate WADE. Specifically, UNSW-NB15

4571

Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of WADE.
Input: The labeled dataset Da and unlabeled dataset Du
Output: Action-value function Q(s, a; θ∗ , α∗ , β ∗ )
1: Initialize Q-value function Q with random parameter
θ, α and β
2: Initialize target Q-value function Q̂ with parameter
θ− = 0, α− = 0 and β − = 0
3: Initialize experience replay memory R to capacity C
4: for j = 1 to n_episodes do
5:
Initial the state s1 ∼ Du
6:
for t = 1 to n_steps do
7:
With probability select at from {a0 , a1 }
8:
Otherwise select at = arg maxa Q(st , a; θ, α, β)
9:
With probability p select st+1 from Da using ga
based on Eq. (10a)
10:
Otherwise select anomaly-biased st+1 from Du
using gu based on Eq. (10b)
11:
Compute the intrinsic reward rti by VAE-based
intrinsic reward function f based on Eq. (5)
12:
Compute the external reward rte by designed
external reward function h based on Eq. (6)
13:
The combined reward rt = rti + rte
14:
Compute the optimized reward rt∗ of rt by MSR
reward optimizer based on Eq. (9)
15:
Store experience (st , at , rt∗ , st+1 ) in R
16:
Randomly sample mini-batch (sl , al , rl∗ , sl+1 )
from R with batch _ size l, received by the agent A
17:
Set yl = rl if episode terminates at step l + 1
18:
Else set yl = rl + γ maxa Q̂(sl+1 , a ; θ− , α− , β − )
19:
Perform gradient descent on
(yl − Q(sl , al ; θ, α, β))2 with respect to the
network parameter θ, α and β
20:
Update Q̂ = Q every K steps
21:
end for
22: end for

comprises one normal class and nine anomaly classes. To
achieve balanced class distribution, we exclude two rare classes
(shellcode and worms) and random downsampling [73] the
remaining seven anomaly classes to under 3,000 instances each.
For NSL-KDD (groups 39 attack types into four categories), we
retain all original anomalies without downsampling in it, simulating a scenario with imbalanced numbers of various anomaly
types.
Following Section II-B1, we preprocess the datasets using
one-hot encoding and Min-Max normalization. Table VI summarizes the processed datasets, which are divided into training
and testing sets with the ratio 4:1 and serve as the foundation
for different experimental scenarios.
2) Metrics: AUC-ROC and AUC-PR are adopted as evaluation metrics, with values ranging from [0,1] where higher scores
indicate better performance. The reported values represent averages from 10 independent runs, with standard deviations calculated to assess model stability. Following [11], the average
ranking is also calculated across all datasets.

4572

TABLE VI
DATASETS SUMMARY. D REPRESENTS DATA DIMENSIONALITY, N-SIZE IS THE
SIZE OF NORMAL DATA, A-CLASS CONTAINS ANOMALY CLASSES OF THE
DATASET, AND A-SIZE IS THE SIZE OF EACH ANOMALY CLASS.

B. Baseline Methods and Parameter Settings
1) Baseline Methods: Considering the IoT scenarios with
limited labeled anomalies and abundant unlabeled data, we adopt
four weakly supervised methods (DPLAN [13], DevNet [73],
FEAWAD [18] and PReNet [17]) in Section II-E for comparison.
These baselines employ diverse detection principles, offering
comprehensive performance benchmarks.
2) Parameter Settings: All baselines follow their original
recommended configurations for optimal performance. Then
a single hidden layer with 20 units and ReLU activation is
applied in the network architecture of all methods. For WADE,
we train VAE model with 15 episodes (batchsize = 128) and
set the MSR threshold η = 2. Other parameter settings are
consistent with DPLAN, including episodes n_episodes = 20,
each episode steps N e = 2000, warming-up steps N w = 10000,
target network updated steps N t = 30000 [13] and default settings of the original DQN [74].
C. Anomaly Detection Performance
1) Known Anomalies From One Class: In this scenario, Da
contains only one specific class of anomalies with a fixed number
n = 60. Contamination rate c = 0.02 represents the ratio of
abnormal data to total data in Du , where almost all classes of
anomalies are controlled to a certain quantity. After processing,
two basic datasets are divided into 11 sub-datasets (each named
by specific anomaly class). Here, Da account for 0.05%-0.07%
of the training sets for different sub-datasets.
Table VII presents the experimental results across all subdatasets. Overall, WADE achieves the best AUC-PR on 7
sub-datasets and AUC-ROC on 6 sub-datasets. Compared to
baselines, WADE averagely obtains AUC-PR improvement of
3.5% (DPLAN), 19.9% (FEAWAD), 12.2% (DevNet), 13.3%
(PReNet) and AUC-ROC improvement of 1.4% (DPLAN),
17.6% (FEAWAD), 4.7% (DevNet), 2.8% (PReNet). Across
different datasets, WADE performs well on UNSW-NB15. While
for NSL-KDD, it achieves better results on R2l and U2r (containing fewer anomalies) but shows slightly reduced performance
on DoS and Probe (containing more anomalies). This discrepancy likely stems from the imbalanced distribution of anomaly
samples across different classes, further confirming WADE’s
strength in scenarios with severely limited anomalies. Moreover,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

WADE exhibits remarkable stability across all sub-datasets, as
indicated by its lower standard deviation values.
2) Larger Amount and Multiple Classes in Known Anomalies: This section examines how the quantity and diversity of
labeled anomalies influence detection performance, where the
anomaly amount and classes in Da are increased. Considering the diverse anomaly classes in UNSW-NB15, we extend
the seven sub-datasets from it by incrementally adding 1-6
anomaly classes to Da , which correspondingly increases the
known anomaly classes in testing set. Then six experimental
groups are conducted, each randomly selecting 1-6 anomaly
classes from unknown anomalies (fixed at 60 samples per class).
For comprehensive comparison, we introduces WADE∗ which
maintains the original anomaly classes while increasing sample
counts to match the total anomaly quantity. Comparative results
are presented in Fig. 3–4.
Experimental results demonstrate significant performance
improvements for WADE as the increasing of anomaly
classes and amount. Specially, AUC-PR increases remarkably from 0.544-0.707 up to 0.741-0.775 and AUC-ROC
increases from 0.843-0.906 up to 0.928-0.935. Meanwhile,
the performance of DPLAN generates more fluctuations indicating that WADE is better at leveraging known supervision information. Furthermore, WADE consistently outperforms
WADE∗ with the same number of anomalies, demonstrating
that expanding the diversity of anomaly classes enhances the
coverage of known anomalies and yields more supervision
information.
3) Increasing Anomaly Pollution: To evaluate model robustness in IoT environments where training data may contain unknown anomalies, we systematically vary the contamination rate
c of Du across {0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1}. Figs. 5/6 present the
AUC-PR/ROC performance under these conditions. Overall, all
methods exhibit clear performance degradation on most datasets
as c increases. While WADE maintains superior performance
with a less pronounced decline compared to baselines under
varying contamination rates. Notably, WADE shows relatively
stable performance on Exploits, Generic, DoS, Probe and U2r.
This stability stems from its enhanced ability to learn potential anomalies from Du , confirming that learning known and
unknown anomalies can appropriately tolerate increasing noise
levels. Moreover, compared to DPLAN (another DRL method),
WADE exhibits smaller performance variation, validating
our architectural improvements substantially enhance model
robustness.
D. Ablation Study
This section presents a systematic ablation study to evaluate
the impact of key components on detection performance of
WADE. Four variants are examined by respectively removing: 1)
intrinsic reward (DME), 2) MSR algorithm (DVE), 3) external
reward (DVM) and 4) Dueling DQN (VME). The results are
summarized in Table VIII.
Experiments on DME: DME variant excludes intrinsic reward rti when computing the total reward rt , resulting in the
decreases of 3.7% in AUC-ROC and 1.8% in AUC-PR. This

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

4573

TABLE VII
DETECTION PERFORMANCE (AUC-ROC/AUC-PR ± STANDARD DEVIATION) OF WADE AND BASELINE METHODS

Fig. 3.

AUC-PR performance of WADE, DPLAN and WADE∗ w.r.t. the number of known anomaly classes.

Fig. 4.

AUC-ROC performance of WADE, DPLAN and WADE∗ w.r.t. the number of known anomaly classes.

Fig. 5.

AUC-PR performance of WADE and its competing methods w.r.t. different contamination rates.

discrepancy stems from the distinct learning focuses of rti and
rte . The former primarily learns from unlabeled data (mainly
normal samples), while the latter specializes in learning labeled
anomalies. AUC-ROC reflects the overall discriminative ability
for positive/negative samples, removing rti (which focuses on
learning normals) causes significant metric decline. In contrast,

the learning of labeled anomalies by rte is less affected, resulting
in a relatively smaller decline in AUC-PR, which specifically
evaluates anomaly detection performance. Building upon DME,
we further develop DME* by eliminating intrinsic rewards from
the extrinsic reward function design. Experimental results show
that DME* achieves inferior performance (AUC-ROC: 0.825%,

4574

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

AUC-ROC performance of WADE and its competing methods w.r.t. different contamination rates.

TABLE VIII
ABLATION EXPERIMENT RESULTS

TABLE IX
TRAINING TIME COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS

AUC-PR: 0.673%) compared to DME, providing additional
empirical evidence for the beneficial role of intrinsic rewards.
Experiments on DVE: DVE variant computes the combined
reward through direct summation of intrinsic and external
rewards (without MSR optimization), resulting in average performance degradation of 3.2% in AUC-ROC and 2.6% in AUCPR. Notably, on highly imbalanced datasets like U2r and R2l
where anomalies are extremely scarce, removing the MSR module leads to pronounced degradation in detection performance.
These results demonstrate that the MSR reward optimization
module effectively stabilizes training under extreme anomaly
sparsity and significantly improves the model’s ability to learn
rare anomalies. Furthermore, comparative training time experiments (in Table IX) confirm that the MSR module introduces
negligible computational overhead.
Experiments on DVM: DVM variant incorporates the external reward function mentioned in [13]. In this design,

negative reward of -1 is given when at = a1 and st ∈ Du , while
no reward is given when at = a0 and st ∈ Du . DVM obtains
average reductions of 5.0% in AUC-ROC and 2.0% in AUC-PR,
validating the efficacy of the designed external reward function
h. Specifically, [13] treats unlabeled data as exclusively normal
but penalizes anomalies inherently degrading discrimination
performance. In contrast, WADE assigns positive rewards for
correct identification of both normal and anomalous instances
within Du . This optimization framework maximizes cumulative
rewards and enhances discriminative learning, leading to superior performance.
Experiments on VME: VME variant substitutes the Dueling
DQN with a standard DQN architecture, resulting in performance declines of 3.0% in AUC-ROC and 6.5% in AUC-PR.
This significant decline, particularly in AUC-PR, confirms that
the separate estimation of state and advantage values in the
Dueling DQN contributes to anomaly detection tasks. Notably,
the standard DQN shows marginally better performance on the
Generic and R2l, likely due to the highly localized nature of
anomaly patterns in these data features that may not benefit from
the separation of state and advantage functions provided by the
Dueling DQN.
E. Convergence Analysis
Considering that reward curves effectively reflect the convergence behavior of DRL, we plot the training reward curves
across all datasets (in Fig. 7). The results show that WADE

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

4575

of WADE in detecting both known and unknown anomalies
compared to four semi-/weakly supervised methods.
This study significantly enhances IoT network security by
enabling timely detection of attacks within large-scale network
traffic. Future research will focus on advancing zero-shot and
multi-classification anomaly detection approaches, through the
integration of LLMs, optimized data preprocessing and representation learning methods.
REFERENCES
Fig. 7.

Episode reward w.r.t. training steps.

achieves early reward stabilization across all datasets, typically
converging within 30,000 steps, which supports our adoption of
the 30,000-step training setting. Additional, the observed slower
convergence of WADE on U2r, Probe and R2l datasets can be
attributed to their constrained sample sizes and severe class
imbalance, both of which adversely affect strategy optimization
and convergence stability.
F. Training Time Analysis
Table IX presents the training time (2,000 steps) of the baseline methods. Compared to DL-based methods, WADE incurs
lower training overhead than FEAWAD but slightly higher than
DevNet and PReNet. This moderate increase in training time
primarily stems from: 1) the complex model architecture incorporating additional VAE training, and 2) the dual-network
parameter updates (Q-network and target Q-network) in the
agent. Notably, WADE achieves comparable training efficiency
to DRL-based DPLAN, demonstrating that WADE increases no
computational complexity.
Considerding model deployment, WADE exhibits inherent
real-time anomaly detection capabilities. It integrates streaming data into the replay memory, enabling dynamic parameter
updates through randomized batch sampling without requiring
complete model retraining. This efficient update mechanism
provides robust adaptability to data streams with experiments
demonstrating its computational efficiency (2000 steps in 82 s),
indicating strong potential for real-time deployment.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a DRL-based weakly supervised traffic
anomaly detection method (WADE) for IoT networks. WADE
tackles the challenge of detecting unknown anomalies with
limited labeled anomalies (containing few known classes) and
large-scale unlabeled data (with both normal and anomalous
instances). Specifically, WADE adopts Dueling DQN to design
the anomaly detection-oriented agent. Then, to enhance the
environment-agent interaction and unlabeled data exploration,
WADE introduces a reward optimization mechanism and an
anomaly biased sampling function. The reward mechanism
comprises VAE-based intrinsic reward function, external reward
function and MSR reward optimizer. Experimental results on
real-world traffic datasets demonstrate the superior performance

[1] W. Zhou, Y. Jia, A. Peng, Y. Zhang, and P. Liu, “The effect of IoT
new features on security and privacy: New threats, existing solutions,
and challenges yet to be solved,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 1606–1616, Apr. 2019.
[2] Y. Yang et al., “ASTREAM: Data-stream-driven scalable anomaly detection with accuracy guarantee in IIoT environment,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3007–3016, Sep./Oct., 2023.
[3] M.-S. Kwon, Y.-G. Moon, B. Lee, and J.-H. Noh, “Autoencoders with
exponential deviation loss for weakly supervised anomaly detection,”
Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 171, pp. 131–137, 2023.
[4] Y. Yuan et al., “Enhancing network abnormal detection with NMFSECNN: Leveraging deep feature learning for high-precision traffic
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2069–2080,
May/Jun. 2025.
[5] X. Zhou et al., “Hierarchical adversarial attacks against graph-neuralnetwork-based IoT network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9310–9319, Jun. 2022.
[6] H. Huang, P. Wang, J. Pei, J. Wang, S. Alexanian, and D. Niyato, “Deep
learning advancements in anomaly detection: A comprehensive survey,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 21, pp. 44318–44342, Nov. 2025.
[7] U. Fiore, A. D. Santis, F. Perla, P. Zanetti, and F. Palmieri, “Using
generative adversarial networks for improving classification effectiveness
in credit card fraud detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 479, pp. 448–455, 2019.
[8] J. L. P. Lima, D. Macêdo, and C. Zanchettin, “Heartbeat anomaly detection
using adversarial oversampling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
2019, pp. 1–7.
[9] Y. Xie, M. Qiu, H. Zhang, L. Peng, and Z. Chen, “Gaussian distribution based oversampling for imbalanced data classification,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 667–679, Feb. 2022.
[10] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 18153–18167.
[11] H. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Wei, S. Jian, Y. Li, and N. Liu, “Fascinating supervisory
signals and where to find them: Deep anomaly detection with scale learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, vol. 202, pp. 38655–38673.
[12] Y. Liu, Y. Gu, X. Shen, Q. Liao, and Q. Yu, “MSCA: An unsupervised
anomaly detection system for network security in backbone network,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 223–238, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[13] G. Pang, A. Van Den Hengel, C. Shen, and L. Cao, “Toward deep supervised anomaly detection: Reinforcement learning from partially labeled
anomaly data,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2021, pp. 1298–1308.
[14] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN: An
efficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few identified
anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1–30,
2022.
[15] T. Qiu, X. Liu, X. Zhou, W. Qu, Z. Ning, and C. L. P. Chen, “An adaptive
social spammer detection model with semi-supervised broad learning,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4622–4635, Oct. 2022.
[16] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020, pp. 1–23.
[17] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep weakly-supervised
anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
[18] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature encoding
with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, Jun. 2022.
[19] Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and N. Freitas,
“Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016, vol. 48, pp. 1995–2003.
[20] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–14.

4576

[21] Z. Hu, K. Wan, X. Gao, and Y. Zhai, “A dynamic adjusting reward function
method for deep reinforcement learning with adjustable parameters,”
Math. Problems Eng., vol. 2019, pp. 1–10, 2019.
[22] F. De Keersmaeker, Y. Cao, G. K. Ndonda, and R. Sadre, “A survey of
public IoT datasets for network security research,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tut., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1808–1840, thirdquarter 2023.
[23] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[24] M. S. Hoque, M. A. Mukit, and M. A. N. Bikas, “An implementation of
intrusion detection system using genetic algorithm,” Int. J. Netw. Secur.
Appl., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 109–120, Mar. 2012.
[25] Q. K. Kadhim, “Classification of human skin diseases using data mining,”
Int. J. Adv. Eng. Res. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, 2017, Art. no. 237008.
[26] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards the
development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for network
forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100,
pp. 779–796, 2019.
[27] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[28] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with contrastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., 2024, pp. 581–590.
[29] S. A. Bakhsh, M. A. Khan, F. Ahmed, M. S. Alshehri, H. Ali, and J. Ahmad,
“Enhancing IoT network security through deep learning-powered intrusion
detection system,” Internet Things, vol. 24, 2023, Art. no. 100936.
[30] X. Wang, X. Wang, M. He, M. Zhang, and Z. Lu, “Spatial-temporal
graph model based on attention mechanism for anomalous IoT intrusion
detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3497–3509,
Mar. 2024.
[31] L. Zou, Y. Wei, L. Ma, and S. Leng, “Feature-attended multi-flow LSTM
for anomaly detection in Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[32] X. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Wang, and Z. Sun, “Spatial-temporal knowledge
distillation for lightweight network traffic anomaly detection,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 137, 2024, Art. no. 103636.
[33] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-e: A
self-supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[34] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[35] X. Zhou et al., “Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge
distillation for lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11817–11828, Sep. 2024.
[36] M. Lanvin, P.-F. Gimenez, Y. Han, F. Majorczyk, L. Mé, and E. Totel,
“Towards understanding alerts raised by unsupervised network intrusion
detection systems,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
Defenses, 2023, pp. 135–150.
[37] J. Tang and W. Shuang, “Research on network traffic anomaly detection
method based on autoencoders,” in Proc. 5th Int. Seminar Artif. Intell.
Netw. Inf. Technol., 2024, pp. 1078–1083.
[38] Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, and X. Huang, “Toward transferable adversarial attacks
against autoencoder-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 13863–13872, Dec. 2024.
[39] F. S. Alrayes, M. Zakariah, S. U. Amin, Z. I. Khan, and M. Helal, “Intrusion
detection in IoT systems using denoising autoencoder,” IEEE Access,
vol. 12, pp. 122401–122425, 2024.
[40] X. Wang, L. Dai, and G. Yang, “A network intrusion detection system
based on deep learning in the IoT,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 80, no. 16,
pp. 24520–24558, 2024.
[41] R. Changala, S. Kayalvili, M. Farooq, L. M. Rao, V. S. Rao, and S. Muthuperumal, “Using generative adversarial networks for anomaly detection in
network traffic: Advancements in ai cybersecurity,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Data Sci. Netw. Secur., 2024, pp. 1–6.
[42] M. Arafah, I. Phillips, A. Adnane, W. Hadi, M. Alauthman, and A.-K.
Al-Banna, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection using denoising
autoencoder and wasserstein GAN synthetic attacks,” Appl. Soft Comput.,
vol. 168, 2025, Art. no. 112455.
[43] T. Yang, Z. Jiang, P. Liu, Q. Yang, and W. Wang, “A traffic anomaly
detection approach based on unsupervised learning for industrial cyber–
physical system,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 279, 2023, Art. no. 110949.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[44] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “DTL-IDS: An optimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning and genetic algorithm,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 221, 2024, Art. no. 103784.
[45] I. M. Sayem, M. I. Sayed, S. Saha, and A. Haque, “ENIDS: A deep
learning-based ensemble framework for network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 5809–5825,
Oct. 2024.
[46] Y. N. Kunang, S. Nurmaini, D. Stiawan, and B. Y. Suprapto, “An endto-end intrusion detection system with IoT dataset using deep learning
with unsupervised feature extraction,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1619–1648, 2024.
[47] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[48] S. K. Amalapuram, S. S. Channappayya, and B. Tamma, “Augmented
memory replay-based continual learning approaches for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36,
pp. 17156–17169 .
[49] S. K. Amalapuram, B. R. Tamma, and S. S. Channappayya, “Spider:
A semi-supervised continual learning-based network intrusion detection
system,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2024, pp. 571–580.
[50] S. K. Amalapuram, A. Tadwai, R. Vinta, S. S. Channappayya, and B. R.
Tamma, “Continual learning for anomaly based network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw., 2022, pp. 497–505.
[51] X. Zhang et al., “Continual learning with strategic selection and forgetting
for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.,
2025, pp. 1–10.
[52] Z. Jin, J. Zhou, B. Li, X. Wu, and C. Duan, “FL-IIDS: A novel federated
learning-based incremental intrusion detection system,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 57–70, 2024.
[53] S. Fuhrman, O. Gungor, and T. Rosing, “CND-IDS: Continual novelty
detection for intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 62nd ACM/IEEE
Design Autom. Conf., 2025, pp. 1–7.
[54] M. Odiathevar, W. K. Seah, M. Frean, and A. Valera, “An online offline
framework for anomaly scoring and detecting new traffic in network
streams,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 5166–5181,
Nov. 2022.
[55] O. A. Wahab, “Intrusion detection in the IoT under data and concept drifts:
Online deep learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 20,
pp. 19706–19716, Oct. 2022.
[56] E. Gelenbe, B. C. Gül, and M. Nakıp, “DISFIDA: Distributed selfsupervised federated intrusion detection algorithm with online learning
for health Internet of Things and internet of vehicles,” Internet Things,
vol. 28, 2024, Art. no. 101340.
[57] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning for
intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
pp. 5668–5683, 2024.
[58] Y. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Yu, G. Chen, and J. Hu, “Online ensemble learning-based
anomaly detection for IoT systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 173, 2025,
Art. no. 112931.
[59] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection model
based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Serv. Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021.
[60] S. Yu et al., “Deep Q-network-based open-set intrusion detection solution
for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7,
pp. 12536–12550, Apr. 2024.
[61] S. Shen, C. Cai, Z. Li, Y. Shen, G. Wu, and S. Yu, “Deep q-network-based
heuristic intrusion detection against edge-based SIoT zero-day attacks,”
Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 150, 2024, Art. no. 111080.
[62] M. Mouyart, G. M. Machado, and J.-Y. Jun, “A multi-agent intrusion
detection system optimized by a deep reinforcement learning approach
with a dataset enlarged using a generative model to reduce the bias effect,”
J. Sensor Actuator Netw., vol. 12, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 68.
[63] F. Louati, F. B. Ktata, and I. Amous, “Big-IDS: A decentralized multi
agent reinforcement learning approach for distributed intrusion detection
in Big Data networks,” Cluster Comput., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 6823–6841,
2024.
[64] C. Strickland et al., “DRL-GAN: A hybrid approach for binary and
multiclass network intrusion detection,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 9, 2024,
Art. no. 2746.
[65] M. He, X. Wang, P. Wei, L. Yang, Y. Teng, and R. Lyu, “Reinforcement
learning meets network intrusion detection: A transferable and adaptable
framework for anomaly behavior identification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2477–2492, Apr. 2024.

WANG et al.: DRL-BASED WEAKLY SUPERVISED TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION FOR IOT NETWORKS

[66] A. Li, C. Qiu, M. Kloft, P. Smyth, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Zeroshot anomaly detection via batch normalization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 40963–40993 .
[67] S. Tao, T. Zhu, H. Wang, and X. Meng, “Semanticmask: A contrastive
view design for anomaly detection in tabular data,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2370–2378.
[68] J. Yin, Y. Qiao, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, and J. Yang, “MCM: Masked cell
modeling for anomaly detection in tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2024, pp. 1–23.
[69] H. Ye, H. Zhao, W. Fan, M. Zhou, D. dan Guo, and Y. Chang, “DRL:
Decomposed representation learning for tabular anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 1–36.
[70] C.-P. Tsai, G. Teng, P. Wallis, and W. Ding, “AnoLLM: Large language
models for tabular anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 7562–7592.
[71] H. Dong, G. Frusque, Y. Zhao, E. Chatzi, and O. Fink, “NNG-Mix: Improving semi-supervised anomaly detection with pseudo-anomaly generation,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 10635–10647,
Jun. 2025.
[72] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with
SMOTE for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 943–956, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[73] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with
deviation networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2019, pp. 353–362.
[74] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.

Ziteng Wang received the B.S. degree in network
engineering from the Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2021. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. His current
research interests include Internet of Things security,
and data and information content security.

Yiheng Ruan received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from the China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, and the M.S. degree from the
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan. He
is also the General Manager of Hubei Chutian
Smart Communication Company Ltd., Wuhan. His
research interests include Big Data and intelligent
transportation.

Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 technical papers in international
top journals and conferences. His current research
interests include industrial Internet of Things security
and reliability, data and information content security,
artificial intelligence security, and social network security. He was the recipient
of the IEEE TCSC Early Career Award and IEEE SCSTC Middle Career Award.

4577

Xiaoxuan Fan (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree from the College of Informatics,
Huazhong University of Agriculture, Wuhan, in 2021
and the M.S. degree from the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2023. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, (HUST). Her
current research interests include Internet of Things
security, data and information content security, and
artificial intelligence security.

Shenghao Liu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2016 and 2021, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
HUST. His research interests include data and information content security, recommender systems,
social network security, and deep learning and neural
networks. He was the recipient of the IEEE SCSTC
Early Career Award.

Wei Feng received the M.S. degree in computer
software and theory from Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China, in 2009. She is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in the School of Artificial Intelligence
and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan. She is with China Nuclear Power
Operation Technology Company Ltd. (CNPO), a subsidiary of China National Nuclear Corporation. Her
current research interests include network security for
industrial control systems, network security detection
and assessment, and neural networks.

Deng Zhang received the M.S. degree from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2014. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan. He
is also a Senior Engineer with China Nuclear Power
Operation Technology Corporation, Ltd., Wuhan. His
current research interests focuses on threat identification of network security.