IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

4361

Early Attack Identification in the Wild
Minji Kim, Dongeun Lee , Kookjin Lee, Doowon Kim, Member, IEEE, Jinpyo Kim , Sangman Lee ,
and Jinoh Kim , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—While characterizing network connections in their
early stage is vital for providing timely responses against network
threats, existing methods become less attractive due to the
requirement of complete connection information (thus unable to
make timely identification) or packet payload inspection (therefore limited to unencrypted packets under no privacy regulation).
To this end, this paper takes an approach of packet stream
analysis referencing statistical information of packet sequences,
requiring neither packet inspection nor complete connection
information. To enable practical packet stream analysis, there
exist several challenges, such as out-of-order packet sequences
introduced by network dynamics and class imbalance with a tiny
fraction of attack connections. To overcome these challenges, we
design two deep sequence models: 1) a bidirectional recurrent
structure designed for greater resilience to out-of-order packet
streams; and 2) a pre-training-enabled sequence-to-sequence
structure designed for creating consistent representations from
unbalanced class distributions using self-supervised learning. We
evaluate the presented deep sequence models using real and
synthetic network data collections for extensive experimentation.
The experimental results support the feasibility of the proposed
models outperforming baseline deep learning models, yielding up
to 94.8% (F1 score) only with the first five packets (k=5) from
the Internet traffic collection containing a substantial fraction of
network flows experiencing out-of-order delivery.
Index Terms—Packet stream, early characterization, out-oforder packets, class imbalance, deep sequence, neural networks.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK-BASED attacks happen increasingly with
growing volume and impacts. This becomes more critical
with ever-growing connectivity with less secure Internet of
Things (IoT) devices through wireless mobile communications. One of the essential functions to protect computing
resources in the networking environment is the effective
detection of network attacks. The approach to network attack
detection can be either host-based or connection-based (i.e.,
host-independent), and the latter would be an attractive option
with relatively low deployment and operation costs [1]. In
addition to detection, the capability of timely responses is
another vital requirement, so as to minimize detection deficit

N

Received 21 May 2023; revised 10 November 2024, 3 May 2025,
and 29 August 2025; accepted 10 March 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor D. Pei. Date of publication 24 March 2026;
date of current version 27 March 2026. (Corresponding author: Jinoh Kim.)
Minji Kim, Dongeun Lee, Jinpyo Kim, and Jinoh Kim are with the
Computer Science Department, East Texas A&M University, Commerce,
TX 75428 USA (e-mail: jinoh.kim@etamu.edu).
Kookjin Lee is with the School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA.
Doowon Kim is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996 USA.
Sangman Lee is with the Department of AI Cyber Security, Korea University, Sejong-si 30019, South Korea.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3677135

(the gap between the time to compromise and the time to
defend) [2]. That is, the network should be able to prepare and enforce relevant countermeasures against individual
attack activities before they are successfully executed. To
this end, there would be at least two prerequisites: First, the
class of attacks should be identified in the detection time to
prepare relevant countermeasures (e.g., based on predefined
security policies). Second, the detection process should be
done as early as possible while the attack is active and in
progress.
Recently a body of studies has employed machine learning
(ML) techniques for detecting network attacks [3], [4]. Despite
their promising detection performance reported, most (if not
all) of previous studies assume the availability of complete
connection records that are only available at the connection
termination time. For instance, common public datasets (e.g.,
KDDCup 1999/NSL-KDD [5], UNSW-NB15 [6], and CICIDS2017 [7]) provide the complete connection information
such as duration, aggregated bytes, and number of packets,
through CSV-formatted files. Such reliance confines the capability of attack detection to postmortem analysis rather than
live online detection for timely actions. Moreover, a large body
of ML-based detection studies targeted anomaly detection (i.e.,
binary decision whether it is likely an attack or not); attack
detection is a more complicated problem and requires the ability to identify the type of attacks (e.g., Web, DoS, and scanning
attacks). Deep packet inspection is an effective method for
identifying attack classes at the early stage of connections
by applying pattern matching with predefined byte sequences
(“signatures”) [8]. However, any payload inspection approach
is extremely expensive for analyzing packet payloads. It is
also limited to unencrypted packets only. Moreover, there
is a trend of banning payload scanning with an increasing
demand on privacy, which renders it unlawful to read even
cleartext packets. In this study, we take an approach of
packet stream analysis referencing statistical information of
packet sequences, thus requiring neither packet inspection nor
complete connection information.
For practical packet stream analysis, there exist several
intricate challenges. First, the communication network is wild
and network dynamics (e.g., routing oscillation) may lead
to out-of-order packet sequences in collection. For example,
packet loss rates are non-negligible in reality, ranging from
0.01% to 20%, even in wired networking settings [9]. Packet
reordering refers to the reception of packets in a different
order than what were originally sent, and it is inevitable to see
packet reordering in packet-switched networks due to several
reasons, such as multi-path forwarding routes, parallelism, and

2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE I
P RIOR R ESEARCH ON PACKET S TREAM A NALYSIS

TABLE II
ATTACK C LASS I NFORMATION D EFINED IN THE I NTRUSION L OG

TABLE III
C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS F ROM WIDE
T RACE (09/01/2020-09/30/2020)

packet loss and retransmission [10]. Possibly, recovering from
packet reordering by referring to the sequence number field
is an option, but it is a highly expensive operation with extra
space and time requirements in an intermediate point in the

network. Such dynamics is generally more critical in wireless
mobile communications with greater loss and retransmission
rates. Second, the measured data collection shows a high
degree of class imbalance with only a small fraction of attack
connections. We can also find significant variations even from
the distribution of attack types (also observed from our dataset
in Table III). Another challenge would be a trade-off between
the number of packet stream variables to be managed and
analyzed vs. the corresponding time/space complexity: for
example, a greater set of variables in analysis may yield better
performance, while imposing greater overheads and expenses.
This paper sheds light on the design of deep learning
models for effective packet stream analysis in the wild, which
enables us to make timely responses against network attacks
by identifying in their early stages. The key contributions of
this study can be summarized, as follows:
• We formulate the problem of packet stream analysis with
the notion of time series classification, which optimizes
identification performance while minimizing the number
of packets on a flow referenced in the analysis process.
• We present two deep sequence models designed to overcome the challenges of incomplete packet sequences and
class imbalance: (i) a bidirectional recurrent structure
designed for greater resilience to missing/out-of-order
packet streams, and (ii) a pre-training-enabled sequenceto-sequence structure designed for creating consistent
representations from unbalanced class distributions using
self-supervised learning.
• We share evaluation details with our observations and
analysis. We conduct extensive evaluations using three
different data collections, one from the Internet backbone

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

4363

Fig. 1. Early attack identification: Each flow is represented with the size and time information, and the framework performs the identification of attack
classes based on the flow representation. Note that ψ(·) is the flow representation function and φ(·) is the flow identification function that takes the input
flow represented by ψ(·) to determine its class.

links and the others collected from simulated networking
environments. The experimental results show that our
deep sequence models consistently outperform baseline
deep learning models across diverse experimental settings, yielding up to 94.8% (F1 score) with the first
five packets (k = 5) from the Internet traffic collection
containing a substantial fraction of network flows experiencing out-of-order delivery.
The organization of this paper is as follows. We begin
with providing the description of the problem and a summary
of closely related studies in Section II. We next introduce
the dataset constructed from the Internet backbone and synthetic traffic traces with the associated ground-truth logs in
Section III. Section IV presents our deep sequence models
developed to analyze the potentially imperfect and unbalanced
packet stream data, with a schematic overview of the the
framework model implementing the deep sequence models
to tackle the problem of early identification. We share the
experimental setting and results with our observations and
implications in Section V, conducted with three data collections. We finally conclude our presentation in Section VI, with
the summary of the study and future directions.
II. BACKGROUND
This section provides the description of the problem and
our framework model designed to tackle the problem.
A. Problem Description
This study aims to accurately identify the type of the
network connections in their early stages by analyzing the
stream of packets. To formulate the problem, we employ
the general concept of connections and flows defined for
point-to-point communications. A connection consists of two
flows for bidirectional communication (e.g., client-to-server
and server-to-client directions). Let ci be a connection and
C the set of connections in a captured network trace. Then,
the size of flow set F is twice the corresponding connection
set size, i.e., |F| = 2 × |C|. A common way of representing a flow (for early identification) is to associate it
with a two-dimensional vector containing the packet size and

packet time recorded for each packet within the flow, which
has often been considered as time series analysis for traffic
classification [11]. For flow f , let bj (f ) be the number of
bytes of the j-th packet and tj (f ) be the inter-packet time
between the (j-1)-th and j-th packets (t1 (f ) = 0). Let ψ be
the function that transforms a flow into this representation:
ψ(f ) = h(b1 (f ), . . . , bn (f )), (t1 (f ), . . . , tn (f ))i, for flow f
consisting of n packets. Note that ψk (f ) takes the first k
packets in the observation (for the purpose of early decision).
Figure 1 depicts the data transformation from a series of
packets captured on a communication link.
For attack types, suppose m attack classes under consideration. A flow may either be a part of an attack connection
or have nothing to do with any of attack classes (referred
to as “background”). Let U be a set of different classes,
U = {Ai |0 ≤ i ≤ m, i ∈ Z}, where A0 is a class for
background traffic while Aj (j > 0) is an attack class. In
other words, a flow belongs to Ai (0 ≤ i ≤ m) depending
on its class. The identification function φ(·) takes the input
representation of a flow ψ(f ) and determines its class, i.e.,
φ ◦ ψ : F → U. As shown in Figure 1, the early identification
framework performs φ(·) to characterize attack classes by
monitoring the size and time information measured from the
first k packets on a flow.
To measure the performance of the identification function,
we utilize standard metrics based on the confusion matrix,
including F1 score and false positive rate (FPR) (defined in
Section V-A). As described, only the first k packets in a flow
are monitored for early identification. The goal is then to
maximize the identification performance for a given packet
constraint k ∗ as follows:
max φ(·) F1 score

subject to k ≤ k ∗ .

For simplicity, we set k = k ∗ , i.e., the number of packets
monitored is equal to the constraint.
B. Related Work
1) Intrusion and Anomaly Detection: Intrusion detection
is a typical second line of defense mechanism, which can
broadly be classified into two groups of signature-based and

4364

anomaly-based approaches [8]. Conventional intrusion detection tools, such as Snort (https://www.snort.org/) and Zeek
(https://zeek.org/), have the capability of detecting unwanted
connections in real time often using textual byte patterns.
Given the wider reliance on payload encryption, however,
those signature-based approaches would be less attractive [8].
Moreover, there is an increase of privacy disputes and legal
regulations, and the payload inspection may not be a valid
option, particularly at a certain network point.
A body of studies investigated various ML approaches
for detecting anomalies from network traffic traces [3], [4].
Despite substantial improvement with brand-new methods,
anomaly detection is inherently limited to the binary decision
without providing information specific to attack classes. Additionally, existing studies largely rely on complete connection
information, which only becomes available after the communication is over. Several studies [7], [12], [13] focused on
attack identification (rather than anomaly detection). A recent
study [14] compares shallow learning and deep learning methods for network attack identification. Using public network
datasets, the authors demonstrate that deep learning models,
such as convolutional neural network (CNN)-based ones, do
not outperform traditional shallow learners like random forest.
Another study [15] explores the impact of mislabeled data
in network attack identification, proposing a clustering-based
classification method with boundary augmentation to better
classify difficult samples located near the decision boundary.
While these studies provide valuable insights, they do not
address the early identification capability that our study aims
to achieve.
Another active line of research avenue in this field focuses
on online detection at the data plane. Several studies have
explored the feasibility of performing detection directly on
programmable switches to enable real-time intrusion detection. For example, an early effort in [16] demonstrates the
integration of a tree-based classification model into the data
plane, addressing the resource constraints of switch hardware.
The work in [17] extends online analysis to support line-rate
performance (scaling up to multi-terabit speeds), while introducing runtime programmability that allows model updates
without requiring a switch reboot. Another work in [18]
presents a co-design approach that incorporates deep learning
models, particularly recurrent neural networks (RNNs), into
the architecture of programmable switches.
2) Packet Stream Analysis: Traffic classification is one of
the core functions in network monitoring and management for
traffic engineering, resource provisioning, Quality-of-Service
(QoS) preservation, and security purposes. Several studies
tackled the problem of traffic classification based on packet
stream analysis, and hence, their proposed method might
provide the function of early classification of network flows
by referencing the first few packets. For instance, the study in
[35] utilized statistical information, such as mean and variance
of packet size and inter-arrival time, for classifying TCP
connections by referring to the first k packets. The work in
[19] records the packet size difference and inter-arrival time
for the first 10 packets on the network flow, which is then
converted to an image to apply a CNN-based classification

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

model for traffic classification. Authors in [20] investigated the
applicability of multi-task learning, simultaneously performing
multiple tasks leveraging information across the tasks, for the
purpose of traffic classification using a one-dimensional CNN
model. The study by [23] explores packet representation using
an attention-based encoding mechanism that can be used for
different downstream classification tasks, not based on flows
but based on individual packets.
Packet stream analysis for early classification has also been
explored in the context of attack detection. In [36], the authors
extract features from the initial set of packets to perform
binary classification (i.e., benign or malicious). Similarly, the
study in [26] uses a one-dimensional CNN to process raw
packet contents from the early portion of a flow, followed
by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for classification, while
the authors in [27] focused on updating the classifier model
for new types of attacks. Several studies focused on the
challenge of limited training data, particularly the scarcity
of attack samples. For example, the authors in [28] explore
the potential of transfer learning not only to mitigate data
scarcity but also to address computational constraints in edge
network environments. Similarly, the works in [29] and [37]
investigate the use of few-shot learning to handle the scarcity
of attack samples, particularly for novel or emerging threats
where labeled data is difficult to obtain. A related study
in [30] further examines the effectiveness of both few-shot
and transfer learning in scenarios constrained by both limited
samples and computing resources. In regard to data scarcity,
our study considers the challenge of class imbalance, where
attack samples represent only a small portion of the training
data. While previous research highlights transfer learning as a
promising solution, we explore an alternative approach—selfsupervised learning. This direction is motivated by recent
findings suggesting that pre-training a supervised learning
model using unlabeled samples can enhance performance [38].
Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, prior work has not
addressed the challenge of out-of-order packet sequences,
which are common in real-world network environments and
can significantly affect detection accuracy. In this study,
we propose a deep sequence modeling approach specifically
designed to handle incomplete and potentially disordered
packet sequences, thereby enhancing the practicality of earlystage traffic analysis.
Table I summarizes prior research on packet stream analysis, focusing on approaches that utilize packet-level data
extracted from flows or biflows, as opposed to aggregated
flow-level statistics, to enable early decisions. Several studies
[26], [28], [30] employ CNNs to extract features directly
from raw traffic bytes. In contrast, our work takes a different
direction by avoiding the parsing of raw packet bytes, thereby
enabling analysis of encrypted traffic streams. To improve
practicality, we leverage only packet size and inter-arrival time
information—features that are easy to obtain with light collection and computing complexities. Furthermore, as summarized
in the table, previous studies largely rely on conventional
back-end classifiers (e.g., MLPs) combined with front-end
convolutional networks. In contrast, our approach emphasizes
temporal modeling through deep sequence architectures based

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

on recurrent structures, which are better suited for time-series
analysis. Lastly, while existing studies often rely on network
traffic data collected from simulated environments, our work
leverages real-world traffic captured from Internet backbone
links, offering a more realistic and representative foundation
for evaluation.
3) Early Detection Studies: Early detection has been a
keyword for many application domains, with the goal of
minimizing the impact of adversarial events by detecting
them in the premature stage. For example, authors in [39]
presented a neural network structure combining recurrent and
convolutional networks for the early detection of fake news
on social media, motivated to reduce societal and economic
damages. Similarly, the studies in [40] and [41] are in the
loop of rumor detection using graph-structured neural networks. Fraudulent event detection is closely related to the
fake news detection, with the focus on the early detection of
malicious activities like posting harmful links on social media
by using an RNN-based survival analysis [42] and fraudulent
reviews through one-class adversarial networks [43]. Recent
research efforts extend fake news and rumor detection by
introducing sophisticated modeling techniques. For instance,
the work in [44] defines a dual convolution networks for
capturing the dynamics of messages in propagation and the
background knowledge, while the study in [45] designs a
multi-view representation method to jointly capture textual
and visual features. Additionally, early detection would be
highly crucial in the healthcare domain as well, and the authors
in [46] presented a survival analysis-based method predicting
when a patient develops complications after being diagnosed.
Unlike our problem, these studies need less attention to the
inconsistency in data sequences owing to the assumption of
messages on social media posted with time stamps.
III. PACKET S TREAM DATA C ONSTRUCTION
To identify different classes of attacks, the availability of
annotated datasets (with the labeled class information) would
basically be required for the unique representation of each
class. Many intrusion detection studies relied exhaustively
on CSV-formatted connection data provided in, for example,
KDD Cup 1999 [47], UNSW-NB15 dataset [6], and CICIDS2017 [7], but those connection files contain the information
of flows that can be only collected after the completion of
communication. Hence, such connection logs would rather be
useful for postmortem analysis than for early detection of
ongoing malicious flows.
In this work, we construct fine-grained packet-level datasets
including the size (in bytes) and time information of individual packets (i.e., constructing ψ(f )) by combining network
traffic traces with corresponding intrusion detection logs.
We consider both real and synthetic traces for constructing
packet-level datasets. The real traffic (known as the WIDE
trace) is captured from Internet backbone links in Japan
[48], [49], while the synthetic packet traces are recorded
on simulated network environments, including UNSW-NB15
[6] and HIKARI-2021 [50]. Note that UNSW-NB15 provides
both packet-level traces and CSV-formatted connection files
(compiled from the raw traces), and we consider the packet

4365

traces for early identification in this study. In this section, we
introduce the process of the packet stream data construction,
primarily with the real Internet traces.
A. Data Construction From Internet Traces
As discussed, we utilize the WIDE trace with the corresponding intrusion logs for labeling of traffic [48], [49]. The
traffic trace contains TCP/IP packet header information in a
pcap file, while the associated intrusion log is provided in a
comma-separated values (CSV) file with the attack information
inferred by multiple detectors. Each pcap file is a recording of
15-minute traffic collected on a specific day. A previous study
in [51] constructed network data by combining these traffic
traces and intrusion logs, but the resulting dataset contains
NetFlow-like statistical information made only available at
the connection release time. In this work, we construct packet
stream data to develop the function for the early identification
of network attacks.
Here, we describe the details of our data construction
process. Basically, the intrusion log contains the flow identification information (“5-tuple”), including the IP address
pair, source/destination port numbers, and the transportlayer protocol (e.g., TCP). The log also provides the attack
class information, including HTTP-relevant attacks (“HTTP”),
heavy hitter traffic (“Alpha”), point-to-multipoint anomalies
(“Multi”), denial-of-service attacks (“DoS”), port scanning
(“PortScan”), network scanning (“ICMPScan”, “TCPScan”,
and “UDPScan”), and tunneling behaviors (“IPv6Tunnel”)
[49]. As can be seen from Table II, a specific attack is
categorized to one of the attack classes based on its intrinsic
characteristics.
Using the flow identifier, the traffic trace is combined with
the associated intrusion log. If the flow from the traffic trace
has a match to a log entry, then the flow is marked as an
attack with the class information (Ai ∈ U ∧ i 6= 0). If no
match is found, then the combining procedure falls back to
4-tuple (excluding the source port number information from
5-tuple) and performs the same combining task. In case of no
match again from the fall-back process, the flow is considered
background traffic (A0 ∈ U). The statistical packet stream
information is then recorded with the class information for
each flow in the traffic trace. In this work, we consider TCP
flows only since it is safe to construct a flow using connection
management flags (e.g., a SYN packet for a new flow start).
Table III shows the extracted flow information from the
25-day network traffic collected in September 2020, excluding
five days due to unavailability (3rd, 14th, 27th, 28th, and 29th).
In the table, we use the label of “Unlabeled” to indicate the
background traffic (i.e., flows that have not been assigned to
any of the attack classes during the combining phase). From
the one-month trace, we observe a set of flows in five attack
classes in addition to background traffic, while there exists no
flow for the rest of the attack classes. Note that it is natural that
the number of flows decreases with greater k values, because
there can be a subset of flows consisting of a small number
of packets only, and any flow with less than k packets should
be excluded from the collection.

4366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 2. Visualization of the packet size and time for 100 random samples (WIDE): Each row shows a flow and each column shows a time step (packet
number) from 1 to 10. Each class shows somewhat distinctive patterns across time steps.

TABLE IV

TABLE V

BACKGROUND T RAFFIC S TATISTICS (T OP -5)

C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS (UNSW-NB15)

Table IV provides additional details about the background
traffic, including the distribution of source and destination
ports. While HTTPS accounts for the largest share of TCP
traffic, standard HTTP remains widely used in web communications. Secure Shell (SSH) contributes to the second largest
portion of the traffic. We observe traffic asymmetry in both
directions, which may be attributed to factors such as traffic
engineering, load balancing, asymmetric routing, and multipath forwarding. This observation supports our assumption
regarding the importance of out-of-order packet sequences for
effective traffic characterization.
As described in Section II-A, we primarily collect the
packet length bj (f ) and inter-packet time tj (f ) information
for the characterization. Figure 2 shows the visualization of
the sampled flows in different classes, with respect to bj (fi )
(Figure 2(a)) and tj (fi ) (Figure 2(b)), where i = [1, 100]
and j = [1, 10]. Although randomly sampled, we can see
somewhat distinctive patterns for individual classes across time
steps, which signals the feasibility of the identification process
in their early stage.
Finally, the extracted data samples are pre-processed before
being fed to ML algorithms, which largely includes rescaling
and data normalization. Collectively, they constitute φ(·). In
particular, we observed high skewness from both the byte
and inter-packet time fields. To resolve this, in the rescaling
process, logarithm functions were applied to take the skewness
of distributions into account: log(bj (f )) and log(tj (f )). Then,

data normalization was performed with the min-max scaling
function: {log(·)−min(log(·))}/{max(log(·))−min(log(·))}.
B. Data Construction From Simulated Traffic
For comprehensive experiments, we further construct two
additional datasets derived from the synthetic traffic recorded
from simulated network environments.
1) UNSW-NB15 [6]: This dataset was created in 2015
from a simulated environment consisting of servers for traffic
generations and routers capturing packets (and saving them
to pcap files). The simulated network contains two servers
for the normal spread of the traffic and one server for
generating malicious traffic. This dataset defines nine attack
classes: Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic,
Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and Worms. The ground-truth log
information was obtained using the Bro-IDS tool (https://
www.zeek.org/) The dataset contains two collections, each of
which contains a single data trace captured in January and
February, respectively. We construct the packet stream data
from the January collection.
Table V shows the number of instances for each class, which
shows the majority of classes (other than Unlabeled, Fuzzers,
and Exploits) contain a small number of instances only. In the

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

4367

TABLE VI
C ONSTRUCTED DATA W ITH C LASS L ABELS (HIKARI-2021)

table, Unlabeled indicates background traffic that has not been
assigned to any of the attack classes, as in Table III.
2) HIKARI-2021 [50]: This dataset was published in 2021.
The network configuration shows an attacker network, a victim
network, and an interface to the public Internet. Like the
WIDE and UNSB-NB15 data, HIKARI-2021 provides the
raw packet traces in the pcap format with the ground-truth
data. The collection defines four attack types: Bruteforce,
Bruteforce-XML, Probing, and XMRIGCC (malicious cryptomining). The non-attack data contains both simulated benign
traffic and background traffic to/from the public network.
From our data construction using the entire traces and groundtruth, we found no instance of XMRIGCC. Table VI shows
the number of instances for each class constructed from the
HIKARI-2021 collection.
IV. M ETHODS —D EEP S EQUENCE M ODELS
The primary goal of this study is to develop an effective
packet stream analysis tool that provides accurate early attack
identification from potentially incomplete, skewed packet
stream datasets with out-of-order sequences and unbalanced
class distributions. In this section, we initially describe the
overview of deep learning for time series analysis, and
then present our deep sequence models designed to address
the above challenges: (i) bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM) as an implementation of bidirectional recurrent
structure, and (ii) sequence-to-sequence autoencoder as an
implementation of pre-training-enabled sequence-to-sequence
structure.
A. Deep Learning for Time Series Analysis
Considering a sequence of packets in a flow as the input
variable and a class as the target variable, we can formulate
the identification problem as a classification problem in a
supervised learning setting. In particular, we aim to learn a
function φΘ , which predicts an attack class or the background
class given the first k packets of a flow: Ai = φΘ (ψk (f )),
where Θ is a set of model parameters to be learned; and ψk (·)
maps the flow representation to k tuples.
Among various forms of φΘ ,1 we choose recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) because they are specifically designed for
processing time series data by utilizing shared and recurring
units [52]. At time index t, RNNs operate on an input xt
(1)
(2)
and update hidden states h t = (ht , ht , . . .) by applying a
recurring function,
h t = RNN(xt , h t−1 ; ΘRNN ),
1 We assume that φ also includes pre-processing of data samples: rescaling
Θ
and data normalization.

Fig. 3. LSTM cell information flow. At the tth time step, the LSTM cell
takes the previous hidden state h t−1 and the previous cell state c t−1 . The
forget gate, f t , controls the information flow from the previous cell state,
the input gate, g t , controls the information flow to update the cell state, and
the output gate q t controls the information flow from the current cell state c t
to the output h t . The operator
denotes the element-wise multiplication.

where ΘRNN denotes the model parameters of RNN and
(`)
ht denotes a hidden state at the `th RNN layer. For the
classification task, a classifier network takes (a part of) the
last hidden state h last to make a prediction on a probability
hlast ), where
distribution over a set of classes, i.e., p = cξ (h
p = [p0 , . . . , pm ]T denotes a vector of probability masses; each
pi denotes the probability that the flow is classified as the ith
label; and cξ is a classifier network with a set of trainable
parameters ξ. In our scenario, we pre-process ψk (f ) and set
it to xt . For a given p , the attack (or background) class Ai
is determined by the index i that satisfies pi ≥ pj for all
j ∈ {0, . . . , m}.
1) Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM): As standard RNNs
typically suffer from vanishing or exploding gradient problems
[53], modern RNN architectures such as LSTM [54] and
gated recurrent unit (GRU) [55] were proposed as gating
mechanisms to mitigate such problems by creating computational paths whose gradients do not vanish or explode for
a long period. In this study, we choose LSTM over GRU as
LSTM is known to be strictly more expressive, outperforming
GRU in many complex applications [56]. LSTM resolves
vanishing/exploding gradient problems by adding LSTM cells.
In addition to the standard RNN hidden states h t , LSTM
cells have a cell state c t , which is updated by an internal
recurrence and creates paths where the gradient can flow over
longer duration. Then the gating mechanisms control the flow
of information by employing three gates: input, output, and
forget gates. The input gate controls the extent to which new
input data is transferred to update ct , the output gate controls
the extent to which the LSTM cell output flows out to the
output (the hidden state), and the forget gate controls the
extent to which ct remains unchanged. The gating mechanisms
allow important information to last longer while forgetting less
significant information. Now, the recurring function becomes
h t , c t = LSTM(xt , h t−1 , c t−1 ; ΘLSTM ).
Figure 3 illustrates the information flow of the LSTM cell.
2) Bidirectional LSTM: The use of bidirectional LSTM
represents a novel approach to network traffic modeling,
especially in scenarios with missing or out-of-order elements

4368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

in the input sequence. While RNNs, including LSTM and
GRU, have been explored for traffic classification tasks
[57], they often struggle when sequence data is incomplete
[58] or unordered [59]. Traditional LSTM models rely on
single-direction processing and typically require customized
pre-processing, such as interpolating missing values based on
domain-specific heuristics [58], which may not be adaptable
across different applications.
In contrast, bidirectional LSTM provides a more advanced
solution by processing information bidirectionally (both forward and backward) within a sequence. This dual-directional
analysis enhances the model’s ability to infer context around
missing or misaligned data points, leading to higher accuracy
without requiring application-specific data handling techniques
[60]. By offering improved contextual awareness and more
robust dependency modeling [61], [62], bidirectional LSTM
can capture crucial relationships across sequential data, even
when elements are out of order. This approach positions
the bidirectional LSTM as a promising advancement for
resilient and adaptable traffic classification in diverse network
conditions.
In our task of the attack classification, the performance of
the task depends not only on understanding “causal” relationship of packets in the input sequence, but also on extracting
other useful features that would otherwise be overlooked by
only focusing on causality. However, a regular LSTM only
employs a past history to extract features. To address this
issue, bidirectional LSTM [63] has been studied and has
demonstrated its effectiveness in many applications [64]. Thus,
in this study, we consider the bidirectional LSTM, which
combines two LSTM architectures: one moving forward from
the beginning to the end of the input sequence and the other
moving backward from the end to the beginning of the input
sequence. That is,
fwd
fwd
fwd
h fwd
= LSTM(xt , h fwd
t , ct
t−1 , c t−1 ; ΘLSTM ),
bwd
bwd
bwd
h bwd
= LSTM(xt , h bwd
t , ct
t+1 , c t+1 ; ΘLSTM ),

where the superscripts fwd and bwd indicate the quantities
associated with the forward and backward operations. The
final hidden representation at time t can be obtained by the
bwd
hfwd
concatenation, h t = [h
t , h t ]. With this architecture, we
anticipate that the model can handle a flow better even if
packets arrive out of order.
3) Training: As the classifier network is designed to produce a probability that the input flow is categorized into each
class, the last component of the classifier is a softmax layer,
which turns its input vector
P o into the probability vector p
such that pi = exp(oi )/ i exp(oi ). Then, the model can be
trained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss:
LCE = −

1

nX
m
train X

ntrain j=1 i=0

yj,i log(pj,i ),

where yj,i ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator denoting if the index i of
a training sample j is the correct classification; pj,i is the pi
of the training sample j; and ntrain is the number of training
samples.

B. Self-Supervised Learning
In many applications, the distribution of classes of interest
could be biased or skewed, and training a classifier directly
could fail to capture an underlying distribution correctly.
To mitigate this class imbalance issue, a training algorithm
that does not require the knowledge of class labels can be
employed to pre-train the classifier. As pointed out in the
state-of-the-art unsupervised learning study (contrastive-lossbased models, e.g., [38]), a main purpose of unsupervised
learning is to pre-train a model, which is in turn fine-tuned
with supervised learning. We follow this approach in this
study.
1) Sequence-to-Sequence Autoencoder: Autoencoder is a
feed-forward neural network, which attempts to copy its input
sequence to its output sequence. We consider a type of autoencoder, called sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) autoencoder
model, whose input and output are sequences. In general,
the Seq2Seq model consists of three parts: an encoder, a
decoder, and a context vector. To handle the sequence, the
encoder and the decoder are typically modeled as RNN-type
neural networks. The encoder processes an input sequence
and produces the context vector, which would contain the
most salient features of the input sequence. Figure 4 depicts
the network architecture of the Seq2Seq autoencoder model.
Internally, the multilayer perceptron (MLP) component inside
the encoder compresses the output of the LSTM to produce the
context vector projected in a lower-dimensional space, and the
other MLP at the decoder performs the decompression.
We now formally describe the Seq2Seq model. Specifically,
the model can be written in a form:
x̃ = gdec (genc (x; Θenc ); Θdec ),
where genc and gdec denote the encoder and the decoder,
respectively; Θenc and Θdec denote the model parameters
for the encoder and the decoder, respectively; x̃ denotes the
reconstruction of x that is a pre-processed version of ψk (f ).
The encoder takes the input sequence and produces the context
vector c:
c = genc (x; Θenc ).
The decoder performs the reverse action of the encoder,
x̃ = gdec (c; Θdec ),
where the output approximates the input x̃ ≈ x.
2) Training: The goal of the training is to find sets of model
parameters (Θenc , Θdec ) that minimize mean squared error
(MSE) between the output sequence and the input sequence:
LMSE =

1

nX
train

ntrain i=1

2

kxi − x̃i k2 ,

where xi and x̃i denote the i-th training sample for the input
and the reconstruction, respectively.
Note that this approach can be categorized as selfsupervised learning, as it does not require additional labels
for training, except the input variable. Once the training of
the Seq2Seq autoencoder is finished, we take the network
weights and biases of the encoder as initial values of network
weights and biases of the LSTM network for the classification,

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

4369

Fig. 4. Seq2Seq autoencoder for self-supervised learning: The encoder and the decoder are typically modeled as RNN-type neural networks to handle the
sequence. Internally, the MLP component inside the encoder compresses the output of the LSTM to produce the context vector projected in a lower-dimensional
space, and the other MLP at the decoder performs the decompression to restore the sequence.

i.e., ΘRNN = Θenc . After that, we continue training the
LSTM network to minimize the cross-entropy explained in
Section IV-A.
The mathematical ground as to why self-supervised learning
can be more robust in learning representations in the scenarios
of class imbalance is still an active area of research. However,
strong empirical evidence has been presented in a recent
work where self-supervised learning resulted in more robust
representations [65].
C. Proposed Framework
To realize early identification based on the deep sequence
method, we design a framework consisting of a set of
functional components to fulfill its mission, as illustrated in
Figure 5. The following are the details about the framework
components:
• Data Gen creates normalized, labeled data instances by
combining the given packet traces and the associated
intrusion logs, which will be used for constructing the
learning model. Attack flows are labeled with their specific attack class, while the rest of the flows are labeled
as “Unlabeled”;
• Packet Stream Gen groups a stream of packets based
on the flow identifier information. The statistical packet
stream information from the predetermined number of
packets (k) on the same flow is measured and delivered
to Early Identifier;
• Pre-trainer is equipped to perform self-supervised learning, which helps initialize the neural network in a way to
stabilize the learning model from the impact by probabilistic skewness and class imbalance. Note that the label
information is not referenced in the pre-training stage;
• Main Trainer learns the characteristics of individual
attack classes by referencing the annotated class label
information. The pre-trained model is loaded as the
initialization of the Main Trainer, and the labeled samples
are injected to construct the learning model for early
attack identification;
• Early Identifier performs the identification of attack
classes against the given data instance delivered from
Packet Stream Generator. The learning model built by
Main Trainer is loaded to this component for actual
decisions. The early decision is then made by classifying
each instance into one of the classes (Ai ∈ U).
Basically, there are two parts in the presented framework.
The data measurement part (Data Gen and Packet Stream Gen)

described in Section III. In fact, the ML part is the core of the
framework performing learning and decisions. As mentioned,
there would be several challenges for realizing early decisions
from potentially imperfect and unbalanced network packet
data. We develop two deep sequence models for addressing
those challenges, as discussed earlier in this section. The
designed sequence-based models include a bidirectional recurrent structure built upon long short-term memory (LSTM)
for resiliency against packet missing and reordering (designed
for Main Trainer), and a pre-training-enabled sequence-tosequence structure based on the autoencoding architecture for
stability from unbalanced class distributions (designed for PreTrainer). The framework has been implemented using PyTorch
and we will discuss the evaluation of the proposed method in
the following section.
In Figure 5, the process flow is as follows: (i) The framework starts by creating labeled training data from raw packet
traces and the associated intrusion logs; (ii) The labeled data
is then fed into the deep sequence model, which characterizes
each attack class using the first k packets from each sample;
(iii) Self-supervised learning may be employed to enhance
model initialization, making the neural network distributionaware; (iv) The deep sequence model (bidirectional LSTM or
Seq2Seq) is trained to learn the unique features of each class;
(v) The trained model is subsequently deployed for real-time
testing on individual flows captured from live traffic; (vi) Flow
information is extracted based on five-tuple identification from
the raw traffic; (vii) Finally, the deep sequence model makes
a classification decision based on the extracted flow data.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we share the evaluation results with our
observations and implications. We first describe the experimental setting for compared models, data preparation, and
evaluation metrics. Then we report the experimental results,
which demonstrate the feasibility of our deep sequence models
for early decisions with improved performance compared
to the baseline models. This section primarily reports the
experimental results collected with the WIDE dataset. Additionally, we share the results obtained with the synthetic
datasets (UNSW-NB15 and HIKARI-2021) and the (UDPbased) QUIC dataset (CESNET-QUIC22 [34]).
A. Experimental Setting
We evaluate a set of deep learning models for packet stream
analysis in the context of network attack identification. As the

4370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. Overview of the proposed framework for early attack identification, which analyzes packet streams using a time series-aware ML component for
learning and classifying. The circled numbers represent the process flow in the framework.

baseline, we consider two neural network models: (i) a multilayer perceptron (MLP) model that takes a vector containing
the packet size and time without the notion of time sequences
(“MLP”) and (ii) a unidirectional LSTM model widely applied
for time series analysis (“FWD”). As the realization of the
proposed models, we implement two deep sequence models:
(iii) the bidirectional LSTM model (“BI”) and (iv) the unidirectional LSTM model pre-trained with Seq2Seq autoencoder
(“SEQ”). Note that we configure FWD with the identical
neural network architecture to SEQ, with the same level of
optimizations for fair comparison; hence, SEQ can be regarded
as a pre-trained version of FWD with self-supervised learning.
For BI, we test models with an additional fully-connected
layer that produces a hidden vector, which has the same size
as the context vector. Internally, we use ReLU for MLP and
tanh for LSTM for non-linear activation. For each ML model,
we utilize check-pointing to search a model instance with
the greatest validation accuracy over 1,000 epochs with the
learning rate 10−3 .
As shown in Table III, the created dataset mainly contains
three attack classes (HTTP, Multi, and Alpha). We composed the ML models to classify the traffic into four classes
(i.e., three attack classes and the background). For training,
min(10000, x) number of instances were randomly chosen
from each class pool, where x is the actual size of the pool.
Hence, the sampled dataset is intrinsically unbalanced with
less than or equal to 10,000 samples, particularly if k gets
larger. The validation set contains 200 instances for each
class, and the testing set includes 100 instances per class. To
ensure no-overlap among training, validation, and test sets, the
validation and test samples had been drawn before composing
the training set.
To measure model performance, we basically refer to the
confusion matrix consisting of TP (True Positive), FP (False
Positive), FN (False Negative), and TN (True Negative). We
measure the identification performance using F1 score, since
the metric of accuracy may lead to a biased outcome under
a setting with unbalanced classes (same as our setting). The

2T P
metric of F1 score is defined as: F1 score = 2T P +F
P +F N ,
and hence, the model performs better if the score is higher.
Since the attack identification is not a binary classification
problem, we calculate F1 score based on the number of
true instances for each class (i.e., Macro Avg. F1 score).
We additionally report false positive rate (FPR) defined as:
P
FPR = F PF+T
N . In our setting, a false positive event refers
to a case where Unlabeled (A0 ) is classified into one of the
attack classes ({Ai |i 6= 0}).
Our implementation and the WIDE dataset can be
accessible online through: https://github.com/dcstamuc/
PacketStreamDataCollection

B. Performance Comparison
We first perform a fair comparison under the assumption of
the identical configuration setting for the number of hidden
layers (HLAYER) and the hidden dimension size (HDIM):
HLAYER = 3 and HDIM = 20. Additionally, we set the size
of context vector (or hidden vector) (CV) to three for BI and
SEQ as their default values (i.e., CV = 3). We then report the
configuration of each model yielding the best F1 score with
the corresponding FPR. Finally, we analyze the performance
of BI and SEQ with different values for CV and HDIM.
Figure 6 shows the classification performance in F1 score
under the fair comparison setting. From the figure, we can see
that our deep sequence models (BI and SEQ) substantially outperform MLP consistently across different k’s. Interestingly,
the unidirectional LSTM model (FWD) collapses to 0.1 when
k = 10, implying high sensitivity and instability of the model
when the sampled dataset gets more unbalanced. BI and SEQ
are capable of providing early identification of attack flows
with fairly acceptable performance even with three packets
(k = 3), while monitoring the first five packets (k = 5)
escalates the identification performance to 93.5% (BI) and
93.7% (SEQ). One interesting observation is that increasing
the number of packets (k ≥ 10) does not help improve
the identification performance, which will be discussed in
Section V-F.

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

Fig. 6. Performance comparison: BI and SEQ consistently outperform MLP
and FWD across different k values, yielding up to 93.5% (BI) and 93.7%
(SEQ) with k = 5. Note that FWD collapses to around 10% when k ≥ 10
(thus showing the broken line).
TABLE VII
B EST-P ERFORMING C ONFIGURATION FOR E ACH M ODEL (k = 5)

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE (F1 S CORE ) U NDER D IFFERENT C ONFIGURATIONS
(B OLD =B EST, I TALIC = B EST FOR THE OTHER M ODEL )

4371

Fig. 7. Performance comparison for different feature sets (k = 5): Utilizing
both features perform highly consistently across different identification models. Relying on the size information shows slightly better performance than
utilizing the time information that produces an F1 score of at least 79.9%.

The results in Table VIII suggest a room to optimize the
models with non-negligible improvements compared to the
default setting, i.e., (CV = 3, HDIM = 20). In the table,
the bold-faced result indicates the best performance among
the entire settings for a given k. We also italicize the best
performance of the other model for the comparison of the
two models (i.e., BI and SEQ). For example, BI(3,40) yields
the best performance (and bold-faced) when k = 3, while
SEQ(3,40) works the best among the SEQ settings (and
italicized). Overall, BI(3,40) performs consistently, yielding
over 91% without any significant variations across different
configurations. SEQ works well by and large but shows
some degraded performance with the longest sequence (k =
20), presumably due to the increased complexity of the
reconstruction.
C. Significance of Packet Size and Time Features

We next compare the best performance of the models. In
fact, we have performed extensive hyper-parameter-search on
a grid and here we report the results of the best configurations
with respect to F1 score when k = 5 (as observed in Figure 6).
Table VII provides the performance with F1 score and FPR
for each model. In the table, CV is not applicable for MLP
or FWD. The results show that SEQ is slightly better than
the others, while BI shows the lowest FPR. Although the
performance gap between the baseline models (MLP and
FWD) and our deep sequence models (BI and SEQ) is small
here, BI and SEQ perform more consistently, which is a crucial
factor in actual deployment.
Lastly, we provide further results for BI and SEQ under
different CV and HDIM settings. For the exposition purpose,
we name a model with a suffix of (CV, HDIM): for example,
BI(3,20) refers to the BI model with CV = 3 and HDIM = 20.

Thus far, we assumed a two-dimensional vector containing
the packet size and packet time as input for characterizing a
flow f , i.e., h(b1 (f ), t1 (f )), . . . , (bk (f ), tk (f ))i, from k packets measured for that flow. As shown in Figure 2, individual
classes may have distinctive patterns when visualizing the
sample instances using the size and time information, respectively. To see their impact on identification performance, we
conduct another experiments with a single variable sequences
(i.e., either size or time).
Figure 7 shows the performance comparison with different feature sets: packet size information only (i.e.,
hb1 (f ), b2 (f ), . . . , bk (f )i), packet time information only (i.e.,
ht1 (f ), t2 (f ), . . . , tk (f )i), and both the size and time information. The number of packets is set to five (k = 5) in
this comparison study. The figure shows that using both
features leads to highly consistent performance across different
identification models. Relying solely on the size information
shows slightly better performance than utilizing only the time
information that produces an F1 score of 79.9% in the worst
case. This result supports the significance of utilizing both the
size and time information for packet stream analysis.
Table IX and Table X provide further details of the measured
performance when using the packet size information only
(Table IX) and the packet time information only (Table X). We

4372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 8. Performance comparison with other datasets: BI and SEQ do not show substantial performance improvements with the synthetic traffic sets that have
relatively low rates of out-of-order delivery compared to the WIDE dataset, as shown in Table XI.

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE W ITH PACKET
S IZE I NFORMATION

TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE W ITH PACKET
T IME I NFORMATION

TABLE XI
F RACTION OF F LOWS E XPERIENCING
O UT- OF -O RDER PACKETS

can see from both tables that our deep sequence models overall
outperform the baseline models, yielding over 80% of performance across different k values consistently. In particular, the
SEQ model trained with the packet size information shows an
F1 score of 93.3% when k = 10, approximating to the best
result in Table VIII. We also observed that FWD collapses with
poor performance with k ≥ 10, as in the previous experiments.

function since other classes contain only a small number of
flows when k is large. In Table V, DoS contains only 310
samples when k = 20, while other attacks than Fuzzers and
Exploits have an even smaller number of instances than DoS
has. Figure 8(a) shows the identification performance over
different k values. We can see that k = 3 would not be enough
to accurately classify, while k ≥ 5 show significantly improved
performance. Note that FWD failed when k = 10, 20, similar
to what we observed in Figure 6.
We next report experimental result conducted with the
HIKARI-2021 collection. We experimented with the four
classes defined in Table VI. The performance comparison in
Figure 8(b) shows somewhat closer patterns to the WIDE
evaluation result in Figure 6. All the models perform the best
with k = 5, while referring to more packets reduces the chance
of correct identification.
The experimental results with the synthetic collections
(Figure 8(a) and Figure 8(b)) show that BI and SEQ do not
make any substantial performance enhancement, unlike the
observation from WIDE (Figure 6). We conjecture that this is
because the synthetic traffic was collected in highly controlled
networking settings.
We measured packet losses from the three data collections
by analyzing packet sequence numbers. Table XI compares
the three datasets with respect to the fraction of flows experiencing out-of-order packets. The real Internet trace (WIDE)
shows considerably greater losses. The HIKARI-2021 collection partly includes the Internet traffic as well as the
simulated traffic, which results in a higher loss rate than the
entirely synthetic UNSW-NB15 trace. This result supports our
hypothesis that the presented deep sequence models (BI and
SEQ) are beneficial for characterizing packet streams in the
wild with out-of-order packets in the measurement.

D. Experiments With Synthetic Traces
Here, we carry out experiments with the synthetic collections of UNSW-NB15 and HIKARI-2021. The experimental
setting is identical to what was used for the WIDE collection
analysis (described in Section V-A).
For UNSW-NB15, we selected three classes of Fuzzers,
Exploits, and Unlabeled for evaluating our identification

E. Experiments With QUIC Traffic Dataset
QUIC is a transport protocol built on top of UDP, designed
to improve performance for HTTPS traffic [66]. With features
like encryption and low latency, this protocol has quickly
gained popularity, supporting a variety of applications such
as web browsers (Chrome) and video streaming services

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

TABLE XII
QUIC T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE
(F1 S CORE )

(YouTube) [67], [68]. The rapid adoption of QUIC led to
increased share in the Internet traffic and over 8% of websites
worldwide are QUIC-capable as of November 2024 [69]. However, this growing adoption also raises security concerns, as the
relatively new protocol may still have vulnerabilities, including
susceptibility to DoS attacks on QUIC-enabled servers [70]. In
this study, we evaluate our deep sequence models with QUIC
traffic to assess the applicability of our proposed method.
The CESNET-QUIC22 dataset [34] provides a month-long
QUIC traffic captured from Internet backbone links. The
dataset includes bidirectional connection data, featuring packet
sequence information (such as packet sizes, directions, and
inter-packet times) for the first 30 packets, along with aggregated connection statistics (including duration, transmitted
bytes and packets, and packet histograms). The dataset defines
18 class labels, and we chose four majority classes (Streaming,
Social, Advertising, and Search) having the highest number of
data instances for our experiments.
Table XII compares the performance of models for QUIC
traffic classification when k = 20 and k = 30. For evaluation,
we employed the model configuration that had performed the
best in Section V-B without extra optimizations. Additionally,
we excluded the use of meta information (connection statistics), relying solely on the packet size and inter-packet time
features. The results indicate that the proposed models (BI and
SEQ) outperform the baseline models (MLP and FWD) in both
settings. The FWD model shows poor performance, collapsing
to 0.1, which is consistent with previous experiments. Our
proposed models show at least a 5% improvement, with no
significant difference observed between BI and SEQ.
F. Discussion
Now, we discuss some interesting observations from our
experiments with the WIDE dataset. In Figure 6, we observed
that increasing the number of packets (k ≥ 10) does not
improve any identification performance, which is somewhat
counter-intuitive since monitoring more packets could give further information about the communication. Regarding this, we
can get some clues from previous studies. A pioneering study
in [35] claims that the first four packets of a TCP connection
would be sufficient to characterize network applications, and
the authors observed that monitoring more than four packets
even results in the degradation of identification performance.
A recent study in [20] also concludes that keeping track of
more packets does not help the prediction accuracy for traffic
classification, in which k ranged between 30 and 60.
Another interesting observation in our evaluation is the
impact of training samples on identification performance. As

4373

TABLE XIII
F1 S CORE W ITH D IFFERENT DATASET C ONFIGURATIONS (k=5):1,000
S AMPLES FOR S ET 1 & S ET 3 AND 10,000 FOR S ET 2 & S ET 4

described, we randomly sampled min(10000, x) number of
instances from each class pool for the evaluation (including
200 for validation and 100 for testing), where x is the actual
size of the pool. In Table XIII, we organize four different
sets for evaluation: Set1 has 1,000 instances sampled and Set2
10,000 instances sampled from the first week, while Set3 has
1,000 samples and Set4 10,000 samples from the whole month.
With the week-long datasets (Set1 and Set2), we can clearly
see the benefit of the increased training set size. In contrast, the
month-long setting does not give any progress even with the
larger dataset. One possible explanation is that using 10,000
instances would not be enough to capture the distribution
of data from the month-long pool, while that same number
would suffice for the relatively small week-long pool. This
would also be a reason why Set2 shows the better performance
than Set4. However, if we have to draw a less number of
instances (i.e., 1,000 samples for Set1 and Set3), the result
shows that sampling from the whole month performs better;
presumably, it would be beneficial to choose samples from the
larger (month-long) pool if we have to choose only a small
number of instances. We observed almost the same patterns
from different BI and SEQ configurations. In fact, this study
limits the number of samples to 10,000 to keep computational
complexity manageable but evaluating the models with an
extensive set of data samples from a longer-term capture would
be interesting to better understand the impact of data quantity
and quality.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper presented the design and evaluation of deep
sequence models designed for effective packet stream analysis
to achieve accurate identification of network attacks in a timely
manner. With the rationale of network dynamics (causing
out-of-order packet sequences) and class imbalance (resulting
in learning inconsistent representations), we designed two
deep sequence models based on a bidirectional structure
(for the former concern) and a pre-training-enabled Seq2Seq
structure (for the latter concern). To develop and evaluate
the deep sequence models, we construct packet-level datasets
from the network traffic traces collected from the Internet
backbone links and simulated networking environments. Our
experimental results support the feasibility of the presented
deep sequence models, showing up to 94.8% (F1 score) for
identifying three different attack types (with one background
traffic class) from the Internet traffic collection containing a
substantial fraction of network flows that experienced out-oforder delivery. The results from the three data collections also
suggest that monitoring the first five packets (k = 5) would
suffice, enabling timely responses against network threats
while the connection is still active and in progress.

4374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

There are several directions for further investigations. We
examined the two deep sequence models independently, but
ultimately the models would be combined to expect a synergistic benefit, which will be the next step of this study.
Data quantity would be a concern for analyzing the data
collected over an extended period (e.g., several years). Since
the learning complexity is proportionate to data quantity,
discovering a more represented group of data samples would
be interesting and statistical approaches could be investigated
for that purpose. In this study, we considered the number of
packets as the criterion for early attack identification. Another
criterion would be a time constraint (e.g., making a decision
within t seconds), and it will be interesting to explore neural
sequence structures to support such an alternative criterion.
Additionally, we plan to apply the deep sequence approach for
conventional traffic classification and application identification
to see its feasibility in other network monitoring tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive
feedback. This work was supported in part by the East Texas
A&M University Presidential GAR Initiative program.
R EFERENCES
[1]

Q. Zou, A. Singhal, X. Sun, and P. Liu, “Deep learning for detecting
network attacks: An end-to-end approach,” in Proc. IFIP Conf. Data
Appl. Secur. Priv. (DBSec), 2021, pp. 221–234.
[2] A. Oprea, Z. Li, R. Norris, and K. Bowers, “MADE: Security analytics
for enterprise threat detection,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
Conf., Dec. 2018, pp. 124–136.
[3] N. Moustafa, J. Hu, and J. Slay, “A holistic review of network anomaly
detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 128, pp. 33–55, Feb. 2019.
[4] G. Fernandes, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, L. F. Carvalho, J. F. Al-Muhtadi,
and M. L. Proença, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly
detection,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 447–489, Mar. 2019.
[5] L. Dhanabal and S. Shantharajah, “A study on NSL-KDD dataset
for intrusion detection system based on classification algorithms,” Int.
J. Adv. Res. Comput. Commun. Eng., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 446–452, 2015.
[6] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[7] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[8] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Dec. 2019.
[9] H. X. Nguyen and M. Roughan, “Rigorous statistical analysis of
internet loss measurements,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 734–745, Jun. 2013.
[10] A. El-Atawy, Q. Duan, and E. Al-Shaer, “A novel class of robust covert
channels using out-of-order packets,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 116–129, Mar. 2017.
[11] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar,
“Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network
traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019.
[12] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Tiki-taka: Attacking and
defending deep learning-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop, Nov. 2020,
pp. 27–39.
[13] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. AlNemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent
intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41525–41550,
2019.

[14] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF
beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and
classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic
classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 103000.
[15] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based
on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, Aug. 2023, Art.
no. 103300.
[16] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello,
“Programmable switches for in-networking classification,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[17] S. U. Jafri, S. Rao, V. Shrivastav, and M. Tawarmalani, “Leo: Online
ML-based traffic classification at multi-terabit line rate,” in Proc.
USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Impl. (NSDI), 2024, pp. 1573–1591.
[18] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, F. Zhang, and B. Chen, “RIDS: Towards
advanced IDS via RNN model and programmable switches co-designed
approaches,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May
2024, pp. 591–600.
[19] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2Img: A sequence-to-image
based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec.
2017, pp. 1271–1276.
[20] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Multitask learning for network traffic
classification,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.
(ICCCN), 2020, pp. 1–9.
[21] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
just a few labels: A semisupervised approach using sampled packets,”
in Proc. Ind. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2019, pp. 28–42.
[22] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[23] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet
representation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 3546–3554.
[24] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari,
“Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton.
Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf.
Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
(DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), 2020, pp. 63–70.
[25] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[26] T. Ahmad, D. Truscan, J. Vain, and I. Porres, “Early detection of network
attacks using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Test.,
Verification Validation Workshops (ICSTW), Apr. 2022, pp. 30–39.
[27] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Sustaining the high performance of AI-based
network traffic classification models,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 816–827, Apr. 2023.
[28] D. A. Bierbrauer, M. J. De Lucia, K. Reddy, P. Maxwell, and N. D. Bastian, “Transfer learning for raw network traffic detection,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 211, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 118641.
[29] D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, P. Voria, M. De Ieso, and
A. Pescapè, “Few-shot class-incremental learning for network intrusion
detection systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 6736–6757,
2024.
[30] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[31] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
“Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[32] H. Seo and M. Yoon, “Generative intrusion detection and prevention on
data stream,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023,
pp. 4319–4335.
[33] A. Parmisano, S. Garcia, and M. J. Erquiaga, “A labeled dataset
with malicious and benign IoT network traffic (1.0.0),” Zenodo, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4743746
[34] J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek, T. Čejka, A. Lukačovič, and P. Šiška,
“CESNET-QUIC22: A large one-month QUIC network traffic dataset
from backbone lines,” Data Brief, vol. 46, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 108888.
[35] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application
identification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol.
(CoNEXT), 2006, pp. 1–12.

KIM et al.: EARLY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION IN THE WILD

[36] I. Guarino, G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, and
A. Pescapé, “On the use of machine learning approaches for the early
classification in network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Meas. Netw. (M&N), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[37] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
“Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learning,”
J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 83, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103762.
[38] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[39] Y. Liu and Y.-F. Wu, “Early detection of fake news on social media
through propagation path classification with recurrent and convolutional
networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32, no. 1, 2018,
pp. 354–361.
[40] X. Yang, Y. Lyu, T. Tian, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, and X. Zhang, “Rumor detection
on social media with graph structured adversarial learning,” in Proc. 29th
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2020, pp. 1417–1423.
[41] T. Bian et al., “Rumor detection on social media with bi-directional
graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34,
2020, pp. 549–556.
[42] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “SAFE: A neural survival analysis
model for fraud early detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1278–1285.
[43] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets
for fraud detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 33,
2019, pp. 1286–1293. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
AAAI/article/view/3924
[44] M. Sun, X. Zhang, J. Zheng, and G. Ma, “DDGCN: Dual dynamic graph
convolutional networks for rumor detection on social media,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), vol. 36, 2022, pp. 4611–4619.
[45] Q. Ying, X. Hu, Y. Zhou, Z. Qian, D. Zeng, and S. Ge, “Bootstrapping
multi-view representations for fake news detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2022, pp. 5384–5392.
[46] B. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Sun, S. Ghosh, and K. Ng, “Early prediction of
diabetes complications from electronic health records: A multi-task
survival analysis approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
vol. 32, 2018, pp. 101–108.
[47] M. Ahmed, A. Naser Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60,
pp. 19–31, Jan. 2016.
[48] R. Fontugne, P. Borgnat, P. Abry, and K. Fukuda, “MAWILab: Combining diverse anomaly detectors for automated anomaly labeling and
performance benchmarking,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp.
Technol., Nov. 2010, pp. 1–12.
[49] J. Mazel, R. Fontugne, and K. Fukuda, “A taxonomy of anomalies
in backbone network traffic,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile
Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Aug. 2014, pp. 30–36.
[50] A. Ferriyan, A. H. Thamrin, K. Takeda, and J. Murai, “Generating
network intrusion detection dataset based on real and encrypted synthetic
attack traffic,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 17, p. 7868, Aug. 2021.
[51] J. Kim, C. Sim, and J. Choi, “Generating labeled flow data from MAWILab traces for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. ACM Workshop
Syst. Netw. Telemetry Anal., Jun. 2019, pp. 45–48.
[52] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning internal
representations by error propagation,” in Parallel Distributed Processing,
Volume 1: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations.
The MIT Press, Jul. 1986. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7551/
mitpress/5236.003.0012
[53] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term dependencies
with gradient descent is difficult,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 157–166, Mar. 1994.
[54] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[55] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN
encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc.
Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), 2014,
pp. 1724–1734.
[56] D. Britz, A. Goldie, M.-T. Luong, and Q. Le, “Massive exploration
of neural machine translation architectures,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2017, pp. 1442–1451.
[57] M. Camelo, P. Soto, and S. Latré, “A general approach for traffic
classification in wireless networks using deep learning,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5044–5063, Dec. 2022.
[58] Z. C. Lipton, D. C. Kale, and R. C. Wetzel, “Directly modeling missing
data in sequences with RNNs: Improved classification of clinical time
series,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Healthc. Conf., 2016, pp. 253–270.

4375

[59] O. Vinyals, S. Bengio, and M. Kudlur, “Order matters: Sequence to
sequence for sets,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., May 2016,
pp. 1–11.
[60] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, and A. S. Namin, “The performance of
LSTM and BiLSTM in forecasting time series,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Big Data, Dec. 2019, pp. 3285–3292.
[61] R. L. Abduljabbar, H. Dia, and P.-W. Tsai, “Development and evaluation of bidirectional LSTM freeway traffic forecasting models using
simulation data,” Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 1, p. 23899, Dec. 2021.
[62] X. Lu, L. Yuan, R. Li, Z. Xing, N. Yao, and Y. Yu, “An improved
bi-LSTM-based missing value imputation approach for pregnancy examination data,” Algorithms, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 12, Dec. 2022.
[63] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural
networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681,
Nov. 1997.
[64] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process., May 2013, pp. 6645–6649.
[65] H. Liu, J. Z. HaoChen, A. Gaidon, and T. Ma, “Self-supervised learning is more robust to dataset imbalance,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent. (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–24.
[66] A. Langley et al., “The QUIC transport protocol: Design and internetscale deployment,” in Proc. Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data
Commun. (SIGCOMM), 2017, pp. 183–196.
[67] T. Shreedhar, R. Panda, S. Podanev, and V. Bajpai, “Evaluating QUIC
performance over web, cloud storage, and video workloads,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1366–1381, Jun. 2022,
doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2021.3134562.
[68] A. Bujari, C. E. Palazzi, G. Quadrio, and D. Ronzani, “Emerging
interactive applications over QUIC,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Annu. Consum.
Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[69] Usage Statistics of QUIC for Websites. Accessed: Nov. 5, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://w3techs.com/technologies/details/ce-quic
[70] E. Chatzoglou, V. Kouliaridis, G. Karopoulos, and G. Kambourakis,
“Revisiting QUIC attacks: A comprehensive review on QUIC security
and a hands-on study,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 347–365,
Apr. 2023.

Minji Kim received the master’s degree in computer
science from the Computer Science Department,
East Texas A&M University. Her research interests include network traffic analytics, deep sequence
models, healthcare informatics, time series analysis,
and machine learning.

Dongeun Lee received the B.S. degree in computer
science and engineering and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering and computer science from
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea,
in 2006 and 2014, respectively. He was a Computer Systems Engineer with the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory and also jointly affiliated as a
Post-Doctoral Research Associate with the School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ulsan
National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan,
South Korea. He joined the Department of Computer
Science, East Texas A&M University, in 2016, where he is currently an
Associate Professor. His current research interests include big data analytics
for time-series data and scientific machine learning.

4376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Kookjin Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from Seoul National University and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
Maryland, College Park. He is currently an Assistant
Professor with the Computer Science Department,
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence,
Arizona State University. Before joining ASU, he
was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Sandia National Laboratories. He received the NSF
CAREER Award in 2024.

Sangman Lee received the master’s degree in
mathematical data science from Korea University,
Sejong-si. He is currently an Industry-Academia
Collaboration Professor in AI cyber security at
Korea University. He works as the CEO of Seqrypton and the Director of the Korea Institute of
Information Security & Cryptography. His research
interests include intrusion detection systems, network security, cryptography, and quantum circuit
optimization.

Doowon Kim (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Maryland in 2020. He
is currently an Assistant Professor in electrical engineering and computer science with the University
of Tennessee, Knoxville. He conducts research on
computer and web security, with particular expertise in phishing attacks and network threats. His
contributions to cybersecurity have been recognized
through the NSF CAREER Award in 2025, the ACM
CCS Distinguished Paper Award in 2025, and the
NSA Best Scientific Cybersecurity Paper Award in
2017.

Jinpyo Kim received the master’s degree in computer science from the Computer Science Department, East Texas A&M University. His research
interests include network traffic analytics, temporal
point processes, neural instantiation of stochastic
methods, and machine learning.

Jinoh Kim (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. He is
currently a Professor in computer science with East
Texas A&M University, an Affiliate Faculty Scientist
with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
(LBNL), and an Executive Member of the Silicon
Valley Cybersecurity Institute (SVCSI). His
research spans distributed systems, network security,
IoT/CPS, toward intelligent, resilient, and autonomic
systems using AI/ML methodologies. He is a
member of ACM.