706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Effective Sample Generation for Industrial
Control Systems: A GAN-Based Approach
Zhongyuan Qin , Yuxuan Liu, Tiantian Wang, Liquan Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yubo Song

Abstract—In industrial control systems (ICSs), safeguarding system security is vital, and intrusion detection
is an effective protective measure. In real-world ICS environments, however, the training data for intrusion-detection
models are dominated by normal traffic, with very few abnormal samples. This scarcity prevents the model from
fully learning abnormal characteristics, thereby limiting
anomaly-detection performance. ICS traffic is also noisy
and often captured incompletely, which is especially problematic because it possesses strong temporal dependencies. Moreover, ICS operations tend to be highly regular
and follow a strict logical order, causing data to cluster densely in certain regions while edge regions remain
sparsely populated—an imbalance that easily leads to misclassification. To tackle data imbalance, missing temporal features, and edge-sample scarcity, we propose the
DualCGAN-AE approach. It employs two conditional generative adversarial networks to perform dynamic learning on
global and edge features and to enrich samples with temporal information; a multimodel discriminator is incorporated to enhance training stability. We validated the method
on two datasets, assessing both the quality of the generated samples and their impact on intrusion detection
performance. Experimental results show that the samples
produced by DualCGAN-AE significantly boost detection
accuracy.
Index Terms—Edge distribution, generative adversarial
network (GAN), industrial control system (ICS), intrusion
detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITH the ongoing development of industrial control systems (ICSs), their scale and complexity are continuously
increasing, as seen in natural gas plants, power plants, and
water treatment facilities. Within these systems, devices, such
as sensors, follow instructions from upper level components,
such as programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and remote terminal units. They carry out periodic operations based on logical
patterns and transmit control commands via network traffic to
the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) control

W

Received 29 May 2025; revised 8 July 2025; accepted 22 August
2025. Date of publication 10 October 2025; date of current version
5 February 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U22B2026. Paper no. TII-253556. (Corresponding author: Zhongyuan Qin.)
The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211102, China (e-mail:
zyqin@seu.edu.cn; 220224934@seu.edu.cn; 220235240@seu.edu.cn;
lqchen@seu.edu.cn; songyubo@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3609080

center for monitoring and management. This comprehensive
framework enables effective monitoring of industrial processes,
facilitating timely anomaly detection [1]. However, as ICS advances, malicious attacks on sensors or higher level machines
are also on the rise. Consequently, real-time intrusion detection
for time-series traffic data has become a research priority, and
improving detection accuracy by leveraging the temporal nature
of industrial traffic data remains a long-term challenge [2].
At present, numerous remarkable research outcomes exist in
the realm of ICS intrusion detection, with machine learning and
deep learning approaches being predominant. These techniques
analyze ICS traffic, compare key fields in normal traffic, extract
crucial semantic features from ICS traffic, and employ these
features for anomaly detection [3]. Thanks to their capacity
for autonomous learning and enhancement, these methods have
somewhat reduced the costs associated with feature selection.
As a result, recent research has predominantly focused on this
area.
However, as new attack types continue to emerge, legacy
models gradually lose their effectiveness and struggle to counter
these novel threats. Consequently, leveraging unsupervised
learning for ICS intrusion detection is vital for defending against
an increasingly diverse array of attacks [4]. Yet, because attack
samples are scarce, the training data consist almost entirely
of normal traffic, resulting in severe class imbalance. This
imbalance readily leads to overfitting during model training,
thereby degrading the model’s decision accuracy. Moreover, the
ICS environment is inherently noisy, often corrupting traffic
data and even causing partial data loss—situations to which
the logic-driven operations of ICS are especially sensitive [5].
Therefore, completing missing traffic data and mitigating the
impact of heavy noise on model judgments are crucial for
improving training precision, with data repair and augmentation
playing key roles in this process.
To address the issues in industrial traffic sample generation,
this article proposes the DualCGAN-AE sample generation
approach, with specific contributions as follows.
1) We propose an effective sample generation approach that
employs two generative adversarial networks (GANs)
in an interactive training scheme. The first GAN learns
the overall data distribution; its low-scoring samples are
passed to the second GAN as learning targets. This allows
the second GAN to focus on the data’s edge-distribution
characteristics and generate samples with those properties, thereby mitigating the long-tail distribution problem
in the dataset.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH

2) To enhance training stability and cope with potential temporal data loss in industrial traffic samples, we introduce
a time interval matrix (TIM) to preserve the completeness
of temporal features. In addition, we adopt a multimodel
discriminator: the single discriminator score is replaced
with the weighted average of multiple model scores,
which stabilizes the discriminator’s training process.
3) To resolve the issue of label-containing sample generation
and enable category-specific sample generation, modify
the original GAN network to a conditional GAN (CGAN).
Introduce label condition information to achieve controllable and targeted data generation, while still meeting
the training requirements of unsupervised learning for
labeled data.
4) Experiment on two different datasets and meticulously
evaluate the generated samples. Assess our proposal in
terms of data quality and its impact on intrusion detection
performance.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
reviews related work. Section III details our method. Section
IV presents results and discussion. Finally, Section V concludes
this article.
II. RELATED WORKS
In recent years, research on addressing sample data imbalance has fallen into two categories: traditional artificial data
generation techniques and GAN-based data augmentation methods. Traditional artificial data generation techniques rebalance
datasets by increasing the number of minority class samples.
Common approaches, such as random oversampling and the synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) algorithm,
raise the minority class’s share by duplicating or synthetically
creating samples. Oversampling, however, can introduce overfitting, whereas undersampling risks discarding critical information. GAN-based data-augmentation methods use generative
models to create new minority-class samples from random noise,
producing more diverse data that better match the original
distribution. CGANs incorporate auxiliary information, such as
class labels during generation, yielding samples that are both
more structured and more varied. These GAN-based approaches
have proven highly effective for remedying sample imbalance,
particularly with complex data types, such as images and text.
SMOTE is a common sample generation solution that alleviates data imbalance to some extent. Dablain et al. [6] proposed
DeepSMOTE, a method specifically designed for deep learning
models. It preserves the attributes of original images during processing and generates high-quality artificial images. Composed
of an encoder or decoder framework, SMOTE-based oversampling, and a penalty-enhanced loss function, DeepSMOTE has
the advantage of not requiring a discriminator, and the generated
images are information-rich and suitable for visual inspection.
Maldonado et al. [7] introduced a SMOTE-like method using
weighted Minkowski distance to define the neighborhood of
each minority-class sample. This approach better defines neighborhoods by prioritizing features relevant to the classification
task and performs feature selection by discarding attributes

707

with weights below a threshold, addressing class overlap and
centrality issues without increasing methodological complexity. Bao and Yang [8] proposed methods to tackle this issue.
They pointed out that the imbalanced classification problem is
a significant challenge in neural networks and machine learning. Although SMOTE is widely used to address this issue, it
has a major limitation: noisy samples may be involved in the
sample-synthesis process, reducing the rationality of newly synthesized samples and degrading network classification performance. Arafa et al. [9] presented RN-SMOTE. In data balancing
research, random over-sampling (ROS), random under-sampling
(RUS), and SMOTE [10], [11], [12] remain primary methods.
RN-SMOTE introduces noisy oversampling in the minority
class, uses DBSCAN for noise detection and removal, combines
the processed instances with original data, and then applies
SMOTE again before introducing the dataset to the underlying
classifier, thereby improving evaluation performance metrics.
Combining SMOTE with various networks is an effective way
to enhance its performance. For example, Liaw et al. [13] proposed the H-SMOTE-FAM model, which integrates histograms,
SMOTE, and fuzzy ARTMAP (FAM) networks. This model first
organizes minority-class samples into histogram bins, calculates
the target number of samples for each bin, and then generates
synthetic samples within each bin using SMOTE. This systematic approach addresses SMOTE’s limitations in handling
intraclass imbalance and small disjunctive samples. The FAM
network then processes the increased data volume through
incremental learning to improve classification performance.
Experimental results show that H-SMOTE-FAM outperforms
other SMOTE variants and GAN-based oversampling methods.
Similarly, Liu et al. [14] combined SMOTE with a deep twin
multihead self-attention network to develop a feature-level data
augmentation method. This method uses the network structure to
map original data to a feature space with better class separability
and then generates samples in this space using SMOTE. This
approach has demonstrated good performance on multiple public datasets. In summary, by addressing SMOTE’s limitations
and improving data augmentation, combining it with different
networks can enhance its performance, and these combined
methods have shown promising results in various applications.
In recent years, the advancements in GANs have been remarkable, leading to significant achievements in fields, such as
natural language processing and image generation. Using GANs
for data generation to enhance data quality and address data
imbalance issues has also become one of the current research
priorities. For example, Yuan et al. [15] proposed the B-GAN
method for intrusion detection systems in ICS. This method
captures data features through long short-term memory (LSTM)
networks and uses GANs to generate high-quality abnormal
samples, effectively tackling data imbalance. Chen et al. [16]
introduced the DAGAN method, which constructs a dual GAN
model to learn the underlying data distribution without abnormal
samples. By optimizing abnormal scores based on the learned
normal and marginal distributions, this approach reduces the
misjudgment of marginal samples as outliers. In summary,
these GAN-based methods have demonstrated great potential
in solving data imbalance problems, particularly in generating

708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

high-quality and diverse samples to enhance model performance
in tasks such as intrusion detection.
Meslet-Millet et al. [17] proposed NeCSTGen, a novel architecture based on variational autoencoders (VAEs) and recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) for generating diverse network traffic. This architecture can generate packets, flows, aggregates,
and external data without protocol or dynamic knowledge. Its
core methods include: using VAE for feature vector embedding
of packets, Gaussian mixture models for similarity identification and clustering, and RNN with transition matrices for
flow and aggregate generation. Li et al. [18] introduced two
models, DCCSO-Res-BIGRU and GFDA-WGAN. DCCSORes-BIGRU extracts features through attribute core matrices
and their associative relationships, while GFDA-WGAN detects
imbalanced attack traffic using a conditional Wasserstein generative adversarial network (WGAN) to generate pseudosample
features of unseen classes, optimized by the GFDA strategy.
Geng et al. [19] proposed a few-shot anomaly-driven generation
method, which leverages only a small number of real anomaly
samples to guide a diffusion model in generating realistic and
diverse anomalies, thereby facilitating the training of anomaly
detection models. Specifically, it learns the anomaly distribution
from limited real anomalies, injects the learned knowledge into
an embedding vector, and then uses this vector together with a
given bounding box to guide the diffusion model in generating
realistic and diverse anomalies.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
This section describes the methodology of the GAN model.
By modifying the original GAN structure, introducing variant
GAN models, and enhancing training stability and completeness, the model better adapts to training tasks with labeled data.
It addresses issues, such as long-tail distribution and temporal
data loss in industrial control traffic data, improving training effectiveness [20], sample diversity, and the generalization ability
for industrial control traffic sample generation . The proposal is
presented in the following three sections. Section III-A shows
an overview of the overall architecture. Section III-B gives an
introduction to the enhanced CGAN and stability optimization
strategies. Section III-C discusses design principles and strategies of the DualCGAN-AE model.
A. Architecture of Our Scheme
To generate high-quality samples for ICS traffic, we optimize
the model design using a CGAN-based approach, considering
the differences between industrial and general traffic. The specific challenges are as follows.
1) Imbalanced Data Distribution: ICS traffic contains a high
proportion of normal samples and few abnormal samples,
a characteristic not reflected in public datasets. This leads
to poor performance of models trained on public data in
real ICS scenarios. The model must accurately generate
abnormal samples from a large number of normal samples.
2) Gaussian Distribution of Data: Devices, such as PLCs
in ICS, operate according to logical rules, causing data

to repeat and concentrate in specific regions, with sparse
samples in marginal areas. This makes model training in
marginal regions error-prone, necessitating supplementary data in these areas to improve accuracy.
3) Temporal Characteristics and Data Integrity: ICS traffic
is highly temporal, but the complex ICS environment
introduces high-noise operational data, inevitably causing
traffic data loss and disrupting temporal integrity. Therefore, missing temporal traffic data must be supplemented
to ensure feature completeness.
To address these issues, we propose the DualCGAN-AE
model for high-quality sample generation. As shown in Fig. 1,
the model consists of an encoder, a generator, and a discriminator. Generator: It uses a TIM to supplement missing temporal
features and modifies the traditional GAN to a CGAN to handle insufficient labeled samples. Discriminator: It employs a
multimodel weighted averaging mechanism to enhance training stability. Dual CGAN structure: It replaces single CGAN
training to learn data features of both concentrated and marginal
distributions, mitigating the long-tail distribution problem.
In DualCGAN-AE, the encoder of the autoencoder (AE)
is shared by two CGAN models to ensure consistent lowdimensional latent representations of input noise and labels [21].
This design avoids initialization differences, provides rich features for the generator, and facilitates rapid learning of data distributions to improve generation quality. The encoder’s effective
learning of data representations helps the generator quickly capture data distributions, enhancing generation performance and
alleviating mode collapse. By deeply analyzing the differences
between ICS traffic and general traffic, we optimize the model
design to significantly improve sample generation quality.
B. Enhanced CGAN and Stability Optimization Strategy
1) CGAN Model: When training generators and discriminators
using traditional GAN models, the primary reason for generating
low-quality fake data is the lack of effective information. To address this issue, CGANs [22], [23] have been proposed. CGANs
assist adversarial training by adding extra effective information
(such as original data labels and different data modes) to the
generator or discriminator. Specifically, the model inputs real
labels to both the generator and the discriminator, making the
discriminator’s output a conditional probability based on real
labels and ensuring that the fake samples generated by the
generator “know” their corresponding real labels [24]. The loss
function of CGANs is improved based on the original GAN, as
shown in the following equation:
minG maxD V  (D, G)
= Ex∼Pdata(x) [log(D(x|y))]
+ Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D(G(z|y)))].

(1)

In this way, CGANs use original data labels as conditional
inputs to influence the generator and discriminator. This not
only addresses the issue of insufficient input data in labeled
imbalanced datasets but also provides insights for the architecture proposed in this article for training marginal distribution

QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH

Fig. 1.

709

DualCGAN-AE model structure.

data using dual GANs. In subsequent related research, the loss
function of CGANs for marginal distribution training will be
adjusted according to modified training objectives. In summary,
modifying traditional GAN models into label-embedded CGAN
models can alleviate data imbalance in industrial control traffic
to some extent, but further enhancement of CGAN models is still
needed to ensure training stability and generate higher quality
data.
2) Multimodel Discriminator: To enhance the stability of
CGAN training and avoid discriminator fitting issues caused
by model differences, a multimodel discriminator is adopted instead of the traditional single-model discriminator. Specifically,
three discriminator models—multilayer perceptron, gate recurrent unit (GRU), and LSTM—are used to capture data features
from different perspectives through their complementarity and
diversity, thereby improving overall discriminative capability.
Considering the temporal characteristics of industrial control
traffic data, GRU and LSTM are selected as discriminator models. These models are trained using real and generated samples
to score the data, and the final discriminative result is determined
by the weighted average of the three models’ scores, enhancing
judgment accuracy and reducing misjudgment.
During training, higher weights (40% each) are assigned to the
temporal feature-capturing discriminators (GRU and LSTM),
with the multilayer perceptron accounting for the remaining
20%. This strategy improves the feedback accuracy of discriminator training, enhances its generalization ability, and motivates
the generator to produce traffic sample data with richer features.
The overall discriminator loss function is shown in the following
equation:
Lvote =

N


w i Li .

(2)

i=1

Here, Li denotes the loss of the ith discriminator model, and
wi represents its corresponding weight. Although each GAN

contains three distinct discriminator models, they collectively
form a traditional “generator-discriminator” structure. This
improved architecture stabilizes the training process of the
discriminators, diversifies the samples output by the generator,
and thus meets the task objectives. Fig. 2 compares the
multimodel discriminator structure used in this article with the
traditional structure.
3) Time Interval Matrix: This article proposes the TIM to
enhance model training. Before constructing TIM, it is crucial
to ensure that the dataset contains time feature values suitable
for timestamps. For each time-series data point denoted as st,
we first check whether the time intervals between samples in the
dataset are regular. For each missing value, we calculate the time
difference between the two nearest observations; if the missing
value is at the start or end of the sequence (with no preceding
or succeeding observations), we use the minimum time interval
in the dataset as the default. Based on these calculated time
differences, we construct a matrix X with the same shape as the
original time-series data, where each element xdt in matrix X
represents the time interval corresponding to a specific timestamp.
During model training, TIM is incorporated as part of the
input to the generator, helping the model better capture the
temporal characteristics of the data and improve its predictive
and generalization capabilities for time-series data. As shown in
Fig. 3, TIM adjusts the generator’s sample-generation ability by
serving as part of its input. In the final DualAE-CGAN model,
noise and label attributes are part of a common embedding, while
TIM exists independently, acting solely as an imputation matrix
for capturing time dependencies.
C. DualCGAN-AE Scheme Introduction
Based on the traditional GAN, this article introduces a second
GAN model dedicated to learning marginal distribution data.
By analyzing the discriminator scores from the original GAN,

710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 2.

Multimodel discriminator compared with traditional discriminator.

Fig. 3.

TIM structure.

marginal and concentrated data in the samples are distinguished.
After each training round, the discriminator scores all samples,
with the scores reflecting the type of data distribution. For
labeled samples, the traditional GAN is switched to a CGAN
model. The proposed DualCGAN model consists of two CGANs
with different training objectives:
The first CGAN (CGAN1) serves as the core model, learning
features from the entire dataset through preset multiple training
rounds. After each round, CGAN1 scores the data, and its results
influence the second CGAN responsible for processing marginal
data. Although CGAN1 cannot accurately learn marginal data
features, its training process still positively impacts the final
generated data due to the majority of the data being concentrated.
The discriminator loss function of CGAN1 remains unchanged,
as shown in the following equation:
= − Ex∼Pdata(x) [log(D1 (x))]
LCGAN1
D
− Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D1 (G1 (z)))].

(3)

The second CGAN (CGAN2) is crucial for addressing
CGAN1’s limitation in learning marginal sample features. During training, CGAN1 uses a training set of size N. After each
training round, its discriminator scores the N samples and ranks
them in ascending order. Samples with the lowest scores are
selected as marginal distribution samples according to a critical
ratio, and their average score x̂ becomes the target score for
CGAN2. Through alternating training of CGAN1 and CGAN2,
dynamic learning of central and marginal distribution features
is achieved. The proportion of marginal distribution samples is
set based on industrial control traffic distribution—similar to a
Gaussian distribution, which is nonuniform due to production
environment noise. The Gaussian distribution formula is shown
in the following equation:
g (x) =

1 x−μ 2
1
√ e2( σ ) .
σ 2π

(4)

The mean is μ, and the variance is σ 2 . The distribution
probability within the interval [μ − 3σ, μ + 3σ] is 99.7%, and

QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH

within [μ − 2σ, μ + 2σ], it is 95.4%. When selecting data, two
tradeoffs are considered: avoiding insufficient data points that
lead to incomplete marginal distribution learning, and preventing excessive data from including central distribution samples,
which could affect CGAN2 training. Therefore, in the experiment, the 95.4% probability value corresponding to the marginal
distribution is used as the basis—after each CGAN1 training
round, all sample scores are sorted in ascending order, and the
lowest 4.6% are designated as marginal samples. Their average
score, x̂, serves as the target score for CGAN2.
In traditional GAN discriminator training, scores range from
0 to 1, where values closer to 1 indicate more realistic samples.
However, in this article, both the target score and loss function
for CGAN2 training are adjusted: samples closer to the target
score x̂ are more likely to be identified as marginal distribution
samples. Consequently, the generative adversarial loss in the
generator’s loss function is adjusted as shown in (5), while the
discriminator’s loss function is presented in (6)
= Ex∼Pdata [
x − D2 (G2 (z))]
LCGAN2
adv

(5)

LCGAN2
= − Ex∼Pdata(x) [log D2 (x)]
D
x − D2 (G2 (z)))].
− Ez∼Pz(z) [log (

(6)

In the DualCGAN-AE model, the encoder of the AE serves
as a shared module for the two CGAN models, ensuring that
input noise and labels produce consistent low-dimensional latent
representations. This design avoids initialization discrepancies
and provides rich features for the generator, facilitating rapid
learning of data distributions and enhancing data generation
quality. These improvements mean that the CGAN network
includes the AE encoder in addition to the generator and discriminator. Consequently, the training loss functions of the two
components have also changed: an encoder loss term is added
to the original generator loss function. As shown in (7), the
generator loss function of CGAN1 includes both encoder loss
and adversarial loss, while the generator loss function of CGAN2
differs only in the adversarial loss component
= wenc LCGAN2
+ wadv LCGAN2
LCGAN2
G
enc
adv
1
2
(GE (x) − E(x ))
N i=1
N

= wenc

(7)

+ wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log (
x − D2 (G2 (z)))].
The generator’s loss function in the DualCGAN-AE model
incorporates both encoder and adversarial losses, with wenc and
wadv representing their respective weights. The original input
data are denoted by x, and the reconstructed output data are
represented by x . After the generator produces samples, the data
are fed into the discriminator, which also experiences loss function changes. Unlike traditional single-model discriminators,
this article employs a multimodel discriminator. Consequently,
the discriminator’s loss functions for CGAN2 are modified, as
shown in (8).
In the DualCGAN-AE model, the generator’s loss function
incorporates both encoder loss and adversarial loss, where ωenc
and ωadv denote their respective weights. The original input

711

data are denoted as x, and the reconstructed output data are
represented as x . After the generator produces samples, the data
are fed into the discriminator, and the discriminator’s loss function also undergoes changes. Unlike traditional single-model
discriminators, this article employs a multimodel discriminator;
therefore, the discriminator loss function of CGAN2 is adjusted
as shown in the following equation:
= − Ex∼Pdata(x) [logD2 (x)]
LCGAN2
D
x − D2 (G2 (z)))]
− Ez∼Pz(z) [log (


N

wi Li (x)
= − Ex∼Pdata(x) log


i=1

− Ez∼Pz(z) log (
x−

N



wi Li (x) (G2 (z))) .

i=1

(8)
In this article, Di represents the ith discriminator in the
multimodel discriminator, which forms the overall discriminator
after weighted averaging. The proposed model improvements
aim to address the challenge of generating labeled industrial
control traffic samples. The specific process is as follows: noise
and label data are embedded into the encoding layer, decoded
by CGAN1’s generator, and then evaluated by the multimodel
discriminator. The resulting marginal distribution scores serve as
the target scores for CGAN2, which are then trained accordingly.
The detailed description of the algorithm process is shown in
Algorithm 1 as follows.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
Common industrial control datasets include ISCX2012, CICIDS2017, and UNSW-NB15 [25], [26], [27]. Thomas Morris
from MSU released lab-scale natural gas pipeline and water
tower datasets [28]. These datasets, preprocessed to remove
low-level transport data (e.g., TCP and MAC), focus on traffic
between ICS control layers and SCADA. They include seven
attack types targeting PLCs and normal data categories. The gas
pipeline dataset has 26 features (excluding labels), and the water
tower dataset has 23.
We chose these datasets because they reflect real industrial
control environments, with most traffic being safe, leading to
highly imbalanced label distributions. This imbalance, challenging for multiclassification, highlights the effectiveness of our
sample generation. Both datasets have eight labels: seven attack
types and one normal traffic type.
The datasets released by Thomas Morris have undergone
certain preprocessing to strip underlying transmission data in
network communications, such as TCP and MAC data. They
include seven types of attacks targeting basic Internet of Things
devices, such as PLCs: simple malicious response injection
(NMRI), complex malicious response injection (CMRI), malicious state command injection (MSCI), malicious parameter
command injection (MPCI), malicious function code injection
(MFCI), denial of service (DoS), and reconnaissance, along with
a normal data category. The datasets primarily focus on traffic

712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE I
DATASET I DISTRIBUTION

TABLE III
MODE SCORES UNDER TWO DATASETS

TABLE IV
GAUSS MMD OF VARIOUS SAMPLE GENERATION METHODS

TABLE II
DATASET II DISTRIBUTION

TABLE V
KMMD OF VARIOUS SAMPLE GENERATION METHODS ON DATASET I

data between the control layer of ICSs and SCADA. The natural
gas pipeline dataset contains 26 features excluding labels, while
the water tower dataset has 23 features excluding labels. The
specific dataset classifications are given in Tables I and II.
To verify the superiority of our proposed DualCGAN-AE
over other common sample generation methods, we selected
four popular schemes for comparison: SMOTE, traditional
GAN, WGAN-GP, and AE-GAN. These include three different
GAN models, with AE-GAN serving as an ablation study for
DualCGAN-AE.
In the experiment, 5000 samples of each type were generated.
This number balances different attack samples well and keeps
generated samples from overwhelming the real ones, ensuring
data authenticity.
1) Generate sample quality assessment: In the mode score
evaluation experiment, five different sample generation methods
were tested on two datasets. The mode score calculation involved
the inertia clustering evaluation index, which is the sum of
squared distances from all data points to their cluster centers.
Lower inertia indicates better clustering, meaning more similar
samples within each cluster.
During training, cluster size parameters were tested from
1 to 9. The proposed DualCGAN-AE and SMOTE showed
better inertia, while WGAN-GP had lower inertia but better
mode score performance. However, SMOTE’s final sample
distribution mode score was poor; Table III gives the mode
scores for all generation methods. Under the mode score criteria,
DualCGAN-AE performed best, followed by WGAN-GP, with
SMOTE performing relatively poorly.
In GAN performance evaluation, MMD measures the discrepancy between the distributions of generated and real samples by mapping them to a high-dimensional space using a
kernel function and computing the mean difference. The Gauss

Fig. 4. Gaussian KMMD of various sample generation methods on
different datasets.

MMD values for five sample generation methods across different
datasets are given in Table IV, with comparisons in Fig. 4.
The results indicate that DualCGAN-AE outperforms the other
methods in terms of MMD, followed by WGAN-GP, while
SMOTE shows relatively poorer performance.
In GAN performance evaluation, maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) measures the distribution difference between generated and real samples by mapping them to a high-dimensional
space using a kernel function and computing the mean difference. Smaller MMD values indicate more similar distributions,
meaning the generated samples are closer to the real ones. In this
study, four kernel functions were tested, but the Gaussian kernel
was chosen, as it aligns with the industrial control environment’s

QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH

713

TABLE VI
1-NN SCORES ON TWO DATASETSS

Fig. 6.

Fig. 5. Radar chart of 1-NN classification accuracy for various sample
generation methods.

noise distribution. Due to large datasets, this article uses random
sampling to approximate MMD calculation, effectively reducing
memory requirements.
For kernel maximum mean discrepancy (KMMD), it can be
used to calculate the distribution difference between generated
samples and real samples in the performance evaluation of
GANs. By using different kernel functions, the corresponding
samples are mapped into a high-dimensional space to calculate
the corresponding distribution differences for effect comparison.
It can be seen that except for the Gaussian kernel function, the
fluctuations of the linear kernel and polynomial kernel are relatively large, making them unsuitable as measurement standards.
Although the Laplacian kernel function has a smaller fluctuation range, the Gaussian kernel function is finally selected for
experimental evaluation according to the principle of choosing
kernel functions based on the noise distribution characteristics of
industrial control environments as much as possible. The kernel
MMD value experiments are carried out for five different sample
generation schemes, as given in Table V.
In addition to the above two evaluation metrics, this article
employs the 1-NN classifier as a third metric for sample generation quality. Unlike traditional classification evaluations where
higher 1-NN scores indicate better performance, for sample
generation, mixing generated and real samples and achieving a
classification accuracy close to 50% (i.e., random level) suggest
better generated sample quality. Specific results are given in
Table VI and Fig. 5 .
In addition, when the model processes rare attack types in the
experimental dataset (such as DoS and MFCI, which usually
have fewer original samples), the quality of generated samples
may be constrained by the scarcity of training data, thereby
leading to insufficient diversity or mode collapse in generated

Intrusion detection accuracy of various sample.

samples. Although DualCGAN-AE optimizes the generation
of minority-class samples through its dual-CGAN architecture,
the detection accuracy of these extremely rare categories has
only increased by approximately 8% compared with baseline
methods, which is still lower than that of common attack types.
This indicates that when the proportion of original samples in the
minority class is below a critical threshold, the model’s ability
to capture fine-grained features may be affected.
As shown in the 1-NN classification accuracy results, a score
closer to the random distribution probability of 0.5 indicates that
the generated samples are more realistic. The DualCGAN-AE
model proposed in this article achieves 1-NN scores closer to 0.5
on both datasets, outperforming the other four methods. In addition, the ablation study AE-GAN also shows good performance.
This highlights the importance of using multiple evaluation
metrics for sample quality assessment. While AE-GAN may
perform poorly in terms of Gaussian kernel mean maximum
difference, it performs well in the 1-NN classifier evaluation.
2) Impact of Generated Samples on Intrusion Detection Performance: In the experiments assessing the impact of generated
samples on intrusion detection algorithms, three machine learning models were used: SVM, random forest (RF), and decision
tree (DT). These algorithms were chosen as they are common in
intrusion detection and require minimal manual tuning, allowing
a clearer assessment of sample quality on results.
To ensure result authenticity and fairness, the original datasets
were split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio.
We generated 5000 samples for each type of label, and after
generating new samples, they were mixed with the original data
to create a new dataset for retraining the three intrusion detection
algorithms and calculating their accuracy. Experimental results
are given in Table VII. The radar chart for the result comparison
is shown in Fig. 6.
The DualCGAN-AE model enhances the performance of industrial control intrusion detection algorithms in two main ways.
First, it trains on global data by leveraging the characteristics of
CGAN to train labeled samples as unlabeled ones. This prevents
model training bias caused by insufficient samples. Second,
it can learn the long-tail distribution of samples, particularly

714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 1: DualCGAN-AE Model Training Algorithm.
Input: σ, Gaussian distribution variance;
θE , parameters of the initial encoder E;
CGAN 1 CGAN 2
, θG
, parameters of the initial generator G1
θG
and G2 ;
CGAN 1 CGAN 1 CGAN 1
θD1
, θD2
, θD3
and
CGAN 2
CGAN 2
CGAN 2
, θD2
, θD3
,
θD1
parameters of the initial discriminator D1 and D2 ;
w1 , w2 , w3 are the weight of three discriminator models,
w1 = w2 = 0.4, w3 = 0.2;
λ1 , λ2 , λ3 are the learning rates of encoder, generator and
discriminator,
λ1 = λ2 = 5 × 10−4 , λ3 = 1 × 10−3
CGAN 1 CGAN 2
WHILE θG
, θG
do not reach convergence:
/∗Step 1: Data compression processing:∗/
(x, y) = Batch(T rainingset) //Get Label
Calc AE: z = E((x, y); θE )
/∗Step 2: Training CGAN1: ∗/
CGAN 1
)
x1 = G1 (z; θG
N
1
LE = N i=1 (G1 (x) − E(x1 ))2
Update encoder parameters: θE
CGAN 1 
CGAN 1
DCGAN 1 = w1 DD1
(x1 ; θD1
)+
CGAN 1 
CGAN 1
CGAN 1 
CGAN 1
w2 DD2
(x1 ; θD2
) + w3 DD3
(x1 ; θD3
)
x̂ = average(T raniningset, 2σ)
1
= −E x∼Pdata(x) [logD1 (x)]
LCGAN
D
−Ez∼Pz(z) [log(1 − D1 (G1 (z)))]
Update discriminator parameters:
CGAN 1 CGAN 1 CGAN 1
, θD2
, θD3
θD1
N
1
1
 2
LCGAN
=
w
enc
G
i=1 (GE (x) − E(x ))
N
+wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log (1 − D1 (G1 (z)))]
CGAN 1
Update generator parameters: θG
/∗Step 3: Training CGAN2: ∗/
CGAN 2
)
x2 = G2 (z; θG

1
 2
(G
LE = N N
2 (x) − E(x2 ))
i=1
Update encoder parameters: θE
CGAN 2 
CGAN 2
DCGAN 2 = w1 DD1
(x2 ; θD1
)+
CGAN 2 
CGAN 2
CGAN 2 
CGAN 2
(x2 ; θD2
) + w3 DD3
(x2 ; θD3
)
w2 DD2
2
=
−E
[logD
(x)]
LCGAN
x∼Pdata(x)
2
D
−Ez∼Pz(z) [log(x̂ − D2 (G2 (z)))]
Update discriminator parameters:
CGAN 2 CGAN 2 CGAN 2
, θD2
, θD3
θD1
N
CGAN 2
 2
LG
= wenc N1
i=1 (GE (x) − E(x ))
+wadv Ez∼Pz(z) [log(x̂ − D2 (G2 (z)))]
CGAN 2
Update generator parameter: θG
END WHILE

TABLE VII
INTRUSION DETECTION ACCURACY OF MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS ON
DATASETS

TABLE VIII
INTRUSION DETECTION ACCURACY OF DEEP LEARNING ALGORITHMS ON
DATASET I

focusing on the easily overlooked marginal distribution features. It generates samples in proportion to ensure the generated
samples retain the long-tail distribution characteristics of industrial control traffic. This guarantees distribution consistency
in the mixed samples. As a result, when intrusion detection
algorithms are trained on these mixed samples, they learn the
distribution features of industrial control traffic more comprehensively, rather than just focusing on centrally distributed
data.
Table VIII gives the intrusion detection accuracy of deep
learning algorithms on Dataset I. From the table, we can see that
the DualCGAN-AE model demonstrates distinct performance
patterns when applied to deep learning and machine learning
methods. In terms of accuracy, the mixed samples generated by
DualCGAN-AE proposed in this article provide more positive
effects on industrial control intrusion detection algorithms compared with other schemes. The quality of samples generated by
other schemes varies: although they can improve the final results
in some detection algorithms, there are still cases where the
final results may decrease. The time-series schemes generally
show better results than the convolutional schemes, which is
related to the fact that industrial control traffic data have fewer
dimensional characteristics and the spatial extraction effect is not
good.
In summary, the DualCGAN-AE model can generate traffic data that better match the distribution characteristics of
ICSs. The generated samples are diverse and similar to real
data, effectively improving the accuracy of intrusion detection algorithms and unlocking their potential for performance
improvement.
V. CONCLUSION
In recent years, with the expansion of ICSs, cybersecurity has
become a critical issue. Both upper layer control hosts and lower
layer industrial devices rely on traffic for information transmission, where the traffic may contain malicious instructions, posing significant security risks to industrial systems. These systems
use traffic to transmit information between control devices and
industrial equipment but they may be exploited by malicious
actors to disrupt operations. To address the above problems and
improve the actual detection accuracy of intrusion detection in
ICSs, this article focuses on enhancing the application of GANs
in sample generation. We propose the DualCGAN-AE model,
which improves the model structure, training algorithm, and
intrusion detection model for ICS traffic samples. This model
strengthens training stability and the ability to learn marginal
distribution data. Experiments conducted on two datasets, evaluating both data quality and impacts on intrusion detection

QIN et al.: EFFECTIVE SAMPLE GENERATION FOR INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS: A GAN-BASED APPROACH

performance, demonstrate that the proposed DualCGAN-AE
solution significantly improves detection accuracy and has the
potential for further performance enhancements.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Md Hossain et al., “Deep learning and ensemble methods for anomaly
detection in ICS security,” Int. J. Inf. Tecnol., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1761–1775,
Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s41870-024-02299-7.
[2] A. H. El-Kady, S. Halim, M. M. El-Halwagi, and F. Khan, “Analysis of
safety and security challenges and opportunities related to cyber-physical
systems,” Process Saf. Environ., vol. 173, pp. 384–413, May 2023,
doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2023.03.012.
[3] F. Mesadieu, D. Torre, and A. Chennamaneni, “Leveraging deep reinforcement learning technique for intrusion detection in SCADA infrastructure,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 63381–63399, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3390722.
[4] Y. Lu, “The current status and developing trends of Industry 4.0:
A review,” Inf. Syst. Front., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 215–234, Feb. 2025,
doi: 10.1007/s10796-021-10221-w.
[5] A. M. Y. Koay, R. K. L. Ko, H. Hettema, and K. Radke, “Machine learning
in industrial control system (ICS) security: Current landscape, opportunities and challenges,” J. Intell. Inf. Syst., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 377–405,
Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s10844-022-00753-1.
[6] D. Dablain, B. Krawczyk, and N. V. Chawla, “DeepSMOTE: Fusing deep learning and SMOTE for imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 6390–6404, Sep. 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136503.
[7] S. Maldonado, C. Vairetti, A. Fernandez, and F. Herrera, “FW-SMOTE:
A feature-weighted oversampling approach for imbalanced classification,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 124, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108511,
doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108511.
[8] Y. Bao and S. Yang, “Two novel SMOTE methods for solving imbalanced
classification problems,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 5816–5823, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3236794.
[9] A. Arafa, N. El-Fishawy, M. Badawy, and M. Radad, “RN-SMOTE:
Reduced noise SMOTE based on DBSCAN for enhancing imbalanced
data classification,” J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 5059–5074, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2022.06.005.
[10] H. Ebrahimy, B. Mirbagheri, A. A. Matkan, and M. Azadbakht, “Effectiveness of the integration of data balancing techniques and tree-based ensemble machine learning algorithms for spatially-explicit land cover accuracy
prediction,” Remote Sens. Appl.: Soc. Environ., vol. 27, Aug. 2022, Art.
no. 100785, doi: 10.1016/j.rsase.2022.100785.
[11] A. A. Hussin A. Khatir, and M. Bee, “Machine learning models and databalancing techniques for credit scoring: What is the best combination?,”
Risks, vol. 10, no. 9, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 169, doi: 10.3390/risks10090169.
[12] D. Elreedy, A. F. Atiya, and F. Kamalov, “A theoretical distribution
analysis of synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) for imbalanced learning,” Mach Learn, vol. 113, no. 7, pp. 4903–4923, Jul. 2024,
doi: 10.1007/s10994-022-06296-4.
[13] L. C. M. Liaw, S. C. Tan, P. Y. Goh, and C. P. Lim, “A histogram
SMOTE-based sampling algorithm with incremental learning for imbalanced data classification,” Inf. Sci., vol. 686, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 121193,
doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2024.121193.
[14] D. Liu, S. Zhong, L. Lin, M. Zhao, X. Fu, and X. Liu, “Feature-level
SMOTE: Augmenting fault samples in learnable feature space for imbalanced fault diagnosis of gas turbines,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238,
Mar. 2024, Art. no. 122023, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122023.
[15] L. Yuan, S. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Duan, and K. Li, “A data balancing approach
based on generative adversarial network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 141, pp. 768–776, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2022.12.024.
[16] L. Chen, Y. Li, X. Deng, Z. Liu, M. Lv, and H. Zhang, “Dual auto-encoder
GAN-Based anomaly detection for industrial control system,” Appl. Sci.,
vol. 12, no. 10, May 2022, Art. no. 4986, doi: 10.3390/app12104986.
[17] F. Meslet-Millet, S. Mouysset, and E. Chaput, “NeCSTGen: An approach
for realistic network traffic generation using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE
Globecom, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2022, pp. 3108–3113.
[18] K. Li, W. Ma, H. Duan, H. Xie, J. Zhu, and R. Liu, “Unbalanced network attack traffic detection based on feature extraction and
GFDA-WGAN,” Comput. Netw., vol. 216, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 109283,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109283.

715

[19] Z. Geng, C. Shi, and Y. Han, “Intelligent small sample defect detection
of water walls in power plants using novel deep learning integrating
deep convolutional GAN,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 7489–7497, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TII.2022.3159817.
[20] R. Liu et al., “Anomaly-GAN: A data augmentation method for train
surface anomaly detection,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 228, Oct. 2023, Art.
no. 120284, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120284.
[21] X. Kang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, N. Ma, and L. Wen, “Anomaly detection
in concrete dam using memory-augmented autoencoder and generative
adversarial network (MemAE-GAN),” Autom. Construction, vol. 168,
Dec. 2024, Art. no. 105794, doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105794.
[22] Y. Chen, J. Xu, Z. An, and F. Zhuang, “Multi-scale conditional reconstruction generative adversarial network,” Image Vis. Comput., vol. 141,
Jan. 2024, Art. no. 104885, doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2023.104885.
[23] C. Ravi and S. Gaddadevara Matt, “IC-CGAN: Imbalanced classconditional generative adversarial network with weighted loss function,”
Int. J. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 15, no. 2, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 1632,
doi: 10.11591/ijece.v15i2.pp1632-1646.
[24] X. Qin, F. Jiang, X. Qin, L. Ge, M. Lu, and R. Doss, “CGANbased cyber deception framework against reconnaissance attacks
in ICS,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251, Sep., Art. no. 110655. 2024,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110655.
[25] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, May 2012,
doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2011.12.012.
[26] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 Network Data Set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., MilCIS, Canberra, ACT, Australia,
2015, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
[27] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116,
doi: 10.5220/0006639801080116.
[28] T. Morris and W. Gao, Industrial Control System Traffic Data Sets for
Intrusion Detection Research, vol. 441, J. Butts and S. Shenoi, Eds., Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2014, pp. 65–78, doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-45355-1_5.

Zhongyuan Qin received the Ph.D. degree in
communication and information systems from
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2003.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research interests include Internet of Things security and mobile intelligent terminal security.

Yuxuan Liu received the B.S. degree in software engineering from the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanjing University
of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in
2022, and the M.S. degree in cybersecurity from
the School of Cyberspace Security, Southeast
University, Nanjing, in 2025.
His research focuses on malicious traffic analysis in the field of cybersecurity.

716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Tiantian Wang received the B.S. degree in
computer science from the Nanjing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China,
in 2023. She is currently working toward the
M.S. degree in cybersecurity with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing.
Her research interests include deep learning
and its applications in industrial control system
traffic detection.

Liquan Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in signal and information
processing from Southeast University, Nanjing,
China, in 2005.
From 2005 to 2007, he was a Postdoctoral
Researcher with Southeast University, where
he was an Associate Professor from 2008 to
2018. From 2011 to 2012, he was a Visiting
Scholar with the National University of Singapore, Singapore. He is currently a Professor with
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University. His research interests include information security,
cryptography, network security protocol, and others.
Dr. Chen became a Senior Member of IEEE in 2022.

Yubo Song received the B.Sc. degree in electric
engineering, the M.Sc. degree in communication and information systems, and the Ph.D. degree in signal and information processing from
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2005.
He joined the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Southeast University as a Lecturer
after graduation, where he is currently an Associate Professor and the Vice Director. He also
works with Purple Mountain Laboratories. He
has authored or coauthored more than 30 technical articles in international journals and conferences. His research
interests include mobile security, wireless network security, and security
protocol analysis.