7662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on
Two-Phase Feature Fusion
Xiaobin Tan , Member, IEEE, Chaoming Huang , Hao Wang, Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE,
and Quan Zheng , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The existing encrypted traffic classification schemes
have not taken full advantage of the principles of network traffic
encryption technology, resulting in poor classification accuracy
and interpretability. In fact, the transmission process of encrypted
flows can be divided into a handshake phase and a secure
data transmission phase, each with distinct characteristics and
inter-packet correlations. Therefore, an effective approach for
encrypted traffic classification should employ different processing
methods for each phase and then combine the results. In
this paper, we propose the Two-Phase Feature Fusion (2P2F)
approach for classifying encrypted network flows. In 2P2F,
during the handshake phase, a convolutional neural network
(CNN) processes the encryption protocol extension field to extract
application-related features. For the secure data transmission
phase, a transformer model captures content-related features
from the TCP segment length sequence. Finally, an attention
mechanism is used to fuse the refined features from both phases,
allowing the classification model to focus more on important
features and achieve accurate classification of encrypted network
flows. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed scheme.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, two-phase features, feature fusion, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the rapid development of the Internet technology and its applications, network traffic is constantly
increasing, which puts a strain on network management. Effective network traffic classification is essential for enhancing
network management capabilities, improving service quality,

W

Received 5 May 2025; revised 25 November 2025 and 10 February 2026;
accepted 6 April 2026. Date of publication 14 April 2026; date of current
version 30 April 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key
R&D Program of China under Grant 2020YFA0711400, in part by the Anhui
Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2408085MF165, in part by
the China Environment for Network Innovations under Grant 2016-00005273-01-000515, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant U23A20275, 62341113, and 62021001, by the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was L. Z. Granville.
(Corresponding author: Shuangwu Chen.)
Xiaobin Tan, Shuangwu Chen, and Quan Zheng are with the Department
of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230000, China, and also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail:
xbtan@ustc.edu.cn; chensw@ustc.edu.cn; qzheng@ustc.edu.cn).
Chaoming Huang is with the Department of Automation, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail:
huangcm@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
Hao Wang is with the Institute of Advanced Technology, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230000, China (e-mail:
wanghao1014@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3683889

and ensuring application security [1], [2], [3]. However, as
the demand for data privacy and security keeps growing, an
increasing proportion of network traffic is encrypted, making
classification more challenging [4], [5], [6].
Traditional network traffic classification approaches, such as
port-based, deep packet inspection (DPI) based, and machine
learning-based, are ineffective in classifying encrypted network traffic. Port-based approaches rely on known ports
assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA),
rendering them incapable of handling dynamic or disguised
ports [7]. DPI-based approaches analyze the payload data of
the entire data packet to match predefined regular expressions, but they cannot inspect encrypted packet payloads [8].
Machine learning-based approaches heavily rely on feature
engineering and professional knowledge, which can be a
challenging and laborious task [9], [10], [11], [12], [13].
Recently, deep learning (DL) has gained significant attention
as a potential solution for encrypted network traffic classification due to its capability to effectively extract complex
features and capture intricate relationships automatically [14].
However, many existing deep learning-based approaches tend
to focus solely on either classifying the application types [15],
[16], [17], [18], [19] or content types [20], [21], [22] of
encrypted traffic. Furthermore, these approaches often exhibit
limitations, such as either solely considering the characteristics
of individual packets rather than the packet sequences within
network flows, or failing to address the underlying principles
of network encryption protocols.
The most widely used encryption protocols are Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and its successor Transport Layer Security
(TLS) protocol [23]. According to the workflow of SSL/TLS,
an encrypted network flow can be naturally divided into two
phases, namely, the TLS handshake phase and the secure
data transmission phase [24], [25]. These two phases expose
different observable information and exhibit distinct interpacket correlations. In the handshake phase, packets follow
a well-defined protocol format and contain unencrypted handshake metadata that reflects negotiation details between the
client and server. In the secure data transmission phase,
the application payload is encrypted and remains opaque.
Nevertheless, traffic-analysis side-channel patterns such as the
sequence and distribution of TCP segment lengths can still
be observed and may correlate with coarse content types.
Importantly, we do not decrypt or inspect application payload
contents at any stage. Therefore, to improve classification

2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION

accuracy and interpretability, a sensible strategy is to extract
complementary features from these two phases using phaseappropriate models, and then fuse them to obtain the final
classification result.
However, many existing approaches treat an encrypted flow
as a single homogeneous entity and apply one generic model to
the entire flow, or they focus on coarse intra-packet divisions
(e.g., header/body) rather than the protocol-phase workflow.
As a result, they may fail to fully exploit the heterogeneous
yet complementary information available in the handshake
metadata and in the transmission-phase traffic patterns.
In this paper, we present a novel encrypted network traffic
classification scheme called Two-Phase Feature Fusion (2P2F).
This scheme is motivated by the analysis that different phases
of the encrypted network flows play distinct roles in traffic
classification. In 2P2F, during the handshake phase, a convolutional neural network (CNN) processes the encryption protocol
extension field to extract application-related features. Meanwhile, in the secure data transmission phase, a transformer
model captures side-channel statistical features from the TCP
segment length sequence. Finally, the attention mechanism is
employed to fuse refined features from both phases, allowing
the model to focus more on important features, effectively
classify encrypted network data flows.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
• We propose an encrypted traffic classification framework
based on two-phase feature fusion. In this framework,
features are extracted from both the handshake phase
and the secure data transmission phase, which are subsequently fused to achieve accurate classification. This
scheme leverages the unique characteristics of both
phases, enabling precise classification results while utilizing only a limited number of features.
• We design two feature extraction schemes tailored to the
characteristics of each phase. The CNN-based scheme
is designed to process the encryption protocol extension
field of handshake phase to extract application-related
features, while a transformer model is employed to capture content-related features from the TCP segment length
sequence in the secure data transmission phase.
• We design an attention mechanism based feature fusion
algorithm for the semantic features from the handshake
phase with the statistical features from the secure data
transmission phase of encrypted network flows. This
approach effectively classifies encrypted network data by
focusing on the most important features.
• We implement an encrypted traffic classification testbed
and construct a real-world network traffic dataset.
Through extensive experiments, we compare the performance of our proposed scheme against state-of-the-art
methods. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of the proposed scheme.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II describes some of the related work of network traffic classification. Section III introduces the concept
of encrypted traffic classification problem and motivation.
Then, the two-phase feature fusion-based encrypted traffic

7663

classification scheme is proposed in Section IV. The experiment results and analysis are given in Section V, and the last
Section VI gives the conclusion of this paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we provide an overview of prior research
on traffic classification, categorized into traditional, machine
learning-based, and deep learning-based approaches.
A. Traditional Traffic Classification
Port-based schemes [7] encounter challenges in scenarios involving dynamic ports, while DPI-based approaches
[26] prove ineffective in classifying encrypted traffic. Protocol analysis-based methods extract the distinctive behavioral
characteristics of specific applications by analyzing their communication processes. Korczyński and Duda [15] proposed
first-order homogeneous Markov model fingerprints to characterize the dynamics of SSL/TLS sessions. Shen et al. [16], [17]
extended it to the second-order Markov model by clustering
the certificate length and the first packet length to improve
the classification performances. However, due to the caching
mechanism, not all encrypted flow contains a certificate.
Pan et al. [18] combined Message Type Sequence (MTS)
and the lengths of the first several packets in a network flow
to construct the Markov model and hidden Markov model
(HMM) and then used a weighted ensemble classifier to
improve the results. Despite achieving commendable classification performance, this approach has limitations due to
the potential lack of clear distinctions in packet length when
different applications transmit identical business content.
In summary, the failure of these traditional methods to reliably handle encrypted payloads necessitates the shift towards
more advanced, learning-based approaches.
B. Traditional Machine Learning Based Traffic Classification
Anderson et al. [9] employed logistic regression with a
combination of flow metadata, packet length distributions,
time distributions, byte distributions, and unencrypted TLS
header information to identify malware-encrypted traffic.
Sun et al. [10] applied TLS pattern matching to filter out all
TLS traffic, followed by Naı̈ve Bayes classification, achieving
a classification precision of 93%–96% for HTTPS and TOR
traffic.
Sivanathan et al. [11] effectively identified encrypted traffic, particularly IoT devices, by leveraging carefully selected
features through the Random Forest algorithm. Cao et al. [12]
proposed a real-time accurate SVM training model. They used
PCA to extract features from the data to reduce the dimension
of the original features and a particle swarm optimization
algorithm to search the optimal working parameters of the
kernel function automatically. This method can improve traffic
classification accuracy through a small number of training
samples compared with the traditional SVM. Lashkari et al.
[13] used time-related features such as the duration of the
flow, flow bytes per second, forward and backward inter-arrival
time, etc., to characterize the network traffic using k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) and C4.5 decision tree algorithms.

7664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

However, the performance of machine learning methods
depends on the rich experience, professional knowledge, and
features that are artificially selected.
C. Deep Learning Based Traffic Classification
Deep learning has emerged as a promising technique for
encrypted traffic classification. Wang [27] applied a simple
SAE automatic encoder to traffic classification. Li et al. [28]
introduced the recurrent neural network to network traffic
classification and designed the byte segment neural network
where the segments of payloads are put into the attention
encoder to get the features. Then the softmax classifier is used
for classification.
References [20] and [29] designed a novel method that
combined the convolutional network and the recurrent network
to improve the accuracy of the classification results. The
convolutional network extracts the packet features for a single
packet. The recurrent network is trained to pick out the flow
features based on the inputs of the packet features of any three
consecutive packets in a flow. Liu et al. [19] considered the
length of packets in the encrypted traffic and proposed an endto-end model taking a multi-layer bi-GRU encoder to learn the
representation of the flow sequence, and reconstructing the
original sequence with a multi-layer bi-GRU decoder.
Recently, more advanced deep learning models, such as
graph neural networks (GNNs) and transformers, have been
widely adopted for encrypted traffic analysis. For instance,
researchers have utilized GNNs to capture complex flow
interaction patterns for encrypted malware detection [30], [31].
Some works have even begun to differentiate the physical
components of a packet, such as the header and payload,
for more fine-grained classification [32], [33]. Concurrently,
Transformer-based models have demonstrated their potential
by applying self-attention mechanisms to traffic sequences
[34], [35].
However, existing deep learning-based approaches often
neglect the intricate working mechanism and distinctive characteristics of encrypted network protocols, or apply a single,
generic model to the entire flow, failing to optimally extract
the heterogeneous features from different phases.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we first investigate the mechanisms of
encrypted protocols, then define the problem of encrypted traffic classification, and finally present our research motivation.
A. Encryption Protocol Analysis
As shown in Fig. 1, the interaction process of a typical
encryption protocol, such as SSL/TLS, consists of two distinct
phases: the handshake phase and the secure data transmission phase. In the handshake phase, we use only observable
handshake metadata. In the secure data transmission phase,
payload contents are encrypted and are not inspected; we use
only side-channel statistical feature, represented by the TCP
segment length sequence. This phase-wise design avoids any
payload decryption while leveraging complementary cues from
protocol metadata and transmission behaviors.

Fig. 1. The composition of encrypted flow.

In the handshake phase, certain TLS handshake metadata
(e.g., message fields and extension information) is observable
and follows a well-defined protocol format. For a specific
network application, these data possess distinct meanings and
represent the distinct status and characteristics of a flow. As
a result, they serve as valuable features for application-type
classification.
On the other hand, the secure data transmission phase
involves the transmission of content segmented into a sequence
of encrypted packets [36]. Although the packets in this phase
are encrypted, different content types (e.g., video streaming,
text, or digital files) exhibit discernible behavioral characteristics, including packet size distribution, packet arrival interval
distribution, and other statistical features. These features can
be effectively utilized for content-type classification of network flow.
B. Problem Definition
Encrypted traffic classification is generally performed to
identify the application and/or content type of packet sequence
within a given network flow. Specifically, the application
type refers to application-related information such as Baidu,
a website search engine and Bilibili, an online video platform, or other network applications, while the content
type refers to the nature of the transmitted data, such as
video, image, text, and so on. To be precise, we define
three distinct classification tasks which will be evaluated:
“Application-Type Classification” (identifying only the application, e.g., “Baidu”), “Content-Type Classification” (identifying only the content, e.g., “video”), and “Application-Content
Classification” (the joint and granular task of identifying the
specific pair, e.g., “Baidu-video”) theClassification is conducted at three levels: packet level, stream level, and session
level, depending on the specific classification requirements or
techniques employed for network traffic classification.
The aim of this paper is to propose a methodology for jointly
classifying the application and content types of encrypted network flows at the session level, specifically those utilizing the
SSL/TLS protocol, as they traverse network nodes including
switches or gateways. In this context, a network flow is defined
as a series of packets that share the same five-tuple (Source IP,
Source port, Destination IP, Destination port, Transport layer
protocol) information.
C. Motivation
As discussed in Section III-A, a typical encrypted network
flow consists of two distinct phases: the handshake phase and

TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION

the secure data transmission phase, each exhibiting unique
packet sequence characteristics. Unfortunately, previous studies often treat the encrypted network data flow as a whole
entity, overlooking the distinctions between these two phases.
This oversight has resulted in poor classification accuracy.
To address the aforementioned issue, we believe that a
reasonable solution should utilize distinct processing methods
for different phases of encrypted network flows and then
fuse the results to achieve accurate classification. Specifically,
for the handshake phase, since each field in this phase is
unencrypted and holds a specific meaning, we propose to
employ a CNN model to analyze the handshake phase and
extract application-type-relevant features.
The secure data transmission phase relies on encryption
technology, rendering the classification of content through
the inspection of payload contents infeasible. Nevertheless,
statistical features derived from the packet sequence within
this phase can be leveraged for content-type classification. To
this end, we propose the adoption of a transformer model
to analyze the statistical features of the packet sequence,
including packet size distribution, with the aim of extracting
content-type-relevant features.
Moreover, as web browsing typically generates multiple
network flows corresponding to various web components
with different types (e.g., video, image, text, etc.), the accuracy of application-content classification can be enhanced by
combining the application-type-relevant features and contenttype-relevant features extracted from these two distinct phases.

IV. T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION BASED E NCRYPTED
T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION
This section introduces the overview and detail of the
proposed encrypted traffic classification scheme.

A. Overview
The architecture of two-phase feature fusion-based
encrypted traffic classification is shown in Fig. 2, which
consists of the modules of traffic preprocessing, feature
extraction, feature refinement, and feature fusion.
In the traffic preprocessing module, the first step involves
partitioning the raw traffic into session flows based on their
five tuples. Following this, in the feature extraction module,
features are extracted and normalized to mitigate the influence
of variations in magnitudes. To refine the quality of the
extracted features, a CNN model is employed to process
the features from the handshake phase, while a transformer
model handles the features from the secure data transmission
phase. Finally, the refined features are fused using an attention
mechanism [37], facilitating the classification of applicationcontent types and yielding the final classification results.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that the CNN model responsible for processing features obtained from the handshake
phase and the transformer model responsible for processing
features extracted from the secure data transmission phase are
pre-trained offline in advance.

7665

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed two-phase feature fusion traffic classification.

B. Feature Extraction
We conduct experiments to evaluate various features
extracted from both phases and select two highly effective
features, namely the protocol extension information in the
handshake phase and the TCP segment length sequence in
the secure data transmission phase. Features susceptible to
network conditions, such as packet inter-arrival time, are
deliberately excluded. Additionally, using IP addresses directly
for classification is not a good choice due to the existence
of content delivery network (CDN) or other load balancing
mechanisms.
1) Protocol Extension Field: The extension fields in the
SSL/TLS protocol are used to transmit additional information
and functionality during the handshake process. For different
applications, there are significant differences in the specific
negotiation content and the encryption suite between the client
and server which are recorded in the protocol extension fields
of the SSL/TLS layer. Thus, we extract the raw extension
field data from the ‘Client Hello’ and ‘Server Hello’ messages
during the handshake phase and convert it to hexadecimal
format, which facilitates its transformation into grayscale
images. The server name field in the protocol extension field
can be forged, so we replace its content with 0.
2) TCP Segment Length Sequence: During the secure data
transmission phase, content is encrypted to ensure confidentiality, rendering the analysis of the encrypted content ineffective
in obtaining useful information about the network flow.

7666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 3. The mapping between TCP session flow and IP packet sequence.

Fig. 5. Grayscale images converted from the features of the extension field
for different types of content.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF CNN M ODEL U SED FOR F EATURE R EFINEMENT
OF H ANDSHAKE P HASE

sequence. Finally, We select the length information of the first
32 TCP data segments in the secure data transmission phase
as the feature for classifying encrypted traffic.
Fig. 4 showcases an example histogram illustrating the
distribution of the first 32 TCP segment lengths during the
secure data transmission phase for four different types of
content. It is evident that the transmission of different contents
exhibits distinct distributions, further highlighting the potential
of utilizing this feature for content classification.
Fig. 4. Distributions of the TCP segment lengths for different types of content.

C. Feature Refinement
However, even in the presence of encryption, it is still possible
to differentiate between various types of transmitted content,
such as text or video, based on the statistical distribution of the
packet sequence within the flow. This statistical distribution
can serve as a distinctive feature for classifying encrypted
network flows.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the data segments of the TCP
session flow are fragmented into a sequence of IP packets, with
most packets having uniform sizes. This fragmentation leads
to the partial loss of application-related information within
the IP packet sequence. To address this, we adopt a different
approach compared to previous research that primarily focused
on the statistical distribution of packets in the IP layer. Instead,
we use Scapy1 to parse the handshake layer and record layer
protocol types of all TLS packets, which are unencrypted, and
divide the handshake phase and secure data transmission phase
of the encrypted flow based on them. For packets that have
been split due to their length exceeding the IP layer limit,
we merge them and extract the original TCP segment length
1 https://scapy.net

1) Feature Refinement for Handshake Phase: According to
the standard of encryption protocols, the data in each fixed
position in the protocol extension field denotes a specific
meaning, so the data in the protocol extension field has a
certain regularity, and this regularity can be analyzed by
using the CNN model. Crucially, this 2D image conversion
is applied only to the unencrypted handshake field, as it
preserves the spatial structure of the protocol data and creates
an information-dense (non-sparse) representation for the CNN
to analyze.
In order to preserve the information of the protocol extension field in its entirety and also to facilitate the input of this
information into the CNN model, we convert the extension
field into grayscale image format. The length of extended fields
varies depending on the data type, but most will not exceed
448 bytes, we transform the protocol extension field into a
16 × 28 grayscale image, as shown in Fig. 5. The structure
and parameters of the CNN model are shown in Table I.
2) Feature Refinement for Secure Data Transmission Phase:
The specific content of the data transmission phase is
encrypted, but we can still extract sequence features to predict

TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION

TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF T RANSFORMER M ODEL FOR F EATURE R EFINEMENT OF
S ECURE DATA T RANSMISSION P HASE

7667

V. E VALUATION
This section provides an overview of the dataset and
experimental setup utilized in the evaluation, followed by a
comprehensive analysis of the experimental results.
A. Experimental Setting

user behavior, which are more suitable to be analyzed by using
an transformer model. As a special type of RNN, Transformer
model not only has the ability for neurons to directly affect
themselves at the next moment but also solves the limitation
of ordinary RNNs by adding gating mechanisms within the
network, to train TCP segment length sequences. The structure
and parameters of the model are shown in Table II.
D. Feature Fusion
For the classification of encrypted network flow, the features
of different phases of encrypted flow play a certain role in
different classification tasks. Feature fusion is to fuse the
features extracted and refined from different phases together
to achieve more accurate classification results.
In feature fusion, we employ an attention mechanism in our
encrypted traffic classification scheme. The attention mechanism allows our approach to selectively focus on the most
informative features from each phase of the encrypted flow
during the fusion process. It assigns different weights or
importance to the features based on their relevance to the
classification task at hand. The attention mechanism helps us
overcome the unbalanced role of features from different phases
by dynamically adjusting the contribution of each feature
during the fusion process. It allows us to effectively combine
the relevant information from different phases and enhance the
overall classification performance. Suppose the output of the
CNN model is Fc , and the output of the transformer model
is Ft , we use them separately to generate the query, key, and
value:
Q = WQ · Fc ,

(1)

K = W K · Fc ,

(2)

V = WV · Ft ,

(3)

where WQ , WK and WV is the learnable parameter matrix.
Then we use them to calculate attention scores:


QK T
V, (4)
Ffused = Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √
dk
where dk is the dimension of the key.
Finally, the fused features are input into the classifier to
obtain the traffic label:
y = arg max(softmax(Wcls · Ffused + b)),
k

(5)

where Wcls and b is the learnable parameter, k is the index of
classes.

1) Datasets: The first dataset in our experiments, 2P2F
Website Dataset, was captured by ourselves on the China
Environment for Network Innovations (CENI-HeFei) platform
[38]. it consists of five commonly used applications, including
Bilibili, TouTiao, Himalaya, Netease cloud, and Baidu, and
these traffic data are categorized into five types: image, audio,
radio, live video, and video. The figures in the table represent
the number of session flows, with a total size of 175.8Gb.
In addition, we conducted experiments on the publicly
available dataset CIC IoT 2022 [39] and mobile app dataset
[40] to validate the generality of our approach. We selected
10 use cases with larger sample sizes from these two datasets
for experimentation. The ratio of training and testing data for
all datasets is 8:2, and the specific composition is shown in
the table III below.
2) Preprocessing: We divided the Pcap file that contains all
captured packets into multiple Pcap files based on the transport
layer protocol type (TCP or UDP) using SplitCap.2 We then
selected the largest SSL/TLS session flow as our classification
object, after dividing the Pcap file generated by accessing a
specific website into multiple session flows. This approach
reduces the impact of background traffic and ensures the flow
is related to the content type.
3) Experiment Setup: All these experiments use the Intel
6142 server equipped with 16 core CPU as the hardware
platform, a NVIDIA Tesla P4 GPU as the training and testing
of the model, with 512G memory and 256G SSD. The software
is based on the depth model framework Pytorch 2.0, with cuda
version 11.8 and operating system Ubuntu 16.04.
B. Comparison Algorithms
We compare our proposed scheme with three state-of-the-art
solutions. These baselines were selected to be representative
of the primary categories of classification methods: classic
machine learning (CCIT), deep sequence models (FS-Net), and
modern semi-supervised fingerprinting (FlowPrint).
• CCIT [11] is a classical method that utilizes a carefully
selected set of features to accurately identify encrypted
traffic originating from IoT devices. This method employs
the random forest algorithm to achieve effective classification.
• FS-Net [19] considered the length of the first n packets
in the encrypted data flow and proposed an end-to-end
model taking a multi-layer bi-GRU encoder to learn the
representation of the flow sequence and reconstruct the
original sequence.
• FlowPrint [41] is a semi-supervised approach for fingerprinting mobile apps from encrypted network traffic.
It can automatically find temporal correlations among
2 https://www.netresec.com/?page=SplitCap

7668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

TABLE III
T HE C OMPOSITION OF T HREE DATASETS IN T ERMS OF THE N UMBER OF S ESSION F LOWS

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE OF 2P2F AND C OMPARISON
A LGORITHMS ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 6. The accuracy of application type classification among features.

destination-related features of network traffic and use
these correlations to generate app fingerprints.
• DE-GNN [32] is a state-of-the-art method for fine-grained
encrypted traffic classification. This model uses a dual
embedding layer to encode the packet header and payload
separately, then constructs the data flow into a Traffic
Interaction Graph (TIG), and utilizes Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to extract flow-level features.
C. Classification Results With Compared Algorithms
In this evaluation, the 2P 2F -f use is the complete version of the proposed method, which combines features from
two phases to achieve a joint classification of application
and content types. The 2P 2F -assoc5 signifies the utilization of features from the handshake phase to determine the
application type, and the utilization of features from the
secure data transmission phase to determine the content type,
followed by the simple concatenation of the two results.
The 2P 2F -handshake and 2P 2F -transmission respectively represent the direct recognition of application and
content types using features solely from the handshake phase
and secure data transmission phase.
As shown in Table IV, 2P 2F -f use shows excellent performances on encrypted traffic classification. It is observed that
the proposed 2P2F method has significant improvements.
The results in Table IV demonstrate the superiority of
our approach. We first analyze our own model variants
as an ablation study to justify our design, addressing the

need to isolate each phase’s contribution. On the 2P2F
Website dataset, 2P 2F -handshake (handshake-only) and
2P 2F -transmission (transmission-only) achieve F1-scores
of 0.82 and 0.90, respectively. Our full 2P2F-fuse model
significantly outperforms both, with an F1-score of 0.96. This
explicitly validates our core thesis that both phases contribute
unique, essential information, and our fusion mechanism is
necessary to achieve the best results.
Compared to the baselines, this optimized 2P2F-fuse model
also shows clear advantages. The baseline methods falter
because they fail to properly distinguish and process the two
distinct phases of encrypted traffic. CCIT’s manual features
lack generalization. FS-Net’s “one-size-fits-all” model ignores
the differing semantics of handshake and transmission packets.
FlowPrint’s narrow fingerprinting fails in diverse scenarios,
and DE-GNN’s physical-based header/payload division is less
effective than 2P2F’s protocol-based (handshake/transmission)
split. The failure of these methods further validates that
processing each phase with specialized models and fusing the
results is crucial for accurate classification.
D. Effectiveness of Our Selected Feature
To evaluate the effectiveness of our selected features, we
compared the protocol extension field, TCP segment length
sequence, and other features to test their effectiveness in
identifying application types and content types, respectively.
It can be observed from Fig. 6 that considering only the
handshake protocol state is better than using the full protocol

TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION

7669

TABLE VI
T HE P ERFORMANCE OF C ONTENT T YPES BASED ON
T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION

Fig. 7. The accuracy of content type classification among features.
TABLE VII
TABLE V
T HE P ERFORMANCE OF A PPLICATION T YPES BASED ON T WO -P HASE
F EATURE F USION

state. Therefore, it is more reasonable to consider different
types of features for different phases of the flow. Although the
application type classification can be achieved to some extent
by using the handshake protocol state, the results show that the
classification accuracy of Bilibili and TouTiao is significantly
lower compared to the experiment results based on packet
features. This also indicates the inability to achieve the best
classification result by using features from only one phase of
the flow.
As shown in Fig. 7, although we can observe that the
classification of content types based on encrypted payload
is effective to some extent through comparison experiments,
the classification results do not change much if we change
all payload data to 255. Therefore, we believe that the real
information processed by the CNN should be the contour
information constructed by different packet payload lengths in
the grayscale image. This contour information also verifies that
the length should be considered in encrypted traffic analysis
rather than the specific content after encryption.
E. Effectiveness of Feature Fusion
1) Effectiveness of Feature Fusion for Single Task: We now
study the classification by using different sets of features in
order to understand the impact of each feature in classification performance. We study three scenarios: using the fused
features from both phases, using the feature only from the
handshake phase, and using the feature only from the secure
data transmission phase.
The application-type classification results are shown in
Table V. It can be observed that the extended field information
in the handshake phase is more suitable for application classification than the length information of the TCP segment in the

T HE P ERFORMANCE OF A PPLICATION -C ONTENT T YPE C LASSIFICATION
BASED ON T WO -P HASE F EATURE F USION

secure data transmission phase. Furthermore, the performance
of fused features for classification is better than that of
individual features.
The content-type classification results are presented in
Table VI indicate that the length information of the TCP
data segment in the secure data transmission phase is more
suitable than the information of the protocol extension field
in terms of content-type classification. This finding confirms
the correctness of our feature selection method. Moreover,
the two-phase feature fusion leads to an improvement in the
accuracy of content type classification, which is similar to
the improvement observed in application classification. The
precision, recall, and F1-Measure of feature fusion are also
higher than those of individual features.
2) Effectiveness of Feature Fusion for Multi-Task:
2P 2F -assoc10 uses the two features mentioned above for
application-content type recognition directly and selects the
result with higher confidence of the two features.
The accuracy of the comprehensive classification obtained
by combining different classification tasks using feature fusion
is higher than that obtained by direct combination application
type and content type and higher than that obtained by direct
combination application-content type (Probability addition).
This finding highlights the effectiveness of feature fusion
for multi-task classification. Moreover, the superiority of
application-content type classification based on feature fusion
is confirmed by the evaluation of other indicators presented in
Table VII.

7670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON (F1-S CORE ) U NDER
L ENGTH -O BFUSCATION S CENARIOS

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix of the proposed 2P2F method. The class indices
correspond to: 1) Baidu image, 2) Baidu video, 3) Bilibili radio, 4) Bilibili
live video, 5) TouTiao image, 6) TouTiao live video, 7) Netease cloud audio,
8) Netease cloud video, 9) Himalaya audio, and 10) Himalaya radio.

To further analyze the detailed performance of the 2P2Ffuse model on application-content classification task, we
plotted its confusion matrix on the 2P2F Website test set,
as shown in Fig. 8. The diagonal elements of the matrix
represent the number of correctly classified samples, while
the off-diagonal elements show the specific confusion between
different classes. It is clear from the figure that the model
performs exceptionally well on most classes, such as “TouTiao
live” and “Himalaya radio”, which achieved near-perfect classification. The main confusion occurs between semantically
similar classes. For example, a small number of “Bilibili radio”
samples were misclassified as “Bilibili live”, and there was
also minor confusion between “Baidu image” and “Baidu
video”. This aligns with the relatively lower F1-scores for
the “Bilibili radio” and “Bilibili live” classes presented in
Table VII.
F. Robustness Analysis
Recent systematization efforts (e.g., the SoK by Wickramasinghe et al. [42]) highlight that modern encrypted traffic may
be subject to padding and traffic-shaping mechanisms, which
can substantially weaken classifiers that rely on packet/record
length statistics. Since the transmission branch of 2P2F models
the TCP segment length sequence with a Transformer, it is
necessary to assess how sensitive the overall framework is to
length obfuscation.
1) Experimental Setup: We perform a controlled simulation on the 2P2F-Website dataset by perturbing the test-set
TCP segment length sequences to emulate different degrees
of length obfuscation, while keeping the handshake inputs
unchanged. This isolates the effect of padding on the
transmission-phase features and allows us to evaluate the benefit of two-phase fusion under adverse conditions. Specifically,

for each TCP segment length L, we construct a padded length
L0 using one of the following strategies:
• Random Padding: L0 = L · (1 + δ), where
δ ∼ U(0.10, 0.30). This emulates mild and variable
padding/noise that partially perturbs length statistics.
• Block Padding: L0 = dL/256e · 256. This emulates aggressive block-quantization shaping that coarsens
length resolution and makes different flows more similar
from a length-statistics perspective.
Table VIII indicates that the transmission-only variant is
sensitive to block padding. When lengths are rounded to
256-byte blocks, fine-grained length differences across traffic
classes are removed, making the resulting length sequences
more similar and therefore harder to separate, which leads to
a large F1 drop (0.90 → 0.59).
In contrast, the fused model remains robust because it can
still rely on handshake-phase TLS metadata (extension fields)
that is not affected by transmission-phase length obfuscation.
Consequently, even when length cues are degraded, the handshake branch provides complementary information, allowing
2P2F-fuse to retain strong performance (F1 = 0.88).
2) Discussion on Contextual Overfitting: The above
padding stress-test complements recent SoK findings on
encrypted traffic classifiers, which caution that performance
may be driven by contextual artifacts (e.g., collection environment, implementation behaviors, or network conditions) rather
than intrinsic application/content-type regularities. From this
perspective, padding and traffic shaping can be viewed as one
practical source of context shift that directly perturbs lengthbased side channels.
To reduce context dependence, we deliberately exclude
highly variable features such as packet inter-arrival time
and avoid using IP addresses directly due to the instability
introduced by CDN and load balancing. Nevertheless, we
acknowledge that side-channel-based methods may still be
sensitive to broader context shifts (e.g., device/browser versions, network paths, and server deployments). We therefore
treat cross-context evaluation (e.g., train/test splits across time
or network environments) as an important direction for future
work and include this limitation to contextualize applicability.

G. Time Overhead Analysis
Time overhead is a critical metric for practical, real-time
traffic classification scenarios. To evaluate the feasibility of
our 2P2F scheme, we conducted an experiment to measure
its processing latency per network flow, and compared it with
DE-GNN, a representative SOTA method that also requires
complex feature engineering.

TAN et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON TWO-PHASE FEATURE FUSION

TABLE IX
T IME OVERHEAD C OMPARISON (AVERAGE P ER F LOW )

The analysis was performed on our testbed, which is
equipped with an Intel Xeon Silver 4214 CPU and an NVIDIA
V100 GPU. We measured the average time for two main
stages:
• Preprocessing & Feature Extraction: For our 2P2F,
this includes parsing the flow from raw packets, identifying the handshake and secure data transmission phases,
generating the protocol extension field image (16 × 28),
and extracting the TCP segment length sequence (first
32 segments). For DE-GNN, this involves the complex
construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) for
each flow.
• Model Inference Time: This is the computation time
required by the respective pre-trained models (2P2F-fuse
vs. DE-GNN) to process the features and produce a
classification result.
The results of this comparison are summarized in
Table IX. Our 2P2F model demonstrates high efficiency.
The combined preprocessing and feature extraction, which
involves lightweight parsing and sequence extraction, takes
only 4.82 ms on average. The model inference is also very
fast, at 0.91 ms.
In contrast, the DE-GNN model incurs a significantly higher
overhead. As hypothesized, its preprocessing stage, which
requires constructing a complete Traffic Interaction Graph for
each flow, is computationally intensive, averaging 25.41 ms.
While its GNN inference time is also efficient (2.15 ms), its
total overhead is nearly 5 times that of our method.
H. Summary
Based on the experimental findings, we can conclude that
the grayscale image of the protocol extension fields during the
handshake phase is suitable for application-type classification,
while the TCP segment length sequence during the secure
data transmission phase is most suitable for content-type
classification. The features from both phases complement each
other, which is why we have fused them together. By doing so,
we have improved the accuracy of both application and content
type classification. Furthermore, our feature fusion approach
has achieved the best results for application-content type
classification, thus confirming the effectiveness and superiority
of the proposed 2P2F scheme.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose 2P2F for classifying encrypted
network data flows by leveraging the distinct characteristics
of different network communication phases and effectively
fusing the extracted features. The 2P2F integrates a CNN and a

7671

transformer model. The CNN analyzes the encryption protocol
extension field during the handshake phase, extracting features
relevant to the application type. Meanwhile, the transformer
model processes the sequences of TCP segment lengths in the
secure data transmission phase, extracting features related to
the content type. Finally, an attention mechanism fuses the
features extracted from both phases, facilitating the classification of the encrypted network data flow. The effectiveness of
the 2P2F method is validated through comparative experiments
and feature analysis, demonstrating its superior performance.
R EFERENCES
[1]

H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
techniques for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 132, pp. 81–98,
Feb. 2018.
[2] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[3] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing
Android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125, Jan. 2016.
[4] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in
traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan. 2012.
[5] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, A. Taherkordi, and A. D. Jurcut, “Active
learning for network traffic classification: A technical study,” IEEE
Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 422–439, Mar. 2022.
[6] Z. Niu, J. Xue, Y. Wang, T. Lei, W. Han, and X. Gao, “QARF: A
novel malicious traffic detection approach via online active learning for
evolving traffic streams,” Chin. J. Electron., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 645–656,
May 2024.
[7] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A flowbased relation network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. Web
Conf., Apr. 2020, pp. 13–22.
[8] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
[9] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s11416-017-0306-6.
[10] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, and C. Li, “An novel hybrid
method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf. GLOBECOM, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[11] A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in smart
cities and campuses,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), May 2017, pp. 559–564.
[12] J. Cao, Z. Fang, G. Qu, H. Sun, and D. Zhang, “An accurate traffic
classification model based on support vector machines,” Int. J. Netw.
Manage., vol. 27, no. 1, p. e1962, Jan. 2017.
[13] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[14] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
2019.
[15] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[16] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
pp. 1–10.
[17] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[18] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic
classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, Aug. 2017, pp. 50–57.

7672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

[19] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[20] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, and Z. Yao, “Encrypted
traffic classification with a convolutional long short-term memory neural
network,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Communications; IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Smart City; IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Data
Sci. Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Jun. 2018, pp. 329–334.
[21] Y. He and W. Li, “Image-based encrypted traffic classification with
convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci.
Cyberspace (DSC), Jul. 2020, pp. 271–278.
[22] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
2017, pp. 43–48.
[23] J. Clark and P. C. van Oorschot, “SoK: SSL and HTTPS: Revisiting
past challenges and evaluating certificate trust model enhancements,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2013, pp. 511–525.
[24] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol
version 1.2,” Standards Track, IETF, Fremont, CA, USA, Tech. Rep.
Request for Comments 5246, Aug. 2008. [Online]. Available: http://
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5246.txt
[25] J. Xu et al., “A cascaded broad learning network embedded image features for malware traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun.
Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2426–2439, Apr. 2024.
[26] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Müller, and K. Hanssgen,
“A survey of payload-based traffic classification approaches,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2nd Quart.,
2014.
[27] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,”
BlackHat USA, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[28] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “Byte segment neural
network for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int.
Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[29] B. Zhou, J. Liu, S. Cui, and Y. Zhao, “A large-scale spatio-temporal
multimodal fusion framework for traffic prediction,” Big Data Mining
Analytics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 621–636, 2024.
[30] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def.,
2022, pp. 495–509.
[31] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” 2023,
arXiv:2301.13686.
[32] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for
fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245,
May 2024, Art. no. 110372.
[33] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
[34] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[35] F. Wu et al., “Multi-variate time series prediction of traffic and users for
dynamic RRH-BBU mapping in C-RAN,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10557–10572, Oct. 2025.
[36] H. Liu, Z. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic
classification using composite features set,” J. Netw., vol. 7, no. 8,
pp. 1195–1200, Aug. 2012.
[37] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” 2014, arXiv:1409.0473.
[38] (2024). China Environment for Network Innovations (CENI-Hefei).
[Online]. Available: https://ceni.ustc.edu.cn/
[39] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11.
[40] S. Zhao, S. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Wei, J. Zhong, and J. Liang, “A large-scale
mobile traffic dataset for mobile application identification,” Comput. J.,
vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1501–1513, 2023.
[41] T. V. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.
(NDSS), vol. 27, Feb. 2020, pp. 1–18.
[42] N. C. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “SoK:
Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1825–1843.

Xiaobin Tan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC), China, in 1996
and 2003, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Automation,
School of Information Science and Technology,
USTC. His research interests include future internet
architecture, adaptive streaming, and information
security.

Chaoming Huang received the M.S. degree from
the University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC), China, in 2019, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree. He is currently with the
Department of Automation, USTC, and the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive
National Science Center, Hefei. His research interests include encrypted traffic classification, machine
learning, and network security.

Hao Wang received the M.S. degree from the Institute of Advanced Technology, University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC), China, in 2023.
His research interests include encrypted network
traffic identification.

Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He is currently
an Associate Professor with USTC. His research
interests include future networks, multimedia communication, and network security.

Quan Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in production process automation from
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning,
China, in 1992, and the M.S. degree in automatic
control theory and application and the Ph.D. degree
in computer software and theory from the University
of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei,
Anhui, China, in 1995 and 2003, respectively. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Automation and the Deputy Director with
the Laboratory for Future Networks. His research
interests include video semantic retrieval, media content distribution, video
quality detection, and future networks.