This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

1

Energy-Efficient Distributed Intrusion Detection Leveraging
Graph-Smoothness and Sparsity in Consumer IoT WSNs
Tanveer Ahmad, Asma Abbas Hassan Elnour, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu

Abstract—An effective security approach is essential for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) against various security threats,
which helps to estimate the lifetime of the network. This makes
it highly valuable to design an Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) that consumes less energy and identifies malicious activity
precisely. Traditional IDS techniques are limited to detecting
only certain types of attacks and often suffer from reduced
network longevity. Intrusion detection plays a critical role in
consumer electronics by safeguarding user privacy, ensuring
reliable device operation, and protecting interconnected smart
environments from increasingly sophisticated cyber threats. This
paper proposed a Distributed ADMM-based IDS (D-ADMMIDS) using graph-smoothness priors and sparsity-driven anomaly
decomposition for real-time threat detection. The proposed
framework optimizes locally at each sensor, exchanging only
compressed dual variables, thereby reducing communication
by 11.1% compared to existing schemes. The system adopted
a convex composite objective, ensuring convergence within 25
ADMM iterations, with residuals below 2.3×10−3 and 2.0×10−3 .
The simulations show that D-ADMM-IDS achieves a detection
accuracy of 96.4% while maintaining a false positive rate of
only 1.9%. Additionally, the proposed method reduces average
detection latency 3.0 s and energy consumption 0.875 J per node.
Index Terms—Consumer IoT, Energy, Intrusion, Graph
smoothness, Signal Sparsity.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

SNS is a key technology for enabling smart environments, supporting applications like environmental
monitoring, precision agriculture, industrial control, intelligent transportation, and critical infrastructure surveillance [1].
These networks comprise many sensor nodes deployed on an
area to monitor physical phenomena and communicate via
multi-hop transmission. The WSNs face limitations due to
their constrained energy, memory, bandwidth, and computational capabilities. WSNs are vulnerable to various cyber and
physical threats, such as sinkhole, selective forwarding, Sybil,
and false data attacks [2]–[4].
The integration of WSNs into IoT and emerging 6G networks increased the system scalability and complexity. Smart
homes, wearables, industrial systems, and transportation all
depend on WSN data, expanding the attack surface and
T. Ahmad is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus, Nicosia Cyprus. Corresponding Author (e-mail: tahmad01@ucy.ac.cy)
A. A Hassan Elnour is with the Department of Computer Science, Applied
College, Girls Section, King Khalid University, Mahayil, Saudi Arabia. (email: aselnour@kku.edu.sa)
Thippa Reddy Gadekallu is with the College of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou 311300, China, as well as
with the College of Mechanical Engineering, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing
314001, China, and with the Division of Research and Development, Lovely
Professional University, Phagwara, India. email: (thippareddy@ieee.org)

exposing networks to advanced threats. Existing signaturebased systems require frequent updates and miss new attacks,
while anomaly-based methods are too resource-heavy for sensor nodes. Centralized detection creates high communication
overhead and single points of failure, whereas distributed
systems often lack coordination and resilience to handle sophisticated threats [5], [6]. In consumer IoT scenarios, these
failures can directly threaten user privacy, trust, and safety,
making lightweight and intelligent intrusion detection vital
for safeguarding devices and applications. Therefore, an IDS
framework that is accurate, resource-efficient, scalable, and
capable of real-time operation under limited resources is
urgently needed [7], [8]. As consumer electronics continue
to increase at an extremely high rate, including smart home,
wearables, and connected appliances, wireless sensor networks
are now firmly rooted in everyday life. Due to compromising
performance of the network, security breaches directly jeopardize the privacy, safety, and trust of the user. Conventional
intrusion detection systems tend to be too resource-intensive
or centralized to work with consumer electronics. This inspires
the necessity of a lightweight, distributed, and energy-efficient
IDS framework that would be reliable to work within the
limited environments of consumer IoT-enabled WSNs.
In this study, a novel Distributed IDS for WSNs in smart
consumer environments, utilizing the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers (ADMM) is proposed. The core innovation is framing intrusion detection as a structured optimization
problem that adopted two key properties of WSN communication in consumer networks, including (i) low-rank patterns
in typical network traffic caused by spatial and temporal correlations and (ii) sparsity of anomalies, indicating that attacks
are localized and rare. By integrating graph-smoothness priors
based on the network topology, the system ensures consistency
with physical connectivity while identifying attack-related
disruptions. The main contributions of this work are:
Development of an accurate, topology-aware, distributed
IDS framework designed specifically for the operational
realities of consumer IoT WSNs.
• Formulation of IDS as a graph-smoothness and sparsityregularized optimization, enabling accurate separation of
network behavior from localized attack patterns.
• Design of a novel low-rank and sparse decomposition
model, a distributed ADMM-based solution that combined with graph regularization to detect both overall
patterns and localized anomalies.
• Mathematical formulation of a grounded optimization
algorithm that ensures high detection robustness while
reducing energy and bandwidth use.
•

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

2

By combining distributed optimization, graph-theoretic
modeling, and sparse signal recovery, the proposed system enhances the latest capabilities in consumer ioT WSN intrusion
detection. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related
work is presented in Section II. Section III introduces the
system model, threat model, including the network overview,
communication flow, energy model, and threat model. The proposed intrusion detection mechanism is described in Section
IV. Section V presents the analytical analysis of the proposed
method, followed by results and discussion in Section VI.
Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section various methods for IDSs and secure data
transmission in WSNs are discussed and summarized in Table
I. In [9], the author introduces a lightweight, energy-efficient
IDS specifically designed for LoRaWAN end devices, aiming
to counteract energy depletion attacks that gradually drain
battery life. It tracks sensor energy consumption patterns
through distance-metric-based anomaly detection, and used for
resource-limited IoT devices and demonstrates high detection
accuracy, with a F1 scores above 0.95 with 0.1 and 4.1%
energy consumption. A FL framework for intrusion detection
in WSNs, combining FedAvg with XGBoost and utilizing fog
computing to extend the network edge is presented in [10]. The
method improves XGBoost with an enhanced histogram-based
approximation tailored for the imbalanced data typical of
WSNs and further reduces communication costs using a TOPK gradient selection to limit uploaded parameters. Experiments
show that this approach achieves better detection accuracy
and lower energy use compared to traditional methods. The
author in [11] proposed an IDS for sensor networks using
an enhanced deep neural network (IDNN). The system architecture is optimized with coyote optimization algorithm
integrated with global search (COA-GS). The system testing
on KDDCup-99 and WSN-DS datasets shows robust performance, achieving approximately 95% accuracy, 96% recall,
95% F1-score, and an ROC AUC around 98%, along with
low detection latency ( 1 ms) and delay ( 0.8 ms).
A novel FIDS-HMM technique for WSNs is proposed with
the integration of fuzzy logic and the hidden Markov model
to identify black hole attacks and malicious nodes [13]. The
HMM monitors the energy level of the node, while fuzzy inference leverages metrics such as packet arrival rates, packet drop
rate, and remaining energy to assess the likelihood of an attack.
The simulations were performed in NS-2 which shows that
FIDS-HMM enhances QoS metrics—namely packet delivery
ratio, throughput, and delay. [13] introduces a collaborative
IDS (CIDS) designed for RPL-based networks within the Internet of Everything that focuses on complex joint routing attacks
that impair performance and energy efficiency. It integrates
queue and workload-aware RPL (QWL-RPL) for congestion
control, genetic algorithm-optimized weighted random forwarding for load balancing, fuzzy logic for assessing trust,
LightGBM for attack detection, and Q-learning with trickletime for collaboratively classifying and managing attacks. The
results show improved detection accuracy, higher throughput,

and better energy efficiency, along with lower control overhead
and faster computation. Author in [14] presents TEAD, a
hybrid IDS designed for IoT-enabled WSNs. It combines
trust assessment with ML-based anomaly detection. TEAD
calculates real-time trust scores for nodes using behavioral
indicators like communication link reliability, weight ratio, and
frequency deviation. Testing on the NSL-KDD and CIC-IDS2017 datasets shows TEAD’s high effectiveness, with 96%
accuracy, a 2% false positive rate, and a 3% false negative
rate, making it well-suited for resource-limited IoT-WSNs.
Another study introduces an energy-efficient data transmission
framework for WSNs that combines the Low-Energy Adaptive
Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) protocol with a fuzzy-based
IDS [15]. LEACH reduces energy use by randomly selecting cluster heads (CHs) and rotating the role among nodes,
promoting balanced energy consumption. The Fuzzy-IDS uses
fuzzy logic and artificial neural networks (ANNs) to identify
nodes as either legitimate or malicious, strengthening network
security. Simulation results show that the proposed method
achieves about 97% accuracy, precision, and specificity, with
low false positive and negative rates, thereby enhancing data
transmission efficiency and extending network lifespan.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
This section discusses the architecture of consumer WSNs
and presents a threat model that identifies intrusions based on
a formal mathematical framework for precise analysis.
A. Smart Environment and Network Overview
A smart environment can be described as a physical facility,
e.g., a smart building, agricultural field, or urban infrastructure,
integrated with ubiquitous sensing, computation, and communication resources. In our model, this environment is equipped
with a set of N wireless sensor nodes, represented by:
V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN }.

(1)

Each node vi consists of sensing modalities, a microcontroller,
a radio transceiver, and a limited-capacity power source. The
consumer network operates in a multi-hop topology, in which
is data originating at a source node may traverse intermediate
nodes before reaching the sink or base station. Let E ⊂ V × V
represent the set of bidirectional communication links. The
network can be represented as an undirected graph:
G = (V, E).

(2)

Nodes (vi , vj ) ∈ E, communicate directly if their Euclidean
distance satisfies dij ≤ Rc , where communication range Rc
is determined by the radio hardware and path-loss conditions.
In the presence of node mobility or topology changes, the
graph Laplacian is updated dynamically. As long as topology
variations occur on a slower timescale than the ADMM iterations; the graph-smoothness regularization remains effective
and preserves convergence properties.
B. Communication and Data Flow Model
Time is expressed as discrete slots t ∈ N+ . In each time
slot, a node may be in sense, transmit, receive, or idle status.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

3

TABLE I: Summary of Intrusion Detection Approaches in WSNs and IoT Networks
Ref

Target Network

9

LoRaWAN
End Devices

10

WSNs

11

WSNs

12

WSNs

13

RPL-based IoE
Networks

14

IoT-enabled WSNs

15

WSNs

Methodology

Main Contribution / Focus

Performance Highlights

Lightweight IDS, energy consumption
monitoring, anomaly detection
FedAvg (federated learning), XGBoost,
TOP-K gradient selection
Deep Neural Network (DNN), Coyote
Optimization Algorithm (COA-GS)
Fuzzy logic, Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)
Collaborative IDS, QWL-RPL, fuzzy
logic, LightGBM, Q-learning
Trust evaluation, LSTM, autoencoder
anomaly detection

Detects energy depletion attacks efficiently
for resource-constrained IoT devices
Federated IDS for WSNs to detect intrusions
while reducing communication overhead
Optimized IDS design for WSNs with
enhanced detection
Effective detection of black hole
attacks in WSNs
Detects joint routing attacks in
low-power networks
TEAD framework combining trust metrics
with ML-based IDS
Energy-efficient data transmission
with fuzzy IDS routing

High detection performance
with low resource
Improved detection accuracy
and energy efficiency
∼95% accuracy, low detection
latency (∼1 ms)
Enhanced packet delivery ratio,
throughput, and delay
Higher accuracy, throughput,
and energy efficiency

LEACH clustering, Fuzzy logic, ANN IDS

The sensed value at node vi and time t is denoted by:
si (t) ∈ R.

(3)

(4)

The network adopted a store-and-forward routing paradigm.
Let Pi→sink represent a path from node vi to the sink node
vsink . The path length is the number of hops:
L(Pi→sink ) = cardinality of edges in path.

∼97% accuracy, precision, and
specificity, low false positive/negative

D. Channel Model

The data packet transmitted from vi to vj is denoted by
pij (t), that contains the sensed value and optional metadata
like timestamp and node ID.
N (i) = {vj ∈ V | (vi , vj ) ∈ E}.

96% accuracy, 2% FPR, 3% FNR

(5)

The end-to-end delay for a packet from vi to the sink is:


X
(m,n)
(m)
(m)
Di =
Ttx
+ Tqueue
+ Tproc
,
(6)

The wireless channel connecting two nodes experiences
fading and noise. For heterogeneous sensor, the measurement
noise variance is either obtained from device specifications or
estimated empirically during a short calibration phase. Each
node maintains a local noise estimate, allowing the model to
accommodate sensor-dependent uncertainty without requiring
global synchronization. We represent the baseband equivalent
channel coefficient between vi and vj at time t as follows:
p
(10)
hij (t) = Gij · ηij (t),
where, Gij is a large-scale path gain, inversely proportional to
dγij , ηij (t) is a small-scale fading coefficient (Rayleigh fading).
The received signal at vj from vi is:
rj (t) = hij (t) · xi (t) + nj (t),

(11)

where xi (t) is the transmitted symbol and nj (t) is additive
white Gaussian noise with variance σn2 .

(vm ,vn )∈Pi→sink
(m,n)

where Ttx
is the transmission delay between vm and vn ,
(m)
(m)
Tqueue , Tproc is the queuing and processing delay.

E. Threat Model

Energy efficiency is essential for the networks because
nodes typically run on batteries. The energy used to transmit
data from vi to vj is described by the first-order radio model.

In a smart WSNs, an adversary aims to disrupt or manipulate
sensing, communication, or decision-making. The adversary
may be external, injecting, jamming, or eavesdropping on
traffic, or internal, having compromised nodes with access
to keys, memory, or sensing functions. These attackers can
intercept or modify messages, or tamper with node hardware
or firmware. Let yi (t) be the true sensed value at node vi .
Under attack, the observed value ỹi (t) can be modeled as

Etx (k, dij ) = Eelec · k + Eamp · k · dγij ,

ỹi (t) = yi (t) + ai (t),

C. Energy Model

(7)

where k is a packet size in bits, Eelec is the energy per bit, Eamp
is the energy per bit per mγ , and γ is a path-loss exponent.
The energy consumption for receiving a k-bit packet is:
Erx (k) = Eelec · k.

(8)

The energy update equation for a node vi is therefore:
(i)

(i)
(i)
Ei (t + 1) = Ei (t) − Etx (t) − Erx
(t) − Eproc
(t),
(i)

(9)

where Eproc (t) is the energy spent on computation and sensing.

(12)

where ai (t) is the disturbance caused by the adversary. The
resulting packet delivery ratio (PDR) is
P P
(i)
(1 − Ploss (t))
PDRattack = t i P
.
(13)
tN
Assuming that the network topology, represented as G, remains connected under normal conditions because of a trusted,
physically secure sink node. Also, the time synchronization
is accurate for slot-based modeling, and that communication
occurs over half-duplex shared channels. The ADMM penalty
parameter ρ is important for governing the balance between

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

4

primal consistency and dual update magnitude. As ADMM
ensures convergence for any ρ > 0 under convexity, the practical convergence speed is highly sensitive to its value. A small
value leads to slow enforcement, whereas an excessively large
one ρ may cause oscillatory updates or numerical instability.
IV. P ROPOSED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ECHANISM
This section describes a detailed, mathematical formulation
and description of the proposed IDS designed for consumer
IoT WSNs. Consider a network with N sensors, where the
connectivity is depicted by an undirected graph G = (V, E). At
each discrete time index t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } the sensors gather
a vector of scalar measurements denoted by,

⊤
y(t) = y1 (t), y2 (t), . . . , yN (t) ∈ RN .

a combination of both time regularization and space Laplacian
coupling to retrieve the natural framework of intrusion conduct
in the WSNs. Temporal regularization imposes smoothness of
the legitimate signal through the consecutive time indices and
guarantees smooth dynamics of the system that vary gradually,
and abrupt deviations, which are usually brought about by
intrusions, are isolated in the sparse component. At the same
time, spatial Laplacian prior utilizes the similarities between
adjacent nodes: legitimate behavior is more likely to develop
in a coherent manner throughout the graph, but attacks are
typically local or asymmetric. The temporal regularizer Rt (S)
refers to the mathematical constraint added to stabilize and
smooth the sparse intrusion signal S across time.

(14)
Rt (S) =

These measurements result from the physical process, measurement noise, and possible malicious perturbations. The
observed vector can be conceptually separated as
y(t) = s(t) + a(t) + n(t),

(15)

where s(t) the legitimate signal component is, a(t) indicate an adversarial perturbation, and n(t) is the stochastic
measurement noise. The s(t) is assumed to change rapidly
over the graph. The adversarial component a(t) is defined as
spatially sparse and possibly temporally sporadic. To formalize
smoothness in the network, let L ∈ RN ×N is the combinatorial
graph Laplacian integrated with G, defined by L = D − W
where W is the symmetric weighted adjacency matrix and
D =Pdiag(d1 , . . . , dN ) is the diagonal degree matrix with
di = j Wij . The graph Laplacian encodes local differences
N
between node values,
P for any vector2 u ∈ R the quadratic
1
⊤
form u Lu = 2 i,j Wij (ui − uj ) computes the weighted
variation of u on the graph. Given a temporal window t =
1, . . . , T we obtained the measurements into a matrix


Y = y(1), y(2), . . . , y(T ) ∈ RN ×T .
(16)
Similarly, we define the matrices for legitimate signals, adversarial perturbations, and noise as S, A and N respectively,
so that a concise model for the observation window becomes:
Y = S + A + N.

(17)

The detection task is to identify nonzero entries of A,
including their spatial and temporal support, and measure their
magnitudes, while estimating the smooth component S.
1
min ∥Y − S − A∥2F + α tr(S⊤ LS) + β ∥A∥1,1 + γ Rt (S). (18)
S, A 2
1
2 ∥Y

A∥2F

where
− S −
ensures that the data remains accurate even in noisy environments.
Meanwhile,
PT
⊤
⊤
thePLaplacian
quadratic
tr(S
LS)
=
s(t)
Ls(t) =
t=1
P
1
2
W
(s
(t)
−
s
(t))
encourages
spatial
smoothness
ij
i
j
t
i,j
2
P
by penalizing. ℓ1 norm ∥A∥1,1 = i,t |Ai,t | promotes sparsity
in the adversarial matrix, which aligns with the idea that
attacks typically impact only a limited number of sensors. The
temporal regularizer Rt (S) ensures that S captures the slow
dynamics of the legitimate process. The proposed model uses

T
X

∥s(t) − s(t − 1)∥22 = ∥SH∥2F ,

(19)

t=2

where, H ∈ RT ×(T −1) is the first-difference operator, where
the entries are defined as Ht,t = 1, Ht+1,t = −1. The
optimization problem in equation (18) is convex and amenable
to powerful numerical methods. However, the centralization
implied by solving (18) in a single location is impractical for
large-scale WSNs. Let si ∈ RT is the temporal sequence of
legitimate values at node i, and ai ∈ RT represent the temporal
attack sequence
at node
i. The matrices can be decomposed


⊤
⊤
⊤
as S = s⊤
1 ; . . . ; sN and A = a1 ; . . . ; aN . The Laplacian
smoothness can be expressed using the edge incidence.
tr(S⊤ LS) =

1 X
Wij ∥si − sj ∥22 .
2

(20)

(i,j)∈E

The Frobenius data-fidelity
PNterm decomposes as a sum of
nodewise squared errors 12 i=1 ∥yi − si − ai ∥22 where yi
denotes the ith row of Y and similarly for the other matrices.
For each node i we introduce local copies of its own signal
and attack variables. More specifically, define for each edge
(i, j) ∈ E an auxiliary variable zij ∈ RT intended to represent
the local agreement between si and sj . The constraints satisfy
that zij = si and zij = sj in the consensus limit. Using
these auxiliary variables, the optimization can be equivalently
expressed (for the squared-difference temporal regularizer) as
N
1 X
1X
∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + α
Wij ∥zij − zji ∥22
2
{si ,ai },{zij } 2
i=1

min

(i,j)∈E

+β

N
X
i=1

∥ai ∥1 + γ

N
X

∥Dt si ∥22

(21)

i=1

subject to zij = si , zji = sj , ∀(i, j) ∈ E. Dt is
the temporal-difference operator such that Dt si yields the
first differences of si . The augmented Lagrangian for the
constrained problem (21) in Lagrange multipliers {λij , λji }
that correspond to the constraints zij −si = 0 and zji −sj = 0,

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

5

respectively. The resulting Lagrangian is:
N
X

1
1 X
∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + α
Wij ∥zij − zji ∥22
2 i=1
2

Lρ =

(i,j)∈E

+β

N
X

∥ai ∥1 + γ

i=1

∥Dt si ∥22

i=1

X

+

N
X

λij , zij − si +

(i,j)∈E

X ρ
∥zij − si ∥22 . (22)
2

(i,j)∈E

The ADMM proceeds by alternating minimization over the
primal blocks {si }, {ai }, and {zij } followed by dual updates
for the multipliers. At ADMM iteration k the ai update solves:
(k+1)

ai

1
(k)
∥yi − si − ai ∥22 + β∥ai ∥1 .
2

= arg min
ai

(k)

The residual vector ri
by soft-thresholding:

(23)

(k)

= yi − si , the solution is given

(k+1)

ai

(k) 

= Sβ ri

,

(24)

The zij -updates at iteration k solve, for every edge (i, j) ∈ E,
(k+1)
(k)
zij
= arg min αWij ∥zij − zji ∥22
z
ij

ρ
(k)
(25)
+ ∥zij − si ∥22 .
2
This is a quadratic problem and yields a closed-form linear
update, which is rewritten as:
−1
(k+1)
(k)
(k)
(k) 
zij
= 2αWij I+ρI
2αWij zji +ρsi −λij . (26)
+

(k)
(k)
λij , zij − si

The si is computationally involved because it integrates data
fidelity, temporal smoothness, and the consensus terms related
to incident edges. The node update is solve by:
(k+1)

si

1
(k+1) 2
= arg min ∥yi − si − ai
∥2 + γ∥Dt si ∥22
si
2

X 
ρ (k+1)
(k)
− si ∥22 . (27)
+
− λij , si + ∥zij
2
j∈N (i)

Since all terms are quadratic, si minimization simplifies to
solving a linear system. Gathering the quadratic and linear
components results in a system expressed as:
(k+1)

Qi si

(k)

= bi ,

(28)

where the matrix Qi ∈ RT ×T is positive definite. Solving
the local update for si requires O(T ) operations using the
banded structure of Qi , while the soft-thresholding update
for ai is O(T ) per node, making each ADMM iteration
computationally lightweight for WSN hardware.
Qi = IT + 2γD⊤
t Dt + ρ|N (i)|IT ,
(k)

bi

solvers can be used. The temporal window T manages the
trade-off between detection delay and computational effort.
Additionally, precomputing a Cholesky factor of Qi helps
minimize runtime on platforms with limited resources. The
dual variables are updated in the usual ADMM fashion:
(k+1)
(k)
(k+1)
(k+1) 
λij
= λij + ρ zij
− si
, ∀(i, j) ∈ E. (31)

(k+1)

= yi − ai

+

X

(k+1)

ρzij

(k) 
− λij .

(29)

(30)

j∈N (i)

Solving this linear system provides the current legitimate
signal for node i. When Qi is banded, which occurs if Dt
is the first-difference operator, efficient banded or Cholesky

These dual updates are distributed, matching the primal
steps locality, nodes exchange their si and zij values with
neighbors for updates. Communication is reduced through
lightweight compression methods like quantization or sketching. ADMM maintains global convergence and its speed
improves with proper scaling of Wij and warm-starting across
windows. The false alarm control is controlled by statistically
calibrated thresholds τ = σr Φ−1 (1 − αf /2), with asynchronous spatially adaptive variants used for heterogeneous
sensor noise. Consider the statistic for node i at time t be:

t
bi,τ
X
f1 A
(32)
Ti,t =
log
,
bi,τ
f0 A
τ =t−M +1

where f1 and f0 are the likelihood functions. The proposed method enhances sensor network security by integrating
smoothness and sparsity models. Algorithm 1 focuses on
processing at the local node level. Each sensor node independently monitors its environment, filters data, and extracts
features like sudden changes, noise, or patterns. Algorithm
2 employs an ADMM-based consensus update, where nodes
share partial information to iteratively distinguish between a
smooth, legitimate signal and a sparse anomaly component.
ADMM facilitates agreement among nodes with minimal communication, enhancing anomaly detection and noise reduction
to differentiate normal fluctuations from genuine intrusion
attacks. In Algorithm 3, an intrusion detection rule is applied
using anomaly estimates at each node. Instead of arbitrary
thresholds, it uses a statistically derived threshold based on
residual variance.
Algorithm 1 Local Node Processing at Sensor i
Require: Observations yi (t) for t = 1, . . . , T
1: Preprocess signal: remove mean and normalize yi (t)
2: Extract local features: temporal differences, variance, and
correlations
3: Compute preliminary anomaly score si (t)
4: Store si (t) and prepare local data for ADMM update
Ensure: Feature vector fi (t) and anomaly score si (t) =0
Algorithm 2 Distributed ADMM Consensus Update
Require: Local observations yi , preliminary si , neighbors Ni
(0)
(0)
(0)
1: Initialize si , ai , dual variable λi
2: for each iteration k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
(k+1)
3:
Update smooth signal si
4:
Update anomaly component via soft-thresholding
(k+1)
ai
(k+1)
5:
Update dual variable λi
6: end for
bi =0
Ensure: Local estimates b
si , a

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

6

Algorithm 3 Intrusion Detection and Decision Rule
bi (t), residuals ri (t)
Require: Estimated anomaly signals a
1: Estimate residual variance σr2 over calibration window
2: Set threshold, τ
3: for each node i and time t do
bi,t | > τ then
4:
if |A
5:
Declare intrusion at node i, time t
6:
else
7:
No intrusion
8:
end if
9: end for
Ensure: Intrusion decision map D(i, t) =0
Lemma 4.1 (First-order optimality and subgradient characterization): Let Y, L, and the regularization parameters α, β, γ
be given. Any pair (S⋆ , A⋆ ) that minimizes
J (S, A) = 21 ∥Y − S − A∥2F + α tr(S⊤ LS) + β∥A∥1,1 + γ Rt (S) (33)

satisfies, for i and time index t, the stationarity conditions

0 = − Y − S⋆ − A⋆ + 2αLS⋆ + γ ∇S Rt (S⋆ )
(34)

0 ∈ − Y − S⋆ − A⋆ + β ∂∥A⋆ ∥1,1 ,

(35)

where ∂∥ · ∥1,1 is the subdifferential of the mixed ℓ1 norm.
Theorem 4.2 (Convergence of the distributed ADMM
solver): Assuming that the temporal regularizer Rt is convex
and the central objective is convex and closed, then for fixed
penalty parameter ρ > 0, the iterates generated by ADMM
will converge to a primal-dual optimal (S⋆ , A⋆ , {z⋆ij }, {λ⋆ij })
provided the network graph remains connected and each local
subproblem is solved exactly at every iteration.
Definition 1 (Low-frequency smooth subspace): Let L =
UΛU⊤ be the eigen-decomposition of the Laplacian, and Ur
represents the subspace spanned by the r lowest-frequency
eigenvectors, i.e., Ur = span{u1 , . . . , ur }. A matrix S is said
to be r-bandlimited in time if each temporal column s(t) is
contained within Ur .
Theorem 4.3 (Sufficient condition for exact recovery in
the noiseless case): Suppose the observations that follow the
equation Y = S0 + A0 , where S0 is perfectly r-bandlimited,
and A0 contains no more than s nonzero entries in the N × T
matrix. The incoherence parameter:
√
µ = max
max
N |Uik |,
(36)
i=1,...,N k=1,...,r

measures how concentrated the low-frequency eigenvectors are
in the canonical form. If the pair (r, s) satisfies the relation
NT
s≤c· 2
(37)
µ r log(N T )
for a positive numerical constant c.
Theorem 4.4 (Stable recovery under Gaussian noise): Assume Y = S0 + A0 + N, where N consists of independent
and identically distributed Gaussian entries with a variance of
σ 2 . Given the same incoherence and sparsity, the minimizer
b A)
b meets the error bound.
(S,
√
b − S0 ∥F + ∥A
b − A 0 ∥F ≤ C · σ N T ,
∥S
(38)
with high probability, where C is a constant that depends polynomially on µ, r, and the chosen regularization parameters.

V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
To assess how well the proposed Distributed ADMM-based
IDS (D-ADMM-IDS) performs, we set up a detailed array
of simulation parameters. The N sensor nodes are deployed
randomly across a 2D space measuring 500 × 500 m2 . The
communication radius Rc is kept at a steady 50 m, which
helped maintain a connected network with an average node
degree of about d¯ ≈ 8. Each node was assumed to use an IEEE
802.15.4-compliant transceiver, with the energy cost per packet
κ calculated. The sensing process xi (t) at each node i and
time step t, influenced by Gaussian noise ni (t) ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
with σ set according to the targeted SNR. The high-amplitude
anomalies ai (t) were embed into a fraction ϕ of nodes
(ϕ = 1% − 30%). The ADmm parameters were tuned for fast
convergence and low communication overhead, with penalty
ρ = 1.0 and stopping criterion based on primal and dual
residuals below 10−4 . The simulation ran for T = 100 steps,
and the performance was analyzed using accuracy A, false
positive rate FP , accounting for computation and communication costs. The simulation parameters are summarized in
Table II. The anomaly model tests the IDS against unusual
attack signatures, with attack intensity σ. This demonstrates
how D-ADMM-IDS surpasses current methods, comparing
it with enhanced graphSAGE-based IDS [16], multi-channel
gated recurrent unit [17], and a classical graph-based anomaly
detector [18]. The detection accuracy η as a function of the
attack intensity ρa , where ρa is represented as the proportion
attack |
of compromised nodes to the total network size, ρa = |N|N
| is
shown in Figure 1a. The accuracy of the proposed D-ADMMIDS is above 94.8% even at ρa = 0.15. In comparison,
enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] drops from 92.3% to
85.4%, Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17] from 90.1%
to 83.0%, and the classical graph-based anomaly detector [18]
from 87.9% to 80.5% for same range.
TABLE II: Simulation Parameters for D-ADMM-IDS
Parameter
Number of nodes N
Deployment area
Communication radius Rc
Mean node degree d¯
Sensing noise standard deviation σ
Attack intensity ϕ
Anomaly distribution
ADMM penalty parameter ρ
Per-packet energy cost κ

Value
50–300
500 × 500 m2
50 m
≈8
0.05 (normalized units)
0.01–0.30
Laplacian, zero-mean
1.0
50 nJ/bit

Figure 1b examines the false positive rate (FPR) as a funcFP(θ)
tion of the decision threshold θ, i.e., FPR(θ) = FP(θ)+TN(θ)
.
The D-ADMM-IDS keeps an FPR below 2.8% for all θ ≥ 0.4,
whereas the enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] exhibits
an FPR as high as 5.5%, the multi-channel gated recurrent unit [17] attains 7.8%, and the classical graph-based
anomaly detector [18] exceeds 10.2% for lower thresholds.
Interestingly, even with θ = 0.7, our method achieves a false
positive rate (FPR) of just 1.9%, which is 3.6%. Figure 1c
shows the average energy consumption per node En in joules.
Comparing it to the Enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16],
the Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17], and a traditional
Graph-based Anomaly Detector [18], we see that they scale
with coefficients of 2.0 × 10−3 , 2.5 × 10−3 , and, 3.0 × 10−3

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

7

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1: (a) Detection Accuracy vs. Attack Intensity, (b) False Positive Rate vs. Detection Threshold, and (c) Energy Consumption
per Node vs. Network Size.
respectively. This results in an increase of energy consumption
by 9% to 23% for a network with 250 nodes. To better
quantify scalability, we fit the energy consumption curve using
a log–log regression model of the form E(N ) = k N α , where
E(N ) denotes per-node energy usage and α captures the
scaling behavior with respect to network size. The regression
yields α ≈ 0.31, indicating sublinear growth. A similar trend
is observed for communication overhead, with the log–log fit
confirming that message exchange scales as O(N 0.28 ), demonstrating favorable scalability for large WSN deployments.
The total communication cost Ccomm , measured in bytes
exchanged as a function of the number of ADMM iterations k, is illustrated in Figure 2a. By defining the cost
function as Ccomm (k) = C0 + βcomm · k, where C0 =
2000 bytes and βcomm = 20 bytes/iter for our approach,
leading to Ccomm (20) = 2400 bytes. In comparison, Enhanced GraphSAGE-based IDS [16] begins at 2200 bytes with
βcomm = 25, Multi-Channel Gated Recurrent Unit [17] starts at
2400 with βcomm = 30, and the classical graph-based anomaly
detector [18] kicks off at 2600 with βcomm = 35. This results
in a reduction of communication load ranging from 14.5%
to 25.8% over the span of 20 iterations. Table III provides a
clear and concise overview of how the proposed D-ADMMIDS stacks up against existing methods.
The convergence of the proposed D-ADMM-IDS is illustrated in Figure 2b. We observed the primal residual ∥rk ∥2 and
dual residual ∥sk ∥2 against the number of ADMM iterations
k on a logarithmic scale. Furthermore, both residuals show a
geometric decay rate, dropping to values below 10−2 within
just 25 iterations. This swift decline highlights the strong
convexity of the optimization problem at hand and the effective
variable updates provided by the distributed ADMM framework. Specifically, the primal residual decreases from 5×10−1
at k = 1 to 2.3 × 10−3 at k = 25, while the dual residual
falls from 4 × 10−1 to 2.0 × 10−3 in the same timeframe.
Such a rapid convergence ensures that synchronization delays
across nodes in the WSN are kept to a minimum, which
directly contributes to low detection latency. The smooth,
steady decline also indicates algorithmic stability given the
network topology and intrusion patterns considered, making it
resilient to the noise that often comes with sensor measurements. The comparative analysis of recovery errors for the
proposed D-ADMM-IDS, along with B1 (E-GraphSAGE), B2
(MC-GRU), and B3 (Graph-Anomaly), is detailed in Figure 2c.

We considered two metrics, the Frobenius norm of the sparse
intrusion signal recovery error, ∥Ŝ − S0 ∥F , and the low-rank
network state matrix recovery error, ∥Â−A0 ∥F . The proposed
method shows impressive results with ∥Ŝ − S0 ∥F = 0.05
and ∥Â − A0 ∥F = 0.07, which are 58.3% and 50.0% lower
than the nearest competitor, B1 . This significant improvement
is largely due to the joint graph-smoothness and sparsityregularized decomposition used in D-ADMM-IDS, allowing
for a clear distinction between anomalous patterns and the
normal dynamics of the WSN. On the other hand, the existing
methods show higher recovery errors, ranging from 0.12 to
0.18 for S and 0.14 to 0.21 for A. This is mainly because
they depend on centralized or non-sparsity-aware learning
models. The lower recovery error not only leads to better
detection accuracy but also reduces false alarms, highlighting
the advantages of the proposed approach for real-world smart
environment applications.
TABLE III: Comparative Performance Analysis
Metric

Proposed

[16]

[17]

[18]

Accuracy @ ρa = 0.30 (%)
FPR @ θ = 0.7
Detection Delay Mean (s)
Energy per Node @ 250 nodes (J)
Comm. Overhead @ k = 20 (bytes)
Overall Improvement Range (%)

88.5
1.9
3.0
0.875
2400
14-28

85.4
5.5
4.0
0.95
2700
–

83.0
7.8
5.0
1.05
3000
–

80.5
10.2
6.0
1.10
3300
–

To understand the role of each component in D-ADMM-IDS
framework, an ablation experiments is conducted by disabling
or modifying key modules. First, the temporal regularizer is
removed by setting γ = 0. The sensor cannot accurately
detect intrusions across consecutive time slots without temporal smoothing. Analytically, the detection accuracy drops by
nearly 12.5%, and the false positive rate increases by 18.7%.
Second, the ADMM consensus mechanism is turned off and
allows each node to operate independently. Information is not
exchanged among neighbors, and the estimates si and ai are
based solely on local data. This show a performance decline,
with detection accuracy decreasing from 96.4% to 81.9%, and
false positives nearly doubling as illustrated in Figure 2d.
Third, adaptive substitution statistically calibrated thresholds
with fixed global thresholds. The precision reduces by about
14.2%, and the recall worsens at high-variance nodes. The
adaptive thresholding scheme is thereby fair and robust in
heterogeneous environments. These ablation prove the fact that

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3665793

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2: (a) Communication Overhead vs. ADMM Iterations, (b) Convergence of ADMM in D-ADMM-IDS, (c) Recovery error
comparison, and (d) Ablation analysis of the proposed IDS.
all three modules, temporal regularization, ADMM consensus,
and adaptive thresholds are critical. Although this evaluation is
simulation-based, the simulator uses realistic communication,
energy, and latency models, with full hardware validation
planned for future work.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, D-ADDM-IDS, a distributed IDS of consumer
IoT WSNs, was proposed to combine graph-smoothness priors with sparsity-based anomaly decomposition for real-time
security. The proposed model uses the ADDM to perform
local optimization at each node, which is an easier method
to calculate distributively, which needs more communication
and may lead to delays. The simulations show that D-ADMMIDS achieves a detection accuracy of 96.4%. The algorithm
converges in 25 iterations, with primal and dual residuals
falling below 2.3 × 10−3 and 2.0 × 10−3 , respectively. These
convergences lead to an average detection latency of 3.0
seconds and energy consumption of 0.875 joules, a 14.2%
decrease compared to the most efficient methods. D-ADMMIDS provides high accuracy, fast convergence, and resource
efficiency, marking a significant advancement in IDS design.
Future work will focus on implementing the proposed IDS on
a physical WSN testbed to validate performance under real
deployment conditions. We also plan to extend the framework
to larger and more heterogeneous IoT networks to further
evaluate its scalability and robustness.
VII. F UNDING S TATEMENT
The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of
Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University for
funding this work through Large Research Project under grant
number RGP2/544/46.
R EFERENCES
[1] Ahmad, T., Li, X.J. and Seet, B.C., 2017. Parametric loop division for
3D localization in wireless sensor networks. Sensors, 17(7), p.1697.
[2] Krishnasamy, Sundaramoorthy, Mutlaq B. Alotaibi, Lolwah I. Alehaideb,
and Qaisar Abbas. ”Development and validation of a cyber-physical
system leveraging EFDPN for enhanced WSN-IoT network security.”
Sensors 23, no. 22 (2023): 9294.
[3] Li, Yang, Ming Wei, Jing Nie, Sezai Ercisli, Kai Fang, and Thippa Reddy
Gadekallu. ”Enhancing DDoS Defense in the Internet of Energy through
Intelligent Task Scheduling Framework.” IEEE Network (2025).
[4] Krishnasamy, Sundaramoorthy, Mutlaq B. Alotaibi, Lolwah I. Alehaideb,
and Qaisar Abbas. ”Development and validation of a cyber-physical
system leveraging EFDPN for enhanced WSN-IoT network security.”
Sensors 23, no. 22 (2023): 9294.

[5] Hussain, Saqib, Jingsha He, Nafei Zhu, Fahad Razaque Mughal, Muhammad Iftikhar Hussain, Abeer D. Algarni, Sadique Ahmad, Mira M. Zarie,
and Abdelhamied A. Ateya. ”An adaptive intrusion detection system
for WSN using reinforcement learning and deep classification.” Arabian
Journal for Science and Engineering 50, no. 15 (2025): 12463-12477.
[6] Tiwari, Vaibhav, Chandrasen Pandey, Shamila J. Francis, Ishan Budhiraja,
Pronaya Bhattacharya, Zhu Zhu, and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu. ”Artificial
intelligence enhanced edge server placement for workload balancing
and energy efficiency in B5G networks.” Digital Communications and
Networks (2025).
[7] Mopuru, Bhargavi, and Yellamma Pachipala. ”Advancing IoT Security:
Integrative Machine Learning Models for Enhanced Intrusion Detection in
Wireless Sensor Networks.” Engineering, Technology & Applied Science
Research 14, no. 4 (2024): 14840-14847.
[8] Ahmad, Tanveer, Muhammad Usman Hadi, Vasos Vassiliou, Loukas
Dimitriou, Asim Anwar, and Tien Anh Tran. ”Real-Time Anomaly
Detection in Smart Vehicle-To-UAV Networks for Disaster Management.”
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies 36, no. 5
(2025): e70162.
[9] Proto, André, Charles C. Miers, and Tereza Cristina Carvalho.
”Lightweight Architecture for Intrusion Detection of Energy Depletion
Attacks in LoRaWAN End devices.” SN Computer Science 6, no. 6
(2025): 1-20.
[10] Wu, Hongjiao. ”Intrusion detection model for wireless sensor networks
based on FedAvg and XGBoost algorithm.” International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks 2024, no. 1 (2024): 5536615.
[11] Sedhuramalingam, K., and N. Saravanakumar. ”A novel optimal deep
learning approach for designing intrusion detection system in wireless
sensor networks.” Egyptian Informatics Journal 27 (2024): 100522.
[12] Ravindran, S., 2024. Intelligent fuzzy logic based intrusion detection
system for effective detection of black hole attack in WSN. Peer-to-Peer
Networking and Applications, 17(4), pp.1813-1829.
[13] Abdulkareem, Omar A., Raja Kumar Kontham, and Farhad E. Mahmood. ”Collaborative Intrusion Detection System to Identify Joint Attacks
in Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks Routing Protocol
on the Internet of Everything.” Mesopotamian Journal of CyberSecurity
4, no. 3 (2024): 251-277.
[14] Anwer, Raja Waseem, Mohammad Abrar, Abdu Salam, and Faizan
Ullah. ”TEAD: trust-enhanced anomaly detection framework for intrusion
detection in IoT-enabled wireless sensor networks (WSNs).” Wireless
Networks (2025): 1-19.
[15] Tabbassum, Saziya, and Rajesh Kumar Pathak. ”Effective data transmission through energy-efficient clustering and Fuzzy-Based IDS routing
approach in WSNs.” Virtual Reality & Intelligent Hardware 6, no. 1
(2024): 1-16.
[16] Lo, Wai Weng, Siamak Layeghy, Mohanad Sarhan, Marcus Gallagher,
and Marius Portmann. ”E-graphsage: A graph neural network based
intrusion detection system for iot.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16329
(2021).
[17] Jingjing, Zhou, Yang Tongyu, Zhang Jilin, Zhang Guohao, Li Xuefeng,
and Pan Xiang. ”Intrusion Detection Model for Wireless Sensor Networks
Based on MC-GRU.” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
2022, no. 1 (2022): 2448010.
[18] Zhu, Qianwen, Jinyu Zhou, Shiyu Zhao, and Wei Wang. ”GraphBased Anomaly Detection of Wireless Sensor Network.” In Artificial
Intelligence in China: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence in China, pp. 144-150. Singapore: Springer
Singapore, 2022.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.