9138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Enhance UAV Network Resilience by Malicious
Traffic Detection: A Twin Graph
Encoder Approach
Xuzeng Li , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Tao Zhang , Member, IEEE, Jiacheng Wang , Member, IEEE,
Jiangtian Nie , Jian Wang , Xuangou Wu , Member, IEEE, Zhen Han , Jiqiang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE,
Dusit Niyato , Fellow, IEEE, and Dong In Kim , Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) networks are increasingly exposed to widespread and various network attacks due to
their fully distributed nature and the limited defensive capabilities of individual devices. Existing defense strategies rely on
network connectivity and UAV status information, which overlook
information of network traffic. Malicious traffic detection offers a
promising solution to achieve fine-grained attack detection. However, the dynamic nature and complexity of UAV networks limit
the effectiveness of traditional traffic detection methods. Current
approaches either fail to fully exploit the raw characteristics of
traffic or do not consider the timeliness requirements of UAV
networks. To address these challenges, we propose a novel twin
graph encoder neural network, which can extract features of
raw traffic bytes for efficient traffic detection. First, we propose
a decoupled architecture for model training and inference to
enable efficient detection of malicious traffic in UAV networks.
Second, we propose a novel modeling method that models traffic
as the co-occurrence graph and word frequency graph based on
raw bytes. Then, we propose TGE-ETD, a Twin Graph Encoder
for Encrypted Traffic Detection. TGE-ETD consists of a set
Received 26 October 2025; revised 13 February 2026 and 31 March
2026; accepted 3 May 2026. Date of publication 13 May 2026; date of
current version 29 May 2026. This work was supported in part by Beijing
Natural Science Foundation under Grant L251041; in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62402029; in part
by the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture under
Grant HLW2025MS02; in part by the Open Fund of Anhui Provincial Key
Laboratory of Digital Twin Technology in Metallurgical Industry under Grant
ADW24-01; in part by the Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Integrated
Services Networks under Grant ISN27-22. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was M. J. Khabbaz.
(Corresponding author: Tao Zhang.)
Xuzeng Li and Tao Zhang are with the School of Cyberspace Science
and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China, and also
with the State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: 22110130@bjtu.edu.cn; taozh@bjtu.edu.cn).
Jiacheng Wang and Dusit Niyato are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
(e-mail: jiacheng.wang@ntu.edu.sg; dniyato@ntu.edu.sg).
Jiangtian Nie is with the School of Natural and Computing Sciences, University of Aberdeen, AB24 3FX Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail:
jiangtian.nie@abdn.ac.uk).
Jian Wang, Zhen Han, and Jiqiang Liu are with Beijing Key Laboratory of Security and Privacy in Intelligent Transportation and the
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University,
Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: wangjian@bjtu.edu.cn; zhan@bjtu.edu.cn;
jqliu@bjtu.edu.cn).
Xuangou Wu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University of Technology, Anhui 243002, China (e-mail:
wuxgou@ahut.edu.cn).
Dong In Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail:
dongin@skku.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2026.3693173

of twin graph encoders that effectively extract intrinsic traffic
features from graphs constructed from raw bytes. In addition,
TGE-ETD employs a global attention pooling mechanism to
effectively distinguish the feature contributions of different bytes.
Finally, we conducted extensive experiments on a real UAV
traffic dataset and four real-world network traffic datasets. TGEETD achieved an improvement of 1%-20% over the baseline
methods by reducing the number of parameters by 20 times.
Tested on multiple UAV hardware devices, TGE-ETD can achieve
millisecond-level traffic detection.
Index Terms—UAV networks, malicious traffic detection, graph
representation, graph learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the rapid development of the low-altitude economy, uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) networks have
been widely deployed in military and civilian domains [1],
including applications such as battlefield surveillance and
disaster response [2], [3], [4], [5]. UAVs often operate
in swarms to perform data collection or model inference
tasks, collaborating with ground-based or cloud servers
to form heterogeneous UAV networks [6]. However, the
fully distributed nature and structural heterogeneity of such
networks expose them to significant security threats. In addition, the limited computational resources of UAV devices
restrict their defensive capabilities, thus broadening the attack
surface [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. These challenges
highlight the urgent need for robust and broadly applicable defense strategies tailored for heterogeneous UAV
networks.
Secure communication is a fundamental prerequisite to
ensure stable, reliable and safe data transmission and flight
control in UAV networks [9]. Attacks targeting the communication infrastructure of UAV networks can severely degrade
their quality of service and overall performance [13]. Existing
research on UAV network security can be broadly categorized
into attack [7], [8], [13] and defense methods [14], [15],
[16], [17], [18]. Attack methods primarily aim to analyze the
implementation strategies and potential impacts of attacks on
UAV systems. Defense methods focus on designing detection
techniques that are tailored to specific attacks. However, many
of these approaches either rely on connectivity or behavioral
features of UAV networks, overlooking valuable information
embedded in communication data, and thus fail to enable
diversified and fine-grained attack detection.

W

0090-6778 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

Malicious encrypted traffic detection has emerged as a
critical technology in network management, playing a pivotal
role in the resolution of attack challenges [19]. It is particularly
valuable for improving the resilience and security of UAV
networks. Existing approaches to encrypted traffic detection
can be broadly classified into knowledge-based filtering methods [20], [21] and learning-based detection methods [22],
[23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. Knowledgebased methods, such as port-based identification and deep
packet inspection (DPI), rely on predefined rules to classify
traffic. However, as network environments become increasingly complex, with the widespread adoption of non-standard
interfaces and dynamic port allocation, the effectiveness of
these methods has decreased significantly [30]. Furthermore,
encryption transforms payloads into ciphertext, rendering DPI
ineffective in the general applicability of knowledge-based
techniques [27]. To overcome these limitations, researchers
have proposed learning-based encrypted traffic detection methods, leveraging the powerful feature extraction capabilities
of deep neural networks. Although these approaches have
shown impressive performance, they often suffer from two key
drawbacks, including inadequate utilization of raw encrypted
traffic features and lack of consideration of the resource
constraints inherent in UAV networks. As a result, the complexity of these models hampers their practical deployment
in UAV scenarios. Moreover, the highly dynamic nature of
UAV networks and the heterogeneity of devices increase the
complexity of encrypted traffic. As a result, traditional feature
engineering methods become ineffective as they cannot extract
explicit information from encrypted packets, such as five-tuple
features. Meanwhile, existing deep learning–based approaches
lack systematic modeling of UAV network traffic characteristics, hindering their ability to capture the latent features of
UAV traffic, thus constraining their detection performance.
To address these challenges, we propose a resilience
enhancement strategy for UAV networks based on malicious
encrypted traffic detection [31], which leverages encrypted
traffic information within the network to enable accurate
attack detection. Specifically, we design a malicious encrypted
traffic detection architecture tailored for UAV networks, which
decouples the training and inference of detection models
between UAVs and servers, thereby mitigating the impact of
limited computational resources. We further introduce TGEETD, a Twin Graph Encoder for Encrypted Traffic Detection.
TGE-ETD incorporates a hybrid modeling technique that fuses
co-occurrence graphs and term frequency graphs, along with a
lightweight yet expressive twin graph encoder built upon graph
neural networks (GNNs), to effectively extract discriminative
features from encrypted UAV network traffic [32]. To validate
the effectiveness of our method, we conducted extensive
comparative and ablation experiments on five widely used
public datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that TGEETD consistently performs better than benchmarks. The main
contributions are summarized as follows.
1) We propose a novel architecture to improve the
resilience of UAV networks that decouples the
training and inference phases of malicious encrypted
traffic detection models. By offloading model training to

9139

cloud servers and enabling collaborative inference with
UAVs, the architecture addresses the computational limitations of UAVs while ensuring efficient attack detection.
2) We propose TGE-ETD, a malicious traffic detection
approach. It employs a modeling method that integrates
co-occurrence graphs and word frequency graphs to
represent traffic at the byte level. Furthermore, we design
a twin graph encoder to extract byte-level features and
incorporate a global attention pooling mechanism to
differentiate the contribution of each node in the traffic
graph enabling accurate attack detection.
3) We conducted comprehensive experiments based on five
real-world datasets, including comparative and ablation
studies. The results show that TGE-ETD reduces the
number of model parameters by a factor of 20 compared
to the baseline methods, while consistently achieving a
1%-20% improvement in performance.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Attacks Detection in UAV Networks
UAV networks are exposed to a wide spectrum of security
threats [33], including but not limited to denial of service
attacks, jamming attacks, and spoofing attacks [10], [34]. Due
to their distributed nature and complex network topology, UAV
networks inherently present multiple attack surfaces. At the
device level, UAVs are vulnerable to threats such as malware infections, sensor spoofing, and side-channel attacks [9].
During communication, UAV networks face various attacks,
including flooding and sybil attacks [9]. At the network
architecture level, threats such as man-in-the-middle attacks
and data falsification attacks are also prevalent [9]. Research
on deep learning-based attack detection in UAV networks is
still in its early stages. Existing studies rely on UAV log data
[17], [18], [35] or flight data [36], [37] for attack and anomaly
detection. Although these approaches can partially mitigate
security threats, they depend heavily on expert knowledge, or
it is hard to achieve a precise identification of attacks.
B. Malicious Traffic Detection
1) Feature Engineering Methods: As traditional methods
are no longer applicable to complex encrypted traffic scenarios [38], [39], machine learning has begun to be widely
used to classify encrypted traffic through feature engineering.
Taylor et al. [40], [41] designed extracts traffic features based
on flow length and packet size information to distinguish
traffic from different mobile applications. Liu et al. [42]
used the Markov model to extract features from the packet
length sequence and the message type sequence. Shen et al.
[43] used the length of packets in bidirectional client-server
interactions as features and extracted sequence features or
statistical features for traffic classification. However, feature
engineering methods rely on manually constructed features
to identify types of traffic, such as maximum packet length,
average delay, and so on. Universality of these methods is
difficult to guaranty because manually constructing features
costs a lot and they rely on expert experience.

9140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 1. Proposed resilient UAV network architecture based on malicious encrypted traffic detection. The part A of the figure illustrates the network model,
highlighting the various attacks during UAV collaborative inference. The part B in the right presents the execution workflow of the architecture.

2) Deep Learning Methods: As deep learning shows powerful feature extraction capabilities, it has been applied to
traffic classification. Lotfollahi et al. [44] proposed DeepPacket, which uses stacked autoencoders and CNN to extract
the features of the traffic packet. Liu et al. [25] and Wang et al.
[45] used a recurrent neural network to extract features of
the packet length sequence. Meng et al. [46] used variational
autoencoders to detect unknown malicious traffic. Zhang et al.
[47] designed a time-cyclic attention mechanism to identify
the attack patterns of malicious traffic. Shen et al. [48] and
Ding et al. [49] used contrastive learning and adversarial training to detect malicious traffic, which can effectively defend
against evasion attacks. Zhang et al. [47] realized lightweight
malicious traffic detection using an innovative model-splitting
algorithm and a hardware specific unsupervised decision tree.
Xu et al. [50] took CNN and long short term memory
network as teacher models to extract the structural features
of traffic to achieve lightweight malicious traffic detection.
Cai et al. [51] used cycle generative adversarial networks to
capture traffic features. Although these methods have achieved
high accuracy, they cannot fully capture the original traffic
information.
In order to extract traffic features more effectively, graph
learning is widely used because of its powerful representation
ability. Shen et al. [29] constructed a traffic interaction graph to
extract features from traffic bursts. Zhang et al. [30] proposed
the idea of representing the original bytes of encrypted traffic
as a graph and designed a graph neural network for encrypted
traffic classification. Han et al. [52] combined the traffic
interaction graph and the original byte graph to extract traffic
features using GNNs. However, GNNs-based methods rely on
a single modeling approach and fail to prioritize the detection
of malicious encrypted traffic.

3) Pretraining Methods: In order to make full use of the
original information of traffic, pre-trained models have been
widely used. He et al. [28] proposed PERT based on dynamic
word embedding, which takes the original bytes of the traffic
packet as input and extracts the original byte features using
the dynamic word embedding method. Lin et al. [26] proposed
ET-BERT based on BERT [53], which converts the flow
into word-like tags and extracts characteristics from unlabeled
traffic in a pre-trained manner. Zhao et al. [27] converted the
packet bytes into a multi-level flow representation matrix and
then pre-trained the model to extract features from unlabeled
traffic. Yang et al. [54] designed a pre-trained model based
on packet length sequence to achieve stable traffic analysis.
Although these methods achieved inspired results, their complexity and high computational resource requirements make
them difficult to deploy in UAV networks.
III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW
A. Network Model
As illustrated in part A of Fig. 1, the UAV network
framework comprises multiple UAV swarms and a cloud server
that collaboratively execute tasks [17], [31]. Taking collaborative inference as an example, the server first distributes the
inference model to the UAVs, which then perform inference
locally. During this process, individual UAVs, UAV swarms,
and the cloud server are all potential targets of attackers. Due
to their operational independence and reliance on wireless
communication, individual UAVs are particularly vulnerable
to direct attacks. Attackers may exploit system vulnerabilities
to implant malicious software, thus gaining control over the
UAV or disrupting its mission [17]. The interdependent nature
of UAV swarms makes them especially susceptible to singlepoint failures, which compromise of a single node may trigger

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

9141

Fig. 2. The architecture of TGE-ETD. (a) Byte graphs construction: Build the co-occurrence graph and frequency graph using the original bytes;
(b) The twin graph encoder and the attention feature fusion: Fuse the co-occurrence graph and word frequency graph and perform feature embedding,
then extract the original byte features using GNN and obtain the final feature representation based on the global self-attention mechanism; (c) Malicious
detection: Obtain the label of encrypted traffic.

cascading failures. In addition, they are exposed to distributed
denial-of-service (DDoS) and flooding attacks. The cloud
server, which serves as the data processing and storage hub
for the UAV system, faces threats such as malware and DDoS
attacks, which not only jeopardize data security, but can also
disrupt the operation of the entire UAV network.
B. System Model
The attack detection architecture based on malicious
encrypted traffic detection in part B of Fig. 1 that illustrates
the coordination between the cloud server and the UAVs
[17]. The server first collects and processes encrypted traffic
from the UAV network. Then, based on the proposed bytelevel encrypted traffic modeling approach, the encrypted traffic
is transformed into traffic graphs. These graphs are used as
input to the designed twin graph neural network for model
training. Once trained, the resulting attack detection model is
distributed to UAVs for inference. This architecture decouples
model training from detection, thus fully leveraging the computational resources of the server while alleviating the burden
on resource-constrained UAVs.
C. Analysis of Network Resilience
The accuracy and timeliness of the malicious traffic detection framework will impact on the resilience of the UAV
network. Taking collaborative UAVs inference scenarios as
an example, accurate detection constrains the propagation of
anomalous traffic among UAVs, thus mitigating packet loss
and improving the packet delivery ratio. Let Us denote a UAV
swarm participating in collaborative inference, where inference
results are exchanged through encrypted communication. The
probability of successfully detecting malicious traffic within
a single detection interval is denoted as pd . We assume the

number of rounds N until the first successful detection follows
a geometric distribution P r(N = k) = (1 − pd )k−1 pd . If
each detection interval lasts for ∆t, the expected detection
time can be expressed as E [Tdet ] = ∆t/pd . Higher detection
accuracy pd enables UAVs to effectively filter malicious traffic,
while improved detection timeliness ∆t reduces the duration
for which the network remains exposed to attacks. It is evident
that prolonged exposure of the network to malicious attacks
leads to a lower task success rate, a higher packet loss ratio,
and reduced inference reliability.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we first describe the malicious encrypted
traffic detection task, and then introduce TGE-ETD in detail.
The overview of TGE-ETD is shown in Fig. 2, which mainly
includes byte graph construction, twin graph encoder, and
attention-based feature fusion.
A. Task Description
The malicious encrypted traffic detection task is to use
the information from traffic packets captured by professional
software to distinguish malicious traffic (produced by attacks)
from normal traffic. In this paper, we perform fine-grained
malicious encrypted traffic detection, specifically identifying
the specific categories of malicious traffic packets.
B. Formulation
We define a traffic packet as a sample and detect malicious
packets, which is common practice in many encrypted traffic
methods. A session S = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ] (bidirectional flow)
in the network consists of exchanged request and response
packets between two communicating entities in the network,
where n is the length of the packet sequence and pi is

9142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

the i-th packet in the session. The packet is represented as
pi = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bm ], where m is the length of the byte
sequence and bj is the j-th byte of i-th packet. According
to the definition above, the (packet-level) malicious encrypted
traffic detection task is to identify whether an unseen traffic
packet pi is malicious and identify its specific category Ck .
C. Byte Graphs Construction
In our detection task, we focus on network traffic packets.
Previous studies have shown that the header and payload
parts of traffic packets contain different information and contribute differently to network detection capabilities, so we
divide traffic packets into header and payload. Each packet
can be described as p = [header, payload]. We choose to
use raw bytes to represent header and payload instead of
statistical information because the raw bytes information is
more accurate and comprehensive. For feature extraction of
raw bytes, we consider three aspects including different bytes
having different meanings, different positions of specific bytes
in the context contain different information, and the frequency
of the same bytes appearing in different parts of the data
packet is different. Therefore, we construct a byte graph based
on these three aspects of information to represent the traffic
packet.
In addition, to distinguish the same bytes at different
positions in the byte sequence, we treat the repeated bytes
as separate nodes in the graph (the number of nodes does
not exceed 256 [27], [30]), which can avoid the problem of
the number of graph nodes exploding. In order to effectively
pass messages between nodes and fully extract the contextual
information, we build two types of graphs for each part,
including the co-occurrence graph and the word frequency
graph. According to the above description, we convert the
original bytes of header and payload into the co-occurrence
graph Go = {Vo , Eo , Xo }and the word frequency graph Gf =
{Vf , Ef , Xf } based on the correlation between the bytes.
1) Co-Occurrence Graph Construction: For the original
byte representation s of the header (payload) of a traffic
packet. To extract the correlation features between different bytes in the packet, we use the co-occurrence matrix to
establish the relationship between each byte [32]. We construct
the corresponding co-occurrence graph Go = {Vo , Eo , Xo },
where Vo is the set of nodes, each byte contained in s
corresponds to a node, and Xo is the features of the nodes.
We process s using a sliding window of fixed size default
to 3 (according to the ablation experiments in Fig. 11).
For bytes that appear in the same window, we construct the cooccurrence edge Eo between these bytes. Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 3, for s, we first use the sliding window to construct the
byte co-occurrence matrix A, and A is the adjacency matrix
of Go . For bytes i and j in s, we describe the edges between
them through the adjacency matrix as follows:
(
1, (i, j) in W
aij =
.
(1)
0, otherwise
The features of the nodes in Go are initialized to 1 and the
co-occurrence graphs are undirected.

Fig. 3. Construct the co-occurrence graph.

Fig. 4. Construct the word frequency graph.

2) Word Frequency Graph Construction: The frequency of
different bytes in the original bytes s of header (payload)
of the encrypted traffic packet is similar to the frequency of
words in NLP tasks, which is an important feature [32]. We
construct the word frequency graph Gf = {Vf , Ef , Xf } to
extract frequency characteristics. As shown in Fig. 4, each
node in Vf represents a byte in s, the edge set Ef is the selfloop of each node and Xf is the node feature. For the feature
xif of node i, we use the frequency fi and the corresponding
byte value bi of i to represent its feature, bi ranges from 0 to
255. We perform one-hot encoding on bi in [0, 255] to obtain
the vector Bi1×256 , where Bi [bi ] = 1 and other elements in Bi
are 0. We then multiply the frequency and the original byte
value features to get the final representation xif = fi × Bi .
D. Twin Graph Encoder
The information contained in different parts of the traffic
packet is different because the bytes in different positions in
the traffic packet reflect different information. The same bytes
in header and payload of the traffic packet reflect different information. The original bytes of the encrypted traffic
packet header that are not encrypted reflect different information from the original bytes of the encrypted payload.
The same bytes before and after encryption are different. If
we use the same feature embedding representation for the
same bytes in header and payload, it will generate confusing
model inputs, resulting in sub-optimal model performance.
We designed a twin graph encoder to process header and
payload of the traffic packet and then fuse the embedding
vectors of header and payload through the designed attentionbased feature fusion module to obtain the final embedding
representation.
After obtaining the co-occurrence graph and the word
frequency graph of the header (payload), we fuse the cooccurrence graph Go and the word frequency graph Gf to
obtain a unified graph representation GF = {VF , EF , XF }.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

9143

Fig. 6. Details of the network.

Fig. 5. Fuse co-occurrence and word frequency graph.

dimension of the vector. Finally, the generated new target
node embedding vector is computed by a nonlinear transformation to complete the forward propagation of GraphSAGE.
The information transmission process of GraphSAGE can be
formally described as follows:
(l−1)

(l)

X

MN (v) =

u∈N (v)

Then, we update the embedding representation of the byte
node. As shown in Fig. 5, the nodes in the co-occurrence
graph and the word frequency graph are all bytes. The graph
fusion operation is divided into two parts: edge fusion and
node feature fusion. We describe the detailed process of edge
fusion in the form of an adjacency matrix. The adjacency
matrix Ao of the co-occurrence graph Go and the adjacency
matrix Af of the word frequency graph Gf are added to obtain
the adjacency matrix AF of the fused graph. The node feature
fusion processes the node embedding representation in the cooccurrence graph and the word frequency graph, and obtains
a new node representation through multiplication operations
XF = Xo × Xf . The node embedding process updates the
node representation to the fused node representation.
After processing, both header and payload are transformed
into unified byte-level representations using graphs. Although
their original contents differ, the resulting representations are
homogeneous byte graphs with identical structural semantics.
As a result, the same encoder depth and aggregation strategy
are sufficient to capture high-order dependencies in both components. Thus, the twin graph encoder consists of two graph
encoders with the same model structure but not shared parameters, which can process the graph structure data of header
and payload in parallel. The structure of the graph encoder is
shown in Fig. 6. In order to encode the graph composed of
traffic packets into a feature vector, the graph encoder includes
two stacked GraphSAGE [55] modules. For each node v on
the graph G, GraphSAGE first uses the degree of the target
node to normalize the embedding vectors of all neighbor nodes
[30]. Then GraphSAGE concatenates the embedding vectors
of the target vertex and the neighbor vertex and averages each

x(l)
v =σ



xu
|N (v)|



(l)
w(l) · CONCAT x(l−1)
,
M
,
v
N (v)

(2)

where N (v) is the set of neighbor nodes of the target node v,
|N (v)| is the number of neighbor nodes, w(l) is the parameter
on layer l, CONCAT(·) denotes the concatenation operation
and σ(·) denotes the activation function. We use the ReLU
activation function to process the output of GraphSAGE to
increase the nonlinear relationship between the layers of the
network. Lastly, we use batch normalization to normalize the
(l)
updated feature vector xv .
The number of GraphSAGE layers represents the number
of neighbor nodes that each node can aggregate. Too many
layers will lead to an over-smoothing issue [56]. Experimental
verification shows that the number of layers stacked in the
GraphSAGE module does not need to be too large, and high
accuracy can be achieved when the number of layers is two
[55]. Therefore, we stack two layers of GraphSAGE, and use
the output of the first GraphSAGE module as the input of
the second block.
E. Attention-Based Deep Feature Fusion
Since we constructed the graph representation of the
encrypted traffic packet, the malicious packet detection task
became a graph classification task. Therefore, after we
obtained the new node feature representation through the graph
encoder, we designed a feature aggregation method based
on the attention mechanism. The global attention aggregation
mechanism assigns different attention weights to the relationships between nodes, allowing the model to pay more attention
to important nodes and their features, thereby obtaining more

9144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

accurate graph features. Thus, we use the global attention
mechanism [57] to aggregate the node feature to obtain the
representation of the entire graph, and formulate as follows:
fa =

N
X

αi xk ,

αi = σ (fg (ki )) ,

TABLE I
L ABELED USTC-TFC2016 AND CICI OT2022 DATASETS . T HE
TABLE I LLUSTRATES THE T YPES OF T RAFFIC W E C LASSIFY AND
H OW D IFFERENT C ATEGORIES OF T RAFFIC A RE G ENERATED

(3)

k=1

where fg (·) is a neural network that computes attention scores
for each feature, we set fg (·) as a linear layer fg (xi ) = w> xi +
b, σ(·)is the sigmoid function, N is the number of nodes in the
graph, and xk is the feature of the k-th node. Then, we input
the node features into the attention-pooling function fa (·) to
get the graph representation. Subsequently, we concatenate the
head feature Fh and the payload feature Fp to obtain the final
encrypted traffic packet representation,
F = CONCAT (Fh , Fp ) .

(4)

F. Malicious Detection
After obtaining the final feature representation of the
encrypted traffic packet, denoted F, we use a fully connected
neural network to process the features and then use softmax
to obtain the detection results of malicious encrypted traffic
packets. Subsequently, we use the cross-entropy loss function
to calculate the model loss, which is used for back-propagation
during training.
ŷ = Softmax (W · F + b) ,
Loss = −

Q X
C
X

yi log ŷi ,

(5)
(6)

i=1 j=1

where W and b are the parameters of the full connected layer,
ŷ are the predicted values, Q is the quantity of samples, and
C is the number of traffic categories.

TABLE II
L ABELED ISCX-VPN AND ISCX-T OR DATASETS . T HE TABLE I
LLUSTRATES THE T YPES OF T RAFFIC W E C LASSIFY
AND W HERE THE T RAFFIC C OMES F ROM

V. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we first introduce the basic experimental
settings, including the dataset, data preprocessing, the experimental environment, and the evaluation indicators. Then we
introduce comparative experiments, including the introduction
of comparative methods, experimental parameter settings, and
comparative experimental results analysis. Next, we introduce
the ablation experiments, including experimental goal settings,
ablation experiment scheme settings, and results analysis, to
evaluate the effectiveness of TGE-ETD from the dimensions
of sensitivity, accuracy, and model complexity.
A. Datasets
To assess the effectiveness of our method, we use multiple
public datasets, including two datasets USTC-TFC2016 [58]
and CICIoT2022 [59] for malicious encrypted traffic detection.
In addition, to verify the effectiveness of TGE-ETD, we
perform experiments on two widely used datasets, ISCX-VPN
[60] and ISCX-Tor [61]. USTC-TFC2016 [58] contains ten
types of traffic collected from malicious programs and ten
types of traffic collected from benign programs. CICIoT2022
[59] contains normal traffic and attack traffic collected from

IoT devices. ISCX-VPN [60] contains six types of traffic
collected in a Virtual Private Network (VPN). ISCX-Tor [61]
contains eight types of traffic collected through The Onion
Router (Tor). The detailed label is shown in table I and II.
B. Data Pre-Processing
The dataset provides the original encrypted traffic in the
form of pcap files. Since there is invalid and redundant traffic
(flows with a load of 0 and flows with too many packets) in the
original traffic, we need to pre-process the original PCAP files.
The pre-processing operation includes the following steps.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

TABLE III
H YPERPARAMETER VALUES OF TGE-ETD

9145

metrics. We first calculate the values of True Positive, True
Negative, False Positive and False Negative. Then, based on
the above definitions, we can calculate the evaluation metrics.
D. Comparison Methods

1) Segmentation of the Original PCAP File: To delete
invalid traffic, we first use the traffic segmentation tool
(Splitcap) to divide the pcap file into bi-flows based on the
traffic quintuple information. After the segmentation has been
completed, the invalid and redundant traffic is deleted.
2) Data Packet Selection: Our task is to identify malicious
encrypted traffic packets, so after obtaining the encrypted traffic flow, we need to select the data packets for model training.
However, CICIoT2022 and USTC-TFC contain a large number
of bi-flows, on the amount of hundreds of thousands. Thus, we
performed sampling on the CICIoT2022 and USTC-TFC2016
datasets, with 1000 bi-flows in CICIoT2022 and 500 bi-flows
in USTC-TFC randomly sampled from each class for the
experiments. Then, we select a certain number of packets in
each bi-flow to reduce redundancy.
3) Data Labeling: We assign labels to each sample according to the official instructions and the existing method [27].
In addition, we randomly map the source and destination IP
addresses and ports in the traffic packets, retaining only the
relationship information without using the actual numerical
value, in order to protect sensitive information and eliminate
the introduced noise. It should be noted that our algorithm
can process both TCP and UDP packets, but the comparison
algorithm cannot process UDP traffic, so we removed Tinba
traffic in USTC-TFC2016, as Tinba only contains UDP traffic.
Regarding the generalization of real-world UAV traffic, where
UDP is widely used, the applicability of baseline methods
that can only handle TCP traffic will be significantly reduced.
However, since our method inherently supports UDP traffic,
its applicability to realistic UAV networks is not constrained
by this experimental setting.
C. Experimental Implementation Details
1) Experimental Setup: Table III shows the hyperparameter
settings of TGE-ETD in the experiment. We use Adam optimizer to minimize the loss, the initial value of the learning rate
is set to 0.005, the mini-batch size is 128, and the learning
decay rate is the default 0. The dataset is divided into training
and test sets in a ratio of 9:1. Pytorch is used to implement
our model and perform experiments on a server with NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPUs and AMD 3970X CPU.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We refer to existing encrypted traffic classification research [27], [30], [52] and take accuracy
(ACC), precision (PR), recall (RC), and F1 -score as evaluation

We select a packet length-based recurrent neural network
model FS-Net [25], two pre-trained models including ETBERT [26] and YaTC [27], and two graph neural network
models including GraphDAPP [29] and TFE-GNN [30] as
baseline methods.
(1) FS-Net [25]: FS-Net is an end-to-end encrypted traffic
classification model based on recurrent neural networks. It
takes packet length sequences as input, uses bi-GRU to extract
encrypted traffic features, introduces an autoencoder-decoder
structure, and designs a reconstruction mechanism to enhance
feature effectiveness while extracting sequence features.
(2) ET-BERT [26]: ET-BERT converts the encrypted traffic
classification task into a natural language processing task.
It takes the raw bytes of encrypted traffic as input, extracts
features from unlabeled encrypted traffic through pre-training.
(3) YaTC [27]: YaTC constructs the raw packet bytes in
the encrypted traffic flow into a multi-level flow representation
matrix, then uses a masked autoencoder to pre-train a classifier,
extracts features from unlabeled encrypted traffic, and then
fine-tunes the model using a small amount of labeled data.
(4) GraphDAPP [29]: GraphDAPP proposes a traffic interaction graph model. It models the flow as a graph based on the
traffic interaction information and packet length information.
The nodes are traffic packets, the node features are the packet
length and direction, and the interaction relationship between
packets is the edge. Then, the graph neural network is used to
extract the encrypted traffic features and classify them.
(5) TFE-GNN [30]: TFE-GNN divides the encrypted traffic
packet into two parts: header and payload. Each part is
constructed as a graph based on the original bytes of the traffic
packet. The nodes in the graph are the original bytes, the node
features are the vector embeddings of the original bytes, and
the association relationship between bytes is the edge. Finally,
the graph neural network is used to extract the features of each
part, and then the final feature representation of the encrypted
traffic is obtained using the designed feature fusion method.
E. Comparison Experiments
The comparative experimental results are shown in
Table IV. From the results, we can get the following
information.
1) Overall Performance: Compared to the state-of-the-art
method, TGE-ETD has improved 0.5%-5% in four indicators. Compared with baseline methods, TGE-ETD improves
5%-15% in four indicators. TGE-ETD has a more obvious
improvement in the malicious encrypted traffic detection task.
The four indicators on the four datasets are higher than 99%,
which reflects the effectiveness of TGE-ETD.
2) Analysis of Deep Learning Methods: The fluctuation
of various indicators of deep learning methods based on the
packet length in four datasets is greater than 10%. These
methods have difficulty accurately identifying various types

9146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

TABLE IV
T HE R ESULTS OF TGE-ETD AND BASELINE M ETHODS

TABLE V
T HE R ESULTS OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

of traffic because they only consider packet length as a
characteristic of encrypted traffic. It also shows the importance
of original byte information as a feature of encrypted traffic.
3) Analysis of Pre-Training Methods: The indicators of
the pre-training method in the four datasets are all higher
than 89%, but there is a fluctuation of 5%-10%. ET-BERT
and YaTC achieve high ACC and F1 , because they take the
original bytes of encrypted traffic as input and can extract
more origin features. However, there is a gap between the
method based on pre-training and TGE-ETD. This is because
the method based on pre-training does not distinguish the
contribution of the original bytes of encrypted traffic and
cannot fully extract the original features. YaTC selects fixed
header and payload bytes for arrangement, so it achieves
relatively better results.
4) Analysis of Graph Learning Methods: GraphDAPP only
uses the length and direction as node features, so it cannot
effectively extract encrypted traffic features. The TFE-GNN
method constructs the original bytes into a graph and divides
the original bytes to distinguish the contributions of different
parts, achieving high values across all metrics. However,
because of the single graph construction method, it is unable to
fully extract features. In addition, since TFE-GNN combines
multiple encrypted traffic packets to form samples, although it
improves the recognition efficiency, the combination operation
introduces additional noise, which affects the model effect.
5) Comparative Analysis Between Different Datasets: The
traffic in ISCX-Tor is processed by Tor, and encryption and
obfuscation technology make it difficult to analyze the payload
of anonymous traffic, which affects the effect of the baseline

model. However, TGE-ETD directly processes the encrypted
traffic packets and uses multiple graph representation methods
to model the original bytes, improving the accuracy of feature
extraction and improving the model effect. Compared to
CICIoT2022, USTC-TFC2016 contains more attacks, making
it more difficult to detect malicious encrypted traffic, which
affects the performance of baseline methods.
F. Ablation Study
In order to fully verify the effect of each component
of TGE-ETD, we conducted ablation experiments on each
component separately. The results of the ablation experiment
are shown in Table V. We refer to the design principles to
analyze the results of the ablation experiment one by one and
obtain the following results.
1) The Contribution of the Header and Payload Parts of
the Traffic Packet: Compared to the raw byte features of both
the header and the payload, we only use the raw bytes of the
header (or payload) as input, marked w/o-payload (or w/oheader). When only the header part is used for detection, the
model performance drops by about 1%-2%. When only the
payload part is used for detection, the model performance
drops by about 5%-30%. It shows that the header and payload
parts of the traffic packet contribute to the overall encrypted
traffic detection. When both are used as input at the same
time, the model achieves the best effect. Then, through comparison, we found that the header part contributes more to
encrypted traffic detection than the payload part. It is because
the header part is plain text and carries the communication
characteristics of the traffic. In addition, it is difficult to extract

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

Fig. 7. Performances of TGE-ETD on the ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor.

features because the payload part is ciphertext. It can be also
observed that the contribution of the payload part is higher
in the malicious encrypted traffic dataset. This is because the
payload part of the data packets sent by different attacks is
considerably different, while the data packets of the same
type of attack have similar load information, which makes the
payload features easier to distinguish. The encrypted traffic
data packets in VPN and Tor environments are obfuscated,
making the payload part more difficult to distinguish.
2) The Contribution of the Raw Byte Modeling Method:
Compared to the co-occurrence graph and the word frequency
graph to model the raw bytes, we only use the co-occurrence
graph (or the word frequency graph) to model the encrypted
traffic packet, marked as w/o-fg (or w/o-oc). The effect of the
model is poor (down 70%) in the absence of word frequency
graph modeling. The frequency features of bytes and the
original byte feature embedded as node features are missing.
The original byte graph that only retains the co-occurrence
relationship cannot effectively represent the encrypted traffic
packet. In the absence of co-occurrence graph modeling, the
model effect drops by about 10%. It should be noted that
the model ACC drops significantly (about 50%) in the Tor
dataset, which shows that the byte co-occurrence relationship
is an important feature of the encrypted traffic classification
method based on raw bytes.
3) Effectiveness Evaluation of the Feature Fusion Method
Based on Global Attention Pooling: Compared to using global
self-attention to fuse node features to obtain the representation
of the graph, and then concatenating the features of the
two parts to obtain the final representation using linear layer
transformation (marked TGE-ETD-att), we only process node
features by averaging sampling to obtain the representation,
marked as TGE-ETD-mean. By comparing the results of the
average pooling feature fusion and the global self-attention
feature fusion methods, the difference between the two is
approximately 0.5%, which verifies the effectiveness of the
global self-attention feature fusion method.
G. Stability Analysis of TGE-ETD
The results of the stability analysis are shown in
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. We plot the heat maps based on the confusion
matrix. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the
results shown in the figure. First, TGE-ETD achieved high
accuracy in classifying samples of each category in the four

9147

Fig. 8. Performances of TGE-ETD on USTC-TFC2016 and CICIoT2022.

Fig. 9. Standard deviation of the F1 -score.

datasets, and there is no uneven classification effect of samples
of different categories. Second, TGE-ETD is less affected by
the number of categories. TGE-ETD has high accuracy on
different numbers of categories including 6, 8 and 19. Finally,
TGE-ETD can achieve high accuracy even when the ratio of
the number of samples in the two malicious traffic detection
datasets reaches 1:20, which is unbalanced.
In order to verify the stability of the model, we repeated
each experiment ten times and took the average of the ten
experimental results as the final result. Fig. 9 shows the comparison of the standard deviation of F1 of different methods.
For ET-BERT and YaTC, we only repeated the fine-turning
part ten times. The ten experimental results of the fine-tuning
stage of the pre-trained model are the same, so the standard
deviation is 0. From the results in the figure, the standard
deviation of TGE-ETD is smaller than those of FS-Net and
TFE-GNN, which means that TGE-ETD is more stable.
H. GNN Architecture Variants Study
To verify the effectiveness of the GraphSAGE module in
extracting traffic graph features, we use classic GNN models
including GCN [62] and GIN [63] to replace the GraphSAGE
module as variants for comparison.
As shown in Fig. 10, the results show that the encrypted
traffic detection method based on GraphSAGE performs better
than other variants, especially in malicious encrypted traffic detection tasks. This is because GraphSAGE learns the
embedded expression of the target node itself by aggregating

9148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

TABLE VII
T HE C OMPARISON OF THE M ODEL FLOP S AND PARAMETERS

Fig. 10. Comparison results of GNN models. The figure shows the F1 -score
results of different GNN models in the twin graph encoder stage.

TABLE VIII
C ONSUMPTION A NALYSIS OF TGE-ETD ON UAV D EVICES

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON UAV-NIDD (%)

the feature information of the node neighbors and has better
generalization ability than GCN and GIN. At the same time,
all three graph neural networks can achieve a high F1 , which
reflects the effectiveness of the traffic byte graph modeling.
I. Effectiveness of TGE-ETD on UAV Traffic Dataset
The UAV-NIDD [64] dataset contains encrypted traffic collected from real-world UAV networks. To validate
the effectiveness of TGE-ETD in UAV network traffic
detection, we conducted comparative experiments on the UAVNIDD dataset. FNN [64] and MAML [64], which are deep
learning–based approaches for UAV network traffic classification, were included as baseline methods for comparison.
Table VI reports the mean and standard deviation of ten
experiments. The experimental results demonstrate that TGEETD achieves strong performance in UAV network traffic
detection, maintaining high classification accuracy. Compared
with existing UAV traffic classification approaches, TGE-ETD
improves accuracy by approximately 2%–20%. Compared to
baseline methods, TGE-ETD can effectively capture discriminative features of encrypted traffic.
J. Model Complexity Analysis
1) Analysis of Model Parameters Count and Floating Point
Operations: To assess the balance between model performance and complexity, we provide floating point operations
(FLOPs) and parameters of different methods, as shown in
Table VII. Combining the results in Table VII with those in

Table IV, we can conclude that TGE-ETD achieves improvement at low model complexity. Compared with traditional
deep learning and pretraining methods, TGE-ETD has the
smallest number of parameters and the second lowest number
of FLOPs. Although GraphDAPP has the lowest complexity,
TGE-ETD improves performance by 75% compared to GraphDAPP. Although YaTC achieves comparable results on the
ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor datasets, the number of parameters
of YaTC is about 27 times that of TGE-ETD. In addition, the
pre-training phase of YaTC is time-consuming due to the large
amount of additional data and high model complexity during
pre-training. Compared with the advanced GNN-based method
TFE-GNN, which reduces the number of FLOPs by 25 times
and the number of parameters by 500 times, TGE-ETD not
only reduces complexity, but also achieves improvement.
2) Overhead Analysis on UAV Devices: To verify the
feasibility of deploying the model in practice, we collected the
hardware information of six UAV devices from three different
UAV manufacturers. As shown in Table VIII, most UAV
devices are equipped with Wi-Fi modules for communication,
with maximum download speeds ranging from 10 to 80 MB/s
(Mega Byte per second). We saved the TGE-ETD model
parameter file, which is 0.34 MB (Mega Byte). Under these
conditions, the latency incurred during model updating ranges
from 4.25 to 34 ms (millisecond), achieving millisecondlevel performance. The bandwidth occupancy caused by model
updates accounts for approximately 0.43% to 3.40% of the
available per-second bandwidth on the UAV side.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

Fig. 11.
Model sensitivity analysis. Different window size of the
co-occurrence graph construction method on four datasets.

9149

Fig. 13. Experimental environment on realistic UAV hardware.
TABLE X
T ESTING R ESULTS ON R EALISTIC UAV H ARDWARE

Fig. 12. ACC and loss convergence curves of TGE-ETD.
TABLE IX
T RAINING T IME AND R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION OF TGE-ETD

it can be observed that the model converges within 20 epochs.
In addition, we recorded GPU memory consumption and
power usage during the training process. TGE-ETD requires
less than 2 GB (Giga Byte) of GPU memory and consumes
130 W (Watt) of GPU power.
M. Testing on Realistic UAV Hardware

K. Model Sensitivity Analysis
To investigate the impact of sliding window size, we conducted a sensitivity analysis experiment. As shown in Fig. 11,
the model performs relatively well when the sliding window
size for constructing the co-occurrence graph is small. As
the window size increases, there are more edges in the cooccurrence graph, and the relationship between different bytes
becomes less distinguishable, making it difficult for the model
to learn the relationship features between the original bytes.
L. Training Time and Energy Consumption Analysis
We evaluated the training efficiency of TGE-ETD by measuring its training time, convergence (recorded as Conver.)
speed, and energy consumption, with the results summarized
in Table IX. For UAV network traffic data, TGE-ETD requires
only 606.1 s (second) to complete the training. The ACC and
Loss curves of TGE-ETD are illustrated in Fig. 12, from which

We conducted inference experiments on three devices:
Raspberry Pi 5 [68], Orange Pi AIpro [69], and Jetson AGX
64 G [70], as shown in Fig. 13. The test dataset consists of
1267 packets from the UAV-NIDD dataset. Table X reports
the memory footprint and inference latency on each platform.
The results show that our model achieves millisecond-level
per-packet inference latency on ARM-based devices, demonstrating the feasibility of deployment in UAV environments.
N. Attention Visualization of Encrypted Traffic of UAV
To identify bytes that have a greater impact on model classification in UAV traffic, we visualized the attention weights
of the nodes in the constructed traffic graphs. We visualized
normal traffic in the UAV-NIDD dataset, and the results are
shown in Fig. 14. For Normal traffic in the UAV network,
most nodes exhibit attention weights close to zero, while
higher attention values are mainly concentrated in the byte
index ranges of 79–88 and 240–255. The experimental results
reveal a long-tail distribution of attention weights, indicating
that only a small number of nodes play a dominant role in
the classification decision. It is shown that TGE-ETD can
effectively capture discriminative structural features within
encrypted traffic.

9150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 14. Attention weights of normal traffic in UAV-NIDD. The nodes with
higher attention are concentrated in the ranges of 79-88 and 240-255.

VI. F UTURE W ORKS AND C ONCLUSION
A. Future Works
1) Defense Against Network Attacks in Heterogeneous
Large-Scale UAV Networks: With the rapid advancement of
the low-altitude economy, UAV networks are inevitably evolving toward large-scale and heterogeneous deployments. This
trend introduces increasingly complex network attack surfaces
and poses significant challenges for the performance and
scalability of existing defense mechanisms. To address these
issues, future research can explore advanced and proactive
defense strategies such as decentralized federated learning and
moving target defense to enable comprehensive protection.
2) Accurate Encrypted Traffic Modeling Under Massive
UAV Network Traffic: As UAV networks continue to grow
in scale, the volume of encrypted traffic will increase, significantly complicating accurate traffic detection. Therefore,
there is a pressing need to develop more precise and efficient
modeling techniques for encrypted traffic. The graph-based
modeling approach proposed in this work currently relies
solely on raw byte-level information. Future efforts should
focus on improving this modeling framework by integrating
dynamic features such as network connectivity patterns to
improve detection performance.
3) Detection of Unknown Encrypted Traffic Attacks in Open
UAV Networks: Most existing malicious encrypted traffic
detection methods, including the one proposed in this work,
rely heavily on large amounts of labeled data for training.
However, manual labeling is costly and time consuming, and
these methods struggle to identify previously unseen attacks.
To overcome these limitations, future work will explore
few-shot learning and unsupervised detection techniques to
develop open-world detection frameworks capable of identifying unknown encrypted traffic attacks in UAV networks.

4) Timely Encrypted Traffic Detection in Dynamic UAV
Networks: UAV networks exhibit highly dynamic and adaptive
characteristics, and users often have stringent requirements
regarding the timeliness of the collected information. Consequently, the traffic data within UAV networks possess temporal
properties, such as the age of information. In future work,
we plan to incorporate the temporal characteristics of UAV
network traffic and design an efficient malicious encrypted
traffic detection method tailored for dynamic UAV networks.
5) Adversarial Robustness in Practical UAV Networks: In
practical UAV networks, attackers can manipulate traffic to
conceal malicious activities. At the traffic content level, there
exist potential adversarial risks, including adjusting padding
fields, fragmentation boundaries, or other redundant structures
within encrypted payloads, which may alter byte-level statistical characteristics without violating encryption integrity.
At the network level, attackers can further evade detection
mechanisms by manipulating packet lengths, transmission
timing, or traffic burst patterns. Therefore, in our future work
we will investigate encrypted traffic detection in adversarial
UAV environments. We will explore the use of advanced learning paradigms, including large language models, to enhance
robustness against adaptive evasion strategies.
B. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel resilient UAV
network architecture based on malicious encrypted traffic
detection. By decoupling the training and inference processes
of the encrypted traffic detection model, the proposed architecture addresses the computational limitations of UAV devices.
In addition, we have introduced a new end-to-end encrypted
traffic detection model, termed TGE-ETD. To effectively
extract features from encrypted traffic, we have proposed a
graph-based byte-level traffic modeling method. Specifically,
two types of byte graphs, namely the frequency graph and the
co-occurrence graph, are constructed to represent encrypted
traffic. A twin graph encoder is then designed to transform
the byte graphs into feature vectors. Subsequently, a global
attention pooling is employed to obtain the final feature
representation of encrypted traffic. Extensive experiments conducted on four public datasets and one real-world UAV dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of TGE-ETD.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

M. K. C. Shisher, A. Piaseczny, Y. Sun, and C. G. Brinton, “Computation
and communication co-scheduling for timely multi-task inference at the
wireless edge,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2025,
pp. 1–10.
C. Zhao et al., “Foes or friends: Embracing ground effect for edge
detection on lightweight drones,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
Comput. Netw., Dec. 2024, pp. 1377–1392.
B.-B. Zhang, D. Zhang, R. Song, B. Wang, Y. Hu, and Y. Chen, “RFsearch: Searching unconscious victim in smoke scenes with RF-enabled
drone,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., Oct. 2023,
pp. 1–15.
E. Sie, Z. Liu, and D. Vasisht, “BatMobility: Towards flying without
seeing for autonomous drones,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
Comput. Netw., Oct. 2023, pp. 1–16.
C. Lei, W. Feng, P. Wei, Y. Chen, N. Ge, and S. Mao, “Edge information
hub: Orchestrating satellites, UAVs, MEC, sensing and communications
for 6G closed-loop controls,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43,
no. 1, pp. 5–20, Jan. 2025.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

[6]

H. Sun et al., “All-sky autonomous computing in UAV swarm,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 13258–13274, Dec. 2024.
[7] X. Wang et al., “A survey on security of UAV swarm networks: Attacks
and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1–37,
Mar. 2025.
[8] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A tutorial on UAVs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and open
problems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2334–2360,
3rd Quart., 2019.
[9] O. Ceviz, S. Sen, and P. Sadioglu, “A survey of security in UAVs
and FANETs: Issues, threats, analysis of attacks, and solutions,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 3227–3265, Oct. 2025.
[10] L. Cai et al., “Secure physical layer communications for low-altitude
economy networking: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 28,
pp. 2497–2530, 2026.
[11] S. Tian et al., “Reasoning techniques meet GraphRAG: Advancing LLM
for wireless network cyber defense,” IEEE Wireless Commun., early
access, Feb. 27, 2026, doi: 10.1109/MWC.2026.3659831.
[12] X. Li et al., “Protect NTN-IoT security by malicious traffic detection: A
multidimensional hypergraph learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 3594–3607, Feb. 2026.
[13] J. Sharma and P. S. Mehra, “Secure communication in IoT-based UAV
networks: A systematic survey,” Internet Things, vol. 23, Oct. 2023, Art.
no. 100883.
[14] W. Zhai, L. Liu, Y. Ding, S. Sun, and Y. Gu, “ETD: An efficient time
delay attack detection framework for UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2913–2928, 2023.
[15] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and N. Ansari, “A hierarchical detection
and response system to enhance security against lethal cyber-attacks in
UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 9,
pp. 1594–1606, Sep. 2018.
[16] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and M.-A. Messous, “How to detect
cyber-attacks in unmanned aerial vehicles network?,” in Proc. IEEE
Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[17] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Enhancing UAV network security:
A human-in-the-loop and GAN-based approach to intrusion detection,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20870–20884, Jun. 2025.
[18] T. Li et al., “AeroGuard: Towards real-time UAV fault detection
with hybrid models,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 25, no. 6,
pp. 9075–9088, Jun. 2026.
[19] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learning for encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets
and comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022,
Art. no. 102542.
[20] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. de Donato, and A. Pescape, “PortLoad: Taking
the best of two worlds in traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM), San Diego, CA, USA, Mar.
2010, pp. 1–5.
[21] C. Xu, S. Chen, J. Su, S. M. Yiu, and L. C. K. Hui, “A survey on
regular expression matching for deep packet inspection: Applications,
algorithms, and hardware platforms,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut.,
vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2991–3029, 4th Quart., 2016.
[22] A. S. Shekhawat, F. D. Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of
encrypted malicious traffic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141,
Jul. 2019.
[23] A. Este, F. Gringoli, and L. Salgarelli, “Support vector machines for TCP
traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 53, no. 14, pp. 2476–2490,
Sep. 2009.
[24] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
2017, pp. 43–48.
[25] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[26] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[27] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked
autoencoder based traffic transformer with multi-level flow
representation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 5420–5427.
[28] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope: Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.

9151

[29] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[30] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
[31] D. Jiang et al., “Toward synthetic network traffic generating in NTNenabled IoT: A generative AI approach,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 2174–2187, Jan. 2025.
[32] Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Zhan, W. Ma, and Y. Jiang, “Text FCG: Fusing
contextual information via graph learning for text classification,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 219, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 119658.
[33] B. Zhao, S. Guan, M. Chen, J. Wu, C. Qiao, and Y. Xiao, “Efficient and
accurate privacy-preserving task allocation for unmanned aerial vehiclebased mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13,
pp. 5638–5653, 2026.
[34] N. Kumar and A. Chaudhary, “Secure and lightweight mechanism for
UAV-GCS and UAV-UAV authentication based on PUF,” IEEE Internet
Things J., early access, Feb. 27, 2026, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2026.3669029.
[35] K.-D. Lu, B.-X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Shen, and Z.-G. Wu, “MoARNNAM: Multi-objective automated recurrent neural network with attention
mechanism for cyber-attack detection of UAV,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 1738–1749, Feb. 2026.
[36] L. Xie, T. Xiao, M. Zhou, W. Nie, and X. Yang, “Robust two-layer
UAV spoofing detection based on multi-source/multi-dimensional data
analysis for low-altitude networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13,
pp. 6737–6753, 2026.
[37] Y. Xiao et al., “RF-based identification framework against unauthorized
UAV networking in low-altitude economy,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 13, pp. 6538–6555, 2026.
[38] Y. Qi, L. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Xue, and J. Li, “Packet classification
algorithms: From theory to practice,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr.
2009, pp. 648–656.
[39] P. M. Fivos Constantinou, “Identifying known and unknown peer-to-peer
traffic,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), Jul.
2006, pp. 93–102.
[40] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[41] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[42] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
(IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[43] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and N. Guizani, “Optimizing
feature selection for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A systematic approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 20–27, Jul. 2020.
[44] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
[45] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020, pp. 424–429.
[46] Q. Meng et al., “Detection of unknown attacks through encrypted traffic:
A Gaussian prototype-aided variational autoencoder framework,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 10652–10667, 2025.
[47] S. Zhang, F. Yu, H. Zhou, and B. Li, “MalDetectFormer: Leveraging sparse SpatioTemporal information for effective malicious traffic
detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, vol. 39, no. 21,
pp. 22533–22541.
[48] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
[49] Y. Ding, G. Zhu, D. Chen, X. Qin, M. Cao, and Z. Qin, “Adversarial
sample attack and defense method for encrypted traffic data,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 18024–18039,
Oct. 2022.
[50] D. Xu et al., “LMT-SDNN: A lightweight malicious traffic detection method for the Internet of Things based on multiteacher
distillation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 15665–15677,
Apr. 2026.

9152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

[51] S. Cai, Y. Zhao, W. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Wang, and B. Gu, “MD-CGM:
Malicious traffic detection model based on CycleGAN and multi-head
self-attetion mechanism,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 181, Aug.
2026, Art. no. 108421.
[52] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for
fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245,
May 2024, Art. no. 110372.
[53] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[54] L. Yang et al., “Robustness matters: Pre-training can enhance the
performance of encrypted traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 20, pp. 10588–10603, 2025.
[55] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[56] W. Cong, M. Ramezani, and M. Mahdavi, “On provable benefits of
depth in training graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 9936–9949.
[57] Y. Li, R. Zemel, M. Brockschmidt, and D. Tarlow, “Gated graph
sequence neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2016,
pp. 1–20.
[58] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[59] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11.
[60] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[61] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[62] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017,
pp. 1–14.
[63] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–17.
[64] H. J. Hadi, Y. Cao, M. K. Khan, N. Ahmad, Y. Hu, and C. Fu,
“UAV-NIDD: A dynamic dataset for cybersecurity and intrusion detection in UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 2739–2757, Jul. 2025.
[65] DJI.(2026). Consumer Drones Comparison. [Online]. Available: https://
www.dji.com/products/comparison-consumer-drones
[66] Parrot.(2026). Professional Drones Built for Work. [Online]. Available:
https://www.parrot.com/en/drones
[67] Yuneec.(2026). Professional Grade Unmanned Aerial Vehicle. [Online].
Available: https://yuneec.online/h520-series/
[68] RaspberryPi.(2026). Raspberry PI 5. [Online]. Available: https://
www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-5/
[69] OrangePi.(2026). OrangePi Aipro (20T) Built for AI. [Online]. Available:
http://www.orangepi.org/html/hardWare/computerAndMicrocontrollers/
details/Orange-Pi-AIpro(20t).html
[70] NVIDIA.(2026). NVIDIA Jetson Orin: Next-Level AI Performance
for Next-Gen Robotics and Edge Solutions. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/autonomous-machines/embeddedsystems/jetson-orin/

Xuzeng Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng. degree from Beijing Jiaotong
University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research
interests include UAV networks security, traffic
detection, and federated learning.

Tao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the joint
B.S. degree in Internet of Things engineering from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT) and the Queen Mary University of London
in 2018 and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and technology from BUPT in 2023. He is currently
an Associate Professor and an Advisor of Ph.D.
Candidates with the School of Cyberspace Science
and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University. His
publications include ESI highly cited papers and
well-archived international journals and proceedings,
such as IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS, IEEE J OUR NAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS PORTATION S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS , IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING , and IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY . His research interests include
the IoV security, moving target defense, and federated learning. He was a
recipient of the Best Paper Award from NaNA 2018, IWCMC 2021, DIONE
2024, ICA3PP 2024, and KSEM 2025; and the Outstanding Paper Award
from iThings 2023, SmartCity 2024, and Trustcom 2025. His Ph.D. thesis
was awarded the Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation by China Institute of
Communications and BUPT. He is the TPC chair and a PC member for some
international conferences and workshops. He serves as an Associate Editor
for IEEE N ETWORKING L ETTERS, IEEE DATA D ESCRIPTIONS, Computer
Networks, A D H OC N ETWORKS, and EURASIP Journal on Information
Security; and a Guest Editor for Remote Sensing, Electronics, and Chinese
Journal of Network and Information Security.

Jiacheng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Communications and
Information Engineering, Chongqing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China.
He is currently a Research Fellow with the College
of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests
include wireless sensing security, generative AI,
semantic communications, and low-altitude wireless
networks.

Jiangtian Nie received the B.Eng. degree in
electronics and information engineering from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D.
degree from ERI@N, Interdisciplinary Graduate
School, Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
Singapore, in 2021. She was a Visiting Student with
Princeton University and the University of Waterloo.
She is currently a Lecturer with the Computer Science Department, University of Aberdeen, U.K. Her
research interests include edge intelligence, wireless
communications, and the Internet of Things.

LI et al.: ENHANCE UAV NETWORK RESILIENCE BY MALICIOUS TRAFFIC DETECTION

Jian Wang received the Ph.D. degree in cryptography from Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications in 2008. He is currently a
Professor with the School of Cyberspace Science
and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China.
His current research interests include big data
security and analysis, cryptography application and
authentication technology, and computer forensics
technology.

Xuangou Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer software and theory from the
University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC), Hefei, China, in 2013. From September
2018 to September 2019, he was a Visiting Scholar
with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (HKUST). He is currently a Professor
with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University of Technology, Ma’anshan,
China. His research interests include the Internet of
Things, network security, federated learning, and privacy protection.

Zhen Han received the Ph.D. degree from China
Academy of Engineering Physics, Beijing, China, in
1991. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing. He has authored or
co-authored more than 100 papers in various journals
and international conferences. His main research
interests include information security architecture
and trusted computing.

9153

Jiqiang Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, in 1994 and 1999, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing. He has published over
200 scientific papers in various journals and international conferences. His main research interests
include privacy-preserving, the IoT security, and
cryptographic protocols.

Dusit Niyato (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree from the King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Thailand, in 1999, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Canada, in
2008. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. His research
interests include sustainability, edge intelligence,
decentralized machine learning, and incentive mechanism design.

Dong In Kim (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA, in 1990. He was a Tenured Professor
with the School of Engineering Science, Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada. He is currently a Distinguished Professor with the College
of Information and Communication Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea. He
is a fellow of Korean Academy of Science and
Technology and a Life Member of the National
Academy of Engineering of Korea. He was a first recipient of the NRF
of Korea Engineering Research Center in Wireless Communications for
RF Energy Harvesting from 2014 to 2021. He received several research
awards, including the 2023 IEEE ComSoc Best Survey Paper Award and
the 2022 IEEE Best Land Transportation Paper Award. He was selected
as the 2019 recipient of the IEEE ComSoc Joseph LoCicero Award for
Exemplary Service to Publications. He has been listed as a 2020/2022 Highly
Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics. He was the General Chair of IEEE
ICC 2022, Seoul. From 2001 to 2024, he served as an Editor, the Editorat-Large, and an Area Editor of Wireless Communications—I for IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS. From 2002 to 2011, he served as an
Editor and a Founding Area Editor of Cross-Layer Design and Optimization
for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS. From 2008
to 2011, he served as the Co-Editor-in-Chief for IEEE/KICS J OURNAL OF
C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKS. He served as the Founding Editor-inChief for IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS L ETTERS from 2012 to 2015.