IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

2481

Enhancing Anomaly Alert Prioritization Through
Calibrated Standard Deviation Uncertainty
Estimation With an Ensemble of Auto-Encoders
Jordan F. Masakuna , D’Jeff K. Nkashama , Arian Soltani , Marc Frappier , Pierre-Martin Tardif ,
and Froduald Kabanza

Abstract—Deep auto-encoders (AEs) are widely employed deep
learning methods in the field of anomaly detection across diverse
domains (e.g., cybersecurity analysts managing large volumes
of alerts, or medical practitioners monitoring irregular patient
signals). In such contexts, practitioners often face challenges of
scale and limited processing resources. To cope, strategies such
as false positive reduction, human-in-the-loop review, and alert
prioritization are commonly adopted. This paper explores the
integration of uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods into alert
prioritization for anomaly detection using ensembles of AEs.
UQ models highlight doubtful classification decisions, enabling
analysts to address the most certain alerts first, since higher
certainty typically correlates with greater accuracy. Our study
reveals a nuanced issue where applying UQ to ensembles of
AEs can produce skewed distributions of large reconstruction
errors (errors exceeding a pre-defined threshold), which may
falsely suggest high uncertainty when standard deviation is
used as the metric. Conventionally, a high standard deviation
indicates high uncertainty. However, contrary to intuition, large
reconstruction errors often reflect AE is strongly confident that
an input is anomalous—not uncertainty about it. Moreover,
ensembles of AEs generate reconstruction errors with varying
ranges, complicating interpretation. To address this, we propose
an extension that calibrates the standard deviation distribution
of uncertainties, mitigating erroneous prioritization. Evaluation
on 10 benchmark datasets demonstrates that our calibration
approach improves the effectiveness of UQ methods in prioritizing alerts, while maintaining favorable trade-offs across other
key performance metrics.
Index Terms—Auto-encoders, security anomaly detection, alert
prioritization, uncertainty estimation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N THE rapidly evolving landscape of system monitoring,
analysts are confronted with the formidable task of navigating through an overwhelming influx of alerts [41], a challenge
exacerbated by the constraints posed by limited processing
resources. The sheer volume of alerts, often a consequence

I

Received 6 December 2024; revised 12 July 2025 and 24 November 2025;
accepted 10 February 2026. Date of publication 12 February 2026; date of
current version 19 February 2026. The associate editor coordinating the review
of this article and approving it for publication was A. Detti. (Corresponding
author: Jordan F. Masakuna.)
Jordan F. Masakuna is with the University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
QC, Canada, and also with the University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Democratic
Republic of the Congo (e-mail: Jordan.masakuna@unikin.ac.cd).
D’Jeff K. Nkashama, Arian Soltani, Marc Frappier, Pierre-Martin
Tardif, and Froduald Kabanza are with the University of Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3664298

Fig. 1. An uncertainty-aware anomaly detector [54].

of the increasing complexity of threats, demands efficient
approaches to alert management [7]. To address this critical
issue, analysts employ a range of strategies, among which
automated triage, false positive reduction, human-in-the-loop
and alert prioritization stand out [57]. These strategies could
be used, for instance, to bolster the security of networks (such
strategies could also be useful to networks of autonomous
robots [27]).
This paper aims to shed light on a crucial aspect of alert
management—alert prioritization [2] (which involves determination of the likelihood of an alert to be associated with a
genuine security threat). This is particularly pertinent in the
realm of intrusion detection (focuses specifically on identifying security threats within a system) or anomaly detection
(AD)—identifying deviations from normal behavior, which
can include security threats—where distinguishing genuine
threats from benign anomalies is paramount. The emphasis
here lies on leveraging uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods to enhance the prioritization process. UQ methods play
a pivotal role in deciphering the confidence levels associated
with classification decisions. By discerning doubtful decisions,
UQ models provide cybersecurity analysts with a valuable tool
to address the most certain alerts first. This not only optimizes
the allocation of resources but also enhances the overall
efficacy of the cybersecurity response. Here, a prediction is
both a classification decision (as is an instance anomalous?)
and an assessment of uncertainty (as is the decision doubtful?).
As shown in Figure 1, UQ and anomaly classification
are two parallel processes jointly applied to evaluate an
input. Anomaly classification determines whether the input is
benign or anomalous. UQ assesses the confidence/uncertainty

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

in that classification. Together, these processes provide a more
reliable decision-making framework by combining predictive
classification with confidence evaluation. In other words, UQ
does not alter the classification outcome itself. Rather, it
serves as a post-hoc mechanism that evaluates the confidence
associated with a decision and supports alert prioritization (i.e.,
the less uncertain a predicted anomaly, the higher its alert
is prioritized). However, if the confidence of a classification
decision on an input is truly insufficient—corresponding to
very high uncertainty—it could be rejected.
Our research centers on the examination of UQ applied to an
ensemble of auto-encoders (AEs)—a particular unsupervised
deep learning (DL) architecture—in the context of AD. Our
emphasis on AEs is driven by the unique challenges posed
by AD systems, where the scarcity of labelled data makes
supervised learning approaches impractical. AEs excel in
learning intrinsic patterns within the data without the need
for labelled data points, making them particularly well-suited
for the AD task. This investigation aims to delve into the
nuanced interplay between UQ methods and AEs within the
AD domain, offering insights into their effectiveness and
potential applications in unsupervised scenarios.
Different UQ models exist in literature [1] and have different
modelling assumptions and, hence, can yield different uncertainty distributions, depending also on the uncertainty metrics
used. Entropy and standard deviation are most commonly used
metrics to assess predictive uncertainty (other metrics include
Kullback-Leibler divergence, Brier score and log loss), but
they capture different aspects of uncertainty, are applicable
in various contexts (e.g., intrusion detection systems, finance
and manufacturing) and provide complementary insights (the
former is often used to measure the impurity of predictions
while the latter measures variability of a set of predictions).
We observe that ensemble-like UQ methods applied on AEs
can produce large uncertainties on large reconstruction errors
(relative to a pre-defined classification threshold) when standard deviation is used as uncertainty metric. This occurs when
the reconstruction error distribution is skewed. In such cases,
using standard deviation as the uncertainty metric means that
a high standard deviation indicates high uncertainty. This
quantification could be erroneous because, according to AEs,
large reconstruction errors could mean small uncertainty i.e.,
a large reconstruction error often indicates that the model is
confident the input is anomalous—not that it is uncertain about
it. Also, as an ensemble, different AEs produce reconstruction
errors with varying ranges.
Uncertainty can be divided into two main types: aleatoric
and epistemic. Standard deviation, our UQ metric, is effective at quantifying epistemic uncertainty. In other words, an
ensemble of AEs using standard deviation across reconstruction errors primarily captures epistemic uncertainty (model
uncertainty)—i.e., variability in predictions due to differences
among ensemble members [8], [26].
What we aim to convey is that when standard deviation is
used as an uncertainty metric, the interpretation is straightforward: a high standard deviation implies high uncertainty,
while a low standard deviation implies low uncertainty. However, when using an ensemble of AEs, the reconstruction

errors for a given data point often exhibit skewness. This
skewness can cause the standard deviation of the reconstruction errors to become artificially large—exceeding the
chosen threshold—and thus disproportionately influence the
final decision for that data point. Our goal is to mitigate
the impact of this skewness when evaluating standard deviation
for uncertainty quantification.
An AE model that is uncertain about a classification decision is more likely to mislabel a sample. It should be noted
that classification and UQ are distinct tasks here. During
prediction, each AE-based model, independently trained, produces a reconstruction error (an AE operates by attempting to
reconstruct an input x in minimizing the reconstruction error
as much as possible). Then a class is determined by comparing
the reconstruction error to a classification threshold, to indicate
whether the underlying data point is anomalous or not (0 for
normality and 1 for abnormality). The combined classification
decisions from all individual predicted classes, using majority
vote [28], are considered to classify the underlying data point,
and individual reconstruction errors are considered to calculate
the uncertainty associated with the classification decision. In
other words, classification determines whether a data point is
normal or anomalous, while uncertainty quantification assesses
whether the classification decision is doubtful. These two are
closely related: for example, an anomalous data point that is
mistakenly classified as normal should ideally be assigned a
high uncertainty score.
Our work makes the following contributions:
• Calibration method. We identified an interpretation issue
in ensembles of AEs when using standard deviation for
uncertainty quantification. Importantly, large reconstruction errors (i.e., errors exceeding a pre-defined threshold)
do not necessarily correspond to high uncertainty. In
practice, a large error often indicates that the AE is confident the input lies outside the distribution of benign data
[4], [48]—that is, it is anomalous—rather than uncertain
about its prediction. We then propose a technique and
an algorithm to calibrate uncertainty distributions from
ensembles of AEs for anomaly detection when using
standard deviation as the uncertainty metric.
• Alert prioritization strategy. We introduce a novel association between low uncertainty and high reconstruction
error, enabling more effective prioritization of alerts. We
argue that uncertainty quantification can be combined
with contextual alert features (e.g., attack patterns, severity, threat source) to support practical prioritization.
• Empirical evaluation. We validate the approach on
non-temporal/tabular anomaly detection datasets, demonstrating its utility in anomaly detection.
Scope and limitations. Our method builds on existing
standard-deviation-based UQ; it is not a new UQ framework.
We do not aim to produce fully reliable uncertainty distributions (cf. [54]), and our focus on tabular datasets may limit
generalizability to sequential or temporal domains.
While our approach shares similarities with [54]—primarily
because ensembles of models can be given a Bayesian interpretation, albeit with certain caveats [14], [21]—we emphasize
three key differences:

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

• Different uncertainty objective. [54] employs Bayesian
AEs to model total uncertainty (epistemic and aleatoric)
by converting negative log-likelihood estimates as uncertainty metric and uses this to reject predictions. In
contrast, we focus on ensembles of deep AEs using
standard deviation as uncertainty metric and design a
calibration procedure that aligns standard-deviation-based
uncertainty with reconstruction error, enabling alert prioritization rather than rejection. This shift addresses a
distinct operational need in alert monitoring, where analysts must triage alerts under resource constraints rather
than discard them.
• Calibration technique. We tackle the problem of misleading uncertainty estimates—where large reconstruction
errors can spuriously inflate uncertainty—by introducing a calibration strategy that produces more reliable
uncertainty scores. This methodological contribution is
not present in [54] (indeed, [54] is a UQ method, not a
calibration method) and directly improves the utility of
ensemble-based UQ in practice.
• Practical efficiency. “Pure” Bayesian approaches are
computationally demanding, limiting their deployment
in real-time anomaly detection pipelines. Our ensemblebased method offers a lighter-weight calibration method
that scales better to operational environments while still
providing actionable uncertainty information.
It is important to note that the problem tackled here (i.e.,
calibrating UQ from an ensemble of AEs using standard
deviation as the metric) is unprecedented and represents a
unique research challenge with no established prior work.
II. R ELATED W ORK AND BACKGROUND
A. Related Work
Anomaly detection (AD) consists of examining specific
data points and detecting occurrences that deviate from the
established pattern of behaviors. AD is not new and the first
solutions were manual. But as data increases very rapidly manual tracking becomes almost impractical. Various automated
AD methods have been proposed in literature, from classical to
DL approaches [36] (DL for feature extraction with pre-trained
models [49] such as ResNet, VGG and AlexNet composed
with a one-class SVM [15]; learning feature representation of
normality such as AEs [23] and its variants such as DAGMM
[58] and DUAD [23], GANs [43] and predictability modellingbased methods [46]; and end-to-end anomaly score learning
such as LSTM [24]). Furthermore, several issues have been
considered, dictating trends of contributions in AD. For example, using AEs, models are trained on normal data points only.
However, because of constraints of reality, the training data set
can be contaminated, i.e., it can contain abnormal data points,
unbeknownst to users. This work considers uncontaminated
training data sets. Though the methods above are the main
baselines, this work considers vanilla AEs only. We consider
AEs because AE-based models have consistently demonstrated
good results in recent development of AD systems [12], [39].
Alert prioritization. The prioritization of alerts is crucial to
effectively manage resources and respond to potential threats.

2483

Several methods have been proposed to address this challenge,
each offering unique approaches and considerations. One
common approach is risk-based prioritization, which involves
assessing the potential impact and likelihood of system alerts.
For instance in cybersecurity, by considering factors such as
the asset value, threat severity, and exploitability, security
teams can prioritize alerts based on their overall risk to
the organization. Incorporating threat intelligence feeds can
enhance alert prioritization by providing contextual information about emerging threats and attack patterns. By integrating
external sources of threat intelligence into the prioritization
process, security teams can better understand the relevance
and potential impact of security alerts [25]. Some approaches
focus on automating the response to security alerts, thereby
reducing the burden on human analysts and accelerating
incident response times. Automated response mechanisms can
range from pre-defined playbooks to dynamic decision-making
based on real-time analysis of alert data [31]. DL techniques
have also been employed for system alert prioritization. These
methods utilize algorithms to analyze historical data, identify
patterns, and predict the significance of system alerts [3], [55].
This study focuses on DL techniques to quantify uncertainties
for alert prioritization.
Uncertainty quantification (UQ). Various UQ techniques
exist to quantify uncertainties (e.g. Bayesian neural networks
[16], Variational AEs (VAEs) [18] and ensemble DL methods
(EDL) [26], [53]). Bayesian neural networks and VAEs treat
model parameters or architecture as random variables and
place prior distributions over them, and learn their posterior distribution. It is important to note that UQ techniques
yield different uncertainty profiles due to differing modeling assumptions. We focus on ensemble-like setups only
for uncertainty quantification (e.g., multiple runs of Monte
Carlo dropout (MCD) [11] or VAEs, and EDL) as they
provide straightforward interpretability and valuable practical
insights—most ensemble-like UQ methods have Bayesian
interpretation. However, there are alternative standalone methods in literature for providing uncertainty estimations (e.g.,
Gaussian processes [35], quantile regression [19] and conformal prediction (CP) [44]). In our experiments, EDL, DAGMM
[58], MCD and VAEs (using AEs) will be employed—chosen
specifically for their ability to leverage standard deviation.
Our study reveals a nuanced issue where applying UQ to an
ensemble of AEs can lead to skewed distributions of large
reconstruction errors, falsely indicating large uncertainties on
certain classification decisions, contrary to the functioning of
AEs (with AEs, large reconstruction errors indicate that the
model is confident the input is anomalous). We aim to develop
a calibration method to scale standard deviation uncertainties
falsely indicating large uncertainties.
Calibration methods consist of correcting outcome distribution of DL methods, especially, when the (non-calibrated)
outcomes might not align with some underlying properties
[38]. Existing calibration methods for UQ consider classification task [34]. The same concepts can be applied to
unsupervised task. Producing calibrated uncertainty distribution is also important for model interpretability, i.e., the
reliability of a DL model’s confidence in its decisions is

2484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

critical for high-risk applications, for example AD systems.
Accurate uncertainty estimates provide a valuable extra bit
of information to establish trustful AD systems [13]. For
classification tasks, calibration is that a model’s predicted
probabilities of outcomes reflect true probabilities of those
outcomes [33].
B. Background
1) Problem Setting: Let X denote a data set given by
N
,
X = X − ∪ X + = {xi }i=1

(1)

where X − and X + are the sets of normal and abnormal data
points respectively. Every xi in X has its label yi ∈ {0, 1}
(yi = 0 for xi ∈ X − and yi = 1 otherwise). Our setting is as
follows. An AE model is trained on X − only. So, the model
attempts to minimize a loss function (which represents the
sum of reconstruction error ei on each data point xi versus
its reconstructed copy x̂i ) that, using an `2 -norm for instance
(other loss metrics could be used), is
ei = kxi − x̂i k .

(2)

Let ∆ = ∆− ∪ ∆+ be the set of reconstruction errors where
∆ = {ei : xi ∈ X − } and ∆+ = {ei : xi ∈ X + }.
2) Auto-Encoder (AE): An AE is made of two neural
networks, an encoder, fθ , and a decoder, gφ (the full model is
denoted by hΘ ). An encoder consists of learning a latent space
of input space. Once a latent space is learned, a decoder tries to
reconstruct the input instance xi from its latent representation
zi [56]. The goal is then to minimize reconstruction error given
in (3) by searching for optimal model parameters θ and φ, that
best reproduce input instances. It should be noted that since
UQ models used here are ensemble-like approaches where
uncertainties are computed using multiple runs of a model
(for MCD or VAEs) or multiple AEs (for EDL), our previous
notations would slightly change to annotate the run of a model.
A total of K runs would be considered for each UQ method.
The notations fθ will then be replaced by fθ(k) to indicate the
(k)
encoder of the kth run of an AE, gφ by g(k)
φ , hΘ by hΘ , zi by
(k)
(k)
(k)
(k)
zi , x̂i by x̂i , ei by ei and ŷi by ŷi .
The objective function of h(k)
Θ is given by
X (k)
min
ei ,
(3)
−

Θ

xi ∈X −

is defined in (2) and Θ = (θ, φ) denote model’s
where e(k)
i
parameter. From what precedes, it is evident that
(k) (k) (k)
x̂i(k) = gφ (z(k)
i ) = gφ ( fθ (xi )) .

(4)

3) Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model
(DAGMM): is a DL anomaly detection algorithm that
combines the strengths of AE-based feature learning and
Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) for unsupervised learning
tasks [58]. DAGMM is designed to detect anomalies in
high-dimensional data, such as images, time-series, or
tabular data. It utilizes an AE network to learn a lowdimensional representation of the input data. By training the
AE on normal data samples, DAGMM learns to capture the
underlying characteristics of the normal data distribution.

Once the AE is trained, DAGMM uses the latent representations learned by the encoder to fit a GMM to the data. The
GMM models the distribution of the latent representations as
a mixture of Gaussian distributions, where each component
represents a cluster of data points with similar characteristics.
DAGMM optimizes the parameters of the GMM to maximize
the likelihood of the latent space under the mixture model.
After training AE and fitting GMM, anomalies are identified
as data points with small likelihood under the learned GMM.
Data points that deviate significantly from the normal data
distribution in the latent space are considered anomalies.
4) Ensemble Deep Learning (EDL): refers to a technique
where multiple DL models (AEs for in this case), often of the
same type or architecture, are trained and combined to improve
performance [53]. Each individual model in the ensemble
might be trained with different weight and bias initializations,
subsets of the training data, or hyperparameters, leading to
a diverse set of models. The combination of classification
decisions from multiple models can often result in better
performance in terms of accuracy, generalization, and robustness compared to a single model. Decisions from individual
classifiers could be weighted, based on their performance
during training (or using prior knowledge), before fusion [29].
Distinction between reconstruction errors from the K models
is used to assess uncertainty. Common methods for combining
classification decisions in EDL include voting [28] or using
more sophisticated techniques such as stacking or boosting
[42]. To classify a data point using the kth model h(k)
Θ , a
threshold η(k) is set during the training regime for inference.
Ideally, it should be given as in (5). A new data point xi is
(k)
flagged as anomalous if e(k)
i > η . Otherwise, it is normal. A
theoretical threshold for AEs is given by
n
o
−
η(k) = max e(k)
:
∀x
∈
X
.
(5)
i
i
In practice, a validation data set is used to determine the
optimal thresholds, which is the approach we adopt here. It
should be noted that the detection of doubtful decisions based
on uncertainty can be sensitive to the choice of uncertainty
threshold [54].
5) Variational AEs (VAEs): are a type of AEs and are
trained using variational inference, where the model learns
to approximate the true data distribution by optimizing a
lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data [18]. The
key difference between classical AEs and VAEs is in how
they represent and learn the latent space. VAEs introduce
a probabilistic interpretation of the latent space and use
variational inference to train the model, allowing them to
capture uncertainty and generate more diverse and meaningful representations compared to classical AEs. The objective
function for training VAEs typically consists of two terms:
the reconstruction loss, which measures the fidelity of the
reconstructed data, and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the learned latent distribution and a predefined prior
distribution. Mathematically, the objective function for training
VAEs can be expressed as:
LVAE = −Eq(z|x) [log p(x|z)] + DKL (q(z|x)||p(z)) ,

(6)

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

2485

where q(z|x) denotes the approximate posterior distribution
over latent variables given input data x, p(x|z) represents the
likelihood of generating data x given latent variables z, and
p(z) represents the prior distribution over latent variables. DKL
denotes the KL divergence, given by
Z
P(x)
DKL (PkQ) = P(x) log
dx
(7)
Q(x)
At each run of the same trained VAE, a different reconstruction
error could be obtained. This is what makes an ensemble-like
predictions from which uncertainty is quantified.
6) Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD): is a method for estimating uncertainty in deep neural networks (AEs in this case)
by applying dropout at inference time and performing Monte
Carlo sampling [11]. Dropout is a regularization technique
commonly used during training to prevent overfitting. During
training, dropout randomly sets a fraction of the neurons to
zero, effectively removing them from the network. At inference time, MCD applies dropout stochastically and performs
multiple forward passes through the network with different
dropout masks. It then computes statistics, such as the mean
and variance, of the predictions across these forward passes
to estimate uncertainty.
III. O UR P ROPOSED A PPROACH : M OSEMBOLI
We propose a standard deviation uncertainty quantification calibration, named Mosemboli1 (whose architecture is
shown in Figure 2b), to enhance expression of uncertainty
distribution obtained from existing UQ methods. Similarly to
[54], our proposed calibration method is built on top of a
UQ method—its inputs are uncertainty distribution obtained
from existing UQ methods. It is important to note that our
proposed method does not change classification decisions,
but uncertainty distributions only. Our observation is as follows: since an AE is a threshold-based method, it should
be less uncertain on its anomalous classification decisions
with large reconstruction errors where all K classification
decisions converge (i.e., all models agree on the nature of
the underlying data point)—this is a fundamental principle of
AEs; otherwise, the model should have large uncertainty (the
same observation was made in [54] but with entropy alone
as metric where they summarized the anomaly probabilities
from all Bayesian AEs posterior samples via expectation,
so standard deviation was not considered)—the deviation
between a reconstruction error and a fixed threshold is used
to enhance the expression of uncertainty distribution obtained
from UQ methods. Hence, the proposed calibration method,
inspired by the Gaussian distribution mixture method [40],
consists of arranging reconstruction errors into 3 segments (see
Figure 2b), namely: normality, abnormality and uncertainty
zones, where uncertainties in reconstructing inputs are then
expressed in terms of how the three segments or distributions
overlap when plotting the reconstruction errors.
It was indicated that it is not trivial to determine a threshold
using AEs. In practice, an optimal value of threshold using a
1 Mosemboli means a calibrator in Lingala, a local language spoken in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.

Fig. 2. Mosemboli: (2a) proposed architecture and (2b) an illustration of
reconstruction error distribution mixture and how adjacent zones can overlap
to determine the scaling factor.

validation set is found in the neighborhood of η(k) defined in
(5). Here, the zone where a threshold could be found is viewed
as an uncertainty zone. This means that, given an instance xi ,
its uncertainty will be large if its reconstruction error is found
to be in the uncertainty zone. Conversely, an AE model should
have relatively small uncertainty for reconstructions where
errors are outside of the uncertainty zone. Thus, there would
be three distributions for reconstruction errors on normal,
anomalous and uncertain data points where each implements
an uncertainty distribution in a subpopulation of the error
reconstruction space. The 3 distributions should be combined
to produce a calibrated uncertainty distribution. Before delving further, we introduce some properties that Mosemboli
satisfies.

A. Properties of the Calibration Method
Given K trained versions of a UQ model (see Figure 2a),
(k)
each version h(k)
Θ produces a reconstruction error ei on data
instance xi . Here, a model’s version means a run from the
probabilistic UQ method. An uncertainty σi is the standard

2486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

deviation given by
v
u K
K
2
uX (k)  (k)
X
(k)
pi ei − µi where µi =
σi = t
p(k)
i ei ,
k=1

Algorithm 1 Mosemboli
(8)

k=1

(k)
with p(k)
i denoting the probability associated with ei , given,
for instance, by
e(k)
i
,
(9)
p(k)
i =
si

where
si =

K
X
e(k)
i .
k=1

Equation (8) is what a UQ method should produce as measures
of uncertainty. Uncertainty distribution should be calibrated
only for situations where classification decisions converge (all
members of the ensemble are in agreement on the nature of the
underlying data point), i.e., only data points xi associated with
reconstruction errors e(k)
satisfying the following conditions:
i
for normal data
(k)
e(k)
∀k ,
(10)
i <η
and for anomalous data
(k)
e(k)
∀k .
i ≥η

(11)

Equations 10 and 11 are a form of normalization of reconstruction errors (a form of agreement in classification decisions)
from various models, and need to hold on samples which
uncertainties require calibration. ri− , ri+ and ri∗ denote the
probability that the mean reconstruction error êi of a data
point xi be a member of normal, abnormal or uncertain zones
respectively. The calibrated uncertainty ρi on the average êi is
ρi =

ri∗
× σi ,
ri− + ri+ + ri∗

(12)

where ri∗ can be viewed as a scaling factor [38].
An AE-based calibration method to enhance uncertainty
distribution should satisfy 3 properties, which are taken from
the basic functioning principle of AEs: expected behavior of
a system is drawn from the same learnable data distribution
(i.e., normality) while unexpected behavior is difficult to learn.
• (normality): the more similar the reconstructed version
of an input is to the input the less uncertain the model
should be. Mathematically, for êi ≥ ê j and êi ≤ η,
ri− ≤ r−j .

(13)

Equation (13) indicates the less ei gets the smaller r∗ (ei )
gets, i.e., this better aligns with expected behavior of AEs
on normal data as the less reconstruction errors get the
higher is the chance that the instance is normal.
• (abnormality): the more dissimilar the reconstructed
copy of an input is to the input the less uncertain the
model should be. Mathematically, for êi ≤ ê j and êi ≥ η,
+
r+
j ≥ ri .

(14)

Equation (14) indicates the larger êi gets the smaller ri∗
gets, i.e., this better aligns with the behavior of AEs on

(K)
function MOSEMBOLI(h(1)
Θ , · · · , hΘ , η, ϕ, d, Xval )
E ← []
3:
for xi ∈ Xval do
4:
ei ← 0
(1)
(K)
5:
for h(k)
Θ ∈ {hΘ , · · · , hΘ } do
(k)
6:
ei ← ei + kxi − hΘ (xi )k
7:
E.push(ei )
8:
end for
9:
δ− ← (η − min(E)) d
10:
δ+ ← (max(E) − η) d
11:
end for
12:
(Γ− , Γ+ , Γ∗ ) ← (∅, ∅, ∅)
13:
for xi ∈ Xval do
14:
if ei < η − (1 − ϕ)δ− then
15:
Γ− ← ∆− ∪ {xi }
16:
else if ei > η + (1 − ϕ)δ+ then
17:
Γ+ ← ∆+ ∪ {xi }
18:
else
19:
Γ∗ ← ∆∗ ∪ {xi }
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
fit(D− , Γ− )
23:
fit(D+ , Γ+ )
24:
fit(D∗ , Γ∗ )
25:
return (D− , D+ , D∗ )
26: end function

1:
2:

anomalous data as the larger reconstruction errors get the
larger is the chance that the instance is anomalous.
• (symmetry): there is a zone where the AE model is indecisive on the relation between the reconstructed version
of the input and the input itself, i.e., the distribution in
this zone is symmetric. Mathematically, ∃ ε > 0 such that
∗
∗
rη−ε
= rη+ε
.

(15)

Equation (15) indicates that the distribution curve in the
uncertainty area can be divided around the AE threshold
η to produce two equal halves where the model finds it
difficult to distinguish categories of instances.
Mosemboli should satisfy these 3 properties. However, according to (12), this might not be the case as the value of ρi
depends also on σi . This means that for some values of σi ,
(e.g., σi = 0), ρi might not be regular.
B. Proposed Algorithm
To quantify a scaling factor ri∗ the following are considered:
reconstruction errors on (a) normal data points follow a distribution D− , (b) abnormal data points follow another distribution
D+ , and (c) uncertain data points follow another distribution
D∗ . It is intended to design an uncertainty quantification
method that will indicate large uncertainty when reconstruction
errors fall on the uncertainty zone.
Let π−i denote a probability that a data point xi is normal
(i.e., the larger π−i gets the more chance the underlying data
point is normal), π+
i denote a probability that a data point xi

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

Algorithm 2 An Example of How to Use Mosemboli

corresponding to normal data points,

(K)
procedure MAIN(h(1)
Θ , · · · , hΘ , η, ϕ, d, Xval , Xtest )
(1)
(K)
2: (D− , D+ , D∗ ) ←MOSEMBOLI(hΘ , · · · , hΘ , η, ϕ, d, Xval )
3: for xi ∈ Xtest do
(K)
4:
(ei , σi ) ←BASELINE-UQ(h(1)
Θ , · · · , hΘ , xi )
5:
π−i ∼ D− (ei )
+
6:
π+
i ∼ D (ei )
7:
π∗i ∼ D∗ (ei )
π∗
8:
ρi ← π− +π+i +π∗ σi
i
i
i
9:
print(σi , ρi )
10: end for
11: end procedure

1:

is anomalous, and π∗i denote a probability that a data point xi
is uncertain. The mixture of the 3 distributions is
0 −1
πi
1
@π+
A.
(16)
πi = −
i
∗
πi + π+
∗
i + πi
π
i

The calibrated uncertainty ρi on an instance xi is
ρi =

π∗i
× σi .
−
∗
πi + π+
i + πi

2487

(17)

Γ+ = {xi ∈ Xval |ei > η + (1 − ϕ)δ+ } ,

(21)

to anomalous data points and
Γ∗ = {xi ∈ Xval |η − (1 + ϕ)δ− ≤ ei ≤ η + (1 + ϕ)δ+ } ,

(22)

to data points on the uncertainty zone where ϕ denotes some
level of overlapping between every pair of direct adjacent
distributions (i.e., overlaps between distributions of normality
and symmetry, and between symmetry and abnormality). Here,
we set reconstruction errors in Γ− to follow the exponential
distribution with parameters (µ− , α− ), in Γ+ to follow the
cumulative exponential distribution with parameters (µ+ , α+ )
and in Γ∗ to follow the Gaussian distribution with parameters
(µ∗ , α∗ ). We fit the three sets Γ− in (20), Γ+ in (21) and Γ∗
in (22) to estimate distribution parameters using SciPy [51].
∗
Thus, the three probability distributions π−i , π+
i and πi defined
−
+
∗
in (16) are then densities in Γ , Γ and Γ respectively. We
mainly use d = 0.3 and ϕ = 0.4 throughout our experiments
(other values could be used—in fact, other values were used
and produced similar results, which is desirable—the proposed
calibration method is not sensitive to these parameters).
D. Toy Example

Thus, as shown in Figure 2a, the proposed method outputs
two scaled values êi and ρi which denote the average error
reconstruction from versions of a UQ method and the calibrated standard deviation respectively. Our resulting algorithm
is detailed in Algorithm 1 (and an example of how it can be
used is given in Algorithm 2). The code is available at https://
anonymous.4open.science/r/ddm-8D63/.

To illustrate our proposed method, let’s consider the
scenario where 5 reconstruction errors (refer to (23)) are
generated from 5 AE models on a single data point:
0 1
1
B1.2C
B C
C
(23)
e=B
B1.4C ,
@1.3A
2.5

C. On the Implementation of the Proposed Algorithm

with the classification threshold set, for example, to 0.8
for all the 5 models (but each model could have its own
classification threshold). All the members exhibit reconstruction errors surpassing the threshold, implying the anomalous
nature of the underlying instance. So, the final class of x
is y x = 1. We need now to quantify uncertainty associated
to this classification decision. To consider a classification
decision doubtful, the associated uncertainty should exceed
some uncertainty threshold. When using standard deviation
as an uncertainty metric with, for example, the uncertainty
threshold set to 0.3, the associated uncertainty σ for predicting
the data point is approximately 0.6, considerably large in this
instance (0.6 > 0.3). For this case, despite the counterintuitive
nature, as per the functioning of AEs, this large standard
deviation implies small uncertainty (that is because individual
large reconstruction errors indicate that all five models are confident the underlying data input is anomalous)—the intuitive
nature is that a small standard deviation should indicate small
uncertainty. We then need a scaling factor κ to rectify this
counterintuitive effect. For instance, setting κ = 0.1 results
in a calibrated standard deviation uncertainty of κσ = 0.06,
indicating indeed small uncertainty in this case. This paper
revolves around the narrative of calibrating standard deviation
uncertainty when employing vanilla AEs in an ensemble
fashion.

Recall that the proposal considers already trained models.
Models are trained on normal data points only. Further, calibration requires parameters for the three reconstruction error
distributions (we use exponential, Gaussian and cumulative
exponential distributions). The method to get distributions’
parameters to measure the inter-zone overlap is through reconstruction errors of a held-out validation data set Xval . We
need to estimate six parameters (two for each of the three
distributions), namely: (µ− , α− ) for the exponential distribution, (µ+ , α+ ) for the cumulative exponential distribution and
(µ∗ , α∗ ) for the Gaussian distribution. Let d− and d+ denote
the width of reconstruction errors on the left and right sides
of η (the value of η is determined using a held-out validation
dataset) respectively, given by
d− = η − min ei and d+ = max ei − η .
xi ∈Xval

xi ∈Xval

(18)

Let d denote the radius of the uncertainty zone. We define the
following measures,
δ− = d × d− and δ+ = d × d+ .

(19)

We set the three reconstruction error samples as follows
Γ− = {xi ∈ Xval |ei < η − (1 − ϕ)δ− } ,

(20)

2488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 3. Visualisation of training data sets.

IV. E XPERIMENTAL I NVESTIGATION

TABLE I
T HE C HARACTERISTICS OF DATA S ETS TO T RAIN
UQ M ETHODS

A. Experimental Setup
To assess the contribution of the proposed method (Mosemboli) to existing UQ methods (namely, EDL-AE, DAGMM,
MCD and VAEs), the following metrics will be used:
accuracy (ACC), F1 -score (F1 ), inversion number [9] (IN),
root mean square calibration error [33] (RMSCE), correctly
rejection rates (CRR), and analysis of variance of uncertainties. We count (in percentage) number of instances where
the model correctly rejects misclassified decisions. CRR is
used to validate alert prioritization. We vary the uncertainty threshold τ from 10th to [10, 35]th percentile so that
only alerts with smaller uncertainties are considered for
prioritization—predicted alerts with uncertainties below the
threshold are given higher priority than those with higher
uncertainties. We use IN to quantify the difference between
the predicted ranking and the ground truth ranking of alerts
(here, the ground truth ranking of alerts refers to the expected
rankings by AEs). An inversion occurs when the order of alerts
in the predicted ranking is opposite to their order in the ground
truth ranking—a smaller IN suggests that the model is effective
in correctly prioritizing alerts. It is important to highlight that
accuracy and F1 -score are computed based on the model’s
classification decisions, whereas IN, RMSCE, WA, and WR
are calculated using the uncertainties associated with the
model’s reconstruction errors. Further, to form an ensemble
for UQ, we consider a set of 5 candidates as suggested by
[21] and [34]. To evaluate ACC and F1 , each kth version of
the model estimates its classification decision, ŷ(k)
i , using its
classification threshold and a majority vote is applied to obtain
the final flag [28]. Given Λ = {xi ∈ Xtest |σi ≥ τ ∧ ŷi , yi },
CRR =

#Λ
.
#Xtest

(24)

We expect calibrated UQ methods to preserve the same ACC,
F1 and RMSCE (our proposed method does not minimize
RMSCE because this metric is meant to measure calibration
which targets overconfidence as discussed in literature), to
have small IN and large CRR. We use Pytorch [37] to
measure RMSCE. For analysis of variances, the p-value and
effect size from hypothesis tests (are commonly used as an
indication of noteworthy differences between sets of values
[10]) are employed. The significance level for p-value is set
to 0.01 throughout. We use SciPy [51] to run the Wilcoxon
signed-rank and the Friedman tests. We use Kendall’s W to
measure the effect size v [50]. Based on Cohen’s interpretation
guidelines [6], the values of v are interpreted as follows. For

v ∈ [0, 0.3), the effect size is negligible; for v ∈ [0.3, 0.5), it is
medium; and it is large when v ≥ 0.5.
We use these data sets to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach (some of these data sets are originally
designed for anomaly detection, while others are multi-class
classification data sets that we adapt into anomaly detection).
The distributions of these data sets are visualized in Figure 3, and their characteristics are summarized in Table I:
(1) CICIOT is a collection of real-time data containing 33
attacks that are executed in an IoT network [32]. (2) CIFAR10 is a widely used data set in the field of machine learning
and computer vision, consisting of color images across 10
different classes [20]. Classes include airplanes, automobiles,
birds, cats, deer, dogs, frogs, horses, rabbits, and ships.
(3) CREDIT is credit fraud data set comprising financial
transaction records annotated with binary labels indicating
fraudulent or legitimate transactions [52]. (4) ECG consists
of recordings of electrical activity of the heart, capturing
expected waveform patterns and anomalies [17]. (5) revised
IDS contains simulated complex network traffics and several
types of attacks [45]. (6) revised KDD is an intrusion detection
data set [47], containing simulated military traffics and several
types of attacks. (7) KITSUNE is a collection of 9 network
attack data sets captured from either an IP-based commercial
surveillance system or an IoT network [30]. (8) MNIST
consists of grayscale images of handwritten digits (0-9) [22].
MNIST and CIFAR-10 are not naturally designed for anomaly
detection tasks. To make them anomaly detection data sets,
we consider one class (among provided classes) as inliers.
(9) MVTec is a data set for benchmarking anomaly detection
methods with a focus on industrial inspection. It contains
high-resolution images divided into fifteen different object and
texture categories. Each category comprises a set of defect-free
training images and a test set of images with various kinds of
defects as well as images without defects [5]. (10) Visa is an

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

2489

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCES : ACC, F 1 , IN AND RMSCE OF THE U NCALIBRATED AND
C ALIBRATED V ERSIONS OF D IFFERENT UQ M ETHODS

Fig. 4. Differences between uncalibrated and calibrated UQ. Positive values
indicate that calibrated UQ are better.

Fig. 5. Average differences in CRR between calibrated and uncalibrated UQ
methods. Positive values mean improvement.

anomaly detection data set containing objects from 12 classes
of images [59].
While a couple of the chosen data sets may be considered
somewhat dated, they still serve as valuable benchmark data
sets for anomaly detection methods.
For the notations in various tables and figures, if M denotes
an uncalibrated UQ method, M+ will denote the calibrated
version of the same UQ method.
To evaluate model performance, we use 70% of the benign
data for training (i.e., AEs are unsupervised models trained
solely on benign data), while the remaining 30% of the benign
data together with all anomalous data are reserved for testing.
From the test set, 30% is further allocated as a validation
set for threshold selection and early-stopping verification. The
model hyperparameters are: weight decay of 10−5 , batch size
of 32, 100 training epochs, patience of 5 for early stopping,
learning rate of 10−5 , the Adam optimizer, quadratic loss as
objective function and the momentum to 0.9 for all AE models.
For baselines, we rely on the original published implementations. For models, we use an AE (with 8 layers) and its three
variants: MCD, which keeps dropout active at inference for
uncertainty; VAEs, which output distributions for stochastic
reconstructions; and DAGMM, which augments the AE with
a Gaussian mixture network combining reconstruction error
and sample energy for anomaly detection.
B. Results and Discussion
Our key finding is that predictions flagged as uncertain must
genuinely reflect uncertainty; otherwise, we risk generating

false alerts. Specifically, if uncertainty is misquantified, it may
lead to deprioritizing important events or even causing harm
in high-stakes applications. This is particularly critical when
the standard deviation is high—we must ensure that it truly
indicates high uncertainty. One way to validate this is by
checking whether the data point is actually anomalous. In other
words, if a data point exhibits high standard deviation but is,
in fact, normal, this suggests a misestimation of uncertainty.
To assess this issue, we analyze the number of misclassified
data points with uncertainty—based on traditional uncertainty
quantification methods—that are not anomalous, and conversely, the number of data points with low standard deviations
that are anomalous. We expect our method to improve alert
prioritization performance under these challenging conditions,
while preserving comparable classification performance to
traditional methods in typical scenarios.
1) Improved Uncertainty Quantification: Figure 5 illustrates that, averaged across datasets and predictive methods,
there is a 9% improvement in the rejection of misclassified
data points. These correspond to samples that were misclassified but exhibit high uncertainty, primarily driven by
skewed reconstruction error distributions. This underscores the
importance of uncertainty calibration for downstream tasks

2490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 6. A sample of uncertainty distributions on KDD (d = 0.3 and ϕ = 0.4) where EDL-AE (6a), DAGMM (6b), MCD (6c) and VAEs (6d). Blue and
red distributions are for normality and abnormality respectively. The top subplot represents the 3 distributions to model the 3 zones. The x-axis denotes
reconstruction errors. Green and red shades are levels of uncertainties on reconstruction errors obtained from normal and abnormal instances respectively.
Vertical red lines denote the threshold.

such as prioritizing system alerts. Notably, uncalibrated uncertainties can outperform calibrated ones when the ensemble’s
reconstruction errors do not exhibit skewness, in which case
calibration offers limited benefit. UQ methods demonstrate
varying effectiveness in identifying doubtful classification
decisions. For example, MCD and EDL with calibration
yield significantly improved correctly rejection rates (CRR)
compared to their uncalibrated counterparts, whereas VAEs
show a favorable trade-off. In most cases, calibrated UQ surpasses uncalibrated UQ, indicating that calibration enhances
alert prioritization. This indicates that certain high uncertainty
estimates—reflected by large standard deviations—can be misleading. Calibrated UQ methods helped mitigate these cases.
While CRR highlights the importance of calibration, more
robust validation requires reliable ground truth uncertainty
labels. For instance, security experts could provide manual
assessments of uncertainty associated with specific alerts to
better evaluate UQ performance.
2) Improved Alert Prioritization: Table II and Figure 4
demonstrate that calibrated UQ methods consistently yield

lower inversion numbers (IN), as expected. This suggests
that calibrated UQ methods prioritize alerts more effectively
than their uncalibrated counterparts. This means that false
high uncertainty can disrupt alert prioritization by drawing
attention away from truly ambiguous or critical cases. Lower
IN correspond to a stronger agreement between the predicted
alert ranking and the expected ranking, indicating greater
consistency. Such consistency serves as a robust measure of the
model’s effectiveness in alert prioritization, thereby increasing system analysts’ confidence that the prioritized alerts
align with anticipated outcomes. Notably, despite elevated
uncertainty stemming from skewed reconstruction errors in
certain misclassified samples (as illustrated in Figure 5), our
calibration approach successfully mitigates the inconsistency
between uncertainty estimates and classification outcomes.
3) Sustained Classification Performance Reports: Each calibrated UQ method has exactly the same ACC and F1 , and
almost the same RMSCE than its uncalibrated version across
data sets as expected—system analysts can have confidence
when utilizing the calibrated uncertainty for alert prioritization

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

because the calibration process did not impact the overall
reliability of classification decisions. Calibration error arises
when the observed frequency of true positives deviates consistently from the predicted uncertainties. Although not addressed
here, reducing calibration error is crucial for enhancing the
reliability of systems.
4) Statistically Validated Improvements of Our Calibrated
Method: We observed a p-value of less than 0.01 on uncertainties between versions of EDL-AE, DAGMM, MCD and VAEs,
and between UQ, UQ+ and all versions of UQ methods. This
means that there is a significant difference between every two
versions of these approaches. This implies that, because every
UQ method and its calibrated version give the same calibration
error RMSCE, it appears to prefer the calibrated versions that
produce small IN. We also run the Wilcoxon signed-rank test
and the Friedman test between the uncalibrated and calibrated
versions of UQ methods on their IN. We obtained a p-value of
0.0093 and an effect size of 0.5333, which both indicate that
calibrated and uncalibrated UQ methods produce markedly
different levels of sortedness of uncertainties.
5) Increased Complexity Calculation: Assuming that L is
the size of the validation data set Xval and K the size of the
ensemble, the time complexity of our solution is O(KL). The
time complexity of the baseline UQ method is O(K). So, using
our solution adds a cost on the baseline UQ method, resulting
a time complexity of O(KL). However, for typical L and K,
this additional complexity is hardly noticeable.
6) Distributions of Calibrated Uncertainties: Figure 6
shows (for illustrative purposes—only results on one data set
are shown) reconstruction error and uncertainty distributions
using various UQ methods considered here, for d = 0.3 and
ϕ = 0.4. It was observed that different values of d and ϕ give
almost the same results—i.e., the proposed calibration method
is not sensitive to the choices of these 2 parameters, which is
desirable. In Figure 6d, VAEs have expected uncalibrated and
better calibrated expressions of the uncertainty distribution.
Compared to other UQ methods, this might mean that VAEs
have better ways of expressing uncertainty distributions.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we presented a novel method for calibrating standard deviation uncertainty distributions derived from
ensemble-based UQ methods applied to AEs in the domain of
anomaly detection. Our approach leverages calibration techniques to enhance the prioritization of alerts—a critical aspect
of alert management. Particularly, we addressed scenarios
where the certainty levels of alerts are expressed through
standard deviation, emphasizing that alerts with small standard
deviation uncertainties should be considered to be prioritized.
Existing ensemble-based UQ methods on AEs, however, often
exhibit a counterintuitive assignment of large uncertainty to
large-variance reconstruction errors. Our observations led to
the introduction of a calibration method designed to rectify this
counterintuitive utilization of standard deviation. By aligning
uncertainty distribution with reconstruction errors, our method
promotes a more effective prioritization strategy for system
alerts in anomaly detection scenarios.

2491

There are a couple of avenues of interesting work to further
develop our understanding of the uncertainty quantification
methods on auto-encoder-based models for anomaly detection.
First, developing techniques to address the issue of overconfidence that AEs suffer from could be interesting. Also,
it is reported that producing reliable uncertainties is still
an ongoing research challenge [54], investigating production
of reliable uncertainties would be interesting. Furthermore,
in real-time anomaly detection scenarios, intrusion detection
systems must operate on time-evolving data streams. Adapting
the proposed approach under temporal settings would be
interesting.
R EFERENCES
[1]

M. Abdar et al., “A review of uncertainty quantification in deep
learning: Techniques, applications and challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 76,
pp. 243–297, Dec. 2021.
[2] K. Alsubhi, E. Al-Shaer, and R. Boutaba, “Alert prioritization in
intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. IEEE Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp.
(NOMS), Apr. 2008, pp. 33–40.
[3] M. E. Aminanto, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue,
“Threat alert prioritization using isolation forest and stacked auto
encoder with day-forward-chaining analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 217977–217986, 2020.
[4] F. Angiulli, F. Fassetti, and L. Ferragina, “Reconstruction errorbased anomaly detection with few outlying examples,” 2023,
arXiv:2305.10464.
[5] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2019,
pp. 9592–9600.
[6] D. F. Brossart, V. C. Laird, and T. W. Armstrong, “Interpreting Kendall’s
Tau and Tau-U for single-case experimental designs,” Cogent Psychol.,
vol. 5, no. 1, Dec. 2018, Art. no. 1518687.
[7] F. Cuppens, “Managing alerts in a multi-intrusion detection
environment,” in Proc. 17th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf.,
2001, pp. 22–31.
[8] X. Fan, X. Zhang, and X. B. Yu, “Uncertainty quantification of a deep
learning model for failure rate prediction of water distribution networks,”
Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 236, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 109088.
[9] D. Foata, “On the netto inversion number of a sequence,” Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 236–240, Feb. 1968.
[10] G. M. Sullivan and R. Feinn, “Using effect size—Or why the P value is
not enough,” J. Graduate Med. Educ., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 279–282, Sep.
2012.
[11] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation:
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
[12] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geometric transformations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
pp. 1–12.
[13] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration
of modern neural networks,” in Proc. 34th Intl. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017, pp. 1321–1330.
[14] J. A. Hoeting, D. Madigan, A. E. Raftery, and C. T. Volinsky, “Bayesian
model averaging: A tutorial (with comments by M. Clyde, David draper
and E. I. George, and a rejoinder by the authors,” Stat. Sci., vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 382–417, Nov. 1999.
[15] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
[16] Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in Bayesian
deep learning for computer vision,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
[17] A. H. Khan, M. Hussain, and M. K. Malik, “ECG images dataset of
cardiac and COVID-19 patients,” Data Brief, vol. 34, Feb. 2021, Art.
no. 106762.
[18] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[19] R. Koenker and K. F. Hallock, “Quantile regression,” J. Econ. Perspect.,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 143–156, 2001.

2492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[20] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features from
tiny images,” Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep. TR-2009,
2009.
[21] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–12.
[22] Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. Burges, “MNIST handwritten digit
database,” AT&T Labs, Florham Park, NJ, USA, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[23] T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Liu, and W.-Y. Lin, “Deep unsupervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
Jan. 2021, pp. 3635–3644.
[24] B. Lindemann, B. Maschler, N. Sahlab, and M. Weyrich, “A survey
on anomaly detection for technical systems using LSTM networks,”
Comput. Ind., vol. 131, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 103498.
[25] Y. Liu, X. Shu, Y. Sun, J. Jang, and P. Mittal, “RAPID: Real-time
alert investigation with context-aware prioritization for efficient threat
discovery,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022,
pp. 827–840.
[26] J. F. Masakuna, K. N. D’Jeff, A. Soltani, M. Frappier, P.-M. Tardif, and
F. Kabanza, “Streamlined and resource-efficient estimation of epistemic
uncertainty in deep ensemble classification decision via regression,”
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics in Comput. Intell., vol. 9, no. 4, p. 12, Aug.
2025.
[27] J. F. Masakuna, S. W. Utete, and S. Kroon, “A coordinated search
strategy for solitary robots,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. Robotic
Comput. (IRC), Feb. 2019, pp. 433–434.
[28] J. F. Masakuna, S. W. Utete, and S. Kroon, “Performance-agnostic fusion
of probabilistic classifier outputs,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Inf.
Fusion (FUSION), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[29] J. F. Masakuna and P. K. Kafunda, “Do prior information on performance
of individual classifiers for fusion of probabilistic classifier outputs
matter,” J. Classification, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 468–487, 2023.
[30] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[31] S. M. Mohammad and L. Surya, “Security automation in information technology,” Int. J. Creative Res. Thoughts (IJCRT), vol. 6,
pp. 901–905, Jun. 2018.
[32] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
p. 5941, Jun. 2023.
[33] J. Nixon, M. W. Dusenberry, L. Zhang, G. Jerfel, and D. Tran,
“Measuring calibration in deep learning,” in Proc. CVPR Workshops,
vol. 2, 2019, pp. 38–41.
[34] Y. Ovadia et al., “Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? Evaluating
predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–12.
[35] P. S. Palar, K. Zakaria, L. R. Zuhal, K. Shimoyama, and R. P. Liem,
“Gaussian processes and support vector regression for uncertainty quantification in aerodynamics,” in Proc. AIAA Scitech Forum, Jan. 2021,
p. 181.
[36] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
[37] A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
pp. 1–12.
[38] J. Platt, “Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons to regularized likelihood methods,” Adv. Large Margin Classifiers,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 61–74, 1999.
[39] A. A. Pol, V. Berger, C. Germain, G. Cerminara, and M. Pierini,
“Anomaly detection with conditional variational autoencoders,” in
Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2019,
pp. 1651–1657.
[40] C. Rasmussen, “The infinite Gaussian mixture model,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 1–7.
[41] S. Sakazi, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Prioritizing antivirus alerts on
internal enterprise machines,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Detection Intrusions
Malware, Vulnerability Assessment. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
pp. 75–95.
[42] H. Sarvari, C. Domeniconi, B. Prenkaj, and G. Stilo, “Unsupervised
boosting-based autoencoder ensembles for outlier detection,” in Proc.
25th Pacific-Asia Conf. Adv. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 91–103.

[43] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. SchmidtErfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with
generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
May 2019.
[44] G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 371–421, 2008.
[45] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[46] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014,
pp. 1–9.
[47] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[48] H. Torabi, S. L. Mirtaheri, and S. Greco, “Practical autoencoder based
anomaly detection by using vector reconstruction error,” Cybersecurity,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 1, 2023.
[49] R. T. Ionescu, S. Smeureanu, B. Alexe, and M. Popescu, “Unmasking
the abnormal events in video,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2895–2903.
[50] R. Vallat, “Pingouin: Statistics in Python,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 3,
no. 31, p. 1026, Nov. 2018.
[51] P. Virtanen et al., “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for scientific
computing in Python,” Nature Methods, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 261–272,
2020.
[52] S. Warghade, S. Desai, and V. Patil, “Credit card fraud detection from
imbalanced dataset using machine learning algorithm,” Int. J. Comput.
Trends Technol., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 22–28, Mar. 2020.
[53] A. Yazdinejad, M. Kazemi, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and
H. Karimipour, “An ensemble deep learning model for cyber threat
hunting in industrial Internet of Things,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 101–110, Feb. 2023.
[54] B. X. Yong and A. Brintrup, “Bayesian autoencoders with uncertainty
quantification: Towards trustworthy anomaly detection,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 209, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 118196.
[55] Z. Zeng, Z. Yang, D. Huang, and C.-J. Chung, “LICALITY—Likelihood
and criticality: Vulnerability risk prioritization through logical reasoning
and deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 1746–1760, Jun. 2022.
[56] J. Zhai, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Q. He, “Autoencoder and its various
variants,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern. (SMC), Oct.
2018, pp. 415–419.
[57] C. Zhong, J. Yen, P. Liu, and R. F. Erbacher, “Learning from experts’
experience: Toward automated cyber security data triage,” IEEE Syst.
J., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 603–614, Mar. 2019.
[58] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.
[59] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022, pp. 392–408.

Jordan F. Masakuna received the bachelor’s
and Honours degrees in computer science from
the University of Kinshasa, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in 2010 and 2012, respectively,
and the master’s degree in mathematical sciences
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Stellenbosch University, South Africa, in 2015 and
2020, respectively. He is currently a Post-Doctoral
Fellow with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Sherbrooke. He is an Associate Professor with the University of Kinshasa. His research
interests lie in artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, network analysis, distributed robotics systems, data fusion and human activity recognition, and
ambient computing.

MASAKUNA et al.: ENHANCING ANOMALY ALERT PRIORITIZATION THROUGH CALIBRATED STANDARD DEVIATION

D’Jeff K. Nkashama received the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from the University of
Sherbrooke. He is a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the
University of Sherbrooke. His research interests
include the intersection of artificial intelligence and
cybersecurity, with a focus on anomaly and intrusion
detection, adaptive learning systems, and adversarial
environments. His current work explores the use of
generative and agentic AI, including large language
models, for security monitoring, threat intelligence,
and incident response.

2493

Pierre-Martin Tardif received the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from Université Laval,
Québec, QC, Canada. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the SIMQG Department, School of
Management, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke,
QC, Canada. His research interests include cybersecurity for critical infrastructure, large-scale events,
crypto-agility, operational technology, and anomaly
detection.

Arian Soltani received the bachelor’s degree in
electronics engineering from Iran University of Science and Technology (IUST) and the master’s degree
in software engineering from Tarbiat Modares University (TMU). He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the University of Sherbrooke (UdS). His
current research in the intersection of artificial intelligence and cybersecurity, specifically AI-enabled
cybersecurity operations, with UdS Cybersecurity
Expertise Center.

Marc Frappier received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Ottawa. He is currently a Full Professor of software engineering with the Department
of Computer Science, University of Sherbrooke.
His research interests focus on formal methods
for software development (specification, refinement,
code generation, proof) and cybersecurity (intrusion
detection, anomaly detection, access control, vulnerability testing, post-quantum cybersecurity, and
applications of AI to cybersecurity).

Froduald Kabanza is currently a Full Professor of Computer Science with the University of
Sherbrooke, with a career spanning research, innovation, and leadership in artificial intelligence. His
work has advanced AI algorithms and led to impactful applications, including the development of a
hospital AI system commercialized by Lumed Inc.,
Company of bioMérieux. He also founded Menya,
an AI company acquired by Levio, where he was
the Chief AI Advisor until 2024.