490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

EO-EPTC: End-to-End Original Traffic-Based
Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification Framework
Yige Chen , Huajie Jia, Zhenzhou Tang, Senior Member, IEEE, Yipeng Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Hui Liu

Abstract—Machine learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification can be effectively applied to analyze encrypted
proxy traffic generated by proxy protocols, which are intermediary protocols used to route network traffic through a
remote server. Nonetheless, different encrypted proxy protocols
generate distinct traffic patterns, even when they handle the
same network behavior. To address these distribution differences,
a straightforward approach is to collect datasets specific to
each proxy protocol. However, typical proxy protocols repackage
original traffic by encrypting it without payload padding or
compression. This leads to a definite characteristic correlation
between original and encrypted proxy traffic. We propose an
End-to-end Original traffic-based Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification framework (EO-EPTC) to bridge the distribution gap
between original traffic and proxied traffic, enabling the classification of encrypted proxy traffic using a original traffic dataset.
EO-EPTC conducts sequence feature alignment to reduce distribution bias and employs a Seq2Seq model to capture the
underlying semantics of the proxy protocol, creating a sequence
feature transformation model. We apply EO-EPTC to existing
encrypted traffic classification models, training them on original
traffic to classify proxied traffic. This achieves up to 99.70%
accuracy on encrypted proxy traffic, comparable to models
trained directly on proxied traffic.
Index Terms—Encrypted proxy, traffic classification, distribution gap, dataset generation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Motivation and Problem Statement

P

ROXY-BASED communication with encryption is a technique used to route network traffic through intermediary
servers to bypass firewalls, access restricted servers and
enhance anonymity. As shown in Figure 1, the firewall blocks
Received 5 December 2024; revised 11 September 2025 and 25 November
2025; accepted 16 December 2025. Date of publication 22 December 2025;
date of current version 2 January 2026. This work was supported in part
by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
LQN25F020027, in part by the Fundamental Scientific Research Project of
Wenzhou City under Grant G2023005, and in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62472011. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Prosanta Gope. (Corresponding author: Huajie Jia.)
Yige Chen, Huajie Jia and Zhenzhou Tang are with the College of
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence and Wenzhou Key Laboratory
for Intelligent Networking, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou 325000, China
(e-mail: ygchen@wzu.edu.cn; hjjia@stu.wzu.edu.cn; tzz@wzu.edu.cn).
Yipeng Wang is with the College of Computer Science and the Engineering
Research Center of Intelligent Perception and Autonomous Control, Ministry
of Education, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
(e-mail: yipeng.wang1@gmail.com).
Hui Liu is with the Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Beijing 100193,
China (e-mail: pvopliu@tencent.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3646874

Fig. 1. Proxy-based communication with encryption.

TABLE I
D EGRADATION IN C LASSIFICATION D UE TO D ISTRIBUTION G APS

traffic to the target server, restricting users from accessing
it. To resolve this issue, users can redirect original traffic
to a local proxyware using the SOCKS/HTTP protocol. The
proxyware encapsulates and encrypts the traffic according to
the proxy protocol and forwards it to a proxy server that is not
in the firewall’s jurisdiction. The proxy server decapsulates
and decrypts the proxy traffic and relays the original traffic
to the target server, leaving any application-layer encryption
(such as HTTPS) intact between the client and the target
server.
In recent years, several proxy protocols have gained popularity for their ability to circumvent network restrictions
and protect user data, such as Shadowsocks [1], VMess [2],
Trojan [3], and VLESS [4]. While mature technologies such
as TOR [5] and VPN [6] have been extensively studied,
their design goals differ from those proxy protocols examined here. TOR uses multi-hop onion routing for anonymity,
whereas VPNs such as IPsec and WireGuard provide layer-3
encrypted tunnels. This study focuses on protocols that prioritize stealthiness, low latency, and adaptability to specific
network conditions.
Encrypted traffic classification aims to identify the websites
or applications associated with the traffic without the need for
decryption [7], [8], [9]. Current machine learning-based methods have achieved high accuracy in this task. The effectiveness

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

of the existing models heavily depends on the assumption that
the training and test traffic datasets share the same distribution.
Since encrypted proxy traffic is generated by encapsulating
original traffic according to proxy protocol specifications, there
is a distribution gap between the two types of traffic. Table I
illustrates the degradation in classification when classifiers
trained on original traffic are applied to proxied traffic in our
collected dataset. An intuitive approach to addressing this issue
is to collect proxied traffic samples for each encrypted proxy
protocol separately. However, this limits data collection to an
active mode and increases the cost of collection linearly with
the number of protocols and classification targets.
B. Our Insights and Proposed Approach
1) Key Observation to Encrypted Proxy Traffic: The encapsulation mechanism of proxy protocols mainly causes the
distribution gap between original traffic and proxied traffic.
To classify traffic for a specific encrypted proxy protocol, it
is necessary to train a model on a dataset consisting of that
encrypted proxy protocol’s traffic. It is a key observed fact that
encrypted proxy protocols typically do not perform payload
padding or compression to improve bandwidth utilization and
simplify the protocol structure. As a result, there exists a
correlation between the sequence features of the two types
of traffic. This fact makes it feasible to construct a model for
generating proxy traffic sequence features based on a dataset
containing both original and proxied flows.
2) Key Insight Into Our Approach: A key insight into our
approach is that the proxy traffic is derived from the original
traffic, and the transformation between their sequence features
is primarily driven by the transmission protocol and the
proxy protocol. While the transformations introduced by the
transmission protocol can be addressed by parsing the traffic
according to the protocol specifications, the changes caused
by the proxy protocol, which may include both linear and
nonlinear alterations, require a more sophisticated solution. To
address this, we can leverage a Seq2Seq model to capture and
learn the proxy protocol’s semantic transformations from the
original traffic. This approach is particularly effective when
sufficient traffic data is available, as it enables the model to
accurately learn the complex, nonlinear relationships between
the original and proxy traffic sequences.
3) Brief Introduction to Our Approach: In this paper,
we propose the End-to-end Original Traffic-based Encrypted
Proxy Traffic Classification framework (EO-EPTC), which
aims to reduce the cost of dataset collection for encrypted
proxy traffic classification while ensuring high classification
performance. EO-EPTC leverages two sequence feature alignment algorithms and an end-to-end Seq2Seq model to learn the
transformation patterns between original and proxied traffic,
bridging the distribution gaps. EO-EPTC consists of four
phases:
1) Phase 1: Sequence Feature Alignment. This phase
aligns the sequence feature pairs of original traffic and
proxied traffic to address the inconsistencies caused by
network factors and protocol handshakes. The sequence
feature alignment helps the subsequent model learn more

491

stable transformation patterns from sequence feature
pairs.
2) Phase 2: Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling. This phase trains a Seq2Seq model to learn
the underlying semantics of proxy protocols from the
aligned sequence feature pairs. The Seq2Seq model
bridges the distribution gap between original traffic and
proxied traffic, allowing the generated sequence features
to better simulate proxy behaviors.
3) Phase 3: Simulated Sequence Feature Generation.
In this phase, the Seq2Seq model, trained during the
transformation phase, utilizes original traffic sequence
features to generate simulated proxied traffic sequence
features. These simulated features closely resemble
real proxied traffic and serve as a low-cost alternative
for training classifiers without relying on real-world
encrypted proxy traffic datasets.
4) Phase 4: Proxied Traffic Classification. In this phase,
we use the simulated proxied traffic sequence features
to train existing encrypted traffic classifiers. Based on
EO-EPTC, these classifiers can handle various proxy
protocols and adapt to real-world traffic patterns.
C. Key Contributions
We briefly summarize our main contributions as follows:
• We propose an End-to-end Original traffic-based
Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification framework
(EO-EPTC) to bridge the distribution gap between
original traffic and proxy traffic, enabling the training
of an encrypted proxy traffic classification model using
only a original traffic dataset.
• EO-EPTC uses sequence alignment algorithms to prealign the sequence features of original and proxied
traffic, then builds a Seq2Seq model to adaptively learn
the underlying semantics of proxy protocols. EO-EPTC
enables the automatic generation of simulated sequence
features corresponding to proxied traffic, which significantly reduces the cost of collecting datasets.
• We conduct comprehensive evaluation experiments
on EO-EPTC. The results demonstrate that existing
encrypted traffic classification models can achieve up
to 99.70% accuracy when trained on the original traffic
dataset to classify proxied traffic.
The remaining sections of this paper are structured as
follows. In Section II, we present an overview of prior
works. In Section III, we present the design of EO-EPTC,
offering insights into the system’s architecture and providing
an in-depth explanation of each phase. In Section IV, we
elaborate on the details of our dataset collection and provide
an overview of the datasets used in this study. Section V
presents the comparative experimental settings and provides
a comprehensive analysis of the evaluation results. Section VI
presents the performance evaluation for EO-EPTC. Finally,
Section VII outlines the limitations and future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we first provide an overview of current methods for encrypted proxy traffic classification. Subsequently, we

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

discuss existing approaches for encrypted traffic classification
in general. Additionally, we introduce several mainstream
encrypted proxy protocols.
A. Encrypted Proxy Traffic Classification
The study of encrypted proxy traffic classification has
gained significant attention due to the increasing use of proxy
protocols to bypass firewalls and ensure privacy. Researches
[10], [11], [12], [13] have proposed several methods to identify
proxied traffic.
In 2022, Zhao et al. [11] examined deep learning methods
for identifying abnormal encrypted proxy traffic with high
accuracy, specifically targeting Shadowsocks and VMess. In
2023, Ma et al. [12] proposed a random flow rerouting
defense to enhance the flow-context-aware WFP system by
significantly reducing the accuracy of attacks, while incurring
minimal bandwidth and latency overhead. In 2024, Xue et al.
[13] demonstrated a protocol-agnostic approach to fingerprinting obfuscated traffic, targeting Shadowsocks, VMess,
Trojan, and VLESS protocols by leveraging encapsulated TLS
handshakes.
Existing studies on encrypted proxy traffic classification are
often designed and evaluated under protocol-specific datasets,
making their effectiveness highly dependent on the availability
of labeled traffic for each proxy protocol. This reliance not
only increases the cost of data collection but also restricts
the generalization of these methods when applied to heterogeneous proxy protocols.
B. Encrypted Traffic Classification
Encrypted traffic classification methods can be categorized
based on the features they utilize, including statistical features,
payload features, and sequence features.
Statistical feature-based approaches [14], [15], [16], [17],
[18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] rely on the statistical characteristics of traffic flows to classify encrypted traffic. In
2020, Montieri et al. [14] proposed a hierarchical traffic
classification framework for anonymity tools, demonstrating significant improvements over flat classification methods.
Shapira and Shavitt [20], [21] proposed FlowPic, which transforms per-flow packet size and arrival time statistics into
image-like representations and leverages a CNN to accurately
classify encrypted Internet traffic into categories and applications, even in the presence of VPN and Tor. Babaria et al.
[22] proposed FlowFormers, which first convert bidirectional flows into FlowPrints, i.e., time–length histograms
of up/down packet, byte, and average-length counters over
packet-size bins, and then feed these behavioural sequences
into transformer-augmented CNN/LSTM for fine-grained
application-type classification. In 2022, Horowicz et al. [23]
proposed a few-shot traffic classification framework based on
mini-FlowPic representations and network-aware augmentations, which reduces dependency on large labeled datasets
while improving accuracy and implementation efficiency. In
2024, Cerasuolo et al. [18] proposed MEMENTO, a class
incremental learning framework for encrypted traffic, improving new app classification and stability on old apps through
bi-flow augmentation and enhanced distillation.

Payload feature-based approaches [24], [25], [26], [27],
[28], [29], [30], [31], [32] enhance classification accuracy
by analyzing packet content, size, and structure. In 2021,
Aceto et al. [24] presented a multitask multi-modal deep
learning model for encrypted traffic, improving performance
on various datasets over single-modality approaches. In 2022,
Xiao et al. [25] developed EBSNN, a neural network with
segmented byte encoding and attention, achieving remarkable
performance in application and website classification. In 2022,
Lin et al. [28] introduced ET-BERT, a Transformer pre-trained
on datagram-level data, achieving strong generalization and
accuracy across tasks in encrypted traffic classification after
fine-tuning.
Sequence feature-based approaches [33], [34], [35], [36],
[37], [38] leverage characteristics such as packet length,
message type, and arrival timing to model encrypted traffic,
effectively capturing temporal dependencies and enhancing
classification accuracy. In 2019, Liu et al. [33] introduced
FS-Net, an RNN-based network capturing flow sequences,
achieving high true positive rates on encrypted traffic datasets
with an encoder-decoder design. In 2022, Xu et al. [35] developed ETC-PS, leveraging path signatures on packet sequences
for robust encrypted traffic classification across various protocols. In 2023, Zhou et al. [38] presented WF-Transformer for
Tor traffic classification, using temporal features to outperform
CNNs in both closed-world and open-world scenarios.
Research on encrypted traffic classification has advanced
through statistical, payload, and sequence features, and these
approaches demonstrate strong performance when training
and testing distributions are aligned. However, they provide
limited adaptability to asymmetric scenarios, such as when
only original traffic datasets are available for training while
the target traffic is proxied, leaving a gap for methods that
can explicitly bridge this distribution difference.
C. Encrypted Proxy Protocols
Encrypted proxy protocols ensure secure, private communication between clients and servers by protecting data from
tampering and interception. Protocols like Shadowsocks [1],
VMess [2], Trojan [3], and VLESS [4] are commonly used in
proxyware to balance security, performance, and obfuscation.
Shadowsocks [1] is a lightweight proxy protocol that
uses symmetric encryption algorithms like AES-256-GCM
to secure communication. It incorporates traffic obfuscation
techniques to evade detection by firewalls.
VMess [2], the core protocol of V2Ray [39], enables
encrypted communication with robust encryption and authentication mechanisms. It supports dynamic key exchange
alongside TLS to enhance stealth and resist traffic analysis.
Trojan [3] disguises proxy traffic as legitimate HTTPS
traffic by enforcing strict use of TLS. By mimicking HTTPS
behavior, it becomes difficult for Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)
systems to distinguish it from regular web traffic.
VLESS [4] is a streamlined variant of VMess that eliminates authentication and dynamic encryption to reduce latency.
It is commonly paired with TLS to maintain security and is
often used in scenarios where low latency is prioritized.

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

493

Fig. 2. Architecture of end-to-end original traffic-based encrypted proxy traffic classification framework (EO-EPTC).

Fig. 3. The threat model of encrypted proxy traffic classification based on
original traffic.

Mainstream encrypted proxy protocols repackage original
traffic by encrypting it without payload padding or compression. This preserves certain correlations such as packet length
patterns between original traffic and proxied traffic. These
shared characteristics across different proxy protocols reveal
an opportunity to leverage original traffic for building models
that remain effective on encrypted proxy traffic.
III. S YSTEM F RAMEWORK
In this section, we first introduce the threat model for
classifying encrypted proxy traffic using original traffic. Then,
we describe the structured design of the proposed classification
framework, EO-EPTC.
A. Threat Model
Figure 3 illustrates the scenario in which a client attempts
to establish a secure communication channel with the target
server, using both the proxyware and the proxy server as intermediaries. Proxy refers to the intermediate relay mechanism
in which a client forwards original traffic to a proxy server
using a specified protocol. The proxy server then decapsulates,
transmits, and delivers the traffic on behalf of the client.
During the proxy communication process, both the proxyware
and the proxy server must adhere to a predefined proxy
protocol, such as VMess [2]. The proxyware encapsulates
network packets intended for the target server according to the
specified proxy protocol and sends them to the proxy server,
which then decapsulates and forwards them to the target server.
This paper considers an attacker capable of sniffing
encrypted proxy traffic at positions in the network through

which it passes (e.g., firewalls or gateways). The attacker can
observe IP header information and side-channel metadata but
cannot compromise the shared secrets between communicating
parties or decrypt the payload content of the encrypted proxy
traffic.
Before launching the actual attack, the attacker is assumed
to locally access the target applications without using a proxy
and collect their original traffic. Although this original traffic may itself be encrypted (e.g., HTTPS/TLS), it remains
valuable because flow-level characteristics, such as packet size
distributions, inter-arrival times, and directional patterns, are
observable without decryption. Using these flows, the attacker
can construct a labeled dataset at relatively low cost.
With this dataset, the attacker trains a multi-class classifier to capture application-specific traffic patterns. During
the attack phase, when encrypted proxy traffic is available
at the observation point, the trained classifier is applied to
infer which application the intercepted traffic corresponds to.
Crucially, the analysis relies exclusively on flow statistics and
side-channel features, rather than any payload content.
B. Overview
As shown in Figure 2, EO-EPTC consists of four main
phases: Sequence Feature Alignment, Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling, Simulated Sequence Feature Generation,
and Proxied Traffic Classification.
Sequence Feature Alignment: This phase employs
sequence feature reassembly and segmentation algorithms to
align the sequence features extracted from the unlabeled
original and proxied flow pair dataset. The alignment mitigates inconsistencies in sequence features caused by network
transmission or proxy protocol standards.
Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling: This phase
uses a Seq2Seq model to capture the underlying semantic
information by learning the mapping between original and
proxied traffic sequence features of the above unlabeled flow
pair dataset. The model employs an encoder-decoder architecture, encoding the sequence features of original traffic into an
intermediate representation and then decoding it to produce
the simulated sequence feature of proxied traffic.
Simulated Sequence Feature Generation: This phase
takes a original traffic dataset as input and uses the Seq2Seq

494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

model, trained during the sequence feature transformation
phase, to generate simulated sequence features corresponding
to the proxied traffic. The original and proxied traffic datasets
are collected from the same website targets, but neither overlaps with the unlabeled flow pair dataset.
Proxied Traffic Classification: In this phase, we use the
simulated proxied sequence features generated in the previous
phase to train classifiers for encrypted proxy traffic. These
classifiers demonstrate comparable classification performance
to those trained directly on sequence features extracted from
proxied traffic.
C. Sequence Feature Alignment
Uncertain factors such as proxy protocol handshakes, network transmission fluctuations, and MTU fragmentation can
lead to misaligned or unalignable sequence features between
original and proxied traffic. We first perform sequence feature
extraction separately for both original and proxied traffic,
followed by sequence feature reassembly and segmentation for
the original traffic. The alignment of sequence features helps
simplify the learning of the mapping relationship between the
two types of traffic, reducing errors from incidental sequence
misalignments during subsequent Seq2Seq model training and
prediction.
1) Sequence Feature Extraction: The encrypted proxy
client locally receives connections to be proxied via SOCKS
or HTTP, which is the original traffic. It then encapsulates the
traffic payload according to the proxy protocol specifications
before forwarding the traffic to the proxy server, thereby
resulting in the proxied traffic.
Therefore, for original TCP and UDP traffic, we extract the
sequence of traffic payload lengths as the sequence feature.
Packet directions are explicitly denoted with “+/–”, where “+”
represents client-to-server (C2S) packets and “–” represents
server-to-client (S2C) packets. For encrypted proxy traffic, the
sequence features are derived based on the protocol type. For
proxy protocols running over TCP or UDP, we extract the
sequence of payload lengths from the stream, similar to the
method used for original traffic. For proxy protocols operating
over TLS, we use the sequence of payload lengths within the
TLS stream as the sequence feature, specifically the lengths
of messages carried in application data.
2) Sequence Feature Alignment: Sequence feature alignment includes both reassembly and segmentation processes.
The reassembly refers to reconstructing fragmented or segmented payloads into complete data units based on protocol
rules, ensuring the correct application-level payload boundaries. The segmentation follows reassembly to handle any
overly long payloads by dividing them into smaller, consistent units to correct over-reassembly caused by protocol
uncertainties.
In the TCP/IP protocol architecture, the application layer
handles application-specific functions, abstracting away the
details of data transmission. It hands over the payload transmission to the transport layer, which segments the payload
according to the network link’s Maximum Transmission Unit
(MTU). According to TCP protocol specifications, the final
segment is marked with the TCP push flag, signaling the

Algorithm 1 Sequence Feature Reassembly
Require: Packet sequence P = {p1 , p2 , . . ., pn }. Each packet pi
has attributes li (length), di (direction), and fi (push flag).
Ensure: Reassembled sequence feature S.
1: S ← []
2: c2s agg ← 0, s2c agg ← 0
3: for i = 1 to n do
4:
if li > 0 then .Dropping unloaded packets
5:
if di = c2s then .Distinguish packet directions
6:
c2s agg ← c2s agg + li
7:
if fi = 1 then .Last fragmented packet
8:
S.append(−c2s agg)
9:
c2s agg ← 0 .Reinitialize aggregation
10:
end if
11:
else if di = s2c then
12:
s2c agg ← s2c agg + li
13:
if fi = 1 then
14:
S.append(s2c agg)
15:
s2c agg ← 0
16:
end if
17:
end if
18:
end if
19: end for
20: return S

receiver to reassemble the segmented payload and promptly
deliver it to the application layer. For both original TCP
traffic and TCP-based proxied traffic, we apply Algorithm 1
to reassemble sequence features, with the TCP push flag
guiding the reassembly process. Here, client-to-server (C2S)
packets are marked with “+” and server-to-client (S2C)
packets with “–”. The reassembly of sequence features can
prevent duplicate counting of the length of packet headers.
For the original UDP traffic and UDP-based proxied traffic,
we directly use their sequence features without performing any
reassembly.
In TCP transmission, the occasional absence of the TCP
Push flag can lead to over-reassembly during the above
sequence feature reassembly. To address this, it is necessary to
adaptively determine an appropriate threshold for reassembly
payload length, as the upper limit varies with transmission
configurations. In traffic datasets of statistical significance, the
most frequently occurring payload length exceeding the MTU
can serve as a natural upper limit. This value is selected as
the reassembly payload length threshold, and any reassembled
payload exceeding this limit is further segmented to mitigate
over-reassembly caused by the missing Push flag. Algorithm 2
is applied to perform this segmentation, ensuring that the
reassembled sequence features of original traffic align more
closely with those of proxied traffic. This alignment facilitates
the Seq2Seq model in effectively learning and predicting these
two types of sequences.
D. Sequence Feature Transformation Modeling
After sequence feature alignment, we train a sequence
feature transformation model to learn the intricate mapping
rules between original and proxied sequence features. The

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

Algorithm 2 Sequence Feature Segmentation
Require: A set of sequence features S = {S1 , S2 , . . ., Sm },
where each Si = {S i1 , S i2 , . . ., S in } represents a sequence
feature.
Ensure: The segmented sequence features S 0
=
{S01 , S02 , . . ., S0m }.
1: Step 1: Calculate Global Transmission Length Threshold
S
2: Initialize L ←
Si ∈S {|S i j | | S i j ∈ Si }
3: τ ← mode(L) .Most frequent element in L
4: T min ← max(MTU − TCP.head) .Minimum τ threshold
5: while τ ≤ T min do
6: τ ← next valid mode(L, T min )
7: end while
8: Step 2: Split Sequences Based on τ
9: for each sequence Si ∈ S do
10:
Initialize an empty sequence S0 i ← ∅
11:
Initialize a temporary variable T ← 0
12:
for each element S i j ∈ Si do
13:
if |S i j | > τ then .Oversize according τ
14:
T ← T + S ij
15:
while |T | > τ do
16:
if T > τ then .Segment according τ
17:
S0 i .append(τ)
18:
T ←T −τ
19:
else if T < −τ then
20:
S0 i .append(−τ)
21:
T ←T +τ
22:
end if
23:
end while
24:
if T , 0 then
25:
S0 i .append(T)
26:
T ←0
27:
end if
28:
else
29:
S0 i .append(S i j )
30:
end if
31:
end for
32: end for
33: return S 0

challenge faced by classifiers arises from the differences
in traffic data distributions between original and proxied
sequences, which are mainly influenced by the encapsulation
mechanisms inherent to proxy protocols, rather than random
variations. By extracting and aligning sequence features, we
eliminate random transmission noise, improving the structural
and semantic comparability between original and proxied
traffic.
To address the residual differences between original and
proxied sequence features, we design the Sequence Feature
Transformation Model using a Seq2Seq architecture. The
model learns the universal mapping relationships outlined by
proxy protocol specifications, enabling the transformation of
previously unseen original sequence features into simulated
proxy-like features. This significantly enhances the classifiers’
ability to generalize across various traffic scenarios, while

495

ensuring that the transformed features retain crucial classification information and address structural and semantic
inconsistencies.
1) Understanding Feature Distinction: Despite sequence
feature alignment addressing discrepancies caused by transmission, a distribution gap persists between original and
proxied sequence features due to transformations introduced
by proxy encapsulation mechanisms. Figure 4 illustrates an
example of Shadowsocks sequence feature alignment, highlighting key differences:
Boundary Discrepancies: Variations at boundary positions
include examples like -208 and + 39 in Original (indices 0 and
1) compared to −32, −47, and −34 in Proxied (indices 0, 1, and
19). These differences arise from the handshake and teardown
specifications of proxy protocol-specific initialization routines,
which introduce heterogeneity in packet structures during
connection establishment and termination.
Fixed-Value Bias: A uniform encapsulation mechanism
introduces a fixed bias of 34 across most elements, likely
resulting from the consistent addition of control fields defined
by the proxy protocol or the inclusion of encryption parameters
during transmission.
Variable-Value Bias: Instances like + 3509 and + 3575 in
Original and Proxied at index 3 exhibit a variable bias of 67.
This variability often stems from additional content introduced
during early-stage proxy transmission. Factors like dynamic
payload adjustments further amplify divergence beyond the
fixed bias.
Merging and Misalignment: Examples such as double +
602 in Original (indices 8 and 10) vs. + 1272 in Proxied
(index 9) demonstrate that proxies may reorganize segmented
content during transmission. However, this reorganization
inherently alters the sequence feature structure, resulting in
feature order deviations and structural discrepancies.
2) Sequence Feature Transformation: We address the distribution gap between original and proxied traffic sequence
features by employing an encoder-decoder Seq2Seq model
with Transformer as the core sequence model.
The encoder-decoder architecture consists of two components: the encoder, which encodes original traffic sequence
features into intermediate representations capturing underlying
proxy semantics, and the decoder, which transforms these
representations into simulated encrypted proxy traffic sequence
features. This mapping can minimize the distribution gap
between original and proxied traffic features without requiring
prior knowledge of the target proxied traffic.
The Transformer, originally designed for natural language processing (NLP), has recently gained prominence
in encrypted traffic classification, outperforming traditional
RNN-based methods. While many approaches, such as
ET-BERT [28] and WF-Transformer [38], utilize only the
encoder combined with a classifier, EO-EPTC adopts the full
Transformer encoder-decoder architecture. This enables the
effective transformation of sequence features from original to
proxied traffic. We employ an attention mechanism, positional
encoding, and an order-agnostic architecture to address the
four types of sequence feature distinctions mentioned above:

496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 4. An example of Shadowsocks sequence feature alignment (’+’ denotes client-to-server (C2S) and ’–’ denotes server-to-client (S2C)).

• The context-sensitive nature of the attention mechanism
dynamically captures contextual relationships between
sequence features. The decoder with cross-attention
extracts relevant source patterns and effectively manages
dynamic deviations caused by variable-value bias. The
self-attention of the Transformer can effectively handle
boundary discrepancies by capturing global and local
dependencies, enabling precise alignment of boundary
variations caused by protocol-specific initialization. Its
multi-head attention further enhances boundary modeling
by focusing on sequence-specific details.
• Along with multi-head attention capturing fixed-offset
patterns and other semantic features, the positional encoding of the Transformers preserves relative positional
information. This enables the Seq2Seq model to adjust for
the fixed-value bias introduced by proxy encapsulation.
• The order-agnostic architecture of the Transformer facilitates the identification and reconstruction of complex
reordering or merging patterns within sequences. This
capability ensures accurate sequence alignment, preserving structural relationships even in cases of proxy-induced
misalignment or merging.
3) Transformer Details: The core of Transformers is the
multi-head position encoding and self-attention mechanism.
It further combines feedforward neural networks, residual
connections, and layer normalization to learn contextual relationships. Next, this paper will elaborate on the Transformer’s
position encoding, self-attention, multi-head attention, and the
loss function.
a) Position Encoding: The position of elements in a
sequence holds crucial fingerprint information. Unlike RNNs,
which process elements step by step, the Transformer’s selfattention mechanism enables simultaneous interactions across
all elements. To preserve positional and dependency information, the Transformer incorporates position encoding. For a
sequence, the position encoding is calculated as follows:




i
i
, pi,2 j+1 = cos
(1)
pi,2 j = sin
100002 j/d
100002 j/d
where i is the position of the corresponding element in
a sequence,
 d is the word embedding length, and j ∈
1, 2, . . . , d2 .
b) Self-Attention: The self-attention mechanism calculates relationships across all sequence positions, representing
each element based on these interactions. For each input
vector X, linear transformations produce the query Q, key K,
and value V vectors using weight matrices Wq , Wk , and Wv ,
which are initialized randomly and optimized during training.

For example, the scaled dot-product attention mechanism
computes relevance using the dot product of Q and K, with
the resulting scores weighting V to produce position-specific
outputs, the calculation is as follows:
Q = Wq X,

K = Wk X,

V = Wv X


QK T
V.
Attention(Q, K, V) = so f tmax √
dk

(2)

c) Multi-Head Attention: The multi-head attention mechanism allows simultaneous attention to multiple subspaces
within the input vector. Specifically, it applies h independent
linear transformations to the query Q, key K, and value V.
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1 , . . . , headh )W O
where headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV )

(3)

Each head learns its own parameters, capturing dependencies
at different levels or parts of the sequence. The model then
concatenates the outputs of all heads and applies a linear transformation with W O to form the final attention representation.
d) Masked Loss: Given the variable length of traffic
feature sequences and the need to avoid introducing noise from
padding elements during optimization, we adopt a masked
softmax cross-entropy loss function to ensure accurate and
effective model training. This approach ensures that the model
is trained solely on valid sequence elements, thereby focusing
the learning process on meaningful data while disregarding
padding-induced artifacts. Let the original sequence feature be
denoted as x = (x1 , . . ., xT ), and the proxied sequence feature
as y = (y1 , . . ., yT ), where T represents the sequence length.
The loss function is defined as:

PT
i=1 wi · − log p (yi | y1 , . . ., yi−1 , x)
L=
(4)
PT
i=1 wi
where the weight wi masks invalid positions in the sequence.
p(yi | y1 , . . . , yi−1 ) represents the conditional probability of
predicting yi , based on all previous target features y1 , . . ., yi−1 .
This can be expressed as:
exp(ŷi,yi )
p (yi | y1 , . . ., yi−1 , x) = PV
j=1 exp(ŷi, j )

(5)

Here, ŷi,yi refers to the logit output for the target feature yi .
The denominator sums over all possible features in the feature
table, indexed by j, and V is the size of the feature table.
E. Simulated Sequence Feature Generation
In this phase, we apply the Seq2Seq model, trained solely
on the Unlabeled Original and Proxied Flow Pair Dataset, to

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

transform original sequence features into simulated proxied
sequence features. The Seq2Seq model supports sequence
feature transformation without relying on the prior knowledge
of the target proxied traffic. The datasets of original and
proxied traffic, sourced from the same website targets, can
remain distinct from the unlabeled flow pair dataset.
The original traffic initially goes through sequence feature
alignment, as detailed in Phase 1, to resolve inconsistencies
caused by factors such as MTU fragmentation and protocol
handshakes. This process also ensures compatibility between
the original traffic’s sequence features and the patterns learned
by the Seq2Seq model.
Following sequence feature alignment, the encoder of the
Seq2Seq model trained in Phase 2 converts the sequence features of original traffic into intermediate representations. The
decoder then transforms these representations into simulated
sequence features corresponding to the target proxied traffic.
This process retains the intrinsic characteristics of original
traffic while embedding proxy protocol semantics.

497

Fig. 5. The topology of dataset collection platform.
TABLE II
S TATISTICAL S UMMARY OF THE TCP-BASED DATASET

F. Proxied Traffic Classification
In this phase, the simulated proxied traffic sequence features
generated in the previous phase are utilized to train existing
encrypted traffic classification models. The simulated proxied
traffic features produced by the Seq2Seq model closely mimic
real proxied traffic, making them compatible with the input
formats and requirements of existing methods, allowing those
models to maintain their classification capabilities and advantages. Based on our experimental results, EO-EPTC exhibits
strong generalization ability, achieving accurate classification
performance in real-world encrypted proxy traffic scenarios
while maintaining scalability and adaptability across diverse
proxy protocols.
In addition, the simulated proxied traffic features can also
be applied to out-of-distribution (OOD) traffic detection,
enabling the identification of previously unseen traffic that
does not belong to any learned class. Existing classifiers can
be adapted by using their full classification probability vectors
as recognition features. An additional supervised binary classifier can then be applied to identify OOD traffic. To obtain
the training data for the OOD classifier, we require some
samples to serve as OOD traffic so that supervised training
can be performed. In practical scenarios, classes outside the
target recognition set can be grouped together and treated
as OOD samples. By combining the proxied traffic classifier
with the OOD classifier, OOD detection can be achieved in
addition to recognizing proxied traffic. Compared to thresholdbased methods that rely solely on a minimum classification
probability, this supervised approach makes full use of the
entire probability vector, enabling more accurate and robust
decisions.

TABLE III
S TATISTICAL S UMMARY OF THE QUIC-BASED DATASET

A. Dataset Collection Platform
As shown in Figure 5, we set up three hosts to build
the dataset collection platform: the user, who accesses target
websites; the proxy client; and the proxy server. All of these
hosts are located within the same local area network. The user
accesses the Internet through an HTTP/SOCKS proxy service
provided by the proxy client, generating original traffic. The
proxy client packages the traffic received from the user and
forwards it to the proxy server using a proxy protocol, thereby
creating proxied traffic. By controlling user access to network
websites, we can simultaneously capture both original traffic
and the corresponding proxied traffic on the proxy client. The
dataset collection were conducted on a Windows 10 operating
system with the Chrome browser. Since browsers disable
QUIC when a proxy is configured, we must set the Proxy
Client to operate in transparent proxy mode when collecting
QUIC-based original and proxied traffic, ensuring that the
browser functions normally.
B. Dataset Introduction

IV. E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS
This section introduces how we collect an experimental
dataset and provides an overview of the dataset used in the
experiments.

Based on the dataset collection platform, we collected a
TCP-based dataset and a QUIC-based dataset, whose original traffic consists of TCP and QUIC flows, respectively.
Both datasets comprise original traffic and the corresponding
paired proxied traffic. Table II and Table III provide statistical

498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

summary of the two dataset, including the number of websites,
the number of flow pairs, the number of original packets,
the number of proxied packets, and the file size. The proxy
protocols include Shadowsocks [1], VMess [2], Trojan [3], and
VLESS [4]. For both the TCP-based and QUIC-based datasets,
we collect original and proxied traffic pairs simultaneously by
visiting 60 popular websites 750 times for each proxy protocol.
V. C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we conduct several rigorous experiments
to maximize the performance of EO-EPTC. We start by
introducing the evaluation preliminaries. Then, we present the
comparison of Seq2Seq models. Next, we compare various
attention mechanisms. Finally, we provide a detailed comparison of alignment features.
A. Preliminary
1) Evaluation Schemes: We conduct three comparative
experiments on the TCP-based dataset constructed in the
previous section, including 1) comparison of Seq2Seq models,
2) comparison of attention mechanisms, and 3) comparison
of alignment features. We randomly select 30 websites from
the collected TCP-based dataset, and use their original and
proxied traffic to form the Unlabeled Original and Proxied
Flow Pair Dataset, which is used to train the Seq2Seq model.
The remaining original traffic from the other 30 websites forms
the Original Traffic Dataset, while the corresponding proxied
traffic is to be classified. The source code and the dataset of
EO-EPTC is publicly available at https://github.com/ygchen1/
eo-eptc/.
To demonstrate the adaptability of EO-EPTC across various
encrypted traffic classification models, we select the state-ofthe-art sequence-based encrypted traffic classification methods
FS-Net [33] and ETC-PS [35], along with traditional machine
learning models Random Forest [40] and XGBoost [41], as
well as the Transformer [42] model.
• FS-Net [33] employs an end-to-end encoder-decoder
structure to extract features from the packet length
sequence of encrypted traffic. It then performs traffic
classification on a deep neural network.
• ETC-PS [35] constructs path signature features from the
packet length sequences of encrypted traffic. Following
this, it utilizes traditional machine learning methods to
classify traffic based on the extracted features.
• Random Forest [40] uses an ensemble of decision trees
to capture complex relationships between features. It
aggregates the predictions from decision trees to improve
overall accuracy and reduce the risk of overfitting.
• XGBoost [41] optimizes feature classification performance using the gradient-boosted tree method, which
enhances the model’s generalization ability.
• Transformer [42] is a sequence model designed to capture
global dependencies in data through its self-attention
mechanism. We leverage its encoder structure to classify
the sequence features of the traffic.
We set the length of input sequence features to 32, truncating sequences longer than 32 and padding shorter ones. A

sequence length of 32 offers stable and strong classification
performance across many methods [33], [35], [37], minimizing
computational overhead while preserving key features for
traffic classification.
The first experiment focuses on the comparison of Seq2Seq
models in the sequence feature transformation modeling phase.
We base our comparison on the classification performance
achieved by the aforementioned encrypted traffic classification
methods. The Seq2Seq models compared include LSTM [43],
LSTM-Att, GRU [44], GRU-Att, and Transformer [42].
• LSTM [43] is a long short-term memory network
that captures long-sequence dependencies through gating
mechanisms
• LSTM-Att incorporates the attention mechanism to
LSTM, which enhances its ability to focus on the most
relevant parts of the input sequence.
• GRU [44] is a streamlined variant of LSTM, designed
to reduce architectural complexity while preserving its
ability to handle long-sequence dependencies effectively.
• GRU-Att incorporates the attention mechanism to GRU,
which improves its ability to selectively focus on important input features.
• Transformer [42] is a sequence model that uses a selfattention mechanism to capture global dependencies,
enabling parallel processing and efficient handling of long
sequences.
The second experiment is dedicated to comparing different
attention mechanisms for the Seq2Seq model. To maximize
the sequence modeling capability of the Transformer, we
conduct a comparative experiment on four representative
attention mechanisms: Additive Attention [45], Dot-Product
Attention [45], Scaled Dot-Product Attention [42], and Local
Attention [46].
The third experiment aims to compare different combinations of alignment features used in the Sequence Feature
Alignment phase. The optional alignment features include
Directional Feature Encoding (D), Sequence Feature Reassembly (R), and Sequence Feature Segmentation (S).
• The Directional Feature Encoding (D) employs positive
and negative signs to mark the packet direction in the
sequence features, explicitly indicating the transmission
direction information.
• The Sequence Feature Reassembly (R) is to reassemble packet-level sequence features into datagram-level
sequence features affected by MTU limitations, thereby
eliminating distribution differences caused by varying
MTU sizes.
• The Sequence Feature Segmentation (S), which requires
Sequence Feature Reassembly (R) as a prerequisite, is
designed to segment the over-reassembled sequence features based on a statistical payload length threshold.
By combining these alignment steps, we can form six alignment feature combinations: (N), (D), (R), (DR), (RS), and
(DRS), where (N) represents the baseline without any alignment features.
2) Cross-Validation: We use 5-fold cross-validation to
ensure consistent and reliable dataset partitioning in all

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

499

comparative experiments. We average the results across all
folds to provide a robust and comprehensive evaluation of
model performance. We conduct the experiments on a general
R
R
computing server with 2*IntelO
XeonO
Gold 6330 CPU @
2.00GHz, DDR4 2933MHz 256GB, and 2*NVIDIA RTX
3090 GPUs.
3) Evaluation Criteria: In our evaluation, we employ
F1 Macro and Average Normalized Edit Distance (ANED)
as metrics to evaluate EO-EPTC.
• F1 Macro: We define the precisioni of each Website
Webi as the ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows
belonging to Webi to the total number of encrypted flows
classified as Webi . The recalli of each Website Webi is
the ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows belonging
to Webi to the total number of encrypted flows that belong
to Webi . We calculate the F1 scorei of Webi as the
harmonic mean of its precisioni and recalli .
F1 S corei = 2 ×

Precisioni × Recalli
Precisioni + Recalli

(6)

The F1 Macro is the macro average of all F1 score.
N

F1 Macro =

1 X
F1 S corei
N

(7)

i=1

• ANED: We employ Edit Distance (ED), a metric that
quantifies the similarity between two sequences by
calculating the minimum number of operations (insertions, deletions, substitutions) required to transform one
sequence into the other. Given the sequence S 1 and S 2 ,
the edit distance between the first i-th element of the
sequence S 1 and the first j-th characters of the sequence
S 2 is
8
D(i − 1, j) + 1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
<D(i, j − 1) + 1
(8)
D(i, j) = min
ˆ
D(i − 1, j − 1) + 1, S 1 [i] , S 2 [ j]
ˆ
ˆ
:
D(i − 1, j − 1), S 1 [i] = S 2 [ j]
Thus, the edit distance between S 1 and S 2 is
ED(S 1 , S 2 ) = D(|S 1 |, |S 2 |)

(9)

Since the length of the sequence features varies, we
propose the Normalized Edit Distance (NED) to measure the degree of difference between sequence feature
pairs. The NED between two sequences S 1 and S 2 is
computed as:
NED(S 1 , S 2 ) =

ED(S 1 , S 2 )
max(len(S 1 ), len(S 2 ))

(10)

The Average Normalized Edit Distance (ANED) is the
arithmetic mean of NED across all sequence feature pairs.
The ANED across M sequence feature pairs is given by:
M

ANED =

1 X
NED(S 1i , S 2i )
M
i=1

(11)

Fig. 6. Comparison of Seq2Seq model performance.

B. Comparison of Seq2Seq Models
Figure 6 illustrates the F1-Macro of classifiers using
EO-EPTC with various Seq2Seq models, including LSTM,
LSTM-Att, GRU, GRU-Att, and Transformer, across different
proxy protocols: Shadowsocks, VMess, Trojan, and VLESS.
The purple dashed line in Figure 6 represents the ANED
of EO-EPTC, which quantifies the similarity between the
sequence features generated by EO-EPTC and those extracted
from real proxy traffic. Each subfigure corresponds to a proxy
protocol, with the X-axis representing the Seq2Seq method,
and different line styles are used to distinguish the results of
the classifiers across various Seq2Seq models.
Across all proxy protocol scenarios, the Transformer
demonstrates consistent outperformance, exhibiting significantly higher F1-Macro and lower ANED values compared to
the other Seq2Seq models. A lower ANED indicates that the
Transformer is more proficient at predicting the sequence feature of the corresponding proxy traffic. For LSTM and GRU,
incorporating attention mechanisms (LSTM-Att and GRU-Att)
generally improves both F1-Macro scores and ANED values
across most proxy protocol scenarios, with minimal variation
in F1-Macro scores across different classification methods.
However, these performance gains fall short when compared
to the Transformer. Based on the above analysis, utilizing the

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 7. Comparison of attention mechanism performance.

Transformer as the Seq2Seq model proves effective in achieving notable performance in sequence feature transformation.
Fig. 8. Evaluation of alignment feature combinations.

C. Comparison of Attention Mechanisms
Considering the outstanding performance of the Transformer demonstrated in Section V-B, we further investigate
the impact of various Transformer attention mechanisms on
the performance of EO-EPTC. Figure 7 shows the F1-Macro
of classifiers using the Transformer as EO-EPTC’s Seq2Seq
model with various attention mechanisms, including Additive
[45], Dot-Product [45], Scaled Dot-Product [42], and Local
[46] attention mechanisms. Similar to Section V-B, the purple
dashed line in Figure 7 represents the ANED of EO-EPTC.
Each subfigure represents a proxy protocol, where the X-axis
depicts the attention mechanism. Different line styles are
employed to differentiate the classifier results for various
attention mechanisms.
In all proxy protocol scenarios, the Transformer with Scaled
Dot-Product Attention consistently shows the lowest ANED
values and allows classifiers to achieve the highest F1-Macro
scores. Dot-Product Attention and Additive Attention perform
slightly worse than Scaled Dot-Product Attention, while Local
Attention displayed relatively weak performance. Compared to
other attention mechanisms, the Scaled Dot-Product Attention
offers enhanced global context awareness by efficiently scaling
the dot products, which reduces the impact of large value
ranges and ensures a more stable and informative attention
distribution. In contrast, the Local Attention with a limited
context window struggles to model cross-timestep dependencies, especially in complex transmission proxy protocols like
VMess.
In summary, the Scaled Dot-Product Attention proves to be
the most effective mechanism within the EO-EPTC, excelling
in both F1-Macro scores and ANED quality. This reinforces
the Transformer’s capability to capture complex sequence
features effectively.
D. Comparison of Alignment Features
Figure 8 demonstrates the performance of different alignment feature combinations across four proxy protocols, with

ANED as the only evaluation metric. The alignment features
compared include Directional Feature Encoding (D), Sequence
Feature Reassembly (R), Sequence Feature Segmentation (S),
and their combinations, such as DR, RS, and DRS. Notably,
Sequence Feature Segmentation (S) requires Sequence Feature
Reassembly (R) as a prerequisite. We use (N) to represent the
baseline without any alignment features.
The (DRS) combination of all three alignment features
consistently achieves the lowest ANED values across all
protocols. The (RS) also performs well, with ANED values slightly higher than DRS but still lower than other
combinations. This suggests that even without Directional
Feature Encoding, the combination of Sequence Feature
Reassembly and Sequence Feature Segmentation substantially
enhances sequence alignment. The (DR) configuration shows
slightly weaker performance compared to RS but still outperforms using (D) or (R) alone. Both (D) and (R), when
applied individually, provide slight improvements over the
baseline (N). This highlights that only the combination of
Directional Feature Encoding and Sequence Feature Reassembly can achieve a significant improvement in sequence
alignment.
The results demonstrate that the combination of all three
alignment features (DRS) can greatly improve the EO-EPTC
framework’s effectiveness in sequence feature prediction,
which in turn influences the training process for proxy traffic
classification.
VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION FOR E O -E PTC
In this section, we use the optimal configuration of
EO-EPTC demonstrated in Section V to evaluate the robustness and effectiveness of EO-EPTC. We begin by introducing
the evaluation preliminaries, and then present a series of
experiments designed to examine EO-EPTC from multiple
perspectives.

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

501

Fig. 9. Comparison of the impact of dataset scale on the unlabeled flow pair dataset.

A. Preliminary
We conduct three evaluation experiments to assess the
effectiveness of the EO-EPTC configurations demonstrated
in the previous section, including 1) the impact of dataset
scale on EO-EPTC, 2) performance improvement with
EO-EPTC, 3) the compatibility to QUIC-based proxied traffic,
4) the effectiveness of out-of-distribution traffic detection,
5) the impact of different operating systems and browsers
to EO-EPTC, and 6) comparison with representative baseline
approaches.
The first experiment focuses on the impact of dataset scale
on EO-EPTC. In previous experiments, the EO-EPTC uses
the TCP-based Flow Pair Dataset from 30 websites to train the
Seq2Seq model. In this experiment, we evaluate the F1-Macro
and ANED of classifiers using unlabeled flow pair datasets
constructed with 1 to 30 websites.
In the second experiment, we evaluate the performance
improvement achieved by the EO-EPTC. We use TCP-based
dataset to compare the encrypted traffic classifiers under three
training scenarios: original traffic, real-world proxied traffic,
and original traffic combined with EO-EPTC. Subsequently,
we assess the classifiers’ performance using real-world proxied traffic to determine the enhancement brought about by
EO-EPTC.
In the third experiment, we evaluate the compatibility
of EO-EPTC to QUIC-based proxied traffic. Similiar to
TCP-based traffic, we first train a seq2seq model and transform
original sequence features derived from QUIC traffic into
simulated proxied sequence features, then train the classifier
using these simulated features. We evaluate the classifiers’
performance directly on the proxied traffic carrying QUIC.
In the fourth experiment, we evaluate the effectiveness
of out-of-distribution (OOD) traffic detection. We divide the
labeled TCP-based dataset into three mutually exclusive subsets: known classes, simulated OOD classes, and real OOD
classes. We first train a traffic classifier using the simulated
proxied sequence features generated from the original traffic
of the known classes. Then, we train an OOD detector, implemented as a random forest classifier, using the probability
vectors produced by the traffic classifier for the original traffic
of both the known classes and the simulated OOD classes. The

overall detection and classification performance is evaluated
on the proxied traffic samples from the known classes and the
real OOD classes.
In the fifth experiment, we evaluate the impact of different operating systems and browsers on the performance of
EO-EPTC. We construct TCP-based datasets on four platform
combinations by considering two operating systems, Windows
and Ubuntu, and two browsers, Chrome and Firefox. For each
platform, we collect the corresponding traffic datasets and
assess the classifiers under the same experimental settings as
in the original submission.
In the sixth experiment, we compare EO-EPTC with three
representative baseline VPN classification approaches. We
select Flowpic [20], [21], Flowformers [22] and Minipic
[23] as baseline methods. We use the original traffic from
TCP-based dataset as the training set for the baseline models
and evaluate their performance using the proxied traffic. The
results are compared with the performance of the EO-EPTCenhanced FS-Net method.
B. Impact of Dataset Scale on EO-EPTC
Figure 7 presents the F1-Macro and ANED of classifiers
as the number of websites in the unlabeled flow pair dataset
varies from 1 to 30. Similar to the previous figures, the purple
dashed line in Figure 7 represents the ANED of EO-EPTC.
Each subfigure corresponds to a proxy protocol, with the
X-axis representing the number of websites in the unlabeled
flow pair dataset. We use different line styles to distinguish
the results of the state-of-the-art classifiers.
The F1-Macro exhibits a clear upward trend as the number
of websites in the dataset increases. The most significant
improvement of F1-Macro is observed as the number of
websites increases from 1 to 10. When the number of websites
exceeds 26, the F1-Macro tends to stabilize at a high level.
As the number of websites increases, the Seq2Seq model
gradually shifts from learning the transformation rules of
sequence features for specific websites to understanding the
implicit semantics of proxy protocols. This further enables the
transformation of sequence features for the unseen websites.
In terms of ANED, we observe a consistent downward
trend, which also implies that the capacity to predict sequence

502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE IV

TABLE V

C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE I MPROVEMENT W ITH EO-EPTC

C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE TO QUIC-BASED DATASET

TABLE VI
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE TO OOD T RAFFIC

features improves with the expansion of the unlabeled flow
pair dataset. Notably, both Trojan and VLESS exhibit more
pronounced declines in ANED, highlighting that protocols
with more complex transmission patterns derive significant
benefits from the enlargement of the dataset.
In summary, the expansion of the unlabeled flow pair dataset
enhances the Seq2Seq model’s ability to learn the implicit
semantics of proxy protocols. As the dataset becomes more
diverse, the model’s performance stabilizes, indicating that it
learns a generalizable transformation function rather than overfitting to specific website patterns. This enables the model to
handle out-of-distribution scenarios and establish a universal
mapping for unseen websites. As a result, the model accurately
converts original traffic features, allowing classifiers trained on
this simulated data to effectively classify real-world encrypted
proxy traffic.
C. Performance Improvement With EO-EPTC
Table IV presents the detained classification performance of
five state-of-the-art classifiers across three training scenarios:
1) original → proxied, 2) proxied → proxied, and 3) original +
EO-EPTC → original.
The classifiers trained solely on original traffic exhibit
poor classification performance when predicted on the proxied
traffic, with F1-Macro scores ranging from 1.46% to 4.93%.
This is primarily attributed to the distribution discrepancy
between original and proxied traffic, as well as the requirement
for machine learning models to ensure consistency in the
distribution of input data. When EO-EPTC is applied to the
training dataset, classifiers trained on original traffic achieve
F1-Macro scores that closely align with those of models
trained directly on proxied traffic. FS-Net’s performance on
Shadowsocks improved dramatically from 4.02% to 99.70%
when trained with original traffic using EO-EPTC, coming
within 0.23% of the 99.93% achieved by training directly on
proxied traffic. Similarly, XGBoost’s performance on Trojan
traffic rose significantly from 3.99% to 98.32%, closely matching the 99.53% accuracy obtained through direct training on
proxied traffic. The classification performance improvement

achieved by EO-EPTC benefits not only state-of-the-art methods and Transformers but also traditional machine learning
models, such as Random Forest and XGBoost.
These results underscore EO-EPTC’s ability to generate
simulated sequence features of proxied traffic that closely
resemble those of real proxied traffic. This capability allows
existing classifiers to perform effective encrypted proxy traffic
classification using only original traffic for training.
D. Compatibility to QUIC-Based Proxied Traffic
Table V presents the classification performance when applying EO-EPTC to QUIC-based traffic. The F1-Macro score
ranges from 85.77% to 93.70% when training the FS-Net
on the original traffic and evaluating it on Proxied traffic.
While this result is slightly lower than when training directly
on Proxied traffic, it remains significantly higher than the
performance obtained by training on original traffic without the
use of EO-EPTC. This reduction is due to the fact that QUIC
traffic, which is based on the UDP protocol, does not provide
full flow control information, making it difficult to perform
accurate flow reassembly and mitigate traffic noise caused by
network fluctuations. This issue may be partially alleviated by
increasing the volume of data collected for training.
E. Detection of OOD Traffic
Table VI presents the classification performance in scenarios involving OOD (Out-Of-Distribution) traffic. We evenly
divided the 30 website categories into six subsets (A, B, C,
D, E, F), generating different combinations of known classes,
simulated OOD classes, and real OOD classes for evaluation.
We assessed the classification performance under four different
combinations. In each result cell, the first value represents the
overall F1-Macro score for the 21 classes (20 categories +
1 OOD category), while the second value represents the
F1-score for the OOD category.
We used FS-Net as the traffic classifier and random forest
as the OOD traffic detection classifier. It can be observed
that, in the OOD traffic scenario, the FS-Net enhanced with
EO-EPTC still achieves a strong overall F1-Macro score
and OOD category F1-score. This indicates that EO-EPTC

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

503

TABLE VII

TABLE IX

S UMMARY OF THE DATASET F ROM D IFFERENT P LATFORMS

C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINE A PPROACHES

TABLE VIII
C ROSS -P LATFORM P ERFORMANCE OF EO-EPTC

effectively simulates the characteristics of real proxy traffic,
thereby supporting the identification of OOD traffic.
F. Cross-Platform Performance of EO-EPTC

payload information to generate an image-like representation,
and then applies CNN for classification. Flowpic claims to
be capable of classifying VPN traffic when trained on nonVPN traffic, which shares some similarities with our scenario.
Flowformers takes into account the traffic direction and different time-length statistical methods to construct multi-channel
feature representations. mini-FlowPic is an improvement on
Flowpic, increasing the granularity of statistics to achieve
more efficient analysis and classification, thereby reducing the
dependence on dataset size.
Table IX presents the comparison results with the baseline
approaches. Among the three baseline methods, mini-FlowPic
performs relatively better. However, compared to the FS-Net
enhanced with EO-EPTC, the baseline methods show relatively lower classification performance on proxied traffic based
on original traffic. These methods struggle to overcome the
challenges posed by the data distribution differences.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we propose EO-EPTC, an end-to-end original
traffic-based encrypted proxy traffic classification framework
that bridges the distribution gap via sequence feature alignment and a Seq2Seq model, enabling models trained only
on original traffic to classify proxied traffic. Although the
proposed method demonstrates promising results, the current
model assumes a one-to-one mapping between original flows
and proxy flows. However, some proxy protocols, such as Hysteria2, employ multiplexing over QUIC-based HTTP/3, where
multiple application flows are encapsulated within a single
proxy flow. This many-to-one mapping increases the instability
of length sequence features, making accurate identification
more challenging. In future work, we plan to expand our
dataset with multiplexed traffic and investigate temporal slicing
techniques to isolate sub-flows, thereby improving recognition
performance in such scenarios.

We evaluate the classification performance of EO-EPTC
across four platform combinations: Windows 10 + Chrome,
Windows 10 + Firefox, Ubuntu 22.04 + Chrome, and Ubuntu
22.04 + Firefox. The data collection procedures and proxy
protocols remain consistent with the original setup to ensure
comparability. Table VII provides a summary of the extra
dataset.
Table VIII presents the cross-platform performance of
EO-EPTC. EO-EPTC achieves consistently high accuracy
across all platforms, with performance exceeding 90% in every
case. Minor fluctuations are observed between Windows and
Ubuntu, primarily for the VMess protocol, which may be
attributed to differences in TCP stack implementations that
lead to additional instances of merging and misalignment in
sequence features. In contrast, the performance gap between
Chrome and Firefox is relatively negligible.
Overall, these findings confirm that feature distinction is
primarily determined by the inherent characteristics of proxy
protocols, while the influence of the operating system or
browser remains minimal. These observations highlight the
robustness and effectiveness of EO-EPTC when applied to
real-world encrypted proxy traffic classification.

[5]

G. Comparison With Baseline Approaches

[6]

We select three baseline approaches for comparison: Flowpic, which uses statistical analysis of packet timing and

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

(2024). Shadowsocks—A Fast Tunnel Proxy That Helps You Bypass
Firewalls. [Online]. Available: https://shadowsocks.org/
(2024). VMess. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2ray.com/chapter02/
protocols/vmess.html
(2024). Trojan Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://trojangfw.github.io/trojan/
(2024). VLESS. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2fly.org/config/
protocols/vless.html
A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262.
G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.

504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

[7]

[29] Y. Xiao et al., “Distributed traffic synthesis and classification in edge
networks: A federated self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1815–1829, Feb. 2024.
[30] J. Yu, Y. Choi, K. Koo, and D. Moon, “A novel approach for application
classification with encrypted traffic using BERT and packet headers,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 254, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 110747.
[31] Y. Liu, X. Wang, B. Qu, and F. Zhao, “ATVITSC: A novel encrypted
traffic classification method based on deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 9374–9389, 2024.
[32] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[33] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOMIEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[34] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level
relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217, Nov.
2022, Art. no. 109309.
[35] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[36] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation
of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf.,
2023, pp. 850–866.
[37] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX
Secur.), 2023, pp. 589–606.
[38] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “WF-transformer:
Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
by using transformer networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 30–43, 2024.
[39] (2024). V2ray. [Online]. Available: https://www.v2ray.com/
[40] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
2001.
[41] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794.
[42] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[43] S. Hochreiter, “Long short-term memory,” in Neural Computation.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1997.
[44] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
arXiv:1412.3555.
[45] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2014, pp. 1–11.
[46] T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning, “Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2015, pp. 1412–1421.

P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[8] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted
TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023.
[9] Y. Wang, H. He, Y. Lai, and A. X. Liu, “A two-phase approach to fast
and accurate classification of encrypted traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1071–1086, Jun. 2023.
[10] X. Ma et al., “Context-aware website fingerprinting over encrypted
proxies,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021,
pp. 1–10.
[11] H. Zhao, S. Zhang, Z. Qiao, X. Huang, and X. Zhang, “On the performance of deep learning methods for identifying abnormal encrypted
proxy traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 1416–1423.
[12] X. Ma et al., “Website fingerprinting on encrypted proxies: A flowcontext-aware approach and countermeasures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1904–1919, Jun. 2024.
[13] D. Xue, M. Kallitsis, A. Houmansadr, and R. Ensafi, “Fingerprinting
obfuscated proxy traffic with encapsulated TLS handshakes,” in Proc.
33rd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 2689–2706.
[14] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Bovenzi, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A
dive into the dark Web: Hierarchical traffic classification of anonymity
tools,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1043–1054, Jul.
2020.
[15] Y. Li et al., “From traffic classes to content: A hierarchical approach
for encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 212, Jul. 2022,
Art. no. 109017.
[16] Z. Wu, Y.-N. Dong, X. Qiu, and J. Jin, “Online multimedia traffic
classification from the QoS perspective using deep learning,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 204, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108716.
[17] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TDSC.2023.3245411.
[18] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental
learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, May 2024, Art.
no. 110374.
[19] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[20] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM-IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2019,
pp. 680–687.
[21] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[22] R. Babaria, S. C. Madanapalli, H. Kumar, and V. Sivaraman,
“FlowFormers: Transformer-based models for real-time network flow
classification,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Mobility, Sens. Netw. (MSN),
Dec. 2021, pp. 231–238.
[23] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
[24] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapé,
“Encrypted multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,”
in Proc. ICC-IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[25] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
“EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
[26] G. Xie, Q. Li, and Y. Jiang, “Self-attentive deep learning method
for online traffic classification and its interpretability,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 196, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 108267.
[27] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps during
COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022, Art. no.
109452.
[28] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.

Yige Chen received the Ph.D. degree in computer
software and theory from the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
China, in 2022. He is currently a Lecturer with the
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, China. His research
interests include encrypted traffic fingerprints, network security, and machine learning.

Huajie Jia received the bachelor’s degree in
computer science and artificial intelligence from
Wenzhou University, China, in 2023, where he is
currently pursuing the master’s degree with the College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence.
His research interests include encrypted traffic fingerprints, network security, and machine learning.

CHEN et al.: END-TO-END ORIGINAL ENCRYPTED PROXY TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

Zhenzhou Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in communication engineering from Zhejiang University in 2001 and 2004,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in communication
engineering from Dalian University of Technology
in 2015. From February 2015 to August 2015,
he was a Visiting Scholar with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA, USA. From
November 2015 to June 2018, he was a PostDoctoral Research Fellow with Zhejiang University.
He is currently a Full Professor with the College of Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, and the Director of Wenzhou Key
Laboratory for Intelligent Networking. His current research interests include
machine learning, intelligent systems, and wireless networks.

Yipeng Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS), China, in 2014. He is currently a Full Professor at the College of Computer
Science, Beijing University of Technology, China.
He has published more than 50 research papers
in refereed international journals and conferences,
such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION
F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANS ACTIONS ON N ETWORKING , IEEE ICNP, and IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT. His research
interests include networking, network security, and machine learning. He
was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at the IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) for his protocol format inference
technology. He serves as a Regular Reviewer for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON

505

I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
ON N ETWORKING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING, and
IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.

Hui Liu received the master’s degree in computer
science from the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China,
in 2020. He is currently a Researcher with Tencent,
Beijing, China. His research interests include large
language models, natural language generation, and
machine learning.