1276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Estimating Node Abnormalities From Imprecise
Subgraph-Level Supervision
Zhen Peng , Yunqi Xue, Yunfan Wang, Qika Lin , Member, IEEE, and Chao Shen

Abstract—Although existing node anomaly detection techniques
following supervised or unsupervised paradigms have achieved
empirical success, the expensive annotation cost and the high possibility of spotting uninteresting outliers are still two major limitations. Interestingly, with limited time, workforce, and expertise,
it seems easier for regulators to roughly screen out a suspicious
region likely to contain anomalies rather than precisely locate the
problematic individual. Thus, it is appealing to investigate how
to learn node abnormalities from such coarse-grained imprecise
subgraph-level supervision, related research however has received
little scrutiny. In this paper, we generalize classic multiple instance
learning to graph data and propose a novel architecture ASSESS
which regards subgraphs as bags and nodes as bag instances. By
pulling apart the score gap between anomalies and normal nodes
through inter-bag loss and intra-bag loss, ASSESS tends to assign
higher scores to abnormal nodes so that node anomalies can be
detected. To further enhance the adaptability to low labeling rates,
the self-training mechanism is introduced to ASSESS++, which
automatically explores subgraphs that may cover abnormal nodes
as pseudo-supervision by measuring the node score distribution
in the subgraph. Experiments on real-world benchmark datasets
corroborate the superiority of our proposed model w.r.t. AUC and
AP.
Index Terms—Graph anomaly detection, weakly-supervised
learning, multiple instance learning, graph neural networks.

I. INTRODUCTION
VARIETY of complex interconnected systems in
the real world, such as social networks, collaboration networks, and economic networks, can be abstracted as

A

Received 2 March 2025; revised 18 June 2025; accepted 24 July 2025. Date
of publication 28 July 2025; date of current version 2 December 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2023YFB3107400, in part by theNational Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302380, Grant 62137002, Grant
62192781, Grant U24B20185, Grant T2442014, Grant 62161160337, Grant
62132011, and Grant U21B2018, in part by Key Research and Development
Project in Shaanxi Province under Grant 2022GXLH01-03, in part by Shaanxi
Province Key Industry Innovation Program under Grant 2023-ZDLGY-38 and
Grant 2021ZDLGY01-02, and in part byChina Postdoctoral Science Foundation
under Grant 2023M742789. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Amiya A.
Nayak. (Corresponding author: Zhen Peng.)
Zhen Peng and Yunqi Xue are with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: zhenpeng27@outlook.com; xueyunqi@outlook.com).
Yunfan Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA (e-mail: abe6fq@virginia.edu).
Qika Lin is with the Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail: linqika@nus.edu.sg).
Chao Shen is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: chaoshen@xjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3593338

graph-structured data1 that describe the rich semantics and
interactions of multiple entities through nodes and edges [2].
To extract valuable insights from such data represented in the
form of graphs/networks, there has been a great deal of interest
in many graph mining tasks, including node/graph classification [3], [4], [5], community detection [6], network partition [7],
personalized recommendation [8], [9], [10], [11], and clickthrough rate (CTR) prediction [12], [13]. As one of the crucial
tasks, node anomaly detection, which aims to uncover suspicious
nodes that significantly deviate from the majority of instances in
the graph, has attracted much attention recently [14], [15], [16]
since it helps regulators identify the risks of detrimental events
occurring in various realistic networks and take early action to
control them [17]. For example, exposing potential fraudsters in
financial networks is beneficial to maintaining the security and
stability of economic systems [18]; controlling the spreaders
of fake news in social networks can prevent them from creating
panic and chaos in society [19]. No matter what kind of networks
being detected, according to the adopted learning paradigm,
existing techniques could be roughly divided into the following categories: supervised/semi-supervised [20] and unsupervised [21]. Although unsupervised approaches avoid laborious
labeling costs, which are indispensable for supervised models
that rely on large-scale annotations, they are prone to spot noisy
or uninteresting outliers as anomalies without knowing what
true anomalies look like [22]. The semi-supervised paradigm
based on a small set of labeled samples seems to alleviate the
above shortcomings. In practice, it may still suffer from the lack
of fine-grained node anomaly labels due to insufficient domain
knowledge and expert experience required for annotation.
Recall that in practical scenarios, regulators are expected to
analyze data as quickly as possible and provide early warning of
risks. Due to the diversity and complexity of anomalies, precise
node-level labeling requires sufficient prior knowledge and detailed one-by-one analysis, which is inevitably time-consuming
and labor-intensive. In contrast, it seems more convenient for
regulators to spend much less effort screening out regions likely
to cover anomalies [23]. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, during
the investigation of financial fraud cases, law enforcement can
easily delineate the scope of suspects through preliminary analysis, and fraudsters engaged in money laundering are highly
likely to exist among them. However, it is significantly more
difficult to pinpoint the real fraudsters in a short period of time
due to intricate information or evidence [24]. Note that the above
1 It can also be referred to as network data [1].

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

Fig. 1. A toy example of the range of potential suspects in a financial transaction network, which most likely contains anomalies (fraudsters).

coarse-grained annotations are typically presented in the form
of subgraphs, and such subgraph-level labels contain minimal
supervision provided to the model. So, here arises a question: can
we accurately identify node-level anomalies with only imprecise
subgraph-level supervision?
Academically, the above task belongs to the category of
weakly supervised learning [25], which is extremely compelling
for practical applications since coarse-grained subgraph-level
supervisory signals are more easily accessible than precise
node-level labels. The weakly labeled subgraph only reflects
the presence of abnormal nodes somewhere in it, but the specific
anomalies are still unknown, hence, it is called imprecise/inexact
supervision. However, taking advantage of such coarse-grained
subgraph-level weak supervision for node-level anomaly detection is not a trivial task. The following challenges exist here.
First, previous works [26], [27], [28] generally formulate similar weakly supervised problems as multiple instance learning
(MIL) [29]. Despite the empirical success, these methods are
almost all oriented to grid-like image data in the computer vision
domain and fail to capture the topological structures between
instances. Moreover, they focus on group/bag-level prediction,
such as image/object classification, rather than instance prediction within the bag. Thus, existing MIL methods cannot be
directly used on graphs to spot fine-grained node anomalies.
Second, imprecise abnormal subgraph labels are noise-prone
as they include a mixture of benign and anomalous nodes.
Thus, they cannot accurately provide the model with node-level
supervision that distinguishes normal from abnormal. How to
mitigate the negative impact of imprecise labeling and convert
such subgraph labels into node-level constraints to capture the
underlying anomaly patterns through modeling inter-subgraph
differences poses another challenge. To the best of our knowledge, existing studies have put very little effort into weakly
supervised node anomaly detection [23], which also motivates
our further research.
To overcome the above challenges and promote the development of the related community, in this paper, we present a novel
MIL architecture adapted to graph data, named ASSESS, for
spotting node-level anomalies under imprecise subgraph-level
supervision. Analogous to the classic MIL concept, we treat
subgraphs as bags in which different nodes constitute instances

1277

in a bag and have inherent topological relations rather than
independence. Then, we rank nodes with the maximum scores
in normal and abnormal subgraphs via the inter-bag loss, and
simultaneously pull apart the difference between potential
anomalies and normal nodes in the abnormal subgraph via
the intra-bag loss. Together with the constraints specifically
designed for graph-structured data and anomaly detection, ASSESS is more inclined to assign high scores to anomalies
such that abnormal nodes can be detected. To further enhance the adaptability of the model to low labeling rates, the
self-training [30] mechanism is introduced to form a variant
ASSESS++. By automatically mining potential candidate subgraphs from the unlabeled set that are similar to the score
distribution of existing labeled abnormal subgraphs to generate pseudo labels, ASSESS++ expands the available label set
iteratively, which significantly alleviates the high cost required
to obtain fine-grained annotations. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows:
r We highlight the practical significance of studying weakly
supervised node anomaly detection, which currently receives less attention and scrutiny, and generalize the classic
MIL to the graph domain, providing a promising solution
for this community.
r We present a novel MIL framework ASSESS to learn node
abnormalities from imprecise subgraph-level supervision
via inter- and intra-bag anomaly ranking while introducing
ASSESS++ to automatically generate pseudo labels to
adapt to low labeling rate cases.
r We empirically demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
ASSESS and ASSESS++ in terms of AUC and AP on
real-world benchmark datasets that involve multiple types
of networks, and intuitively illustrate the detection results
through visual analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start by providing a relatively comprehensive literature review on node-level
anomaly detection and briefly introducing some related works
on multiple instance learning in Section II. Then, in Section III,
we give a formal definition of node anomaly detection under
subgraph-level weak supervision and present our MIL based
framework ASSESS and ASSESS++ in detail. Experimental
evaluations on multiple benchmark datasets and discussions are
placed in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the whole
paper and visions the future work.
II. RELATED WORKS
In line with the focus of our work, we intend to provide a relatively comprehensive literature review on node-level anomaly
detection in graphs and briefly review the previous works on
multiple instance learning. Hopefully this will help general
readers from different disciplines comprehend the background
and motivation better.
A. Node-Level Anomaly Detection in Graphs
Background: In computer science, research on anomaly detection, a.k.a. outlier detection, can be traced back to the 1960s [31],
which aims to detect rare, unusual, and suspicious ones that

1278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS ON NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN GRAPHS

deviate significantly from the majorities in a dataset [17], [18].
Many useful techniques have been developed over the past
decades, especially for identifying anomalies in a set of multidimensional data points [32], [33] such as well-known LOF [34]
and Isolation Forest [35] since conventional methods typically
represent real-world entities as multidimensional feature vectors
(e.g., texts posted by users in social media is represented as
bag-of-words) [17]. Despite their empirical success, they all
inadvertently ignore potential associations between the data.
In fact, many entities in reality are inherently interconnected
and exist in the form of networks. For example, the social
relationships between people constitute a social network; the
physical associations between proteins in a cell or organism
form a PPI biological network. Fortunately, graphs, in which
nodes denote entities and edges characterize their relationships,
have proven to be a powerful tool to effectively model and
analyze various networks. As a result, graph anomaly detection,
which aims to find suspicious graph objects (including nodes,
edges, subgraphs) that differ significantly from the majority of
the reference objects in the graph [18], has begun to attract
considerable and increasing attention from researchers. Compared to other graph objects, current research on graph anomaly
detection mostly focuses on node-level anomaly detection [17],
which has broad applications in many high-impact domains,
such as social media [36], finance [37], and healthcare [38].
Next, we will concentrate on reviewing previous works on
node-level anomaly detection to provide a research context that

is strongly relevant to this paper. A brief summary is shown in
Table I.
Methodology: In the early stage, plain graphs containing only
topological information were often used to describe various
complex networks. Many detection methods exploit structural
statistical properties such as node degree or subgraph centrality
to find patterns and spot anomalies. For instance, SCAN [39]
clusters nodes based on a structural similarity measure to expose
hubs and outliers in the graph. OddBall [40] leverages statistical
features extracted from each node and its one-hop neighbors to
detect specific structural anomalies. Additionally, NrMF [41]
attempts to employ matrix factorization to mine the community structure in the adjacency matrix to identify anomalies.
As attributed graphs (or simply called graphs) carrying node
feature information are now widely used to model realistic
interconnected systems, most existing methods are absorbed
in processing and analyzing such graph data. Among them,
many early methods spot anomalies by analyzing the congruence
between attributes and topology [42], [43], [44]. For instance,
CODA [42] employs a probabilistic model to characterizes both
attributes and edge links simultaneously by defining their joint
distribution. Driven by the good ability of matrix factorization in jointly modeling attributes and topology, various matrix
factorization based methods have been put forward [45], [46],
[47]. For instance, Radar [46] spots anomalies by modeling the
residuals of attribute information and its coherence with network
information. ANOMALOUS [47] jointly conducts anomaly

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

detection and attribute selection based on CUR decomposition
and residual analysis. However, these traditional machine learning techniques still have limitations in seamlessly integrating
graph topology and node attributes, and are difficult to adapt to
large-scale graphs.
Benefiting from the outstanding performance of deep learning, methods based on various graph neural networks (GNN),
such as graph convolutional networks (GCN) and graph attention
networks (GAT) [2], have become the current mainstream. Depending on the learning paradigm adopted, existing deep models
can be broadly classified into supervised/semi-supervised, unsupervised, and weakly supervised. Supervised/semi-supervised
methods [48], [49], [50], [52], [54] focus on leveraging labeled
normal and anomalous samples to learn pattern boundaries of
both categories to detect anomalies. For example, BWGNN [53]
utilizes a supervised learning approach where Beta graph
wavelets are used to generate band-pass filters. GGAD [57] spots
anomalies in a semi-supervised manner by generating pseudo
abnormal nodes to provide effective negative node samples for
training a discriminative one-class classifier under the condition
that only a small portion of labeled normal nodes are accessible.
These methods, however, heavily depend on the availability of
labeled data, which limits their scalability and applicability in
real-world scenarios where labeled data is scarce. In contrast,
due to the advantage of not relying on expensive manual labeling,
the vast majority of existing works [15], [61], [63], [64], [65],
[68], [70] fall under the unsupervised category. The traditional
detection methods mentioned above also belong to this category.
To effectively capture the difference between abnormal and
benign without labels, existing deep models mainly adopt two
strategies: reconstruction and contrastive learning. The first one
calculates the residuals between the input data and its reconstructed version estimated by the model to detect anomalies
as content patterns of anomalies deviate significantly from the
majority and are difficult to reconstruct. An early attempt at this
deep method is DOMINANT [58]. It introduces a GCN based deep
autoencoder to reconstruct the input graph and flags nodes with
high residual errors as anomalies. As an improved version of
DOMINANT, AnomalyDAE [59] employs a dual autoencoder to
encode the graph from structural and attribute perspectives respectively for better reconstruction quality. ComGA [63] further
considers the community structure during anomaly detection
by designing a tailored GCN to encode the modularity matrix.
Contrastive learning based methods capture the pattern differences between normal and abnormal by learning to distinguish
between positive and negative sample pairs. The first attempt was
CoLA [61], which makes the target node and its local subgraph
as a contrastive pair (i.e., node-subgraph contrast), and spots
anomalies by learning and evaluating the consistency between
the node and its local neighboring substructure. On this basis,
ANEMONE [62] adds node-node contrast through a multi-scale
contrastive learning objective, and GRADATE [14] further considers subgraph-subgraph contrast between the original input
graph and the augmented graph modified by edge perturbation.
Some methods combine reconstruction and contrastive learning
to finely expose the discrepancy between abnormal and benign
ones. For example, CONAD [64] models prior human knowledge by data augmentation and integrates it into the encoding

1279

process through a well-designed contrastive loss, then discerns
anomalies based on reconstruction errors. MDA-GAD [15] employs a hybrid learning scheme including graph reconstruction
and multi-view discrimination to identify anomalies. While the
unsupervised methods are more scalable and practical, they are
prone to spot noisy or uninteresting anomalies and suffer from
undesirable detection accuracy since they do not know what
anomalies the user really cares about.
Compared to the impracticality of obtaining fully labeled
datasets, coarse-grained annotations that typically require
marginal time and labor costs are relatively accessible in practical scenarios. Studying weakly supervised node-level anomaly
detection with coarse-grained supervision help alleviate the
drawbacks of the above supervised and unsupervised methods.
However, related research is still in its infancy. One notable work
is WEDGE [23], which spots critical node-level anomalies with
an attention mechanism and contrastive learning under a small
portion of coarse-grained subgraph labels. To promote related
research, we propose a novel weakly supervised model ASSESS, which detects node anomalies under the subgraph-level
supervision by pulling apart the score gap between anomalies
and normal nodes through inter-bag loss and intra-bag loss.
ASSESS++ further enhances the adaptability to low labeling
rates. The differences between WEDGE and ours are discussed
in detai in Section III-C.
Application: As shown in Table I, most existing models are not
developed for a specific network but focus on designing general
learning algorithms to be applied to anomaly detection scenarios
in various networks such as Email networks, social networks,
and transaction networks. For instance, in the Email network
dataset Enron [43], where nodes represent Email addresses and
the email transmission between them form edge links. Each node
is described by 20 attributes such as average content length,
different encodings count, and the average number of recipients.
The email addresses having sent spam messages are regarded as
anomalies and should be identified by the model. Take the social
network dataset Weibo [21] as another example, where nodes
indicate users registered on Tencent-Weibo and users who use
the same hashtag are connected by edges. The attributes affiliated
to each user consist of a one-hot vector describing the location
of the post and the bag-of-words vector of the post. Users who
engaged in at least five suspicious posting activities are considered anomalies that will be detected by the model. Generally
speaking, in engineering practice, we can construct network
data describing various complex interconnected systems based
on detection requirements, and apply these detection models to
discover anomalies for network risk warning and management.
B. Multiple Instance Learning
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a technique that overcomes the limitations of traditional supervised learning when
individual instance labels are unavailable [95]. It is a form
of weakly-supervised learning under inexact supervision [25],
where instances are organized in bags with coarse-grained labels. Formally, in MIL, a bag B = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } is labeled
positive if at least one instance in the bag is positive (Y ),
otherwise, it is marked as negative (N ). The objective in classic

1280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS ON MULTIPLE INSTANCE LEARNING

MIL is to learn a mapping function f : B → Y from a training
set T = {(B1 , y1 ), . . . , (Bk , yk )}, where Bi ∈ B, and yi ∈ Y =
{Y, N } is the bag-level label. The goal is to predict labels for
unseen bags according to the learned f . Typically, depending
on how the information in multi-instance data is exploited,
MIL can be divided into two paradigms [96]. In the Bag-Space
(BS) paradigm, the discriminative learning process occurs at the
bag-level. The classifier makes use of the information from the
whole bag B (e.g., bag embeddings and scores) to establish discrimination between bags. In contrast, the Instance-Space (IS)
paradigm views discriminative information at the instance-level.
The classifier separates the instances in positive bags from those
in negative bags by considering the characteristics of individual
instances.
MIL has been successfully applied to multifarious real-world
scenarios [97]. Table II presents a brief summary of related
works. In the computer vision domain, DSMIL [80] incorporates
self-supervised contrastive learning and multiscale features into
the MIL model for whole slide image (WSI) classification. DMIL [82] employs multiple MIL learners to explore discrepant
but complementary solutions indicating object parts, which are
then fused with a collaborative module to achieve precise object localization. WSSM [72] combines MIL and conditional
random field techniques seamlessly to model sequence data
for video classification. As for text processing and analysis,
D-MILN [78] achieves document-level sentiment classification
by learning aspect-level classifiers from the back propagation of
document-level supervision. Mutual-Att [83] presents a hybrid
fusion MIL model with mutual-attention mechanism to detect
offensive language with document-level supervision. In the medical field, [75] considers each patient as a “bag” labeled with their
diagnosis for histopathological image analysis. PTG [91] is a
patch-target guided dual-branch MIL framework that explores

local features and significant regions simultaneously for 3D
MRI data analysis. Note that there have been several studies on
MIL-based methods in the field of video anomaly detection [73],
[76], [86], [93]. For instance, [73] introduces a MIL ranking
loss with sparsity and smoothness constraints to spot anomalous
video segments with video-level weak supervision. [93] further
proposes a prompt-enhanced MIL framework to detect various
abnormal events in videos while ensuring clear event boundaries.
However, these methods are inapplicable to graph data due to
the unique topological relationships between nodes. Although
some efforts, such as MIL-GNN [77], FS-GCN-MIL [79], and
NAGCN [84], combine graph neural networks with MIL, they
focus on capturing potential relationships between instances
with GNN to solve tasks like weakly supervised image classification or text categorization. Research that directly targets
mining and analysis tasks on natural graph-structured data,
such as node-level anomaly detection, is very scarce. A notable
work is the previously mentioned WEDGE, which follows the
Bag-Space paradigm to uncover node anomalies by enforcing
distinctive representations between normal and abnormal subgraphs. To expand the application of MIL in graph data mining,
we propose a novel MIL framework tailored for graph data to
identify node-level anomalies under imprecise subgraph-level
supervision, which follows Instance-Space paradigm to establish discriminative information at the node instance level by
inter-bag and intra-bag ranking objectives.
C. Summary
As can be seen from Section II-A and Table I, the research on
how to exploit imprecise subgraph-level supervision to identify
anomalies in weakly supervised node anomaly detection is still
in its initial stage, although there are many application scenarios
where coarse-grained labeling is available in reality. However,
as a promising solution to imprecise supervision, Section II-B
and Table II illustrate that existing MIL attempts for analysis
tasks on graph data are very limited. In this sense, our studied
MIL framework tailored for weakly supervised node anomaly
detection in graphs is of great significance. Moreover, compared
to WEDGE that follows the Bag-Space paradigm, our modeling
strategy is more fine-grained since ASSESS establishes discriminative information at the instance-level. ASSESS++ further
enhances the adaptability to low labeling rates, exhibiting good
engineering application value.
III. METHODOLOGY
This section begins with a formal definition of our studied problem. Let G = (V, E, F) denote a graph with |V| = n
nodes and |E| = m edges, where each node vi ∈ V is affiliated with |F| = d attributes. A subgraph in G is defined as
S = (VS , ES , F), where VS ⊆ V and ES ⊆ E ∩ P (VS ). P (VS )
is the powerset of VS . Analogous to the definition of MIL, in our
(i) (i)
(i)
setting, a subgraph Si = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vbi } is considered as a
bag of size bi , where different nodes make individual instances
in the bag. If a subgraph contains at least one anomalous node,
we call it an abnormal subgraph (positive bag) and mark it as
S a . Otherwise, it is called a normal subgraph (negative bag) and

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

1281

Fig. 2. Illustration of the proposed MIL framework ASSESS, which regards subgraphs as bags and nodes as bag instances. By modeling inter-bag and intra-bag
anomaly ranking, ASSESS uncovers node anomalies under subgraph-level weak supervision.

denoted as S n . Assume that we are given a set of k labeled abnormal subgraphs C a = {S1a , S2a , . . . , Ska }, then the set of nodes
included in C a is denoted as V l , and the remaining unlabeled
node set is V u . Note that V = {V l , V u } and |V l |  |V u | as
only a few labeled abnormal subgraphs are available in advance.
Following the convention of graph anomaly detection [18],
our studied problem is formulated as a ranking task, which is
formally defined as follows:
Problem 1. Node Anomaly Detection under Subgraph-Level
Weak Supervision: Given a graph G represented by the adjacency
matrix A ∈ Rn×n and attribute matrix X ∈ Rn×d , as well as a
set of k labeled abnormal subgraphs C a . The task aims to learn
a node-level anomaly detection model that is able to leverage
knowledge from imprecise subgraph-level supervision C a to
learn the mapping from nodes to anomaly scores. Typically,
abnormal nodes should be assigned larger scores and ranked
higher than normal ones.
As can be seen, different from the above-mentioned classic
MIL task which aims to predict labels for unseen bags, our
studied problem is more challenging due to the following two
aspects: (1) unlike the i.i.d. assumption on which most existing
MIL works in the computer vision filed is based, instances as
nodes in bags in the form of subgraphs have inherent topological
relations that must be explicitly considered; (2) our goal is to
exactly uncover fine-grained anomalous nodes (instance-level
prediction) under the guidance of subgraph-level weak supervision, rather than coarse-grained bag-level prediction.
A. Learning From Subgraph-Level Labels: ASSESS
Here we elaborate on the proposed framework ASSESS,
which learns to identify node anomalies under the imprecise
subgraph-level supervision. The overview of its architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
1) Node Representation Modeling: As for the input graph G,
we first need to take a general graph neural network (GNN) as
a graph encoder to convert nodes into informative embeddings
H = GNN(A, X) = {h1 , h2 , . . . , hn } ∈ Rn×h1 for quantitative anomaly assessment. The graph encoder here is compatible
with arbitrary GNN architectures [98], [99], [100]. Hidden vectors H are then projected into another latent space to obtain the

representation Z ∈ Rn×h2 through a nonlinear transformation:
Z = σ(HW t ),

(1)

where W t ∈ Rh1 ×h2 is a learnable parameter matrix, and σ
denotes the parametric ReLU (PReLU) function [101]. Obviously, fully capturing the underlying semantic information
from the input graph to derive high-quality node representations
benefits the accurate estimation of abnormalities. Here, without
external precise supervision, we draw on the idea of maximizing
graphical mutual information in [102] to guide representation
learning:
I(z i ; Gi ) = I(z i ; xi ) +

 I(z i ; xj )
+ I(wij ; Aij ), (2)
|N (i)|

j∈N (i)

where Gi is the computation graph of node vi that specifies
the neighborhood around a particular node to perform a localized convolution. N (i) includes the neighbros of vi , and
wij = σ(z 
i z j ) with the sigmoid function σ. I(·) denotes the
mutual information operator. Let the empirical probability distribution of node attributes xi be p(xi ), the probability distribution
of node representations z i be p(z i ), and the joint distribution
be p(z i , xi ). According to the information theory, the mutual
information between z i and xi is defined as
 
p(z i , xi )
dz i dxi . (3)
p(z i , xi ) log
I(z i ; xi ) =
p(z
i )p(xi )
X Z

By minimizing rep = − vi ∈V I(z i ; Gi ) over all node vectors,
the learned representations Z finely preserve the respective
attributes and topological semantics of nodes, laying the foundation for accurate anomaly estimation.
2) Anomaly Ranking Modeling: Given the final representations Z, we define a score estimator to calculate real-valued
anomaly scores for each node:
c = σ(Zws ),

(4)

where ws ∈ Rh2 ×1 is a trainable scoring vector and the sigmoid
activation σ we employed here aims to derive a reasonable
anomaly score within the range of (0,1).

1282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Considering that the node-level anomaly labels are unknown
during training, we cannot learn the model simply by encouraging anomalies to score higher than normal nodes. Inspired by
the maximum margin idea of classic MIL [73], [103], [104], we
extend the notion of a margin from individual patterns to sets of
patterns and design the following ranking loss with respect to
the maximum scored node (instance) in the subgraph (bag):


(Sia , Sin ) = max

0, 1 − max cp + max cj
(i)

vp ∈Sia

(i)

vj ∈Sin

.

(5)

As can be seen, (5) enforces ranking only on two nodes with
the highest scores in the abnormal subgraph Sia and the normal
subgraph Sin , respectively2 Thus, it is referred to as inter-bag
loss. Intuitively, node with the highest score in Sia is most likely
to be the true anomaly, while node with the highest score in Sin is
most likely a hard negative sample, which seems to be abnormal
but is actually benign. We push the above two types of nodes
far apart in terms of anomaly scores, which contributes greatly
to achieving high anomaly detection accuracy. Recall that there
is no pre-labeled normal subgraph Sin in our task setting. For
efficiency, we randomly select k subgraphs with similar sizes to
Sia from the unlabeled node set V u as normal ones, leading to
a set C n . Due to the rarity of anomalies, the sampled subgraphs
have a high probability of being normal. Experiments later also
validate the effectiveness of this strategy.
Note that Sia may not only have more than a single anomalous
node but also contain normal nodes with a high probability,
according to the definition of the annotated abnormal subgraph.
Thus, we need to introduce additional ranking constraints to further optimize the solution space derived from (5). Specifically,
we pick out a set of nodes with scores lower than the average
anomaly score in Sia , denoted as S̄ia . Nodes with a score above
the average are more likely to be anomalies, while nodes in S̄ia
are more likely to be normal. We push them far away to enhance
the detection model to distinguish normal nodes in the abnormal
subgraph by the following intra-bag loss:


(Sia ) = max

0, 1 − max cp + max cq
(i)

vp ∈Sia

(i)

vq ∈S̄ia

.

(6)

The above-mentioned inter-bag loss and intra-bag loss are
crucial for distinguishing meaningful anomalies from benign
nodes under weak supervision. Specifically, in (5), through the
max operation of term max cp , we define the margin of a
(i)

vp ∈Sia

positive bag (abnormal subgraph) with the margin of the “most
positive” pattern (most likely anomaly). Besides, we find the
“least negative” pattern (the hard negative pattern) in a normal
subgraph through term max cj and regard it as the margin
(i)

vj ∈Sin

of a negative bag. Once the margin between the positive and
negative bags (i.e., the margin between the anomaly and the
indistinguishable normal) is pulled apart to form a distinguishing
boundary through (5), the relative position of other sample
2 This involves the conversion of the node index from a subgraph to the full
graph. For brevity, the index of the score c follows the subscript of the node in
the subgraph.

patterns in negative bags with respect to the boundary becomes
irrelevant [103], and they can all be distinguished from abnormal. We also establish a boundary for the “most positive”
pattern and the most likely negative pattern in a positive bag
through (6) to further separate the normal mixed in weakly
supervised subgraphs. You could refer to the paper [103] to better
understand the maximum bag margin formulation of MIL.
3) Sparsity and Homophily Constraints: Two related factors
should also be considered to capture anomalies effectively. For
one thing, anomalies are usually rare in real-world scenarios,
which is an important principle in anomaly detection tasks. In
this sense, the anomaly scores of nodes in Sia should be sparse,
i.e., most tend to 0, since only a limited number 
of nodes may be
abnormal. Formally, we minimize sp (Sia ) = v(i) ∈S a cp for
p
i
each abnormal subgraph. For another, due to the topological
nature of graphs, the desired scoring scheme should follow the
Homophily assumption [105] and keep the scores of topologically connected nodes as close as possible. Thus, we enforce
the Homophily constraint for each subgraph Si (whether normal
or abnormal) by minimizing the difference of anomaly scores
for neighboring nodes, i.e., hom (Si ) = c
Si LSi cSi , where LSi
denotes the Laplacian matrix of Si and cSi is the score vector of
nodes in Si .
By integrating the above losses, we arrive at the complete
objective function as follows:
 = rep + (Sia , Sin ) + λ1 (Sia ) + λ2 sp (Sia ) + λ3 hom (Si ),
(7)
where multiple λs are trade-off parameters that balance the
importance of the above aspects. Since anomalies usually exhibit
distinct patterns than normal nodes, the scores derived by w s will
be different. To discriminate abnormalities, (Sia , Sin ) and (Sia )
constrain the score of anomalies to be greater than normal nodes.
Furthermore, the sparsity and Homophily constraints make only
a few nodes that may be anomalies have high scores (the situation
where a normal node is assigned the largest score while an
anomalous node is assigned a small score, which violates the
sparsity constraint, will not occur). All the above ensures that
the model is optimized in the right direction. The key steps of
our proposed ASSESS are summarized in Algorithm 1.
B. Automatic Pseudo-Label Generation: ASSESS++
Although the weakly supervised setting weakens reliance
on fine-grained node-level annotations, the limited time, prior
knowledge, and labor costs may still prevent us from obtaining
sufficient coarse-grained subgraph-level labels. Experiments on
detection performance under various numbers of annotated abnormal subgraphs also reflect that too few labels will significantly restrict the model’s ability to uncover anomalies (see
Fig. 8).
To improve the adaptability of ASSESS in practical cases with
low labeling rates, we additionally incorporate a self-training
module to create a variant version named ASSESS++. The core
issue lies in how to select subgraphs that are more likely to contain anomalies from the huge unlabeled node space to generate
pseudo labels. We analyze the scores assigned to nodes in normal

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

1283

Fig. 3. The estimated anomaly scores for nodes in a randomly selected
abnormal (left) and normal (right) subgraph.

Algorithm 1: The Learning Algorithm of ASSESS.
Input: Graph G = (A, X), a set of k labeled abnormal
subgraphs C a , parameters λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , training epochs E
and batch size 2N .
Output: Anomaly ranking of nodes in G (reverse order).
1: Construct C n by randomly selecting k subgraphs from
V u as normal ones;
2: Initialize model parameters by Glorot
initialization [106].
3: while epoch e < E do
4:
Randomly sample N subgraphs from C a and C n
respectively to form a training batch;
5:
Estimate the anomaly score of each node through (1)
and (4);
6:
Calculate the objective function in (7);
7:
Update model parameters by backpropagation;
8:
Update e ← e + 1;
9: end while
10: Derive anomaly scores c and sort them in reverse order.

and abnormal subgraphs during the training process of ASSESS.
Fig. 3 illustrates the node scores in these two subgraphs on
different datasets, where the left column shows anomaly scores
assigned by the model to nodes in a randomly selected groundtruth abnormal subgraph, and the right column shows node
scores in a normal subgraph. As can be seen, there is a clear

Fig. 4. Box plots of the maximum, minimum, and average scores of nodes in
abnormal and normal subgraphs on Weibo and Tolokers.

difference in score distribution between these two types of subgraphs. The node scores in the normal subgraph are all below 0.5,
while the abnormal subgraph has one or more nodes with scores
above 0.5. Moreover, we find that the maximum, minimum, and
average scores of nodes in abnormal and normal subgraphs have
obvious statistical differences, as shown in Fig. 4. In this sense,
measuring the score distribution of subgraphs seems to provide a
good criterion for pseudo-annotation. Accordingly, we propose
a simple yet effective strategy to automatically find unlabeled
subgraphs that may contain anomalies to iteratively expand the
label set C a . More sophisticated methods are left for future work
(the difference in the number of nodes in each subgraph makes
some commonly used distribution measurement methods such
as KL divergence inapplicable). We first sample subgraphs with
similar sizes to the labeled abnormal subgraphs for nodes in V u
t
to form a candidate subgraph set C t = {S1t , S2t , . . . , Sw
}. Then,
the maximum, minimum, and average values are simultaneously
used as indicators to roughly test the difference in score distribution between the candidate subgraph and the labeled sample.
Formally, we score each candidate subgraph Sit by


k

1 


max cp − max cj 
f (Sit ) = 
(i)
(i)

k
a
t
vj ∈Si
i=1 vp ∈Si

1284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026



k

1 


+
min cp − min cj 
(i)
(i)

k
a
t
vj ∈Si
i=1 vp ∈Si




bti
bi
k
1 



1
1


+
cp − t
cj  ,
k

b
b
i (i) t
 i=1 i vp(i) ∈Sia

vj ∈Si

(8)

where bti denotes the size of Sit . We claim that the smaller the
difference between Sit and the samples in the label set C a on
the above three statistical indicators, the higher the possibility
that it contains anomalies. Accordingly, we select the top r
candidate subgraphs with the smallest scores and mark them
with pseudo labels to expand C a for the next training. Through
multiple rounds of iterations, ASSESS++ automatically mines
high-confidence training samples from unlabeled data and then
fine-tunes itself with labeled and pseudo-labeled sets to achieve
accurate node anomaly detection at low labeling rates.
C. Comparison of ASSESS and WEDGE
As mentioned above, MIL can be roughly divided into BagSpace (BS) paradigm and Instance-Space (IS) paradigm [96].
Here we provide a formal discussion on the strengths and
weaknesses of these two paradigms to help readers understand
the superiority of our proposed method later. The BS paradigm
treats each bag as a whole and learns the discriminative information at the bag-level. It typically assumes uniform relevance
of instances within a bag, allowing the model to take into
account global information by aggregating instance features to
distinguish between different bags. By focusing on the bag as a
whole, it is more robust to noise and irrelevant instances as the
aggregation helps to mitigate the influence of outlier instances
within a bag. However, BS paradigm may suffer from the above
restrictive bias, and aggregating instances is prone to the loss
of critical information, especially if the relevant patterns are
only present at the instance level. This coarse-grained representation leads to limited expressiveness of the model. As for IS
paradigm, it follows the standard multiple instance assumption
that at least one instance in a positive bag is relevant to the
positive annotation, which allows for effective learning and
desirable generalization even with limited labeled data. The IS
paradigm focuses on characterizing more detailed patterns of
each instance and enables discrimination at the instance-level.
This fine-grained representation facilitates capturing complex
patterns that may be overlooked in an aggregated view, giving
the model stronger expressiveness.
In addition to the above analysis, existing studies have shown
theoretically and empirically that better performance in baglevel accuracy does not necessarily mean higher instance-level
accuracy [95], [107], [108]. To briefly review, let T P Ri and
T N Ri be the instance-level true positive/negative rate, on a set
of Li instances containing pi positives and ni negatives, the
instance-level accuracy is calculated by
ACCi =

T P Ri · pi + T N Ri · ni
.
Li

(9)

Then on a set of Lb bags, where B + and B − contain positive and
negative bags respectively, the bag-level accuracy is derived by


+
−
Bk ∈B + ab (Bk ) +
Bk ∈B − ab (Bk )
,
(10)
ACCb =
Lb
nk
pk
where a+
and a−
b (Bk ) = T N Ri ,
b (Bk ) = 1 − (1 − T P Ri )
pk and nk denote the numbers of positive and negative instances in bag Bk , respectively. As can be seen, when at least
one instance (whether positive or negative) is predicted as a
positive, the prediction of the positive bag is correct. In this
sense, methods designed for bag classification are not optimal
for accurately distinguishing instances since they are prone to
learn a suboptimal decision boundary for instance classification.
Besides, ACCb is affected by many factors such as the size of the
bags Bk , T P Ri , and T N Ri , ACCi is more stable than ACCb .
For more discussion on the two types of paradigms, you could
refer to [95], [107].
Next, we compare WEDGE with our work. Although both
methods are based on MIL for weakly supervised node anomaly
detection, they are significantly different in terms of technology and our well-designed self-training module improves the
model’s adaptability at low labeling rates. First, as the taxonomy introduced in § II-B, WEDGE adopts the BS paradigm
where the discriminative information is considered to lie at
the bag-level. WEDGE aggregates node (instance) embeddings
and scores through an attention mechanism to obtain subgraph
(bag) embeddings and scores. Then employs contrastive learning
to establish discrimination between subgraphs. As analyzed
above, the correct distinction of subgraphs (bags) does not mean
the accurate judgment of the nodes (instances) in them. In
contrast, we adopt the IS paradigm. Since the discriminative
information is at the instance-level, our modeling strategy is
more fine-grained. Specifically, we formulate anomaly detection
as a regression problem. By ranking nodes with the maximum
scores in normal and abnormal subgraphs, and pulling apart
the difference between potential anomalies and normal nodes
in the abnormal subgraph, ASSESS will assign high scores to
anomalies to identify them. Second, note that many (weakly)supervised methods including WEDGE fail to cope with low
labeling rate scenarios (see experiments). To further enhance the
model’s adaptability, we introduce the self-training mechanism
to form a model variant ASSESS++. By automatically mining
subgraphs that may contain anomalies as subgraph-level pseudo
labels, ASSESS++ expands the available label set iteratively,
which significantly alleviates the high cost required to obtain
high-quality annotations. Compared with WEDGE, our model
has a wider range of practical application scenarios.

D. Time Complexity
The node representation modeling needs O(n2 h + ndh +
nh2 ), the anomaly ranking takes O(kp), the sparsity and Homophily constraints need O(kp) and O(kp2 ) respectively, where
h denotes the embedding dimension, k is the number of labeled
subgraphs, and p denotes the average number of nodes contained
in the labeled subgraph (mostly around 10). Since k and p
are usually very small, the time complexity of ASSESS is

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

1285

TABLE III
STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS

O(n2 h + ndh + nh2 ), which has almost the same efficiency
as those well-known graph representation methods such as
DGI (O(n2 h + ndh)) [109]. Overall, our model processes at
the subgraph granularity, which is a natural batch form that is
advantageous for generalization to large-scale graphs.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section empirically evaluates the anomaly detection
quality of the proposed framework. Moreover, we provide some
important parameter analysis and visualize the detection results
for intuitive understanding.
A. Datasets
We adopt the following four public real-world benchmark
datasets [20] to validate the performance of the proposed ASSESS and ASSESS++. Table III summarizes detailed statistics
such as network size, structure, type, and anomaly ratio. The
networks here are all homogeneous.3
r Weibo [110] is collected from the Tencent-Weibo online
discussion platform, where nodes represent users and edges
indicate that two users have the same hashtag. Users that
engaged in at least five suspicious activities (i.e., posting
twice within a certain timeframe such as 60 seconds) are
labeled as abnormal. Node features are composed of the
location of a micro-blog post and bag-of-words vectors.
r Reddit [111] contains a user-subreddit graph, where nodes
represent posts shared across the subreddits and edges
between two posts indicate that they are commented by
the same user. The text of each post is transformed into a
feature vector representing their LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count) categories. The banned users are labeled
as anomalies.
r Tolokers [112] originates from the crowd-sourcing platform Toloka, where nodes are workers who have joined
in at least one of the 13 selected projects. If two workers
collaborate on the same task, they are linked by an edge.
3 The proposed weakly supervised anomaly detection idea can be naturally extended to heterogeneous networks (by increasing the modeling of heterogeneous
entities/relations). Related exploration is left for future research.

The worker’s profile and task performance statistics form
node features. Workers who have been banned from one of
the projects are marked as abnormal.
r Questions [112] is collected from the question-answering
website Yandex Q. Nodes represent users interested in the
topic “medicine”, and links are established between two
users if one user answers another’s question within a year.
Users who remained active (not deleted or blocked) are
marked as anomalies. Node features are the average of
FastText embeddings of the words in the user description.
As can be seen, the above datasets differ in several network
characteristics such as degree distribution, density, and anomaly
ratio. In Questions, the node average degree and the average
local clustering coefficient for the whole graph are both smaller,
showing a more sparse topological structure. Although Weibo
and Reddit are both online social networks, Weibo is relatively
denser, while the clustering extent of neighbors around nodes in
Reddit is close to 0 (low local clustering), indicating that there
is almost no clique between neighbors (few users comment on
multiple posts). In Tolokers, the higher local clustering coefficient indicates closer cooperation among workers. Based on the
ground-truth node-level anomalies contained in these datasets,
in this paper, we create k = 50 labeled abnormal subgraphs S a
as weak supervision. In detail, we first randomly select k true
anomalies as center nodes, then generate local subgraphs via
random walk with restart (RWR) [113] algorithm. The random
walk length and the restart probability are set to 15 and 0.2,
respectively. Similarly, the normal subgraph S n is created by
applying RWR on randomly chosen nodes from the unlabeled
node set V u . In addition, we set k = 10 to simulate the low
labeling rate situation.
B. Compared Methods
For a comprehensive comparison, we choose three categories
of methods: unsupervised, supervised, and weakly supervised
as baselines.4 The specific details are as follows.
4 Existing supervised methods depend on precise node-level labels. Strictly
speaking, they cannot handle the case with only imprecise subgraph-level
supervision, so we do not consider many such methods in our baselines.

1286

r ANEMONE [62] is an unsupervised framework that employs multi-scale contrastive learning and a statistical
anomaly estimation strategy to identify anomalous nodes.
r GRADATE [14] is an unsupervised multi-view multi-scale
contrastive learning framework that introduces subgraphsubgraph contrast for node anomaly detection performance
promotion.
r RAND [65] achieves unsupervised node anomaly detection with a tailored reinforcement neighborhood selection
and anomaly-aware message aggregation.
r GAD-NR [68] presents a new variant of GAE that incorporates neighborhood reconstruction in terms of local
structure, self-attributes, and neighbor attributes for unsupervised node anomaly detection.
r ADA-GAD [67] introduces a two-stage unsupervised
framework that first trains the autoencoder on graphs
with reduced anomaly levels generated by an anomalydenoised augmentation strategy, then retrains the decoder
for anomaly node detection on the original graph.
r EAGLE [70] disentangles nodes and attributes to reformulate the original graph into a special bipartite graph,
then uncovers node anomalies in an unsupervised manner
through bipartite graph learning.
r GDN & Meta-GDN [51] are GNN-based few-shot node
anomaly detection approaches that enforce large deviations
between abnormal and normal nodes by well-designed
graph deviation networks, where Meta-GDN is additionally equipped with a new cross-network meta-learning
algorithm.
r BWGNN [53] is a supervised architecture that introduces
Beta graph wavelets to create band-pass filters with excellent locality for detecting node anomalies in the spectral
domain.
r SpaceGNN [114] ensembles comprehensive information
from different spaces with a specialized attention mechanism to spot node anomalies under limited node supervised
labels.
r MIL-GNN [77] is a GNN-based MIL model that regards
the graph as a bag to perform graph-level classification in
a weakly supervised manner.
r WEDGE [23] is a weakly supervised architecture equipped
with an attention module, which spots node anomalies by
enhancing the similarity within subgraphs and the disparity
between subgraphs.
Unsupervised methods identify anomalies in input graph data
without available labels. As for supervised methods designed
for node-level labels, following previous studies [23], all nodes
in the labeled abnormal subgraphs act as supervisory signals.
Regarding MIL-GNN specific for graph-level (bag-level) classification, we spot node anomalies by taking the predicted class
probability of the subgraph as the anomaly score of the nodes
within it.
C. Parameter Settings and Metrics
All experiments are implemented in PyTorch [115] and carried out on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. Since WEDGE

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

does not have a public source code, we implemented it ourselves based on its published paper. All other baselines are
implemented through their released source code and undergo
parameter tuning according to the empirical strategies in their papers. As for our framework ASSESS and ASSESS++,5 we adopt
vanilla 2-layer GCN as the graph encoder and Jensen-Shannon
MI estimator (JSD) [116] for mutual information calculation. In
specific, we derive I(z i ; xi ) by
I(z i ; xi ) = −sp(−Dw (z i , xi )) − EP̃ [sp(Dw (z i , x i ))],
(11)
where Dw : d × h2 → R is a trainable discriminator with parameter w. x i is an negative sampled from P̃ = P (we denote
the empirical probability distribution of node attributes X by P ),
and sp(x) = log(1 + ex ) is the soft-plus function. The number
of negative samples for the JSD estimator is set to 5. As for
I(wij ; Aij ), we maximize it by calculating its cross-entropy
instead of JSD estimator as the graph data used in experiments
is unweighted:
I(wij ; Aij ) = Aij logwij + (1 − Aij )log(1 − wij ). (12)
During training, we employ RMSprop optimizer with the
learning rate 0.001, the weight decay is set to 5×10−4 , and the
batch size N = 32. We tune the three parameters λs by a “gridsearch” strategy in the range of [0.01,1]. About ASSESS++, we
create r = 5 pseudo labels every 100 epochs until a total of 50
labeled abnormal subgraphs are reached.
Following the commonly used metrics in the previous studies [14], [17], we employ the criteria of AUC, which is the
area under the ROC curve, to evaluate the detection quality
of various methods. Besides, the AP score (Average Precision)
is also utilized to evaluate the ability of the model to identify
positive instances accurately while maintaining high precision.
AP is more suitable for anomaly detection tasks where positive
(abnormal) and negative (benign) samples are extremely imbalanced. The closer the AUC and AP scores approach 1, the better
the detection performance of the method is. In this paper, we
report the average results with standard deviation over five runs.
D. Main Experimental Results
We summarize the evaluation results under different labeling ratios in Table IV and have the following observations.
In the weakly supervised case with k = 50 subgraph-level
labels, our proposed ASSESS consistently outperforms all
baselines in terms of AUC and AP scores on four datasets.
The performance gains compared to existing weakly supervised models MIL-GNN and WEDGE reflects the effectiveness
of the ranking-based weakly supervised detection framework
we designed. Especially compared to WEDGE based on the
Bag-Space paradigm, which establishes discrimination between
subgraphs (bag-level), the Instance-Space paradigm we adopt
is more fine-grained. By ranking nodes with the maximum
scores in normal and abnormal subgraphs, and pulling apart
the difference between potential anomalies and normal nodes
in the abnormal subgraph, we achieves the discrimination at the
5 Source code is available at https://github.com/zpeng27/ASSESS.

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

1287

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS W.R.T. AUC AND AP (%) ON REAL-WORLD DATASETS

Fig. 5. Visualization of node anomaly scores in a randomly chosen abnormal subgraph predicted by ASSESS. The darker the color, the greater the score, and the
more likely the node is an anomaly.

node-level (instance-level), which demonstrates superior detection performance. Additionally, the significant performance gap
between our method and unsupervised methods such as EAGLE
and GAD-NR illustrates the benefit of introducing external label
knowledge as guidance, even with coarse-grained supervision.
Since the autoencoder-based model ADA-GAD is trained to
reconstruct the network topology and attributes of multiple additional augmented graphs, which takes up a lot of storage space,
it faces a serious OOM (out of memory) problem on large-scale
network datasets such as Questions. As for supervised or even
few-shot learning methods that rely on node-level labeling, they
can only extract limited or even incorrect knowledge from the
coarse-grained supervisory signals, thus weakening the performance. When k is reduced to 10 to reach a relatively low
labeling rate condition, our ASSESS++ consistently achieves
the best across all datasets. Compared to other baselines with
obvious performance degradation, we get desirable results that
are almost comparable to those when k = 50. This is due
to the simple but effective self-training module we designed,
which automatically creates subgraph-level pseudo-labels by

measuring the score distribution of nodes to enhance the model’s
adaptability to low labeling rates in reality. Since unsupervised
methods do not rely on labels and the results remain unchanged,
it is omitted here.
In addition to quantitative results, we also provide some
visualizations of the detection results output by ASSESS to
intuitively demonstrate its good performance. Specifically, we
randomly select an abnormal subgraph from Weibo and Tolokers
datasets respectively, where the ground-truth abnormal nodes
are marked as red. Then, the node anomalies identified by our
ASSESS are colored blue. The darker the color, the greater the
anomaly score and the higher the possibility of an anomaly. By
comparing the subfigures (a) and (b) or (c) and (d) in Fig. 5, it can
be seen that most real anomalies were successfully assigned high
scores by ASSESS, although there were a few misjudgments.
Furthermore, on Weibo dataset, we summarize the anomaly
scores predicted by different models for the two types of nodes,
which are categorized according to the ground-truth abnormal
and normal labels, and illustrate violin plots as shown in Fig. 6.
Obviously, ASSESS assigns higher anomaly scores to true node

1288

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Violin plots of node scores predicted by different models on Weibo dataset, grouped by true anomalies and benign.

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT GRAPH ENCODERS

anomalies, and there is a significant gap between the median
scores of abnormal and normal nodes, forming a clear distinction
boundary. In other methods, however, the two types of nodes
have many overlapping score intervals, and many true anomalies
are assigned scores similar to normal nodes, which leads to
unsatisfactory detection effects. The above visualization results
once again confirm the effectiveness of ASSESS.

Fig. 7. Subgraphs derived by different strategies on Weibo and Tolokers:
BFRW (left), RW (middle), and RWR (right). The abnormal nodes that serve
as starting nodes for sampling are colored by blue, and the true node anomalies
involved in the subgraph are marked in red.
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT SUBGRAPH GENERATION STRATEGIES

E. More Experimental Analysis
1) Adaptability to Different Graph Encoders: In this part, we
intend to explore the adaptability of our proposed ASSESS to
different backbone GNN encoders. The well-known GAT [99],
GIN [100], and MixHop [117] models are chosen as alternative encoders and we keep the other experimental settings
unchanged. Table V summarizes the results. As can be seen,
these encoder variants all exhibit comparable detection performance to GCN on different datasets. Note that GAT adaptively
reweights neighborhoods through the self-attention mechanism,
and MixHop captures neighborhood mixing relationships at various distances by multiple powers of the adjacency matrix. This
fine-scale modeling of graph topology information is conducive
to identifying anomalies, thus they further improves the values
of both evaluation metrics on Weibo, Tolokers, and Questions.
These promising and comparable results demonstrate that our
model allows for a wide selection of backbone GNN encoders.
2) Subgraph Generation Strategies: Here we explore the
impact of weak supervision signals created by different subgraph
(bag) generation strategies on model performance. In addition
to the random walk with restart (RWR), we also consider two
additional methods: vanilla random walk (RW) and breadthfirst random walk (BFRW). It needs to be recognized that

the subgraphs derived by the above strategies have their own
characteristics. Specifically, since RWR introduces the restart
probability, i.e., returning to the starting node, it tends to generate
a subgraph with the abnormal node as the center, containing
neighbors with diverse hops away from the abnormal node. In
contrast, the vanilla RW is more likely to create a subgraph that
exists in a chain-like form, starting from the abnormal node. For
the BFRW, it is prone to generating a subgraph centered around
the abnormal node, containing all neighbors with the same hops
from the abnormal node. Fig. 7 shows some subgraphs derived
by these strategies, and Table VI reports empirical results on
four datasets. As can be seen, the performances under the above
strategies are comparable, indicating that the proposed model

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

Fig. 8.

Fig. 9.

1289

Metric scores on Reddit (left) and Tolokers (right) under different numbers of labeled abnormal subgraphs.

Ablation studies on real-world datasets w.r.t. AUC and AP metrics.

can adapt to a variety of subgraph (bag) generation methods
and has promising anomaly detection capability under different
forms of subgraph-level weak supervision.
3) The Influence of K Value: For weakly supervised anomaly
detection, it is interesting to explore the performance changes
of ASSESS under different amounts of weak supervision. Fig. 8
illustrates the detection results of ASSESS as the number of
annotated abnormal subgraphs (i.e., k value) changes. When k
is less than 50, both AUC and AP increase significantly, while
the performance gain is only a little and almost remains stable
when k continues to increase (further performance gains may
come from more sophisticated model designs, which are left
for the future). This reflects the necessity of sufficient weak
supervisory signals, which motivates us to propose ASSESS++
that can automatically generate pseudo labels to further alleviate
the labeling cost.
4) Ablation Study: We examine the role of each module in
weakly supervised anomaly ranking modeling by removing the
specific loss terms. In detail, w/o inter-bag loss, w/o intra-bag
loss, w/o sparsity constraint, and w/o Homophily constraint
refer to removing the (Sia , Sin ), (Sia ), sp (Sia ), and hom (Si ),
respectively. Fig. 9 illustrates the results under different settings
on all datasets. As can be seen, both AUC and AP metrics

drop most significantly when the inter-bag loss is missing,
which indicates that the inter-bag anomaly ranking is critically
important as it broadly captures the explicit differences between
anomaly and benign. The performance degradation without
(Sia ) reflects the benefit of modeling intra-bag ranking loss in
further distinguishing normal nodes in coarse-grained abnormal
subgraphs. In addition, modeling the sparsity of anomalies and
the homophily principle inherent in graph topology are both
beneficial to identifying anomalies accurately.
5) Computational Complexity: Here we evaluate ASSESS
and other baselines in terms of the computational efficiency
and number of model parameters under the same hardware
environment. Table VII summarizes the results, where #Params
indicate the number of trainable parameters that a machine learning model adjusts during training to improve its performance,
and MACs denote multiply-accumulate operations6 The lower
MACs value means that the model requires less computation
and is more efficient. It can be seen that, compared to WEDGE,
which is a representative weakly supervised model specifically
for node anomaly detection and has the second-best performance, our proposed ASSESS can achieve the best detection
performance with fewer parameters and computational burden.
Compared to others, ASSESS has a relatively moderate number
of parameters, similar to the widely used ANEMONE on all four
datasets. For the pseudo-labeling stage in ASSESS++, additional
dynamic memory allocation of 5.59 M, 6.58 M, 7.29 M, and
26.41 M is consumed on the four datasets respectively. Although
larger MACs are consumed, this contributes to the sophisticated utilization and analysis of coarse-grained subgraph-level
labels to accommodate practical weakly supervised scenarios.
In addition, we analyze the detection duration of the model on
datasets of different scales, as shown in Fig. 10. Here Elliptic
dataset [118] includes a graph of 203,769 Bitcoin transactions as
nodes, and 234,355 payment flows as edges, where each node has
166-dimensional transaction information and 9.8% transactions
belongs to illicit categories such as scams and Ponzi schemes.
On such a large-scale network, most methods such as RAND,
ADA-GAD, EAGLE, GDN, and BWGNN suffer from the OOM
issue. ANEMONE and GRADATE achieve an AUC score of
6 The well-known FLOPs are nearly two times as MACs, more details at
https://github.com/Lyken17/pytorch-OpCounter.

1290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE VII
THE COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS ON REAL-WORLD DATASETS

Fig. 10.

Detection duration on datasets of different scales.

about 43.28%, but they take more than 24 hours (1 d) to complete. In contrast, our model only takes about 4 hours (13956.4 s)
to achieve an AUC score of 86.31%. WEDGE only gets 64.83%
in a similar period of time. Overall, our method exhibits excellent
effectiveness and efficiency in weakly supervised node anomaly
detection, reflecting good engineering application potential.

anomaly detection idea is independent of the specific model
architecture. Our work can be naturally extended to dynamic networks by introducing a dynamic graph representation learning
module. For instance, employing DDGCL [119] or CLDG [120]
derives node representations on dynamic graphs in a selfsupervised manner, and then learn a temporal score predictor to
model node anomaly ranking under the guidance of subgraphlevel weak supervision. (2) In addition, designing more sophisticated subgraph distribution measures to create high-confidence
pseudo-labels automatically or drawing on other high-quality
pseudo-label generation methods [121] to further enhance the
performance of the model at low labeling rates is also a promising future direction. (3) Note that there are inevitably camouflaged anomalies disguising themselves to evade detection in
reality, which may blur the pattern difference between anomalies and benign ones. Existing empirical studies usually divide
camouflages into two types: the feature camouflage and the
relation camouflage [49]. In this regard, it is possible to consider
introducing relevant feature screening mechanisms or employing reinforcement learning (RL) to select optimal neighbors and
high-order topological relations to overcome the representation
similarity issue that may be caused by vanilla GNN aggregation.
This will help the model capture the subtle boundary between
normal and abnormal instances, improving the ability to detect
camouflaged anomalies.
REFERENCES

V. CONCLUSION
This paper investigates how to locate node-level anomalies
under imprecise subgraph-level supervision, which is widely
applicable in practice yet has received less scrutiny. Inspired
by classic MIL methods, we treat subgraphs and nodes as
bags and instances, respectively, and present a novel framework
ASSESS which enforces inter-bag and intra-bag ranking loss
to learn node abnormalities. A variant ASSESS++ equipped
with a self-training module is proposed to further enhance the
adaptability to low labeling ratios. Experiments on four benchmark real-world datasets validate the superiority of ASSESS and
ASSESS++.
Future work could focus on the following three aspects. (1)
Note that the proposed MIL-based weakly supervised node

[1] P. Cui, X. Wang, J. Pei, and W. Zhu, “A survey on network embedding,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 833–852, May 2019.
[2] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[3] H. Chen et al., “Label-aware graph convolutional networks,” in Proc.
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1977–1980.
[4] H. Chen et al., “Neighbor enhanced graph convolutional networks for
node classification and recommendation,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 246,
2022, Art. no. 108594.
[5] Q. Shao, D. Chen, and W. Yu, “A unique framework of heterogeneous
augmentation graph contrastive learning for both node and graph classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5818–5828,
Nov./Dec. 2024.
[6] K. Berahmand, M. Mohammadi, F. Saberi-Movahed, Y. Li, and Y. Xu,
“Graph regularized nonnegative matrix factorization for community detection in attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 372–385, Jan./Feb. 2023.

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

[7] Y. Mo, R. Xing, and H. Hou, “A distributed higher-order k-Medoids
clustering algorithm for network partition,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 4181–4193, Sep./Oct. 2024.
[8] X. Wang, X. He, M. Wang, F. Feng, and T. -S. Chua, “Neural graph
collaborative filtering,” in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
Retrieval, 2019, pp. 165–174.
[9] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang, “LightGCN:
Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation,” in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2020,
pp. 639–648.
[10] A. Sankar, Y. Liu, J. Yu, and N. Shah, “Graph neural networks for
friend ranking in large-scale social platforms,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
pp. 2535–2546.
[11] X. Li, L. Sun, M. Ling, and Y. Peng, “A survey of graph neural network
based recommendation in social networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 549,
2023, Art. no. 126441.
[12] Z. Li, Z. Cui, S. Wu, X. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Fi-GNN: Modeling feature
interactions via graph neural networks for CTR prediction,” in Proc. ACM
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2019, pp. 539–548.
[13] H. Chen et al., “Macro graph neural networks for online billion-scale
recommender systems,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2024, pp. 3598–3608.
[14] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 7459–7467.
[15] J. Lian, X. Wang, X. Lin, Z. Wu, S. Wang, and W. Guo, “Graph anomaly
detection via multi-view discriminative awareness learning,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 6623–6635, Nov./Dec. 2024.
[16] Y. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zheng, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, and S. Pan, “ARC: A generalist
graph anomaly detector with in-context learning,” in Proc. 38th Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 50772–50804.
[17] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[18] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection and description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29,
pp. 626–688, 2015.
[19] V. -H. Nguyen, K. Sugiyama, P. Nakov, and M. -Y. Kan, “FANG: Leveraging social context for fake news detection using graph representation,”
in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1165–1174.
[20] J. Tang, F. Hua, Z. Gao, P. Zhao, and J. Li, “GADBench: Revisiting and
benchmarking supervised graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 29628–29653.
[21] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection
on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022,
vol. 35, pp. 27021–27035.
[22] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weaklysupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
[23] Q. Zhou, K. Ding, H. Liu, and H. Tong, “Learning node abnormality with
weak supervision,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023,
pp. 3584–3594.
[24] E. W. Ngai, Y. Hu, Y. H. Wong, Y. Chen, and X. Sun, “The application
of data mining techniques in financial fraud detection: A classification
framework and an academic review of literature,” Decis. Support Syst.,
vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 559–569, 2011.
[25] Z. -H. Zhou, “A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning,” Nat.
Sci. Rev., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 44–53, 2018.
[26] J. Tang, H. Li, G. -J. Qi, and T. -S. Chua, “Image annotation by graphbased inference with integrated multiple/single instance representations,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 12, pp. 131–141, 2010.
[27] X. -S. Wei and Z. -H. Zhou, “An empirical study on image bag generators for multi-instance learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 105, pp. 155–198,
2016.
[28] S. Angelidis and M. Lapata, “Multiple instance learning networks for
fine-grained sentiment analysis,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
vol. 6, pp. 17–31, 2018.
[29] J. Foulds and E. Frank, “A review of multi-instance learning assumptions,” Knowl. Eng. Rev., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2010.
[30] M. -R. Amini, V. Feofanov, L. Pauletto, L. Hadjadj, E. Devijver, and Y.
Maximov, “Self-training: A survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 616, 2025,
Art. no. 128904.
[31] F. E. Grubbs, “Procedures for detecting outlying observations in samples,” Technometrics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–21, 1969.
[32] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.

1291

[33] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
[34] M. M. Breunig, H. -P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[35] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. -H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[36] H. Yu, W. Liu, N. Zhu, P. Li, and X. Luo, “IN-GFD: An interpretable
graph fraud detection model for spam reviews,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 5325–5339, Oct. 2024.
[37] S. Motie and B. Raahemi, “Financial fraud detection using graph neural
networks: A systematic review,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 240, 2024,
Art. no. 122156.
[38] J. -P. Chen, P. Lu, F. Yang, R. Chen, and K. Lin, “Medical insurance fraud
detection using graph neural networks with spatio-temporal constraints,”
J. Netw. Intell., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 480–498, 2022.
[39] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural
clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2007, pp. 824–833.
[40] L. Akoglu, M. McGlohon, and C. Faloutsos, “oddball: Spotting anomalies
in weighted graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Know. Discov. Data Mining, 2010,
pp. 410–421.
[41] H. Tong and C. -Y. Lin, “Non-negative residual matrix factorization with
application to graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data
Mining, 2011, pp. 143–153.
[42] J. Gao, F. Liang, W. Fan, C. Wang, Y. Sun, and J. Han, “On community
outliers and their efficient detection in information networks,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2010, pp. 813–822.
[43] P. I. Sánchez, E. Müller, F. Laforet, F. Keller, and K. Böhm, “Statistical
selection of congruent subspaces for mining attributed graphs,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2013, pp. 647–656.
[44] P. I. Sánchez, E. Müller, O. Irmler, and K. Böhm, “Local context selection
for outlier ranking in graphs with multiple numeric node attributes,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Sci. Statist. Database Manage., 2014, pp. 1–12.
[45] N. Liu, X. Huang, and X. Hu, “Accelerated local anomaly detection via
resolving attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017,
pp. 2337–2343.
[46] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2017, pp. 2152–2158.
[47] Z. Peng et al., “ANOMALOUS: A joint modeling approach for anomaly
detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2018, pp. 3513–3519.
[48] D. Wang et al., “A semi-supervised graph attentive network for financial
fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 598–
607.
[49] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph
neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324.
[50] A. Kumagai, T. Iwata, and Y. Fujiwara, “Semi-supervised anomaly
detection on attributed graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
2021, pp. 1–8.
[51] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly
detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
pp. 2448–2456.
[52] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive coding for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051,
Aug. 2023.
[53] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf., Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 21076–
21089.
[54] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 1945–1951.
[55] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Addressing heterophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph spectrum,”
in Proc. Web Conf., 2023, pp. 1528–1538.
[56] N. Chen et al., “Consistency training with learnable data augmentation
for graph anomaly detection with limited supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2024.
[57] H. Qiao, Q. Wen, X. Li, E. -P. Lim, and G. Pang, “Generative semisupervised graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2024, pp. 4660–4688.
[58] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 594–602.

1292

[59] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for anomaly
detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
Signal Process., 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[60] X. Yuan, N. Zhou, S. Yu, H. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Xia, “Higher-order
structure based anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Big Data, 2021, pp. 2691–2700.
[61] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
Jun. 2022.
[62] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y. -F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[63] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022,
pp. 657–665.
[64] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. PacificAsia Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 444–457.
[65] Y. Bei et al., “Reinforcement neighborhood selection for unsupervised
graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2023,
pp. 11–20.
[66] H. Qiao and G. Pang, “Truncated affinity maximization: One-class homophily modeling for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 49490–49512.
[67] J. He, Q. Xu, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, and Q. Huang, “ADA-GAD: Anomalydenoised autoencoders for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 8481–8489.
[68] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
reconstruction,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2024,
pp. 576–585.
[69] X. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, M. Yuan, and S. Wang,
“SmoothGNN: Smoothing-aware GNN for unsupervised node anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2025, pp. 1225–1236.
[70] Z. Peng, Y. Wang, Q. Lin, B. Dong, and C. Shen, “When bipartite
graph learning meets anomaly detection in attributed networks: Understand abnormalities from each attribute,” Neural Netw., vol. 185, 2025,
Art. no. 107194.
[71] J. Wu, Y. Yu, C. Huang, and K. Yu, “Deep multiple instance learning
for image classification and auto-annotation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2015, pp. 3460–3469.
[72] J. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Zhu, W. Liu, and D. N. Metaxas, “Video classification
via weakly supervised sequence modeling,” Comput. Vis. Image Underst.,
vol. 152, pp. 79–87, 2016.
[73] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[74] F. Wan, C. Liu, W. Ke, X. Ji, J. Jiao, and Q. Ye, “C-MIL: Continuation multiple instance learning for weakly supervised object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 2199–2208.
[75] P. Sudharshan, C. Petitjean, F. Spanhol, L. E. Oliveira, L. Heutte, and
P. Honeine, “Multiple instance learning for histopathological breast
cancer image classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 117, pp. 103–111,
2019.
[76] J. Zhang, L. Qing, and J. Miao, “Temporal convolutional network with
complementary inner bag loss for weakly supervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., 2019, pp. 4030–4034.
[77] M. Tu, J. Huang, X. He, and B. Zhou, “Multiple instance learning with
graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019.
[78] Y. Ji, H. Liu, B. He, X. Xiao, H. Wu, and Y. Yu, “Diversified multiple
instance learning for document-level multi-aspect sentiment classification,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2020,
pp. 7012–7023.
[79] Y. Zhao et al., “Predicting lymph node metastasis using histopathological
images based on multiple instance learning with deep graph convolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
pp. 4837–4846.
[80] B. Li, Y. Li, and K. W. Eliceiri, “Dual-stream multiple instance learning network for whole slide image classification with self-supervised
contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2021, pp. 14318–14328.
[81] T. Yuan et al., “Multiple instance active learning for object detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 5330–
5339.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[82] W. Gao, F. Wan, J. Yue, S. Xu, and Q. Ye, “Discrepant multiple instance
learning for weakly supervised object detection,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 122, 2022, Art. no. 108233.
[83] J. Liu, D. Kong, L. Huang, D. Mao, and H. Xue, “Multiple instance
learning for offensive language detection,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2022, pp. 7387–7396.
[84] Y. Guan et al., “Node-aligned graph convolutional network for wholeslide image representation and classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 18813–18823.
[85] W. Tang, S. Huang, X. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and B. Liu, “Multiple
instance learning framework with masked hard instance mining for whole
slide image classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2023, pp. 4078–4087.
[86] S. Park, H. Kim, M. Kim, D. Kim, and K. Sohn, “Normality guided
multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2023,
pp. 2665–2674.
[87] K. Chen, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “CaMIL: Causal multiple instance learning
for whole slide image classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2024, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1120–1128.
[88] L. Qu, Y. Ma, X. Luo, Q. Guo, M. Wang, and Z. Song, “Rethinking multiple instance learning for whole slide image classification: A good instance classifier is all you need,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 9732–9744, Oct.
2024.
[89] T. Sun, W. Pian, N. Daoudi, K. Allix, T. F. Bissyandé, and J. Klein,
“LaFiCMIL: Rethinking large file classification from the perspective of
correlated multiple instance learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Natural
Lang. Inf. Syst., 2024, pp. 62–77.
[90] Ł. Struski, S. Janusz, J. Tabor, M. Markiewicz, and A. Lewicki, “Multiple instance learning for medical image classification based on instance importance,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 91, 2024,
Art. no. 105874.
[91] M. Dai, X. Shi, X. Zhu, T. Pan, and K. Li, “Patch target guided dual-branch
deep multiple instance learning for 3D MRI analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Bioinf. Biomed., 2024, pp. 903–910.
[92] F. Liu and W. Liu, “Graph neural network based multi-instance learning
with graph structure learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf, Artif. Intell. Big Data,
2024, pp. 505–510.
[93] J. Chen, L. Li, L. Su, Z. -J. Zha, and Q. Huang, “Prompt-enhanced
multiple instance learning for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024,
pp. 18319–18329.
[94] Y. Zhong, R. Zhu, G. Yan, P. Gan, X. Shen, and D. Zhu, “Inter-clip
feature similarity based weakly supervised video anomaly detection via
multi-scale temporal MLP,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1961–1970, Feb. 2025.
[95] M. -A. Carbonneau, V. Cheplygina, E. Granger, and G. Gagnon, “Multiple instance learning: A survey of problem characteristics and applications,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 77, pp. 329–353, 2018.
[96] J. Amores, “Multiple instance classification: Review, taxonomy and
comparative study,” Artif. Intell., vol. 201, pp. 81–105, 2013.
[97] M. Waqas, S. U. Ahmed, M. A. Tahir, J. Wu, and R. Qureshi, “Exploring
multiple instance learning (MIL): A brief survey,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 250, 2024, Art. no. 123893.
[98] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2017.
[99] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y.
Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018.
[100] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019.
[101] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imageNet classification,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
[102] Z. Peng et al., “Graph representation learning via graphical mutual
information maximization,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 259–270.
[103] S. Andrews, I. Tsochantaridis, and T. Hofmann, “Support vector machines for multiple-instance learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2002, pp. 561–568.
[104] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro,
“Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal feature magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2021, pp. 4975–4986.

PENG et al.: ESTIMATING NODE ABNORMALITIES FROM IMPRECISE SUBGRAPH-LEVEL SUPERVISION

[105] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 27, no. 1,
pp. 415–444, 2001.
[106] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
2010, pp. 249–256.
[107] G. Vanwinckelen, V. Tragante do O, D. Fierens, and H. Blockeel, “Instance-level accuracy versus bag-level accuracy in multiinstance learning,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, pp. 313–341,
2016.
[108] G. Doran and S. Ray, “A theoretical and empirical analysis of support
vector machine methods for multiple-instance classification,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 97, pp. 79–102, 2014.
[109] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D.
Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2019.
[110] T. Zhao, C. Deng, K. Yu, T. Jiang, D. Wang, and M. Jiang, “Error-bounded
graph anomaly loss for GNNs,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2020, pp. 1873–1882.
[111] S. Kumar, X. Zhang, and J. Leskovec, “Predicting dynamic embedding
trajectory in temporal interaction networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1269–1278.
[112] O. Platonov, D. Kuznedelev, M. Diskin, A. Babenko, and L.
Prokhorenkova, “A critical look at the evaluation of GNNs under heterophily: Are we really making progress?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2023.
[113] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J. -Y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2006,
pp. 613–622.
[114] X. Dong, X. Zhang, L. Chen, M. Yuan, and S. Wang, “SpaceGNN: Multispace graph neural network for node anomaly detection with extremely
limited labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
[115] N. Ketkar and J. Moolayil, “Introduction to pytorch,” in Deep Learning
With Python: Learn Best Practices Deep Learn. Models With PyTorch.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2021, pp. 27–91 .
[116] S. Nowozin, B. Cseke, and R. Tomioka, “f-GAN: Training generative
neural samplers using variational divergence minimization,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 271–279.
[117] S. Abu-El-Haija et al., “MixHop: Higher-order graph convolutional architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2019, pp. 21–29.
[118] M. Weber et al., “Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with
graph convolutional networks for financial forensics,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019.
[119] S. Tian, R. Wu, L. Shi, L. Zhu, and T. Xiong, “Self-supervised representation learning on dynamic graphs,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2021, pp. 1814–1823.
[120] Y. Xu, Z. Peng, B. Shi, X. Hua, and B. Dong, “Learning dynamic graph
representations through timespan view contrasts,” Neural Netw., vol. 176,
2024, Art. no. 106384.
[121] B. Wang et al., “Deep insights into noisy pseudo labeling on graph data,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 76214–76228.

Zhen Peng received the B.Eng. degree from the
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree
from the School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2023. She is currently an Assistant Professor with Xi’an Jiaotong University. Her research focuses on graph machine learning and its applications, especially graph anomaly
detection and social network analysis.

1293

Yunqi Xue received the B.Eng. degree in computer
science and technology from the Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in
2022, and the M.Eng. degree in computer science and
technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China, in 2025. Her research focuses on graph mining
and its applications, such as node anomaly detection
and tax Big Data analysis.

Yunfan Wang received the B.Eng. degree in computer science and technology and the B.Eco. degree
in economics from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China, in 2021, and the M.Eng. degree in computer
science and technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2024. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in computer science with the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. His research focuses
on graph machine learning and its applications, such
as anomaly detection and brain network analysis.

Qika Lin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China.
He is currently a Research Fellow with the National University of Singapore, Singapore. He has
authored or coauthored many papers in top-tier journals/conferences, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, ICDE, ACL,
KDD, and IJCAI. His research interests include multimodal learning, logical reasoning, and NLP. He has
actively contributed to several journals/conferences
as a reviewer or PC member, including IJCV, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, NeurIPS, and ACL.
He was the Guest Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL
SYSTEMS.

Chao Shen received the B.S. degree in automation
and the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control
engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China, in 2007 and 2014, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Faculty of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University.
His current research interests include AI security, insider/intrusion detection, behavioral biometrics, measurement and experimental methodology.