IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

1205

Explainable Anomaly Detection in Network Traffic
Using Normalizing Flows
Lior Shafir , Raja Giryes , and Avishai Wool

Abstract—Anomaly detection in network traffic is critical for
identifying deviations from normal behavior—including sophisticated cyber threats and previously unseen attacks—especially
when anomalous examples are absent from the training data. The
escalating complexity of cyber-attacks necessitates developing
methods that not only identify low-likelihood traffic but also
provide insights into its anomalous nature and deviations from
normal behavior, enabling effective response and troubleshooting.
In this work, we leverage the unique capabilities of normalizing
flows (NF), a state-of-the-art reversible generative model for exact
density estimation, to detect anomalies using only normal traffic.
Our approach fundamentally differs from previous methods by
utilizing NF’s exact likelihood computation for unsupervised
detection and combining it with Shapley values to introduce a
novel feature selection framework for guiding the selection of
discriminative features in anomaly detection, while also providing
statistically grounded enhanced explanations for detected anomalies, pinpointing potential root causes. Through experiments on
CICIoT-2023, ISCXTor2016, and CICIDS2017, we demonstrate
that our NF-based approach outperforms existing state-of-theart methods for unsupervised anomaly detection. Notably, on
the CICIoT-2023 dataset, we achieve an accuracy of 0.9951,
comparable or higher than supervised methods, despite being
trained solely on normal data.
Index Terms—DDoS attacks, intrusion detection system, flowbased network intrusion detection, network flow.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the exponential growth of connected devices,
particularly in the Internet of Things (IoT) domain,
the cyber threat landscape has evolved significantly. According
to Cisco [1], the proliferation of IoT devices is expected to
reach hundreds of billions by 2030. This surge in connectivity
presents a vast attack surface, increasing the complexity and
frequency of potential cyber threats. Consequently, the number
of types of anomalous network traffic that threaten the internet
is larger than ever before. Hence, with such a broad spectrum
of low-likelihood network traffic, anomaly detection remains
a critical challenge.
Anomalous traffic may refer to malicious attacks but it can
also include benign deviations—such as infrequent legitimate
variations in traffic or undesired behaviors stemming from
regulatory compliance, privacy constraints, or capacity limitations.

W

Received 16 January 2025; revised 10 August 2025; accepted 8 September 2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor
E. Bertino. Date of publication 13 October 2025; date of current version
5 January 2026. (Corresponding author: Lior Shafir.)
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel (e-mail: lior.shafir@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3617580

Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs) detect
attacks via signature- or anomaly-based inspection of network
traffic [2], [3]. Recent progress in machine learning (ML)
has opened new opportunities for improving the accuracy of
traffic classification tasks, including the detection of anomalous or malicious activity. However, ML-based NIDS still face
substantial challenges due to the complexity of modern ML
models and the need to process high-dimensional or timeseries network data [4].
Supervised ML approaches, in particular, face several limitations in this context: Firstly, they require large amounts of
labeled anomalous data for training, which is often unavailable. Secondly, they encounter challenges with extreme class
imbalance, which further degrades detection accuracy, skewing
model learning towards majority classes and hindering the
identification of minority traffic classes. Lastly, collecting
anomalous traffic data is a costly and time-consuming task
due to its elusive and sporadic nature.
To address the lack of anomalous data for training, some
approaches have explored the use of deep generative models,
such as Generative Adversarial Networks [5] (GANs), to
synthetically create anomaly samples [6]. However, while
generative neural methods like GANs and Variational Autoencoders [7] (VAEs) have demonstrated prominent performance
results on tasks like learning the distribution of natural images,
neither of them allows for exact computation of the probability
density of new data points.
In this work, we propose a novel approach leveraging
Normalizing Flows (NF) [8] for anomaly detection. NF is a
reversible generative model framework that produces tractable
distributions, where both sampling and density-estimation
directions (i.e., the generative and normalizing directions,
respectively) can be efficient and exact.
NF learn an invertible mapping between a simple base
distribution and a complex data distribution, enabling exact
likelihood computation. By training the flow solely on
normal network traffic data, anomalies can be detected
as low-likelihood samples under the learned distribution,
eliminating the need for labeled anomaly examples during
training.
While NF have generative abilities, we leverage its density
estimation capability rather than its generative direction. Our
approach fundamentally differs from other anomaly detection
works that employ generative methods such as GANs, AEs,
and even NF in that we do not generate synthetic anomalies
followed by training a supervised classifier.

2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1206

Such models are inherently sensitive to the proportion and
authenticity of anomalies present in the training set. Firstly,
the generated synthetic anomalies do not overlap well with
real anomaly samples [9], which may lead to suboptimal
training, and reduce the model’s detection effectiveness in
real-world scenarios. Secondly, according to [9], the model’s
performance decreases when the anomaly-to-normal sample
ratio is modified. This indicates that the model’s efficacy
is closely tied to specific sample ratios, which may not be
feasible to predict in real-world scenarios where the rate of
anomalies can be unpredictable.
Feature selection is a critical challenge in anomaly detection, particularly in unsupervised settings, where including
irrelevant or redundant features can obscure the essential
characteristics of normal traffic and degrade the model’s
performance. To address this, we propose a novel Shapleybased [10] feature selection framework that leverages NF’s
probability-based evaluation function. This approach enables
us to identify and rank discriminative features effectively, overcoming the limitations of traditional feature selection methods
that often struggle in unsupervised contexts. Additionally, our
use of Shapley values enhances the interpretability of detection
results, providing statistically grounded explanations for why
a particular traffic sample is anomalous and how it deviates
from normal patterns.
We evaluate our method on three benchmarks: CICIoT2023 [11], ISCXTor2016 [12], and CICIDS2017 [13]. While
two of these datasets contain comprehensive and diverse sets
of attack scenarios, we also extend our evaluation to the
ISCXTor2016 dataset, which focuses on encrypted network
traffic and includes both Non-Tor and Tor network traffic
across seven different application categories. Notably, the
recent CICIoT-2023 dataset encompasses 33 distinct attacks
across seven attack categories. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first study to evaluate this dataset using only
normal traffic.
Our contributions may be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a novel anomaly detection method that
leverages NF’s exact density estimation capabilities to
model normal network traffic and identify anomalies as
low-likelihood samples.
• We integrate the NF probability-based evaluation function
with Shapley values [10] to propose a novel wrapper feature selection method tailored for unsupervised learning,
demonstrating its efficacy through extensive experiments.
Additionally, through simulations and real attack examples, we demonstrate the explainability benefits of using
Shapley values with NF to provide statistically grounded
explanations for detected anomalies.
• We evaluate our method on three publicly available
datasets: two from the DDoS and IDS cyber-attacks
domain, and one from the encrypted traffic classification
domain. We show that our flow-based approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods
for binary classification tasks. Perhaps most strikingly,
on the recent CICIoT-2023 dataset, which contains 33
attacks across 7 different categories, we demonstrate that
our method achieves a detection accuracy comparable

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

or higher than supervised methods, despite being trained
solely on normal data.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection. Anomaly detection
in network traffic has been extensively studied over the past
few decades, cf. [14], [15]. In recent years, deep learningbased methods have gained significant traction, offering
improved accuracy and robustness. Proposed methods include
Support Vector Machines (SVM), Convolutional or Recurrent
Neural Networks (CNN/RNN), and more, cf. [16].
More recently, the application of generative models such
as VAEs and GANs for anomaly-based detection has been
thoroughly investigated. Zavrak and Iskefiyeli [17] employ
both Autoencoders (AEs) and VAEs in a semi-supervised
learning framework to identify unknown attacks based on
flow features extracted from network traffic. Another work
by Min et al. [18] explores the use of a memory-augmented
deep autoencoder for network anomaly detection. It focuses on
leveraging deep learning techniques, specifically AE, enhanced
with memory components to improve anomaly detection accuracy in network traffic data. Azmin and Islam [19] combine a
variational Laplace AE (VLAE) with a deep neural network
(DNN) to enhance intrusion detection accuracy.
GANs [5] have also been used for adversarial traffic generation and anomaly-based intrusion detection. E.g., NetShare
[20] is a GAN-based framework for generating synthetic IP
header traces, Gadot [21] is a GAN-based framework aimed at
enhancing the detection of DDoS attacks, and NIDSGAN [22]
is a GAN-based framework for generating realistic adversarial
network traffic flows.
Wang et al. [23] present Def-IDS, an ensemble-based
defense mechanism designed to protect deep learning-based
network intrusion detection systems from adversarial attacks.
Peng et al. [24] also propose a framework where a GAN is
used to generate adversarial network traffic, which is then used
to train the NIDS. The GAN-generated adversarial examples
help the NIDS to better identify and mitigate potential threats.
While various studies employed VAEs and GANs for
anomaly detection, they face challenges like intractable
marginal likelihoods and mode collapse. Additionally, GANs
require a large amount of training data to generate network
traffic samples. Thus, the acquisition of malicious samples is
still a challenging task.
Another category of unsupervised learning approaches
includes classical algorithms such as Isolation Forest (IF)
and more recent self-supervised methods based on contrastive
learning. These techniques are trained without access to labels
and aim to identify structural irregularities in the data. For
example, Zhang et al. [25] propose an online IF-based model
for malicious traffic detection in SD-WAN environments,
where the model is trained on a mixture of benign and attack
traffic without using labels. Similarly, Li et al. [26] present
a self-supervised contrastive learning framework that learns
representations for intrusion detection using data augmentations and contrastive loss, without label supervision during
the pretraining stage. However, unlike our approach, these
methods are typically trained on a mixture of normal and

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

anomalous samples, relying on their presence in the training
data to identify structural irregularities. In contrast, our model
is trained exclusively on clean benign traffic.
Normalizing Flows for Anomaly Detection. NF have
received attention in the field of anomaly detection, particularly due to their capability to model complex probability
distributions. Various studies in fields other than network
traffic detection have utilized NF for anomaly detection, producing promising outcomes. Gudovskiy et al. [27] proposed
CFLOW-AD, which employs conditional NF for anomaly
detection with localization. CFLOW-AD characterizes the
distribution of normal network-based features and calculates
precise data likelihoods of the examined features, demonstrating faster and more compact performance compared to earlier
models. Yet, it requires a specialized design that is distinct
from standard conditional NF models.
Yu et al. [28] introduced FastFlow, a detection technique that
extends conventional NF to two-dimensional space. Initially, a
feature extractor gathers visual features from normal samples,
which are then input into a 2D flow model to estimate the probability distribution. FastFlow shows enhanced accuracy and
efficiency over previous methods. Dias et al. [29] developed
an unsupervised density estimation approach for trajectory
anomaly detection using NF. They applied RealNVP and
Masked Autoregressive Flow (MAF) to model trajectory data
and identify anomalies, with their experimental results showing that NF outperform traditional density-based methods such
as Local Outlier Factor (LOF) and Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM). Ryzhikov et al. [30] proposed a model-agnostic
anomaly detection process based on NF, addressing classimbalanced classification by integrating existing anomalous
samples during training and reconfiguring one-class classification as two-class classification. The experimental findings
indicated that NFAD surpassed existing anomaly detection
methods.
Concurrently to us, Dang et al. [9] proposed a three-stage
framework that uses only normal traffic data to generate
pseudo-anomaly samples. Their approach also involves the use
of NF to generate synthetic anomalous samples, and training
a supervised classifier to distinguish between normal and
pseudo-anomaly samples. They show state-of-the-art performance on several datasets.
Our work differs from [9] in several key aspects. Firstly,
while their research addresses encrypted traffic binary classification, our work addresses network intrusion detection of more
than 35 different attacks across two IDS and DDoS datasets.
Secondly, their method uses full packet information, including
payload data, whereas we rely solely on flow header statistics.
Thirdly, their approach incorporates a supervised classifier for
detecting anomalies, whereas we utilize the log probability of
NF to identify anomalous traffic. For a fair comparison we
also employed the Tor dataset used by [9] and we provide a
comparative analysis of the results.
III. P RELIMINARIES
Normalizing flows, which gained prominence through the
work of Rezende and Mohamed [8] in variational inference,
and Dinh et al. [31] for their application in density estimation,

1207

Fig. 1. NF Key Idea Illustration. The left figure is the density function of the
source pZ (z). The right figure is the density function of the target distribution
pX (x).

are a powerful framework in ML for constructing flexible
probability distributions by transforming a simple base distribution through a series of invertible mappings.
While in the past, flow-based generative models have gained
less attention in the research community compared to GANs
and VAEs, they have become popular recently [32], and have
been used in various applications such as speech processing
(e.g., NVIDIA WaveGlow [33]), image generation (e.g., OpenAI Glow [34]), and reinforcement learning [35].
The key idea is to represent a complex target distribution
pX (x) as the result of applying a series of invertible transformations to a simple base distribution pZ (z), such as a standard
normal distribution (see Figure 1).
Consider a random variable x ∈ RD with a complex
distribution pX (x) that we aim to model. NF construct a
mapping f such that x = f (z), where z is a latent variable
with a known and simple distribution pZ (z). The mapping f
is chosen to be invertible, with an inverse f −1 , allowing us to
express z as z = f −1 (x). To compute the density pX (x) under
the transformation f , we use the change of variables formula.
Thus, we get
 −1

∂f (x)
pX (x) = pZ (z) det
.
(1)
∂x
Since z = f −1 (x), we can rewrite this as:

 −1
∂f (z)
.
pX (x) = pZ (f −1 (x)) det
∂z

(2)

However, calculating the Jacobian determinant of f −1 directly
can be challenging. Thus, we use the fact that:
 −1
 

−1
∂f (x)
∂f (z)
det
= det
.
(3)
∂x
∂z
To facilitate computation, especially in a ML context, it is
common to work with the natural logarithm of the densities,
which transforms the products into sums, simplifying the
gradients computation. Thus, the log-density is given by:


∂f (z)
−1
log pX (x) = log pZ (f (x)) − log det
. (4)
∂z
NF are typically constructed by composing multiple simple
invertible transformations, each contributing to the overall
flexibility of the model. Let
f = fK ◦ fK−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1

(5)

1208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

be a composition of K invertible transformations fk . The logdensity transformation through a sequence of flows is then
given by:


K
X
∂fk (zk−1 )
, (6)
log pX (x) = log pZ (z0 ) −
log det
∂zk−1
k=1

−1

where zk = fk (zk−1 ) for k = 1, . . . , K and z0 = f (x).
In practice, the choice of transformations fk is critical for
ensuring that the flow is both expressive and computationally
efficient. Common choices include affine coupling layers,
autoregressive flows, and more complex neural network-based
transformations. Each transformation must be designed to
allow efficient computation of the determinant of the Jacobian
and its inverse.
By leveraging these transformations, NF can model highly
complex data distributions while maintaining tractable density
estimation and sampling capabilities. This makes them particularly well-suited to tasks such as anomaly detection, where
exact likelihood evaluation is crucial.
Shapley values. Based on cooperative game theory, Shapley
values [10] provide a way to fairly distribute the “payout” (in
our context, feature importance) among the features of a model
based on their contribution to the model’s predictions. They
are used to interpret complex ML models by assigning an
importance value to each feature reflecting its contribution to
the prediction.
The Shapley value for a feature is calculated as the average
marginal contribution of that feature across all possible subsets
of features. This ensures a fair distribution of importance,
adhering to properties such as efficiency (the total importance
is distributed among features), symmetry (features that contribute equally receive equal values) and additivity (the sum
of the individual contributions equals the total contribution of
the features) [36].
Formally, the Shapley value for a feature i in a model with
n features is defined as the weighted average of the marginal
contributions of i across all possible subsets of features. Let
S be a subset of features not including i, and v(S) represent
the value function (e.g., model output) for the subset S. The
Shapley value φi for feature i is given by:
X |S|!(n − |S| − 1)!
[v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S)] ,
φi =
n!
S⊆N \{i}

where N is the set of all features, n = |N |, and v(S ∪ {i}) −
v(S) quantifies the contribution of i when added to subset S.
This formulation ensures fairness by adhering to the properties
mentioned above. Due to the exponential complexity of calculating Shapley values for all subsets, efficient approximations
are often employed in practice.
Shapley values can provide both global and local explanations. Global explanations offer an overall importance ranking
of features for the entire dataset, helping to understand which
features are generally most influential. Local explanations, on
the other hand, provide feature importance for individual predictions, offering insights into why a specific prediction was
made by highlighting which features had the most influence
on that particular outcome. We are particularly interested in

local explanations to understand why certain anomalies deviate
from normal traffic patterns. By focusing on local Shapley
values, we can pinpoint the specific features that contribute
most significantly to an anomaly, enhancing our ability to
diagnose and respond to unusual network behaviors.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
We propose a novel approach using bidirectional NF to
learn the distribution of normal network traffic, and then use
its normalizing direction, which is essentially a probability
density function, to distinguish between traffic anomalies and
normal behavior.
A. Data Processing and Formulation
For all input network traffic data, we consider only the
header information at the flow level. The features we use
are aggregated flow statistics such as duration, packet size
statistics, inter-arrival times (IAT), and network and transport
layers characteristics (e.g., flag counts and window size) for
each direction of the flow traffic. The data is then represented
as a two-dimensional matrix X with N rows and D columns,
X = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xN )> , where each row xi ∈ RD is a vector
of D features representing a flow sample. Each sample has a
label yi where yi ∈ {0, . . . , C}, with 0 representing a normal
traffic label, and yi representing an anomaly class (e.g., attack
vector or traffic category depending on the classification task).
Since our model relies only on normal traffic to estimate the
likelihood function, our classifier is trained only with samples
where yi = 0. Thus, class imbalance issues, which exist in all
datasets that we evaluate, do not impact our proposed model’s
operation. We later show how we handle the class imbalance
in the testing phase. We also remove any features related to
ports, IP addresses, or absolute timestamps, as they might be
dependent on the setup on which the dataset was created or
might have artifacts with the flow label.
Feature Normalization. NF require feature normalization.
We use z-score normalization, where the features are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one. It is given by zi = (xi − µ)/σ where µ and σ are the
mean and standard deviation of the features, respectively. This
normalization method is chosen over alternatives such as minmax scaling or max-abs scaling due to its effectiveness in
handling outliers and its common use in statistical modeling.
B. Using NF for Anomaly Detection
Training Phase. During the training phase, the input data
is the matrix X that contains a set of normal network traffic
samples only. The NF framework optimizes and learns the
parameters of the transformation that suit the normal traffic
data distribution we are trying to model, with the objective
of maximizing the log-likelihood of the input X, as given by
Equation (6).
Loss Function. The equivalent minimization problem to
maximizing the log-likelihood can be formulated as minimizing the negative log-likelihood. Therefore, the loss function
for training our NF model is defined as:
L=−

N
X
i=1

log pX (xi ),

(7)

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

Algorithm 1 Anomaly Detection Using NF

1209

been found to be unsuitable and, in certain cases, even
counterproductive.
Our aim is not to provide an exhaustive theoretical or empirical study on the use of Shapley values in feature selection.
Instead, we propose an approach that leverages Shapley values
to guide feature selection while avoiding the computational
burden of an exhaustive search through the entire model space
of 2F subsets.
Feature Selection Approaches. Our technique focuses on
local feature Shapley values, computed using small subsets of
samples, rather than relying on global Shapley values across
the entire model. We explore two distinct feature selection
approaches tailored to different settings:
Few-Shots: This semi-supervised method for feature selection leverages a limited set of labeled anomalies. Using this
set, we compute the Shapley values for each sample prediction
on a trained NF model. The marginal contribution of a feature
is evaluated based on its impact on the detection score (log
probability) for anomaly samples compared to normal samples.
Intuitively, an effective discriminative feature should exhibit a
negative marginal contribution to anomaly detection scores and
a positive marginal contribution to normal detection scores.
We employ the following forward feature selection procedure to evaluate features in the dataset:
1) Initialize a base set of features S.
2) For each feature f ∈ F \ S:
• Train a Normalizing Flow detection model N Ff =
N F (S ∪ {f }) using the training set.
• Compute Cf = contribution(f, N Ff , aset , nset ).
3) Select the top k features based on their Cf scores.

where N is the number of samples in X, and xi is the
feature vector of the i-th sample. This loss function encourages
the model to increase the probability of observing the given
samples under the modeled distribution, effectively fitting the
normal traffic profile, as outlined in the T RAIN F LOW function
of Algorithm 1.
C. Feature Selection
Feature selection techniques can be categorized into two
main groups:
• Wrapper Methods: These evaluate subsets of features by
training and validating models on different combinations,
optimizing performance metrics.
• Filter Methods: These rely on statistical properties, such
as correlation or mutual information, to rank and select
features.
We have developed and examined several novel wrapper
feature selection techniques that integrate Shapley values with
the log-likelihood function, which serves as the evaluation
metric for our NF model. While Shapley values have become
a cornerstone in the field of explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI), their typical application is to attribute feature importance for a given model or to explain individual predictions,
rather than being explicitly used as a tool for feature selection.
Furthermore, as discussed in some studies [36], the use of
Shapley-based attribution methods for feature selection has

Here, aset refers to the limited set of anomalies, and nset
is a similarly sized set of normal samples. We experimented
with various initial sets S and contribution metrics to evaluate
the distribution of Shapley values across aset and nset . To
determine the most appropriate S and contribution metric, we
analyzed the correlation between Shapley-based contribution
scores and the NF model’s detection performance on a validation set, measured using the AUROC metric.
As detailed in Section V, selecting S with one or more
discriminative features hindered comparisons of marginal contributions for tested features. The primary issue is that the
Shapley values of tested features are obscured by interactions
with existing features in S. In such cases, each trained NF
model effectively represents a different “game” with unique
characteristics, in which the Shapley values are not necessarily
comparable. Consequently, Shapley values vary significantly
across normal and anomaly samples and across trained models.
To address this, we tested S containing a single “dummy”
feature with controlled distributions. As demonstrated in our
results, using a random noise feature in S and training NF
models with the noise feature alongside the tested feature
provides a method that clearly distinguishes good and poor
discriminative features.
Transductive: In this approach, we take an untagged sampling of both normal and anomaly samples, without their
labels. By combining the log-likelihood function with Shapley values, we identify features that exhibit high variance
in Shapley value distributions. A discriminative feature will

1210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE I
L IST OF ATTACKS AND N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN CICI OT-2023 DATASETS

typically show both relatively high and low Shapley values,
indicating significant impacts on the likelihood computations
for anomalies compared to normal traffic. For each feature,
we compute the mean absolute Shapley value for all samples
in the set. This overall score, termed the Transductive Shapley
Value, is expected to be relatively high for features that can
effectively separate normal samples from anomalies:

TABLE II
L IST OF ATTACKS AND N UMBER OF F LOW I NSTANCES IN THE
CICIDS2017 DATASET

N

Transductive Shapley Valuei =

1 X
|φi,j |,
N j=1

where φi,j is the Shapley value of the i-th feature for the j-th
sample and N is the total number of samples. Feature selection experiments results for both Few-Shots and Transductive
approaches are provided in Section V.

TABLE III
S UMMARY OF T OR VS N ON -T OR IN ISCXT OR 2016

D. Likelihood-Based Detection
Once the NF model is trained using normal network traffic,
we utilize the corresponding likelihood function to distinguish
between unseen anomalies and normal samples. The key idea
is that normal samples should have high likelihoods under
the learned distribution, while anomalies should have low
likelihoods.
During the detection phase, we calculate the log-likelihood
of each incoming network traffic sample using the trained
model. The decision to classify a sample as normal or anomalous is based on a predefined threshold. The detection function
f is defined as:
(
Normal
log pX (x) > threshold
f (x) =
Anomalous log pX (x) ≤ threshold
The threshold value is an important parameter that determines
the sensitivity of the detection system. It can be selected
based on the desired trade-off between false positive and false
negative rates, often determined through empirical analysis or
validation on a labeled dataset.
V. E VALUATION
A. Datasets
We incorporate two datasets focused on intrusion detection,
along with an additional dataset for encrypted traffic classification.1 This diverse selection allows us to compare our
work with a broader set of state-of-the-art anomaly detection
methods including various generative models.
CICIoT-2023: The CICIoT-2023 [11] dataset is designed
to evaluate intrusion detection systems (IDS) within IoT environments. The dataset provides more than 45 million attack
flows and more than one million normal traffic flows, capturing
a wide variety of attacks categorized into seven classes:
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Denial of Service
(DoS), Reconnaissance, Web-based, Brute Force, Spoofing,
and Mirai. More details about the specific attacks included
in the dataset can be found in Table I. All state-of-the-art
classification methods evaluated on this dataset in the literature
are supervised.
1 Throughout this paper, we refer to anomalous samples that are labeled
as malicious in the dataset as “attacks.” Our anomaly detector is trained
exclusively on traffic deemed “normal” — typically the benign or majority
class — and flags deviations from this distribution. In the CICIDS2017
and CICIoT-2023 datasets, the training set consists of benign traffic, and
anomalous samples correspond to labeled attacks. In the ISCXTor2016 dataset,
the model is trained on Non-Tor traffic, and Tor traffic is treated as anomalous.
While some anomalies may be benign in practice (e.g., rare but legitimate
activity), our terminology reflects dataset-specific labeling conventions.

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

ISCXTor2016: The ISCXTor2016 [12] dataset focuses on
the classification of encrypted traffic, particularly Tor network
traffic. This dataset includes both Tor and non-Tor traffic
(see Table III), capturing various internet activities such as
browsing, streaming, and file transfers. It contains detailed
labels indicating the type of application, allowing for the
evaluation of traffic classification methods in an encrypted
context. The dataset emphasizes the challenge of identifying
and classifying traffic when encryption is used to obfuscate
the data.
Using time-based features such as flow duration and interarrival times, ISCXTor2016 aids in distinguishing between
different types of traffic. This focus on temporal characteristics is crucial for the effective analysis and classification of
encrypted traffic, where traditional packet inspection methods
are not feasible.
CICIDS2017: The CICIDS2017 [13] dataset is a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating intrusion detection systems.
This dataset captures a wide range of attack scenarios, including DoS, DDoS, brute force, XSS, SQL injection, infiltration,
port scans, and botnet attacks as detailed in Table II. Collected
over five days, the dataset includes detailed labels and metadata for each instance, facilitating a thorough evaluation of
IDS techniques.
The dataset contains both raw network traffic and extracted
features, facilitating different levels of analysis. Flow-based
features include metrics such as duration, packet sizes, and
various counts of flags and protocol-specific characteristics.
This extensive set of features, combined with the variety
of attack types, makes CICIDS2017 a valuable resource for
developing and testing advanced intrusion detection systems.
While the CICIDS2017 dataset has been extensively evaluated
and studied, there are limited results evaluating this dataset
using a binary classifier trained solely on normal traffic. To
compare our method with state-of-the-art techniques, we evaluate DoS/DDoS attacks (Wednesday traffic, i.e., DoS Hulk,
DoS Goldeneye, Slowloris, and Slowhttptest) similar to the
evaluation in [18] which utilized a semi-supervised, memoryaugmented auto-encoder approach for anomaly detection on
CICIDS2017, and we compare our results to their approach.

1211

In these considerations, we follow similar balancing and
sampling schemes used for testing by other works that evaluate
their binary classification models using CICIoT-2023 [11],
[37], CICIDS2017 [18], and ISCXTor2016 [9]. This approach
ensures proper baselines for comparing the performance and
accuracy results of our method to these state-of-the-art classification models.
We conducted experiments five times using different random
seeds and reported the mean Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUROC). Additionally, for the
CICIoT-2023 dataset, we compared our method to supervised
methods. Therefore, we also reported the F1 score, Recall,
Precision, and Accuracy, using a threshold that maximizes
the True Positive Rate (TPR) minus the False Positive Rate
(FPR).
For AUROC-based evaluations, no threshold tuning is
required. However, when reporting threshold-dependent metrics such as Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Accuracy, we
select the decision threshold using a separate validation set.
This validation set is completely disjoint from both the
training and test sets and contains 1,000 normal and 1,000
anomaly samples—–amounting to 10% of the test set size.
The final metrics are then computed on the fully heldout test set comprising 10,000 normal and 10,000 anomaly
flows.
We also validated that performance metrics remained consistent when evaluated on the full datasets. However, for
consistency and comparability with prior works, we report
performance on downsampled test sets as described.
Implementation Details. We train our NF model using
PZFlow [38]. The models are trained for 100 epochs with
a batch size of 1024. XGBoost [39] classifiers which we
use as benchmarks (See Section V-D), are trained with
learning rate of 0.1, using 10 trees, each has a 10 depth
limit. To estimate Shapley values for any model, we make
use of the open-source code provided by the authors of
[10].
We release an implementation of our proposed method. The
code is available at: https://github.com/lshafir/NF-anomalydetection

B. Testing Methodology
We consider a binary classification model that classifies
each input flow as Normal or Anomalous. The datasets we
use are highly imbalanced. In CICIoT-2023, there are significantly more attack flow instances than benign flows, while in
ISCXTor2016 and CICIDS2017, there are significantly more
Non-Tor and benign flow instances than Tor and attack flows,
respectively.
While class imbalance does not impact the training phase,
it does affect testing. For each dataset, we combine all normal
traffic together and all malicious traffic together (in the case of
attack datasets; for the Tor dataset, we combine all Tor traffic
applications), then shuffle them. For each dataset, we randomly
sampled 20,000 normal flows and 10,000 anomalous flows. We
then split the normal flows into training (10,000 samples) and
testing (10,000 samples) sets.

C. Feature Selection Experiments Results
Here we present experimental results for the two Shapley
based feature selection approaches introduced in Section IV-C.
Few Shots (Semi-Supervised) Approach. Given a dataset
and an input set of features, the Few Shots feature selection
technique leverages a limited number of anomaly samples and
Shapley value distributions to identify features with strong
discriminative power.
We experimented with the wrapper forward feature selection
procedure using different combinations of base features S and
various Shapley distribution contribution metrics.
To evaluate this procedure, we analyzed the correlation
between Shapley value contributions on anomaly and normal
samples with the detection performance of the trained models.
For each experiment, we followed these steps:

1212

1) Select a base set of features S.
2) For each feature not in S, train a NF model N Ff using
S ∪ {f }.
3) Compute Shapley value distributions on small sample
sets of k anomaly samples and k normal samples.
4) Evaluate the detection performance of N Ff on the full
testing set to obtain an AUROC score.
5) Compare the observed Shapley value distributions with
the detection AUROC scores of the models.
We set k = 20 in the following experiments. This
choice reflects the few-shot learning approach, which typically
involves learning or making inferences from a very limited
number of examples (commonly 1 to 100 samples per class).
The goal is to evaluate whether a model or interpretability method can extract meaningful information from scarce
labeled data. This value is supported by an ablation study we
conducted, evaluating the impact of different few-shot sample
sizes, as described later in §V-E.3.
Note that the NF models are trained solely on normal
samples and use a probability (likelihood) score during detection. A feature’s Shapley value for an individual prediction
represents the impact of that feature on the output detection
score. Thus, an effective discriminative feature should exhibit
a negative marginal contribution to anomaly sample detections
and a positive marginal contribution to normal sample detection scores.
While we explored various initial subsets of features, our
results revealed that including both strong and weak discriminative features in the base set S caused varying interactions
with tested features, obscuring their individual contributions.
We experimented with several absolute and relative metrics for
evaluating Shapley distributions but observed that interactions
among features in S significantly affected the interpretability
of results.
As an example, Figure 3 shows results from an experiment
where we selected a single feature, Packet Length Variance,
as the base set S. We tested over 50 other features from the
CICIDS2017 dataset, each trained alongside the base feature.
The box plot illustrates the 10 features with the highest
AUROC scores (rightmost) and the 10 features with the lowest
AUROC scores (leftmost). For each feature, the AUROC score
of the corresponding model is presented above the feature
name. The Shapley value distributions for the base feature and
the tested feature are displayed in the top and bottom areas of
the plot, respectively.
From the results, we observed two key findings: (i) the
Shapley value distribution of the base feature varied significantly across trained models, even when evaluated on the same
set of anomaly (attack) samples, and (ii) no clear correlation
was observed between the Shapley value distributions of the
tested features and the model detection performance.
Given these results, we sought a “neutral” feature to serve
as a baseline for evaluating the Shapley value contributions
of other features. We experimented with a single “dummy”
feature with controlled distributions. While a random feature
with a normal distribution exhibited similar behavior to the
earlier experiments, using a random noise feature produced

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE IV
S PEARMAN C ORRELATION B ETWEEN THE AUROC S CORE AND THE
90 TH P ERCENTILE OF SHAP VALUE D ISTRIBUTIONS ACROSS T ESTED
F EATURES IN CICIDS2017. T HE R ESULTS C OMPARE T WO
BASE F EATURE C ONFIGURATIONS : A S YNTHETIC R ANDOM
N OISE F EATURE V ERSUS A D ISCRIMINATIVE F EATURE
(P acket Length V ariance) U SED AS THE BASE S ET S

notably different results. For this experiment, we selected S
as a single random noise feature sampled uniformly between
−1 and 1, adding it to the training/testing sets and the
limited sets of 20 anomaly (attack) and normal (benign)
samples.
Figures 2 and 4 present the results of this experiment using
the 20 anomaly and 20 normal samples, respectively. Similar
to the earlier setup, we tested over 50 features and provide
results for the 10 features with the highest AUROC detection
scores (rightmost) and the 10 features with the lowest AUROC
detection scores (leftmost). As shown in Figure 2, features
with relatively high AUROC results exhibit significantly negative Shapley value distributions (on the 20 anomaly samples),
with negative median values. In contrast, features associated
with relatively low AUROC results either displayed positive
Shapley value distributions for anomaly samples (indicating
insufficient discrimination) or exhibited no significant contribution compared to the random noise feature. This suggests
that these features have minimal negative or positive impact on
detection.
Importantly, the random noise feature maintained an
insignificant Shapley value distribution (centered around zero
with low standard deviation), enabling meaningful comparisons between the Shapley value distributions of the tested
features.
To quantify this observation, we computed the Spearman
correlation between the AUROC score of models trained
with each feature and the 90th percentile of its SHAP value
distribution, across sets of k = 20 samples. We performed
this analysis on both normal and anomaly samples from the
CICIDS2017 dataset.
Table IV summarizes the correlation results for using the
random noise as the base feature versus using a discriminative
feature such as Packet Length Variance as the base feature.
As shown, there is a significant positive correlation between
SHAP distributions and classifier performance when using the
random noise baseline.
We observed similar results when performing the same
experiment on the ISCXTor2016 dataset, with the random
noise feature as the base feature (see Figure 5).

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

1213

Fig. 2. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the CICIDS2017
dataset, each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot demonstrates a clear correlation between features with predominantly negative Shapley value
distributions and detection performance on the full testing set. The rightmost ten features have the highest AUROC scores, while the leftmost ten features
have the lowest AUROC scores. In total, over 50 different features were evaluated.

Fig. 3. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the CICIDS2017
dataset, each trained alongside the ‘Packet Length Variance’ feature. The plot illustrates how the marginal Shapley values of ‘Packet Length Variance’ interact
differently with the tested features across various trained models.

Fig. 4. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values computed on 20 benign samples for various features from the CICIDS2017 dataset,
each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot illustrates how well each feature aligns with and represents the benign traffic characteristics in the
trained models.

These results support the use of summary statistics of
SHAP value distributions—computed on a small number of

anomaly and normal samples—as a practical criterion for
ranking features. For example, we found that the 90th quantile

1214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. The box plot visualizes the distribution of marginal Shapley values
computed on 20 anomaly samples for various features from the ISCXTor2016
dataset, each trained alongside a random noise feature. The plot demonstrates a
clear correlation between features with predominantly negative Shapley value
distributions and AUROC score on the full testing set.

of SHAP values for anomaly and benign samples correlates
strongly with the AUROC scores of corresponding models.
This enables effective identification of discriminative features
for anomaly detection, and facilitates the exclusion of features
that exhibit minimal or misleading contributions to the detection task.
Transductive Approach. In the second approach, we have
a mixed set of random samples without their labels. Since
we do not know their labels, we cannot compare Shapley
values of anomalies and normal samples across this set. For
each feature, we compute the mean absolute Shapley value
for all samples in the set. This overall score, termed the
Transductive Shapley Value, is expected to be relatively high
for features that can effectively separate normal samples from
anomalies:
N

Transductive Shapley Valuei =

1 X
|φi,j |
N j=1

where:
• φi,j is the Shapley value of the i-th feature for the j-th
sample.
• N is the total number of samples.
Here, we demonstrate the performance of our feature
selection approach on the ISCXTor2016 dataset. We selected
a set of five features: ‘Bwd IAT Std’, ‘Active Max’,
‘Flow Packets/s’, ‘Idle Min’, ‘Flow IAT Max’ which are
not highly correlated, and tested the AUROC results of
training a normalizing flow model using combinations of
two features out of this set. The results are shown in
Figure 6.
Additionally, we trained a NF model using these five features, and calculated both Transductive Shapley scores, with a
random sampling of 100 Tor samples and 100 non-Tor samples
out of the testing sets.
The Transductive Shapley Scores are presented in Table V.
The feature ‘Bwd IAT Std’ stands out with the highest score
of 1.44, followed by ‘Flow IAT Max’ with a score of 1.04.
This approach confirms the importance of these features in

Fig. 6. AUROC value of the ROC curve of each NF model that was trained
on a pair of features using the ISCXTor2016. The ROC curve of the ‘Bwd
IAT Std’ and ‘Active Max’ features achieves the best AUROC score of 0.85.
TABLE V
O UR S HAPLEY S CORES FOR D IFFERENT F EATURES

capturing the underlying characteristics of the data, even
without labeled anomalies.
Figure 6 illustrates the ROC curves for various pairs of
features. The AUROC values for each pair are annotated
in the legend. Notably, the pair (‘Bwd IAT Std’, ‘Active
Max’) achieves the highest AUROC score of 0.85. This
aligns with our Shapley score analysis, further validating
the effectiveness of these features in distinguishing normal traffic from Tor traffic. Other pairs, such as (‘Flow
Packets/s’, ‘Bwd IAT Std’) and (‘Idle Min’, ‘Bwd IAT
Std’), also show strong performance with AUROC scores of
0.80.
Our analysis using the Transductive approach suggests that
some features (e.g., ‘Bwd IAT Std’ and ‘Active Max’) have the
potential to contribute significantly to effective anomaly detection in the ISCXTor2016 dataset. The ROC curves strengthen
these findings, demonstrating high AUROC scores for pairs of
features that include ‘Bwd IAT Std’.
D. Performance Evaluation Results
ISCXTor2016: In Table VI, we compare the AUROC
of our method with various state-of-the-art methods on the
ISCXTor2016 dataset. We compare our results against stateof-the-art anomaly detection methods, including distribution
learning-based methods [43], [44], [45], reconstruction-based
methods [40], [44], knowledge distillation-based methods [41],

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

1215

Fig. 7. Our NF detection method results in histograms showing the distribution of normal and anomaly samples in the testing sets of the three datasets we
evaluated.

TABLE VI

TABLE VII

AUROC C OMPARISON AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A NOMALY D ETEC TION M ETHODS [9] ON THE ISCX T OR AND N ON -T OR DATASETS

AUROC P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ETHOD AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT
M ETHODS ON CICIDS2017 DATASET

[47], normalization flow-based methods [27], [28], and memory matching-based methods [42] as reported by Dang et
al. [9]. In addition, we compare our results with Kitsune
[48] by replicating their method using the publicly available
implementation provided by the authors.
As shown in Table VI, our method achieves the highest
AUROC of 0.8731, significantly outperforming the state-ofthe-art methods. Specifically, our method outperforms the
recent work by Dang et al. [9], which also utilizes NF for
the generation of synthetic anomalies. Note that both flowbased methods of [9] and our method exceed the highest
result among the other state-of-the-art methods by 8.12% and
11.6%, respectively. A visual representation of the anomaly
score distribution of our method on ISCXTor2016 appears
in Figure 7b. Here, the non-Tor and Tor classes are less
separated than the normal and attack traffic on CICIoT-2023
(see Figure 7a). However, these results are still better than
those achieved by other methods.
Our method’s best results are even higher, with an AUROC
of 0.932, when using only two features, one of which is the
‘Protocol Type’ field of the flow. However, since we found this
feature as highly correlated with the Tor class, we focused on
experiments excluding the ‘Protocol Type’ feature to ensure
unbiased evaluation. The best reported results are achieved by

an ensemble of two NF models. The first model is trained
using the ‘Flow IAT Std’ and ‘Flow Bytes/s’ features, while
the second model is trained using the ‘Flow Packets/s’ and
‘Bwd IAT Max’ features. When using an ensemble of more
than one NF-based classifier, a flow is classified as an anomaly
only if all classifiers in the ensemble detect it as an anomaly.
To calculate the joint ROC and the corresponding AUROC,
we normalize the detection thresholds and select the minimum
score for each sample. It is noteworthy that the best AUROC
result for a single NF classifier is 0.851, achieved using only
the ‘Bwd IAT Std’ and ‘Active Mean’ features.
CICIDS2017: To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach
on the CICIDS2017 dataset, we compare our results against
several competitive methods, including OCSVM (one-class
SVM), AE (autoencoder), MemAE [18] (memory-augmented
autoencoder), SparseMemAE [18], and Kitsune [48] (ensemble of AEs). It is important to note that OCSVM, AE
and Kitsune are trained using only normal samples, while
MemAE and SparseMemAE utilize a limited number of
attack samples, employing a semi-supervised approach. The
comparison results are presented in Table VII. As shown,
the OCSVM model exhibits low AUROC performance against
DDoS attacks, while the AE-based models demonstrate overall
high performance. Our proposed method outperforms the AEbased methods, achieving an AUROC of 0.93 for DDoS attack
detection on the CICIDS2017 dataset.
Our best results were obtained using a NF model trained
on a set of five features: ‘Bwd Packet Length Mean’, ‘Fwd
Packets/s’, ‘ACK Flag Count’, ‘Total Length of Bwd Packets’,

1216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE VIII

TABLE IX

P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ETHOD AGAINST S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETH ODS ON CICI OT-2023 DATASET. O UR M ETHOD I S U NSUPERVISED ,
T RAINED U SING N ORMAL T RAFFIC O NLY, W HILE THE C OMPARED
M ETHODS A RE S UPERVISED M ETHODS

D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE W HEN T RAINING AND T ESTING ON D IFFER ENT C OMBINATIONS OF CICIDS2017 (B ENIGN AND C YBERATTACKS
T RAFFIC DATASET ) AND CICDD O S2019 (B ENIGN AND DD O S
ATTACKS ) DATASETS

and ‘Flow Duration’. These features encompass TCP flag
counts, packet length distribution in the downstream direction,
and attack packets’ rate in the upstream direction.
CICIoT-2023: In Table VIII, we present the performance
of our method compared to various state-of-the-art methods
on the CICIoT-2023 dataset. To the best of our knowledge,
our method is the first to evaluate the CICIoT-2023 dataset
using only normal traffic data for training. Thus, all compared
baseline methods are supervised.
Ghorbani et al. [11] applied several ML methods to evaluate the CICIoT-2023 dataset. Their results indicated that
supervised methods like Adaboost, Random Forest (RF), and
Deep Neural Network (DNN) achieved high performance,
with accuracy metrics exceeding 98%. Additionally, Khan et
al. [37] reported high detection performance using Logistic
Regression (LR). However, it is important to note that our NF
model, despite being unsupervised, achieves comparable or
higher results than these supervised methods. Furthermore, we
implemented an XGBoost [39] classifier and trained it on two
random sets of 10,000 benign samples (the same training set as
our method) and 10,000 attack samples (supervised method).
We then evaluated its performance using the same testing sets
used in our experiments.
In addition to the quantitative results, we also provide a
visual representation of our method’s performance. As shown
in Figure 7a, the histogram of the detection results illustrates
the excellent capability of our NF model in distinguishing
between normal and anomaly traffic on the CICIoT-2023
dataset.
Our NF model stands out as a highly effective unsupervised
anomaly detection method. The results demonstrate that it
can achieve or exceed the performance of leading supervised
methods, making it a valuable tool for intrusion detection in
IoT environments.
E. Ablation Study
1) Generalizing Across Datasets: In realistic network
deployments, anomaly detection models are likely to encounter
benign traffic patterns that were not present during training. To
assess the robustness of our approach in such scenarios, we
evaluate its ability to distinguish malicious anomalies from
previously unseen or rare benign traffic.

While the CICIoT-2023 and CICIDS2017 datasets both
include benign samples, their underlying feature sets differ
significantly. Therefore, we conduct cross-dataset generalization experiments using two datasets with comparable feature
sets: CICIDS2017 — one of the three datasets evaluated in
this work — and CICDDoS2019, an additional dataset with
a comparable feature set. Specifically, we train the model on
the benign traffic of one dataset and evaluate it on the benign
traffic of the other, ensuring that the testing benign samples
are entirely unseen during training.
Table IX presents the results across different combinations of training and testing datasets. As shown, performance
slightly degrades when generalizing across datasets compared
to within-dataset evaluation. However, the detection results
remain consistently high, demonstrating that our method is
robust in distinguishing between attacks and previously unseen
benign traffic.
2) Using Additional XAI Methods: To evaluate the generality of our proposed XAI-based feature selection framework,
we investigate whether the few-shot approach—–originally
formulated with SHAPLEY-based explainer—–can be applied
with other explanation methods.
In this experiment, we replace Shapley values
with LIME [49] (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations)—another widely used XAI method—and
repeat the few-shot feature selection procedure. Specifically,
we compute the importance scores of features for each
anomaly sample and analyze their relationship with classifier
performance. As in our original SHAPLEY-based method,
each feature is tested by training NF model on it alongside
a neutral baseline feature (random noise), and the 90th
percentile of its marginal importance values over a small set
of 20 attack or normal samples is recorded. We then measure
the correlation between these values and the AUROC of the
classifier trained using each feature.
As shown in Table X, both SHAP and LIME yield statistically significant positive correlations between importance
values and detection performance when the baseline is a
random noise feature. Conversely, when using a discriminative
feature such as Packet Length Variance as the baseline, the
correlations become insignificant, indicating the impact of
feature interactions on XAI-based comparisons. These results
are consistent with the SHAPLEY analysis in §V-C.
In addition, Figure 8 visually demonstrates that LIME yields
similar explanation patterns to SHAP: features associated with
high AUROC scores tend to have negative importance values

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

1217

TABLE X
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN F EW-S HOTS F EATURE S ELECTION A PPROACH
U SING THE SHAP AND LIME XAI I MPORTANCE ATTRIBUTION
M ETHODS . W E C ALCULATE THE S PEARMAN C ORRELATION
B ETWEEN THE 90 TH Q UANTILE D ISTRIBUTIONS OF M ARGINAL
SHAP/LIME VALUES C OMPUTED ON 20 ATTACK S AMPLES
FOR E ACH F EATURE AND THE AUROC S CORE OF THE
C LASSIFIER U SING T HAT F EATURE

Fig. 9. Stability of few-shots feature selection results across varying sample
sizes.

Table XI and Figure 9 present the correlation results across
the different sample sizes. As shown, all evaluated values
of k, including the smallest sizes (e.g., k = 10), yield
consistently high and statistically significant correlations when
the base feature is a random noise feature. Conversely, when
using a strong discriminative feature such as Packet Length
Variance as the baseline, the correlations become negligible
or insignificant, regardless of sample size.
These findings confirm that our few-shots feature selection
framework remains effective even when applied to small sets
of labeled examples.
VI. E XPLAINABILITY

Fig. 8. The box plot shows the distribution of marginal LIME values for 20
anomaly samples from CICIDS2017, each trained alongside a random noise
feature. As in Fig. 2 (SHAP-based), features with predominantly negative
LIME value distributions correlate with high AUROC scores.

across the anomaly samples, while weak features exhibit
dispersed or positive distributions. This behavior supports our
hypothesis that discriminative features produce more consistent and interpretable attribution patterns when evaluated in
isolation with a controlled baseline.
3) Ablating Few-Shots Sample Size: The Few-Shots feature
selection technique leverages a limited number of anomaly
samples and their corresponding SHAPLEY value distributions to identify features with strong discriminative power. In
this subsection, we ablate the size of the anomaly and normal
sample sets used in this procedure to evaluate the impact of
different few-shot sample sizes on the stability and reliability
of the feature selection results.
To this end, we repeat the procedure described in §V-C
using varying sample sizes k ∈ {10, 20, 50, 100, 200} for both
anomaly and normal samples, drawn from the CICIDS2017
dataset. For each value of k, we compute the Spearman and
Pearson correlations (along with their associated p-values)
between the AUROC score of each feature and the 90th
percentile of the marginal XAI values computed using SHAP.
In addition, we replicate the same experiment using the LIME
method as described in §V-E.2.

In this work, we are interested not only in enhancing
detection performance, but also in understanding what makes
a low likelihood sample an anomaly and how it deviates from
normal behavior. Thus, we combine the NF classifier with
Shapley values, to provide statistically grounded explanations
for detected anomalies, potentially improving the root-cause
analysis of anomalous traffic.
While Shapley values can be used with a variety of methods,
such as Random Forests, Gradient Boosting Machines, and
Neural Networks, treating them as models with unknown
internal logic, it attributes to each feature the change in the
expected model prediction when conditioning on that feature.
This means that Shapley values essentially explain the model
prediction but not necessarily why a sample deviates from a
set of samples statistically. Furthermore, the Shapley values
are influenced by the internal mechanisms and nature of the
model, meaning that the explanations may reflect the model’s
complexity rather than the true cause of the deviation.
Here, we leverage the statistical nature of the NF likelihood
predictions with Shapley values. This approach provides a statistical importance measure to the Shapley values, producing
explanations that elucidate why a particular traffic sample is
anomalous and how it deviates from normal patterns.
Simulation. We start with a comparison of using Shapley values with NF and two other methods: one supervised
(XGBoost) and another unsupervised (OCSVM). We create a
simple simulation of normal and anomaly samples with two
features: F1 and F2 .
Figure 10 illustrates a set of normal samples (blue points)
and anomaly samples (red points). For a comparison, we

1218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE XI
C ORRELATION VALUES AND P -VALUES B ETWEEN THE 90 TH P ERCENTILE OF THE I MPORTANCE VALUE D ISTRIBUTIONS (F ROM SHAP AND LIME)
AND AUROC C LASSIFICATION S CORE , FOR T WO N EUTRAL F EATURES (R ANDOM N OISE AND PACKET L ENGTH VARIANCE ) ACROSS VARYING
S AMPLE S IZES

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF S HAPLEY VALUES ACROSS T HREE D IFFERENT M ETH ODS : XGB OOST, OCSVM, AND NF. T HE S HAPLEY VALUES I NDICATE
THE C ONTRIBUTION OF E ACH F EATURE TO THE P REDICTION OF
T HREE S AMPLES : P1 , P2 , AND P3 (S EE F IGURE 10), E ACH
W ITH T WO F EATURES , F1 AND F2 . P OSITIVE S HAPLEY
VALUES I NDICATE T HAT THE F EATURE C ONTRIBUTES
P OSITIVELY TO THE P REDICTION (N ORMAL ), W HILE
N EGATIVE VALUES I NDICATE A N EGATIVE C ON TRIBUTION (A NOMALY )

Fig. 10. A simulation of normal and anomaly samples with two features.

train two unsupervised classifiers (NF and OCSVM) on the
blue samples only, and an additional XGBoost classifier is
trained on both blue and red samples (supervised). Then,
we select three points: P1 , P2 , and P3 and compute their
corresponding Shapley values using the three methods. Note
that P1 , P2 deviate from the majority of normal samples more
pronouncedly in F2 than in F1 . Additionally, P1 has an F1
value lower than the minimum F1 value of all normal samples.
P3 deviates mostly in F1 .
For a binary classifier, Shapley values represent the contribution of each feature to the model’s output. The sign of
the Shapley value indicates whether the feature’s presence
increases or decreases the likelihood of the sample being
classified as an anomaly.
Table XII presents the Shapley values for points P1 , P2 , and
P3 as computed by the three different models: NF, OCSVM,
and XGBoost. It is evident from the table that while OCSVM
was trained on the same data as NF, its corresponding Shapley
values do not provide any useful explanation for P1 and P2 .
Specifically, both features F1 and F2 have the same Shapley
value of −0.89 for these points. While OCSVM is designed
to find a boundary that encloses the majority of the data
points of the learned class, a few points within the training
data might affect the placement of the boundary, which in

this particular example, also affects the Shapley values of
anomalous samples.
On the other hand, the Shapley values computed by the
XGBoost model do not attribute any contribution to F2 for
any of the points, failing to recognize the significance of F2 in
differentiating between normal and anomalous samples (indicating that XGBoost operates solely on F1 ). This highlights
the limitations of using XGBoost for this particular anomaly
detection task. NF, however, offers a more nuanced explanation
by assigning different Shapley values to F1 and F2 for each
point, which reflects the true nature of their deviations.
Using Real-World Attack Samples. Next, we analyze
Shapley values with NF on attack samples from CICIoT-2023.
Two classifiers were trained using five features: ‘HTTPS’,
‘Protocol Type’, ‘Magnitude’, ‘Variance’, and ‘fin count’. Our
NF model was trained on 10,000 normal samples, while the
XGBoost baseline used the same 10,000 normal samples plus
10,000 attack samples (supervised).
To obtain test anomalies with expected explanations serving
as ground truth, we constructed subsets of attack samples
termed X-Feature Deviant Attack Samples. In each subset,
four features follow the distribution of normal samples, while
one feature (‘X’) takes values unlikely under the normal
distribution. To quantify this deviation, we compute the mean
likelihood of each feature using the normal training set (10,000

SHAFIR et al.: EXPLAINABLE ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK TRAFFIC USING NORMALIZING FLOWS

Fig. 11. CICIoT-2023 ‘fin count’ feature deviant attack samples illustration.
We plot the normalized distributions of five features over 10,000 normal
samples. The points represent the feature values of the attack samples.

TABLE XIII
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN S HAPLEY VALUES U SING O UR NF M ODEL V S .
XGB OOST ON R EAL -W ORLD CICI OT-2023 ATTACK S AMPLES . A S
A G ROUND -T RUTH W E U SE S UBSETS OF ATTACK S AMPLES , IN
W HICH O NLY O NE F EATURE E XHIBITS VALUES T HAT A RE
U NLIKELY TO B E P RESENT IN THE N ORMAL D ISTRIBUTION .
N OTE T HAT L OW NF S HAPLEY VALUES C ORRELATE
W ITH THE D EVIANT F EATURES

samples). Likelihoods are estimated with Gaussian Kernel
Density Estimation (Gaussian KDE), a non-parametric method
for probability density estimation.
As an example, Figure 11 shows the distribution of each
feature in the normal training set (10,000 samples). For each
attack sample in the ‘fin count’ deviant subset, the normalized
feature value is placed on the corresponding distribution curve.
The ‘fin count’ values exhibit very low likelihood, whereas the
other four features remain relatively likely.
We then examine the Shapley values obtained from these
two classifiers. For each such ground-truth sample, we expect
that the Shapley value will attribute a relatively high value
to the feature that deviates from the normal distribution,
with a negative sign indicating that this feature decreases the
likelihood of the sample being detected as normal. Table XIII
shows the results on two subsets of feature deviant attacks (i.e.,
‘Variance’ with 91 samples and ‘fin count’ with 10 samples),
together with the computed likelihood which is used as a
ground-truth measure.
As shown in Table XIII, the XGBoost Shapley values
always attribute the ‘Magnitude’ feature as the most domi-

1219

nant feature for all ground-truth samples. In the ‘fin count’
ground-truth subset, the XGBoost mean Shapley value even
has a positive sign, indicating that this feature increases the
likelihood of being detected as normal despite the very low
likelihood of this feature across the normal samples (0.002).
On the other hand, the NF Shapley values clearly highlight
the “deviant” feature as the one causing the test sample
to be detected as an anomaly, underscoring the significant
improvement in explainability when using our method.
Our analysis demonstrates the potential of combining NF
with Shapley values to enhance network traffic anomaly
detection explainability. While our findings include anecdotal evidence and specific case studies, the promising results
indicate a significant opportunity for future work to further
validate and expand upon this approach in broader contexts.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we demonstrated the efficacy of NF for
anomaly detection in network traffic. By leveraging the density estimation capabilities of NF, our approach effectively
identifies low-likelihood samples, marking them as potential
anomalies. This method avoids the need for labeled anomaly
data during training, which is a significant advantage in realworld scenarios where such data is often unavailable.
Our experiments on the CICIoT-2023, ISCXTor2016, and
CICIDS2017 datasets show that our model achieves high
accuracy, outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods for
unsupervised anomaly detection, and, when combined with
Shapley values, supports feature selection and provides valuable explanations for detected anomalies. While our method
effectively models the distribution of normal traffic within
each dataset, we note that performance slightly degrades when
training on one dataset and evaluating on another, reflecting
distribution shifts between environments. Addressing such
generalization challenges is an important direction for future
work, for example through self-supervised pretraining techniques. Overall, our results indicate that NF offer a powerful
and interpretable solution for anomaly detection in network
traffic.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

E. Bout, V. Loscri, and A. Gallais, “How machine learning changes
the nature of cyberattacks on IoT networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 248–279, 1st Quart., 2021.
A. Sperotto, G. Schaffrath, R. Sadre, C. Morariu, A. Pras, and B. Stiller,
“An overview of IP flow-based intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 343–356, 3rd Quart., 2010.
Z. Ahmad, A. Shahid Khan, C. Wai Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
“Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, p. 4150, Jan. 2021.
S. Gopalakrishnan, N. Tuptuk, and S. Hailes, “Machine learningbased intrusion detection systems: Deployment guidelines for industry,”
PETRAS National Centre of Excellence for IoT Systems Cybersecurity, London, U.K., Tech. Rep., 2023, doi: 10.14324/000.rp.10190465.
[Online]. Available: https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10190465/
I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. NIPS, 2014,
pp. 2672–2680.
A. S. Dina, A. B. Siddique, and D. Manivannan, “Effect of balancing
data using synthetic data on the performance of machine learning
classifiers for intrusion detection in computer networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 96731–96747, 2022.

1220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

[7]

[28] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[29] M. L. D. Dias, C. L. C. Mattos, T. L. C. da Silva, J. A. F. de Macêdo, and
W. C. P. Silva, “Anomaly detection in trajectory data with normalizing
flows,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2020,
pp. 1–8.
[30] A. Ryzhikov, M. Borisyak, A. Ustyuzhanin, and D. Derkach,
“Normalizing flows for deep anomaly detection,” 2019,
arXiv:1912.09323.
[31] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using
real NVP,” 2016, arXiv:1605.08803.
[32] S. Zhai et al., “Normalizing flows are capable generative models,” 2024,
arXiv:2412.06329.
[33] R. Prenger, R. Valle, and B. Catanzaro, “Waveglow: A flowbased generative network for speech synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019,
pp. 3617–3621.
[34] OpenAI. (Jul. 2018). Glow: Better Reversible Generative Models.
[Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/glow
[35] P. N. Ward, A. Smofsky, and A. J. Bose, “Improving exploration in softactor-critic with normalizing flows policies,” 2019, arXiv:1906.02771.
[36] D. Fryer, I. Strumke, and H. Nguyen, “Shapley values for feature
selection: The good, the bad, and the axioms,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 144352–144360, 2021.
[37] M. M. Khan and M. Alkhathami, “Anomaly detection in IoT-based
healthcare: Machine learning for enhanced security,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14,
no. 1, p. 5872, Mar. 2024.
[38] J. F. Crenshaw, Z. Yan, and V. Doster, “jfcrenshaw/pzflow:
V3.1.2 (v3.1.2),” Zenodo, CERN, Tech. Rep., 2024, doi: 10.5281/
zenodo.10636848.
[39] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794.
[40] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon,
“GANomaly: Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial
training,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2018,
pp. 622–637.
[41] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
[42] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[43] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM:
A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
pp. 475–489.
[44] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Draem—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021,
pp. 8330–8339.
[45] N. A. Ahuja, I. Ndiour, T. Kalyanpur, and O. Tickoo, “Probabilistic modeling of deep features for out-of-distribution and adversarial detection,”
2019, arXiv:1909.11786.
[46] S. Akcay, D. Ameln, A. Vaidya, B. Lakshmanan, N. Ahuja, and U. Genc,
“Anomalib: A deep learning library for anomaly detection,” 2022,
arXiv:2202.08341.
[47] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[48] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.09089.
[49] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust you?’:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD), 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.

D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[8] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing
flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1530–1538.
[9] Z. Dang, Y. Zheng, X. Lin, C. Peng, Q. Chen, and X. Gao, “Semisupervised learning for anomaly traffic detection via bidirectional
normalizing flows,” 2024, arXiv:2403.10550.
[10] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2017, pp. 4765–4774.
[11] E. C. P. Neto, S. Dadkhah, R. Ferreira, A. Zohourian, R. Lu, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark
for large-scale attacks in IoT environment,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13,
p. 5941, Jun. 2023.
[12] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[13] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[14] L. Feinstein, D. Schnackenberg, R. Balupari, and D. Kindred, “Statistical
approaches to DDoS attack detection and response,” in Proc. DARPA
Inf. Survivability Conf. Expo., Apr. 2003, pp. 303–314.
[15] P. D. Bojović, I. Bašičević, S. Ocovaj, and M. Popović, “A practical
approach to detection of distributed denial-of-service attacks using a
hybrid detection method,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 73, pp. 84–96, Jan.
2019.
[16] S. Naseer et al., “Enhanced network anomaly detection based on deep
neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 48231–48246, 2018.
[17] S. Zavrak and M. Iskefiyeli, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection from
network flow features using variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 108346–108358, 2020.
[18] B. Min, J. Yoo, S. Kim, D. Shin, and D. Shin, “Network anomaly
detection using memory-augmented deep autoencoder,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 104695–104706, 2021.
[19] S. Azmin and A. M. A. A. Islam, “Network intrusion detection system
based on conditional variational Laplace autoencoder,” in Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. Netw. Syst. Security, 2020, pp. 82–88.
[20] Y. Yin, Z. Lin, M. Jin, G. Fanti, and V. Sekar, “Practical GAN-based
synthetic IP header trace generation using NetShare,” in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conf., Aug. 2022, pp. 458–472.
[21] M. Abdelaty, S. Scott-Hayward, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa,
“GADoT: GAN-based adversarial training for robust DDoS attack
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS), Oct. 2021,
pp. 119–127.
[22] B.-E. Zolbayar et al., “Generating practical adversarial network traffic
flows using NIDSGAN,” 2022, arXiv:2203.06694.
[23] J. Wang, J. Pan, I. AlQerm, and Y. Liu, “Def-IDS: An ensemble
defense mechanism against adversarial attacks for deep learning-based
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
Netw. (ICCCN), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–9.
[24] Y. Peng, G. Fu, Y. Luo, J. Hu, B. Li, and Q. Yan, “Detecting adversarial
examples for network intrusion detection system with GAN,” in Proc.
IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Service Sci. (ICSESS), Oct. 2020,
pp. 6–10.
[25] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online
isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023.
[26] L. Li, Y. Lu, G. Yang, and X. Yan, “End-to-end network intrusion detection based on contrastive learning,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 7, p. 2122,
Mar. 2024.
[27] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.