210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

Explainable Graph Ensemble Learning for
Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
in Cloud Microservice Architectures
Kevin O’Shea , Sen Yan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ming Yu, Xianjuan Chen, Stefano Mauceri ,
Bhaskar Dhariyal , Lei Xu, Noel O’Connor , Member, IEEE, and Mingming Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The increasing adoption of cloud microservice architectures demands robust multivariate time series anomaly detection algorithms to ensure a reliable computing infrastructure.
Although countless of these algorithms are readily available in the
literature, significant concerns remain about their interpretability,
particularly in cases where it is required to consider both the
temporal and topological aspects of the explanation. Our proposed
framework leverages attention-based spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks and ensemble learning to capture complex
spatial-temporal dependencies across time series. Our approach
achieves an averaged event-wise F1 score of 0.94 on two proprietary
datasets. After the detection phase, an analysis of the network
attention weights, at carefully selected layers, provides useful explanations of the anomalous events to cloud operators.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, microservice architecture,
deep learning, graph neural networks, explainability.

NOMENCLATURE
List of Abbreviations & Acronyms
AE
Autoencoder.
ALSTM Attention-Based Long Short-Term Memory.
ASTGCN Attention-Based Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network.
BiLSTM Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory.
DAM
Dynamic Attention Model.
DL
Deep Learning.
GAT
Graph Attention Network.
GCN
Graph Convolutional Network.
Received 18 November 2024; revised 28 July 2025; accepted 14 November
2025. Date of publication 19 November 2025; date of current version 10 March
2026. This work was supported by the Huawei Ireland Research Centre for
the multivariate time series anomaly detection project and Taighde Éireann —
Research Ireland under Grant SFI/12/RC/2289_P2, in part by the European
Regional Development Fund in collaboration with the Research Ireland Insight
Centre for Data Analytics at Dublin City University. Recommended for acceptance by K. Djemame. (Kevin O’Shea, Sen Yan, and Ming Yu contributed equally
to this work.) (Corresponding author: Mingming Liu.)
Kevin O’Shea, Ming Yu, and Xianjuan Chen are with the Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University, Dublin
9, Ireland (e-mail: kevin.oshea@dcu.ie; ming.yu@insight-centre.org; xianjuan.chen@insight-centre.org).
Sen Yan, Noel O’Connor, and Mingming Liu are with the School of Electronic
Engineering and Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City
University, Dublin 9, Ireland (e-mail: sen.yan@dcu.ie; noel.oconnor@dcu.ie;
mingming.liu@dcu.ie).
Stefano Mauceri, Bhaskar Dhariyal, and Lei Xu are with Huawei Ireland
Research Centre, Dublin 2, Ireland (e-mail: stefano.mauceri@huawei.com;
bhaskar.dhariyal@huawei.com; xulei139@huawei.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCC.2025.3634737

GNN
GPD
GT
HITS
LIME
LSTM
ML
MLP
MSE
MTSAD
PatchTST
POT
RF
SHAP
SOFTS
STAD
STGCN
VAE
XAI
xLSTM

Graph Neural Network.
Generalised Pareto Distribution.
Ground Truth.
Hyperlink-Induced Topic Search.
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations.
Long Short-Term Memory.
Machine Learning.
Multi-Layer Perceptron.
Mean Squared Error.
Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection.
Patch Time Series Transformer.
Peaks Over Threshold.
Random Forest.
Shapley Additive Explanation.
Series-Core Fused Time Series Forecaster.
Star Aggregate Dispatch.
Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network.
Variational Autoencoder.
Explainable Artificial Intelligence.
Extended Long Short-Term Memory.

I. INTRODUCTION
LOUD microservice architectures are rapidly replacing
conventional monolithic systems due to their scalability,
flexibility and maintainability [1]. Recent research has been conducted in areas involving fault isolation, performance prediction,
and anomaly detection [2], [3], [4], [5]. Among these, effective
monitoring and timely anomaly detection are the most important
tasks to ensure reliable, uninterrupted cloud services [6]. Several
traditional algorithms have been applied to multivariate time
series anomaly detection in cloud systems, such as rule-based
approaches [7], statistical process control [8], and principal
component analysis-based methods [9]. These techniques usually detect anomalies by first analysing individual (univariate)
time series using statistical thresholds, and then aggregating
the results to infer multivariate anomalies [10], [11]. While
such methods can be effective in well-defined environments,
they often struggle to capture the complex inter-variable dependencies of microservice systems, frequently resulting in alert
storms [12].
To address these challenges, Machine Learning (ML) approaches, particularly Deep Learning (DL) models, have been
employed to capture complex dependencies and adapt to changing service behaviours, and have been shown to achieve better
performance than threshold-based methods [13], [14], [15].

C

© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Unsupervised ML models are predominantly employed to perform anomaly detection as they require no labelled training
data [16]. These models tend to focus on detecting deviations
from expected patterns, which may not always correspond to
meaningful anomalies from a domain perspective, e.g., microservice architectures. Moreover, unsupervised models are
often less capable of effectively capturing the subtle, dynamic,
and nonlinear relationships between variables in multivariate
data. Supervised learning, on the other hand, offers notable
advantages when high-quality labelled datasets are available.
These methods can learn direct relationships between features
and outcomes, enabling better detection of subtle changes in the
system that unsupervised methods may miss. Furthermore, supervised approaches provide greater explainability, as they allow
practitioners to understand why specific inputs are considered
anomalous. However, a key limitation of supervised learning
is its reliance on labelled data, which can be costly to obtain,
and this is also why unsupervised methods are prevalent in
current Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection (MTSAD)
research.
In our previous work [17], we introduced two high-quality
labelled multivariate time series datasets generated from a
simulated sock shop microservice application. These datasets
are specifically designed to capture realistic anomalies in a
microservice-based cloud system. To model the complex relationships present in the datasets, graph-based methods such as
Graph Neural Network (GNN) models can offer benefits [18].
While most existing graph-based approaches are unsupervised
in the literature [19], [20], [21], the availability of high-quality
labelled datasets enables the exploration of supervised methods
for MTSAD, offering insight which cannot be easily obtained
from the unsupervised approaches. These insights include explainability, allowing cloud providers to effectively interpret
results for their customers and improve user experiences [16].
In this work, we extend the Attention-Based Spatial-Temporal
Graph Convolutional Network (ASTGCN) model from [22] via
an ensemble of three graph-view variants with a learnable attention fusion, and we evaluate its performance and explainability
on two proprietary datasets [17] against 12 benchmarks. Our key
contributions are:
r We propose a novel ensemble-based spatiotemporal
anomaly detection architecture that extends ASTGCN by
integrating decisions made from 3 different graph views
and a learnable attention-based fusion module. Its effectiveness is evaluated against 12 benchmark models across
2 datasets based on event-wise F1 scores.
r We apply model-specific explanation techniques, TreeSHAP for Random Forest (RF), GNNExplainer for Graph
Attention Network (GAT), and attention-based HyperlinkInduced Topic Search (HITS) analysis for ASTGCN, to
identify the most influential features, timestamps, and services in anomalous events, providing actionable explanations in cloud microservice contexts.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: In Section II, we
provide a review of existing anomaly detection solutions and
their associated explainability methods. We define the problem statement in Section III. The methodology is detailed in
Section IV, followed by the experimental setup in Section V.
Next, we present the experimental results of graph methods
in Section VI and a comparative study of anomaly detection
models in Section VII. We discuss our findings on explainability
in Section VIII. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section IX.

211

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, we provide a summary of existing studies on
multivariate time series anomaly detection, especially in the
context of microservice applications. We then explore graphbased ML approaches and discuss their applications in detail,
especially in MTSAD. Finally, we review the tools and methods
commonly used to enhance the explainability of ML models,
which are essential to interpreting the predictions of complex
models in cloud environments. These three aspects, i.e., anomaly
detection, graph-based approaches, and model explainability,
jointly form the foundation of our work.
A. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
In multivariate time series analysis, especially in microservice
applications, classical ML methods such as k-means clustering,
support vector machines, and RF have been widely applied
for anomaly detection [13], [14], [15]. While these techniques
offer strong explainability, they often fall short when dealing
with high-dimensional data and complex temporal dependencies [23]. To overcome these challenges, DL models have
emerged as more powerful alternatives, with particular effectiveness in anomaly detection for high-dimensional datasets.
One popular DL approach is the Autoencoder (AE), which
detects anomalies by reconstructing input data and calculating
reconstruction errors as anomaly scores [24]. Based on this, an
Variational Autoencoder (VAE)-based approach was proposed
in [25], which captures robust local features in short temporal
windows and combines them with Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks for long-term correlations. Another class of
methods focuses on prediction-based anomaly detection, where
models predict future data based on historical patterns and compare these predictions with actual values to identify deviations.
A notable example is the Dynamic Attention Model (DAM) [26],
which enhances the prediction power of LSTM models by
incorporating an attention mechanism. This mechanism allows
the model to selectively focus on both temporal and interdimensional dependencies across multimodal data, improving the
accuracy of future value predictions [21]. Additionally, DAM
integrates a dynamic threshold selection algorithm based on
Peaks Over Threshold (POT) [27], ensuring precise anomaly
detection without requiring expert knowledge.
Beyond prediction-based methods, researchers have introduced state-of-the-art models for time series prediction, including LSTM, Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and Transformer
architectures [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34]. These models excel in capturing complex temporal relationships within
multivariate datasets, especially in microservice applications,
enhancing their capabilities in anomaly detection [35].
However, most existing works either focus on flat time-series
modelling or assume fixed input structures, and few are designed
to handle both the dynamic inter-service dependencies and
asynchronous behaviours common in cloud-native microservice
architectures. This motivates our use of graph-based models for
more structured and adaptive representations.
B. Graph Neural Network
Recent advancements in GNN methods have expanded their
applicability to tasks involving graph-structured data, such as
node classification [36] and edge prediction [37]. Among various GNNs, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) models have

212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

gained considerable attention due to their ability to leverage
spectral domain transformations [38]. GCNs extend the convolution operations to graph structures by incorporating the
Laplacian graph matrix, which facilitates efficient message diffusion across nodes. However, traditional GCNs often depend
on predefined graph structures, limiting their adaptability in
dynamic environments. To address this limit, GAT [39] was
proposed based on GNN methods, using attention mechanisms
to dynamically establish relationships between nodes by assigning learnable coefficients to each edge. This evolution enables
GATs to capture dependencies more flexibly and enhances their
applicability to various fields, such as microservice systems [35].
Microservice systems operate in dynamic environments,
where anomaly detection requires considering both temporal
factors in metrics data and spatial connections between interconnected microservices [40]. Recent models, such as SpatioTemporal Graph Convolutional Network (STGCN) [41] and
ASTGCN [22], have shown success in addressing such complex
spatiotemporal tasks, e.g., road traffic prediction. A recent paper [35] applied spatiotemporal GNN-based methods for metric
prediction in microservices, which is the first use of such architectures in microservice environments, providing a foundation
for anomaly detection in our work. Additionally, recent studies
introduced ensemble learning approaches to further enhance
the performance of GNNs. For instance, GNN-Ensemble [42]
presents a framework combining multiple GNN models trained
on randomly selected substructures and features and achieving
improved classification performance. Another [43] used a hierarchical ensemble of GNNs to learn relationships between traffic
flows at various granularity levels.
Inspired by these approaches, we applied ensemble learning to
ASTGCN models in this study, to address MTSAD in microservice environments, capturing diverse spatiotemporal views and
improving robustness in different service topologies.
C. Explainability
As discussed above, ML or DL models are efficient and widely
adopted for anomaly detection in microservices, but their complexity often makes them characterised as “black boxes” [44],
[45], [46] and leads to user concerns related to model reliability
and accountability [47]. Thus, explainability is essential for
increasing transparency and user confidence, as it provides a
clearer understanding of detected anomalies and supports more
informed decision-making [48].
Explainability in complex models can be achieved through
post-hoc Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques [49], [50], of which some provide insights at both
global and local levels, where the former helps reveal a model’s
overall decision logic and the latter clarifies individual predictions [45], [48]. Common XAI techniques include Shapley Additive Explanation (SHAP) [51], Local Interpretable
Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [52], Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [53], causal inference [54], accelerated
model-agnostic explanations [55], Gradient-weighted Cam [56],
and Saliency Maps [57]. Among these, SHAP is widely used
because of its cooperative game theory foundation, allowing it
to compute Shapley values to assess feature contributions to
model predictions. This model-agnostic method provides both
global and local explanations [58], so it has been applied in
many domains, such as feature selection [59], disease prediction [60], [61], and anomaly detection [50], [62], [63], [64],
[65]. For instance, SHAP has been applied in [66] for resource

management in cloud-native microservices, using feature contributions to guide targeted resource reallocation for vertical
scaling and enhance microservice performance. Additionally,
several variants of SHAP have been introduced, including TreeSHAP, which is specifically designed for tree-based models, and
KernelSHAP, a model-agnostic method that, although flexible,
can be computationally intensive [67].
In the field of GNNs, several methods have been developed to
enhance explainability for graph-related tasks and demonstrate
strong performance [68], such as GNNExplainer [69], GNNLRP [70], and SubgraphX [71]. GNNExplainer is designed to
identify compact subgraphs and critical features influencing
predictions, which is widely used among these methods, with
applications in social network privacy leakage [72] and brain
activity analysis [73]. Furthermore, attention weights serve as
a means of improving the explainability for attention-based
models [58], [74]. Specifically, a deep multi-instance contrastive
learning method was introduced in [75] by using dual attention to
detect abnormal precursors, clarifying both temporal dynamics
and spatial variables. Their work is the first to address the “when”
and “where” aspects of anomaly precursor detection, inspiring
our work on explainability with spatiotemporal attention-based
models like ASTGCN.
However, few existing works integrate multiple explainability
methods across different model types or explicitly target cloud
microservice environments. Our work fills this gap by combining model-specific explanation techniques, e.g., TreeSHAP,
GNNExplainer, attention-based analysis, to offer both global
and local interpretability in anomaly detection.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
This study focuses on identifying, predicting, and explaining
multimodal anomalies in multivariate datasets, so we use a cloud
platform scenario as a case study where anomalies can significantly impact system performance and quality. We built a cloud
platform and generated data with manually injected multimodal
anomalies, following the design in [17]. To address the challenge
of detecting and predicting these anomalies, we explored various
ML models with different experimental setups and architectures,
including supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid algorithms. Finally, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the explainability
of the models from both data feature and temporal perspectives.
The ML problem is introduced in detail below.
The ML problem is formally defined as follows: we consider the multi-variable time-series anomaly detection task as
a classification problem. The input is a sequence of vectors
{X1 , X2 , . . . , XT }, where each vector Xt represents d features at time step t. Using a sliding window approach with
a window size w, we define a window starting at time t as
Wt = {Xt , Xt−1 , . . . , Xt−w+1 }. Our model, parameterised by
θ, predicts a probability ŷt = P (yt | Wt ; θ) for each window
Wt . By convention, the labels are typically 0 for normal samples
and 1 for anomalies for this binary classification problem, and
the appropriate objective function is the binary cross-entropy
function, which measures the difference between the predicted
probabilities and the actual labels. The objective is to find the
optimal set of parameters θ that minimises the binary crossentropy loss function over all windows. The loss function L(θ)
is defined as:
T
[yt log(ŷt ) + (1 − yt ) log(1 − ŷt )]
L(θ) = − t=w
(1)
T −w+1

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

213

r RF [15]: RF is a traditional ML technique that operates by

Fig. 1.

Overview of workflow architecture.

where yt ∈ {0, 1} is the actual label for the window starting at
position t. The optimisation problem is thus expressed as:
θ∗ = arg min L(θ)
θ

(2)

In summary, the ML problem in this study involves detecting
and classifying anomalies within the current windowed data up
to time t. This is formulated as an optimisation task for binary
classification aiming to minimise the binary cross-entropy loss
function to accurately distinguish between normal samples and
anomalies.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The workflow architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. Building on
the two datasets generated from a cloud microservice application
as detailed in [17], this study focuses on two primary goals: (1)
developing ML models for multivariate anomaly detection in
cloud microservices, and (2) enhancing model interpretability
through detailed analysis with various explainability techniques.
In this section, we focus on the ML model implemented and
compared in our work. Specifically, we introduced the benchmark models in terms of supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid
methods, and then we detailed the ASTGCN-based ensemble
learning framework designed for anomaly detection in a microservice environment.
A. Benchmark Models
Handling non-stationary, multi-dimensional time series data
with classical tools is challenging, as discussed in Section II. In
contrast, DL models with their non-linear activation functions
to extract non-linear relationships in data, are well-suited for
time series predictions. To evaluate the performance of our
ensemble learning approach, we compare it against 12 DL methods from three categories: supervised algorithms, unsupervised
approaches, and hybrid models.
These models were selected based on their effectiveness,
frequency, and novelty in recent studies on MTSAD. Specifically, supervised models such as RF, Attention-Based Long
Short-Term Memory (ALSTM), Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory (BiLSTM), and GAT have been widely used in both
classic ML and graph-based learning; unsupervised methods
like AE and VAE are frequently applied in anomaly detection
due to their reconstruction-based strategies; and hybrid models
with POT, including recent Transformer-based and MLP-based
architectures, such as TimesNet, iTransformer, PatchTST, represent the current state-of-the-art in time series forecasting and
are increasingly applied to anomaly detection with dynamic
thresholding.
1) Supervised Algorithms:

constructing multiple decision trees during training and
outputting the classes or the average prediction of the
individual trees.
r ALSTM [26]: LSTM network is a type of recurrent neural
network aiming to address the vanishing gradient problem,
which employs memory cells and gates to capture temporal
features. ALSTM uses attention mechanisms to focus on
the most relevant parts of the input.
r BiLSTM [28]: BiLSTM extends standard LSTMs by processing data in both forward and backward directions,
capturing dependencies before and after each time step.
r GAT [21]: GAT is a type of GNN model designed
to enhance the modelling of relationships using attention mechanisms, which dynamically weighs the importance of neighbouring nodes during aggregation, making
the model focus on the most relevant sections of the
graph.
2) Unsupervised Algorithms:
r AE [24]: AEs are designed for data compression and
unsupervised classification. Their primary objective is to
minimise the difference between the original input and its
reconstruction, using an encoder-decoder structure.
r VAE [25]: VAEs extend traditional AEs by introducing
a probabilistic approach. Specifically, Kullback-Leibler
divergence is included in the loss function, which measures
how much the learnt latent distribution deviates from the
prior distribution.
3) Hybrid Models With POT:
r xLSTM [29]: Extended Long Short-Term Memory (xLSTM) uses mechanisms such as memory mixing and exponential gating, enabling more complex computations and
better handling of long-term dependencies.
r TimesNet [30]: TimesNet converts time series data into
frequency components. This approach enhances long-term
forecasting by analysing the frequency domain, capturing
features both within and between these periods.
r SOFTS [31]: Series-Core Fused Time Series Forecaster
(SOFTS) is a multivariate prediction model designed based
on MLP. It embeds multivariate time series temporally for
each channel, captures channel correlations with multiple
Star Aggregate Dispatch (STAD) modules, and aggregates
series representations into a global core using a centralised
STAD structure.
r iTransformer [33]: iTransformer is a variant of the transformer model designed for time series forecasting. This
method uses the attention layer to learn multivariate correlations effectively and the feed-forward network to encode
representations of the input sequence to capture temporal
features and improve prediction accuracy.
r DLinear [32]: DLinear is an MLP-based model used
in long-term time series forecasting. DLinear employs a
decomposition approach combined with linear layers. It
separates the input into trend and seasonal components,
processes each with a single-layer linear model, and aggregates the results for prediction.
r PatchTST [34]: Based on transformer models, Patch Time
Series Transformer (PatchTST) is designed to enhance
forecasting accuracy by using local semantic information
and longer look-back windows, improving the effectiveness of transformers in this domain.
All these hybrid models introduced above predict features
at each timestamp, and these predictions are compared with

214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

the observed values to identify anomalies. The anomaly score
is computed using the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between
the predicted and actual values. To set the anomaly detection
threshold, we apply the POT method, which models the upper
tail of the anomaly score distribution using a Generalised Pareto
Distribution (GPD). The tail is defined as the portion of scores
above a high quantile, serving as the initial threshold th. The
parameters of the GPD, γ (shape) and β (scale), are estimated
using maximum likelihood estimation. The final threshold T h
is calculated using the following formula:
 

−γ
β
nq
T h = th +
−1
(3)
γ
Nt
where q is the desired probability of observing X > th, which
corresponds to the acceptable false positive rate. γ and β are
the GPD parameters, the shape and scale. n represents the total
number of observations, and Nt is the number of peaks, where
Xt > th. If an anomaly score exceeds the final threshold T h, it
is labelled as 1 (anomaly); otherwise, it is labelled as 0 (normal).

The ASTGCN is designed to capture both spatial and temporal dependencies within graph-structured time series data.
Mathematically, we define the microservice data structure as
a weighted graph G = (V, E, A) with N nodes, where V is the
set of nodes, E is the set of edges, describing the connections
between nodes, and A ∈ RN ×N is a predefined adjacency matrix
used to model spatial dependencies in G, where Aij indicates
the weight of the relationship between nodes vi and vj . For each
node vi , the graph convolution operation aggregates information
from its neighbours based on A, which is critical in guiding the
model to learn from spatially correlated nodes.
The input data is represented by a feature matrix X ∈
RN ×F ×T , where N is the number of nodes, F is the feature
dimension, and T represents the time steps. Temporal dependencies are captured using a sliding window approach, where
sequences of previous time steps are used to predict future
behaviour. To further enhance this process, a temporal attention
mechanism dynamically weighs the importance of different time
steps. The temporal attention weights Ti ∈ RT for node vi help
the model focuses on pivotal moments that are more predictive
of the target variable, improving its capability to model the
temporal evolution of anomalies.
As shown in Fig. 2, each ASTGCN block processes the input
data in a specific sequence of layers: (i) the Spatial Att Layer
first applies spatial attention weights to emphasise important relationships within the adjacency matrix A. The spatial attention
weights could be obtained by:
(4)

where S ∈ RN ×N denotes the spatial attention weights, N is
the number of nodes, αij represents the similarity score between
nodes vi and vj ; (ii) then spatial convolutional weights are employed in the Spatial Conv Layer to aggregate the information
from the neighbouring nodes for each node as:
zi =

N

j=1

Sij · (Ws Xj )

Structure of the ASTGCN-based ensemble framework.



B. ASTGCN-Based Ensemble Learning Framework

Sij = softmax(αij )

Fig. 2.

(5)

where Ws ∈ RF,F represents the spatial convolutional weights,
transforming the input feature Xj to the new feature space. F
and F  stand for the dimensions of the original and new feature
spaces, respectively, and zi is the representation of node vi after
spatial aggregation; (iii) after that, the Temporal Conv Layer is
applied to capture dependencies across time steps using temporal
convolutional weights:
zi,t =

k−1


(τ )

Wt

· xi,t−τ + bt

(6)

τ =0
(τ )

where Wt denotes the temporal convolutional weights, controlling the impact of the first k time steps, and bt is a bias term,
ensuring the smoothness of the output; (iv) the Temporal Att
Layer then assigns different levels of importance to each time
step through temporal attention weights:
xi =

T


Tit · xi,t

(7)

t=1

where Tit denotes the temporal attention weights of node vi at
time step t, and xi is the weighted sum of features for node vi
over time, capturing the temporal dependencies most relevant
for anomaly detection.
The final ensemble model combines predictions from each
ASTGCN block representing different graphs. Using a soft voting mechanism with weighted aggregation, predictions across
these distinct views are integrated, achieving a comprehensive
perspective of the system.


M
1 
ŷ = σ
Wm ŷm + b
(8)
M m=1
where M = 3, indicating node, pod, and service graphs, ŷm
(m ∈ {1, 2, 3}) represents the output of each graph, Wm is their
unique weights, and σ is the sigmoid activation function. This
ensemble approach leverages spatial and temporal dependencies
from all graphs to improve anomaly detection accuracy across
various types of anomalies.

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE I
ANOMALY RATIO (% ) PER ANOMALY TYPE FOR 70/30 AND 80/20 SPLITS

V. EXPERIMENTS
In the experimental section, we present a detailed overview
of the datasets, the model configurations, the specific topologies implemented for the GAT and ASTGCN models, and the
evaluation metrics utilised to assess model performance.

215

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF DL MODEL HYPERPARAMETERS

“node-reboot”, respectively. Importantly, the bolded 0.00 indicates that anomaly type 8 (node reboot) is absent from the test set
under the 80/20 split. This is caused by using chronological data
split, as this type of anomaly was relatively rare and occurred
only in the earlier part of the time series. Consequently, it does
not appear in the final 20% used for testing and results in a slight
inconsistency in their performance results in Table I.

A. Datasets
Our experiments are conducted using the Sock Shop Benchmark Microservice System, deployed on Kubernetes1 to manage
container orchestration. The data generation pipeline has been
discussed in the previous work [17]. Specifically, we deployed
a microservice application on Kubernetes on the Cloud for
managed scaling and container orchestration. The Kubernetes
cluster, running on virtual machines, hosts an e-commerce
application, Sock Shop,2 to simulate a realistic microservice
environment, with Istio3 capturing service metrics.
To evaluate the proposed ASTGCN model, two types of
anomalies, i.e., overload and fault injections, are introduced.
Overload anomalies are simulated using Locust,4 which generates dynamic user traffic based on parameters such as user
count and spawn rate. Fault injections are introduced via a fault
injection simulator and applied at both pod and node levels. Podlevel anomalies include pod deletion, CPU and memory stress,
network latency, packet loss, and I/O stress, while node-level
anomalies involve CPU and memory stress, network latency,
packet loss, I/O stress, and instance reboots. Istio manages traffic
flows and captures key metrics, while the cloud monitoring
tool gathers fault injection metrics and logs, with Prometheus
scraping additional Istio metrics.
This setup generated two datasets for time series anomaly
detection, corresponding to the periods 13-05-2024 and 2005-2024. Each dataset contains 10,080 time points (minutes)
and 467 features, which include metrics from nodes, pods,
and services. Specifically, the dataset consists of 125 metrics
from 5 nodes, 252 metrics from 14 pods, and 90 metrics from
10 services. We employed two data split settings for training
and testing: (1) a 70/30 split; and (2) an 80/20 split. Table I
presents detailed information about the anomaly types and
corresponding anomaly ratios (% ) across training and testing
datasets for both data splits, where A.T., TR. and TE. represent
anomaly type, train, and test. Specifically, anomaly types 1
to 8 represent “overload”, “cpu-stress”, “io-stress”, “memorystress”, “network-latency”, “packet-loss”, “pod-deletion” and
1 https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/
2 https://github.com/ocp-power-demos/sock-shop-demo
3 https://istio.io/latest/docs/
4 https://docs.locust.io/en/stable/

B. Model Setup
We perform all experiments on an Intel Xeon CPU with
13 GB of RAM and a Tesla T4 GPU with 16 GB of memory.
The implementation relies on Python, PyTorch, CUDA, and
PyTorch-Geometric, with versions selected according to the
model requirements. We summarise the generic hyperparameters for each DL model in Table II where T. Epochs, LR,
and Loss F. represent training epochs, learning rate, and loss
function, respectively. The remaining specific hyperparameters
for each model are detailed in the sections below.
1) ASTGCN: In our experiments, we evaluate the performance of the proposed ASTGCN model with two setups: (1)
individual graphs; and (2) an ensemble learning method integrating these graphs. Specifically, three graphs were created from
the entire dataset, corresponding to the pods (14 × 18 features),
nodes (5 × 25 features) and services (10 × 9 features), a total of
467 features. Each graph requires an adjacency matrix which is
of size (number of nodes × number of nodes). Each of the three
graphs is independently processed by an ASTGCN block consisting of spatial and temporal attention layers, spatial and temporal convolution layers, and batch normalisation. The attended
features from each ASTGCN block are passed through a fully
connected layer with a sigmoid activation function, producing a
binary output for anomaly detection. After training each ASTGCN model independently, we combine predicted values from
all three graphs through soft voting with weighted aggregation.
2) Supervised Models: RF, ALSTM, BiLSTM, and GAT
models are employed at this stage and introduced below.
RF: The RF model is trained on bootstrap samples with
random feature selection to reduce inter-tree correlation. Preselection techniques, e.g., recursive feature elimination is applied to the RF model to enhance predictive performance.
ALSTM: The ALSTM model consists of three LSTM layers
with batch normalisation to capture temporal dependencies. An
attention mechanism follows the LSTM layers to emphasise
relevant time steps, and a sigmoid activation function is applied
at the output layer for binary classification.
BiLSTM: The BiLSTM model includes three Bidirectional
LSTM layers with batch normalisation to capture both past and
future dependencies. Followed by the output layer, which uses
a sigmoid function to generate binary outputs.

216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

GAT: The GAT model employs a 3-graph structure for pods,
nodes, and services, with predictions made independently on
each graph and combined by soft voting. Different from ASTGCN, each graph is trained without temporal patterns. The
architecture includes two GATConv layers with multi-headed
attention (3 heads) to weigh the importance of neighbouring
nodes, followed by batch normalisation and ReLU activation
after each layer. The output is flattened and processed through a
fully connected layer with a sigmoid function.
3) Unsupervised Models: We apply AE and VAE unsupervised models for comparison and introduce them below.
AE: The AE model consists of an encoder and a decoder.
The encoder compresses the input data using a linear layer
and ReLU activation. The decoder reconstructs the input via
linear layers, applying a sigmoid activation to ensure output
values between 0 and 1. Anomaly scores are computed using
MSE between the original input and its reconstruction, with the
threshold optimised to maximise the F1 score.
VAE: The VAE model includes an encoder that maps input
data to a latent space via a linear layer, generating the mean and
log variance of the latent distribution. A reparametrisation step
facilitates sampling from this distribution. The decoder reconstructs the input from the latent representation by multiple linear
layers with sigmoid activation. Anomaly scores and thresholds
are determined as in the AE model.
4) Hybrid Models: For the hybrid models, including iTransformer, TimesNet, SOFTS, DLinear, and PatchTST, we retained
their original architectures and modified specific hyperparameters. In particular, we set the feature parameter to “M” for multivariate time series prediction, with encoder, decoder, and output
dimensions configured to 467. An early stopping mechanism
with a patience of 3 is applied to prevent overfitting. For xLSTM,
we used “sLSTM” memory cells followed by “xLSTM” blocks
to predict 467 metric values.
All hybrid models are trained with a batch size of 32. To
optimise the F1 score, we experimented with various window
sizes, starting from 3 to 10 with increments of 1, and 10 to 70 with
increments of 10. These ranges were selected to capture both
short- and long-term temporal dependencies, reflecting various
durations of anomaly events observed in our dataset. The (3)
is used to determine the threshold, where th is set as the 95th
percentile and we fine-tune the q values between 0.01 and 0.06
in steps of 1 × e−3 for optimal performance.
C. Implementation of Graph Topology
We implement two settings for the GAT and ASTGCN models: (1) with topology; and (2) without topology. The topology
of the pods deployed in our cluster was obtained from an observability tool within the service mesh, as shown in Fig. 3. This
topology serves as the basis for constructing the graph-based
models. Using adjacency matrices derived from it, we built a
directional graph for pods and a bidirectional graph for services,
while applying a fully connected graph for cloud nodes. To
assess the impact of topology, we compared these models to
configurations with fully connected graphs across nodes, pods,
and services.
D. Evaluation Metrics
In general anomaly detection tasks, Precision = TP/(TP +
FP), Recall = TP/(TP + FN), and F1 score = 2 · (Precision ·

Fig. 3.

Topology of the sock shop microservice architecture.

Recall)/(Precision + Recall) are widely used as evaluation metrics, where TP, FP, and FN refer to true positive, false positive,
and false negative, respectively.
However, in practical applications, maintenance engineers
typically prioritise event detection over point-wise metrics, as
timely identification of fault events is more important than
detecting every anomalous point. To address this, we adopt an
event-wise F1 evaluation protocol, a recently proposed metric
introduced in [76] and further discussed in recent studies [77],
[78], where TP and FP are computed at the event level, while
FN remains as the count of false negatives at the point level.
Additionally, incorporating the False Alarm Rate (FAR) ensures
that precision is not inflated by algorithms that trigger alarms too
frequently. Given the context above, the event-wise recall Re is
still calculated by the same formula with event-level TP and FN,
but the event-wise precision Pe needs to be computed by:
Pe =

T Pe
× (1 − FAR)
T Pe + F Pe

(9)

where T Pe refers to the number of Ground Truth (GT) events
overlapping with detected segments, F Pe is the number of detected segments that do not overlap with any GT event, and FAR
is calculated as the ratio of false positives to the total number
of normal points. Specifically, “segments” represent contiguous
points the algorithm deems anomalous, whereas “events” refer to
GT anomalous events. The event-wise F1 score F 1e is computed
using Pe and Re at the event level.
VI. GRAPH-BASED RESULTS
This section analyses the results of graph-based methods,
focusing on the role of temporal dependencies in the GAT and
ASTGCN models, the impact of varying topologies, and the
effectiveness of ensemble learning techniques.
A. Temporal Dependencies in Graph Methods
In this section, we compare the performance of ASTGCN and
GAT at different levels of the microservice architecture, specifically the pod and node levels. As shown in Table III, ASTGCN
consistently outperformed the GAT model, particularly at the
pod level (ASTGCN-P), achieving F1 scores of 0.82 and 0.77
across the two datasets. In contrast, GAT models, which focus on
spatial relationships through attention mechanisms, performed
optimally at the pod level (GAT-P), with F1 scores of 0.77 and

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF GAT AND ASTGCN (70/30 SPLIT)

217

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE OF GAT AND ASTGCN WITHOUT TOPOLOGY

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF GAT AND ASTGCN (80/20 SPLIT)

0.73, slightly lower than those of ASTGCN. At the node level,
the ASTGCN variant (ASTGCN-N) also demonstrated strong
performance. Meanwhile, GAT’s performance at the node level
(GAT-N) declined significantly, with F1 scores dropping to 0.35.
Our experiments indicate that incorporating temporal dependencies into spatial graphs significantly improved anomaly detection performance in multivariate time series data, especially
in a microservice environment where temporal and spatial interactions are both critical. Through temporal convolutional layers,
ASTGCN models can effectively capture sequential patterns
within microservice pods and nodes. However, in scenarios
requiring the detection of time-dependent anomalies, such as at
the node level, GAT falls short in capturing the temporal patterns
that ASTGCN achieves, resulting in lower detection accuracy.
B. Ensemble Learning Method
As presented in Table III, the individual graph-based models
were evaluated against their ensemble counterparts, specifically
examining the ASTGCN and GAT architectures. The ASTGCNE, which incorporates ensemble learning across node, pod, and
service levels with a higher weight on the pod-level graph,
achieved the highest average F1 score of 0.89 across both
datasets. Its precision and recall are notable, with values of 0.90
and 0.97 for the 13-05-2024 dataset and 0.87 and 0.81 for the 2005-2024 dataset, respectively. The GAT-E ensemble variant also
shows an improvement, achieving an average F1 score of 0.79.
Table IV reinforces the advantage of ensemble learning under an
80/20 split. The ASTGCN-E model achieved even higher performance metrics, with a precision of 0.98, recall of 0.98, and an
F1 score of 0.96 on the 13-05-2024 dataset. On the 20-05-2024
dataset, it reached a precision of 0.93, a recall of 0.89, and an F1
score of 0.91. The GAT-E model also demonstrated improved
performance over its individual-level counterparts, due to an
average F1 score of 0.76. Unlike the ASTGCN models, GAT
relies primarily on attention mechanisms, which improve spatial

relationships within a level. However, when combined through
ensemble learning, GAT’s capability at each level contributes to
an overall view of the system’s operation.
The consistent improvement observed in ensemble models
across both split ratios shows the advantages of integrating
multi-level information in anomaly detection. In a microservice
architecture, this ensemble approach is especially effective. Each
level (node, pod, and service) represents a unique aspect of the
system, capturing information ranging from individual nodes to
more aggregated service-level interactions. Ensemble learning
allows the model to account for these distinct perspectives
simultaneously, which is helpful in detecting various anomalies that arise due to interactions between services in complex
microservice environments.
C. Impact of Graph Topology
As presented in Table V, we summarise the results for the GAT
and ASTGCN models utilising fully connected pod and service
graphs, representing an unknown topology in the microservice
architecture. The fully connected cloud node structure combined
with these graphs yields the aggregated outcomes for both models. Across both the 70/30 and 80/20 data split settings, models
with topology consistently outperformed their fully connected
counterparts. Specifically in topology-based configurations, the
directional pod and bidirectional service graphs, e.g., GAT-P and
ASTGCN-S, demonstrate significant improvements in F1 scores
over fully connected variants, i.e., GAT-FP, GAT-FS, ASTGCNFP, and ASTGCN-FS. The ensemble methods, i.e., GAT-E and
ASTGCN-E, which integrate topological information, achieve
the highest average F1 scores, with the latter reaching 0.94 and
0.89 for the 80/20 and 70/30 splits, respectively. In contrast,
models incorporating fully connected graphs across all nodes,
pods, and services, i.e., GAT-FE and ASTGCN-FE, showed
reduced performance, with the latter achieving F1 scores of 0.84
and 0.85 for the respective data splits.
These results suggest that incorporating structured connections based on service and pod interactions enables models
to better generalise across diverse anomaly scenarios, whereas
the absence of defined topology introduces noise, reducing the
model performance in anomaly detection, especially within
cloud microservice architectures.

218

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

Feature contribution from TreeSHAP in 13-05-2024 dataset.
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS ON 13-05-2024 AND 20-05-2024 DATASETS. (70/30 SPLIT)

VII. COMPARATIVE STUDY
In this section, we provide a comparative study of model
performance, including overall evaluation under different data
split ratios, and a discussion of the model performance.

A. Overall Evaluation
Tables VI and VII present a detailed evaluation of various
anomaly detection models across the 13-05-2024 and 20-052024 datasets, considering event-wise precision, recall, F1 score,
and accuracy under two different data split ratios: 70/30 and
80/20. Under the 70/30 split, BiLSTM and our framework,
ASTGCN-E, achieved the highest F1 scores of 0.85 and 0.89,
respectively, while unsupervised models like AE and VAE
showed lower performance, averaging F1 scores of 0.53 and
0.52. Shifting to the 80/20 split resulted in better performance for
supervised models, with BiLSTM and ASTGCN-E achieving
average F1 scores of 0.93 and 0.94, while unsupervised models
kept underperforming, with only marginal improvements in their
F1 scores to 0.53 and 0.54.

The performance of benchmark models is summarised below:
(1) ALSTM achieved the strongest performance against other
supervised models, i.e., RF, BiLSTM, and GAT, although it still
underperformed ASTGCN-E; (2) unsupervised models, i.e., AE
and VAE, had higher precision but significantly lower recall,
resulting in the lowest F1 scores; and (3) the overall performance
(F1 score) of hybrid models, e.g., iTransformer, TimesNet, and
DLinear, locates between supervised and unsupervised methods.
B. Discussion
The performance evaluation of supervised, hybrid, and unsupervised models provides valuable insights into their capabilities and limitations for multivariate time series anomaly
detection. Supervised models, including spatial-temporal graphbased techniques as well as machine learning methods like RF
and deep learning approaches such as LSTM variants, demonstrate superior anomaly detection performance by effectively
utilising labelled data to capture complex spatial and temporal
relationships. However, their reliance on high-quality labelled
datasets limits their applicability in real-world scenarios where

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

219

TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS ON 13-05-2024 AND 20-05-2024 DATASETS. (80/20 SPLIT)

such labels are scarce or costly to obtain. Hybrid models, which
integrate unsupervised learning with the threshold selection
technique, provide a practical alternative. These models are
particularly effective when labelled data is limited, leveraging
unsupervised methods to identify potential anomalies and using
thresholding techniques to fine-tune detection. Nevertheless,
further optimisation of thresholding mechanisms could significantly improve their effectiveness and reliability. By contrast, unsupervised models struggled to match the accuracy of
supervised and hybrid approaches, particularly in identifying
complex and subtle anomalies in multivariate data. Despite their
limitations, they remain valuable in settings where labelled data
is unavailable or impractical to obtain.
VIII. EXPLAINABILITY
While Sections VI and VII established the strong detection
performance of key models, this section focuses on explaining
the reason for their effectiveness. Through model-specific
explainability techniques, i.e., SHAP, GNNExplainer, and
attention weights, we interpret how models like RF, GAT,
and ASTGCN-E made their decisions on the datasets from
Section V. This analysis validates our architectural choices
and fulfils this study’s core objective of providing actionable,
interpretable results.
A. Feature Importance
TreeSHAP is used with default setting to analyse feature
contributions at a global level for the tree-based model RF.
The SHAP value analysis shows that the top 50 features account for approximately 75% of the total feature contributions,
highlighting their influence on model predictions. Furthermore,
metrics from front-end, followed by order, cart, user, and catalogue, have a greater predictive impact than those from other
sources. Our experimental results revealed several dominant
features across both datasets, such as pod_network_tx_bytes,
pod_cpu_utilization, node_cpu_utilization, and _rt (response
time), but features like pod_number_of_running_containers exhibit greater influence in only one of the datasets, underscoring
dataset-specific variations in feature importance.
In Fig. 4, the beeswarm plots of SHAP values illustrate
each feature’s influence on model predictions, with dots representing individual test instances. Dots on the right (SHAP
value > 0) indicate positive contributions to anomaly detection,

Fig. 5.

Feature importance from GNNExplainer.

while those on the left (SHAP value < 0) indicate negative
contributions. Dot colours range from blue (low feature values) to red (high feature values), reflecting the original feature values. Features are ranked by their mean SHAP values to show their importance. For instance, an increase in
node_cpu_utilization, node_cpu_usage_total, and services response time correlates with a higher likelihood of anomalies,
while node_network_total_bytes has a lower probability.
In addition to SHAP, GNNExplainer is applied to analyse
feature importance in GAT under a binary classification setting
at the graph level. The learning rate and epochs are set to 0.01
and 500, with other parameters at default values. Although
GNNExplainer is primarily aimed at generating local explanations, aggregating these local insights still enables us to identify
the impactful features for model predictions. According to the
feature importance for the pod-level graph visualised in Fig. 5,
we observed a strong correlation between the most influential
features identified by GNNExplainer and those highlighted by
SHAP. However, we also found some differences between them,
e.g., pod_memory_utilisation, showing a higher impact on GAT
model than on RF, which is related to the different characteristics
of the models.
Additionally, the spatial attention weights from ASTGCN at
the pod level, along with HITS scores [79], reveal the five most
influential services: orders, carts, user, front-end, and shipping,
as shown in Fig. 6. These findings closely align with those from
the SHAP analysis of the RF model.

220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

B. Time Slice Contribution
The temporal attention weight plots from ASTGCN for correctly predicted anomalies, shown in Fig. 7, reveal distinct timestamp contributions across the two datasets. Key observations
from this figure include: (1) in the 13-05-2024 dataset, Type
7: delete-pod is uniquely predicted correctly, with timestamp
“t-1” as the only contributor; (2) across all anomaly types in
both datasets, the current timestamp “t” generally serves as the
dominant contributor, with other timestamps having a minimal
impact. More specifically, timestamp “t” shows higher temporal
attention weights in the 20-05-2024 dataset than 13-05-2024
for most anomaly types; (3) contributions from historical timestamps, ranging from “t-8” to “t-1”, also support the anomaly detection process. For instance, in Type 6: packet-loss, timestamp
“t” holds a similar level of influence as previous timestamps
in dataset 13-05-2024, indicating a balanced impact from both
recent and past data.
Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

Pod spatial weights.

Temporal dependencies (%) of different anomaly types.

Furthermore, the explainability techniques provide local interpretability by highlighting the specific influence of individual
feature values on model predictions, suggesting whether they
have a positive or negative effect, and quantifying their contribution to the anomaly score. This capability is particularly valuable
for analysing specific instances at particular time steps, enabling
a deeper understanding of the model behaviour in targeted cases.
For example, when examining anomaly types related to network
latency, local explainability reveals that service-level metrics,
such as response time, are the major contributors to the anomaly.

IX. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present a novel application of the ASTGCNbased ensemble framework for multivariate time-series anomaly
detection in cloud-based microservice architectures. By leveraging spatial and temporal dependencies, our framework consistently achieves superior event-wise F1 scores compared to 12
benchmark models across supervised, unsupervised, and hybrid
approaches. Our experiments demonstrate that larger training
sets significantly enhance the performance of complex models
like BiLSTM and ASTGCN, while graph-based models such as
GAT and ASTGCN outperform non-graph models by effectively
capturing structured spatial relationships. Temporal modelling
further improves detection accuracy, with ASTGCN excelling
at capturing sequential patterns. Additionally, ensemble learning across nodes, pods, and services enhances performance by
incorporating multi-level system interactions. When topology is
unknown, fully connected graphs maintain strong performance,
although predefined structures yield higher accuracy.
To enhance model explainability, we apply TreeSHAP for RF,
GNNExplainer for GAT, and attention weights with HITS for
ASTGCN. TreeSHAP highlights the top 50 features, primarily
from the front-end, order, cart, user, and catalogue pods, with key
metrics such as pod_network_tx_bytes, pod_cpu_utilization,
and node_cpu_utilization. GNNExplainer yields similar results
to SHAP but also emphasises pod_memory_utilization. Temporal attention highlights recent timestamps as most influential,
with earlier ones impacting specific anomalies like overload and
packet loss.
Nevertheless, this study has several limitations. First, our
evaluation is based on two datasets derived from the same
microservice environment, which may limit generalisability
to other domains or real-world scenarios. Second, while the
ASTGCN-based architecture demonstrates strong performance,
its complexity and training cost may hinder deployment in
resource-constrained settings. Finally, although we incorporate
explainability techniques, fully interpretable graph-based models for MTSAD remain a challenging direction.
As part of our future work, we will focus on several directions
aligned with the limitations of this work. Firstly, we aim to generalise our framework across diverse microservice environments
and different workloads, possibly through transfer learning or
domain adaptation techniques. Secondly, we plan to improve
model scalability by reducing computational overhead through
model compression or sparsity-aware techniques. Furthermore,

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

the explainability of graph-based models still needs to be further
explored, particularly in extracting human-understandable root
causes from detected anomalies. Finally, as our data collection
infrastructure evolves, we also plan to explore causal inference
methods for explainability, especially those tailored to graphbased architectures. These techniques could help reveal deeper
causal dependencies among system components, going beyond
attribution-based insights.
REFERENCES
[1] P. D. Francesco, I. Malavolta, and P. Lago, “Research on architecting
microservices: Trends, focus, and potential for industrial adoption,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Archit., 2017, pp. 21–30.
[2] B. Żurkowski and K. Zieliński, “Root cause analysis for cloud-native
applications,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 232–250,
Jan. 2024.
[3] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause analysis
in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, Feb. 2022.
[4] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies
through service-level deep bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int.
Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 48–58.
[5] Y. Yang and Y. Jiang, “Microservice indicator prediction method based
on STE and CNN-BiLSTM,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput.
Intell. Syst., 2023, pp. 511–515.
[6] S. Garg and A. Misra, “Service level agreements for cloud infrastructures,”
in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Comput. Sustain. Glob. Develop., 2019, pp. 276–279.
[7] D. Ma, B. Ding, D. Feng, and H. Liu, “EAD: An efficient anomaly detection
algorithm for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 33 rd Int. Conf. Tools
Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 609–613.
[8] W. Sha, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, and T. Huang, “Statistical learning for anomaly
detection in cloud server systems: A multi-order markov chain framework,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 401–413, Second
Quarter 2018.
[9] B. Agrawal, T. Wiktorski, and C. Rong, “Adaptive real-time anomaly
detection in cloud infrastructures,” Concurrency Computation: Pract.
Experience, vol. 29, no. 24, Aug. 2017, Art. no. e4193.
[10] X. Zhang et al., “Cross-dataset time series anomaly detection for cloud
systems,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2019, pp. 1063–1076.
[11] M. Ma et al., “Jump-starting multivariate time series anomaly detection
for online service systems,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., 2021, pp.
413–426.
[12] Y. Chen et al., “Identifying linked incidents in large-scale online service
systems,” in Proc. 28th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Foundations Softw. Eng., 2020, pp. 304–314.
[13] S. Gadal, R. Mokhtar, M. Abdelhaq, R. Alsaqour, E. S. Ali, and R.
Saeed, “Machine learning-based anomaly detection using K-mean array
and sequential minimal optimization,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 14, pp.
2158, Jul. 2022.
[14] J. Lesouple, C. Baudoin, M. Spigai, and J.-Y. Tourneret, “How
to introduce expert feedback in one-class support vector machines
for anomaly detection?,” Signal Process., vol. 188, Nov. 2021,
Art. no. 108197.
[15] I. A. Khan, H. Birkhofer, D. Kunz, D. Lukas, and V. Ploshikhin, “A random
forest classifier for anomaly detection in laser-powder bed fusion using
optical monitoring,” Materials, vol. 16, no. 19, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 6470.
[16] M. A. Belay, S. S. Blakseth, A. Rasheed, and P. S. Rossi, “Unsupervised
anomaly detection for IoT-based multivariate time series: Existing solutions, performance analysis and future directions,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 5,
Mar. 2023, Art. no. 2844.
[17] M. Allam, N. Boujnah, N. E. O’Connor, and M. Liu, “Synthetic time
series for anomaly detection in cloud microservices,” in Machine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2024.
[18] H. X. Nguyen, S. Zhu, and M. Liu, “A survey on graph neural networks
for microservice-based cloud applications,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 23,
Dec. 2022, Art. no. 9492.
[19] Y. Sun et al., “Interpretable failure localization for microservice systems
based on graph autoencoder,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 34,
Sep. 2024, Art. no. 52.
[20] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised
anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023.

221

[21] Z. Liu, X. Huang, J. Zhang, Z. Hao, L. Sun, and H. Peng, “Multivariate
time-series anomaly detection based on enhancing graph attention networks with topological analysis,” in Proc. 33 rd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., Oct. 2024, pp. 1555–1564.
[22] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention based spatialtemporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 922–929.
[23] C. Wang and G. Liu, “From anomaly detection to classification with graph
attention and transformer for multivariate time series,” Adv. Eng. Informat.,
vol. 60, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102357.
[24] H. Torabi, S. L. Mirtaheri, and S. Greco, “Practical autoencoder based
anomaly detection by using vector reconstruction error,” Cybersecurity,
vol. 6, no. 1, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 1.
[25] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schonborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
“Anomaly detection for time series using vae-LSM hybrid model,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2020,
pp. 4322–4326.
[26] Y. Chen, M. Yan, D. Yang, X. Zhang, and Z. Wang, “Deep attentive
anomaly detection for microservice systems with multimodal time-series
data,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2022, pp. 373–378.
[27] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23 rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[28] M. Pirani, P. Thakkar, P. Jivrani, M. H. Bohara, and D. Garg, “A comparative analysis of ARIMA, GRU, LSTM and biLSTM on financial time
series forecasting,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Elect.
Circuits Electron., 2022, pp. 1–6.
[29] M. Beck et al., “xLSTM: Extended long short-term memory,” Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 37, pp. 107547–107603, 2024.
[30] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timesnet: Temporal
2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2023.
[31] L. Han, X.-Y. Chen, H.-J. Ye, and D.-C. Zhan, “Softs: Efficient multivariate
time series forecasting with series-core fusion,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 37, pp. 64145–64175, 2024.
[32] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective
for time series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
pp. 11121–11128.
[33] Y. Liu et al., “itransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
series forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2310.06625.
[34] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
[35] A. Golovkina, D. Mogilnikov, and V. Ruzhnikov, Graph Neural Networks
for Metrics Prediction in Microservice Architecture. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2024, pp. 343–357.
[36] S. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Dai, and W. Guo, “Graph neural networks in node
classification: Survey and evaluation,” Mach. Vis. Appl., Springer, vol. 33,
no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 4.
[37] M. Chen and Y. Zhang, Link Prediction Based on Graph Neural Networks.
Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2018, pp. 5165–5175.
[38] M. Defferrard et al., “Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast
localized spectral filtering,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, Eds.
Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
[39] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
[40] L. Chen, “Microservices: Architecting for continuous delivery and DevOps,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Archit., 2018, pp. 39–39.
[41] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks:
A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. TwentySeventh Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
[42] W. Wei, M. Qiao, and D. Jadav, “Gnn-ensemble: Towards random decision
graph neural networks,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Dec. 2023,
pp. 956–965.
[43] R. Abu Bakar, L. De Marinis, F. Cugini, and F. Paolucci, “FTG-net-E: A
hierarchical ensemble graph neural network for DDoS attack detection,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110508.
[44] E. Dağlarli, Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) Approaches and Deep
Meta-Learning Models. London, UK: IntechOpen, Dec. 2020.
[45] A. Verdone, S. Scardapane, and M. Panella, “Explainable spatio-temporal
graph neural networks for multi-site photovoltaic energy production,”
Appl. Energy, vol. 353, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 122151.
[46] E. S. Ortigossa, T. Gonçalves, and L. G. Nonato, “Explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI)—from theory to methods and applications,” IEEE
Access, vol. 12, pp. 80799–80846, 2024.

222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2026

[47] D. Branley-Bell, R. Whitworth, and L. Coventry, User Trust and Understanding of Explainable AI: Exploring Algorithm Visualisations and User
Biases. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2020, pp. 382–399.
[48] Z. Li, Y. Zhu, and M. Van Leeuwen, “A survey on explainable anomaly
detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–54,
Sep. 2023.
[49] U. Schlegel, H. Arnout, M. El-Assady, D. Oelke, and D. A. Keim, “Towards
a rigorous evaluation of XAI methods on time series,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop, 2019, pp. 4197–4201.
[50] U. Do, L. Lahesoo, R. M. Carnier, and K. Fukuda, “Evaluation of XAI
algorithms in IoT traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2024 Int. Conf. Artif.
Intell. Inf. Commun., 2024, pp. 669–674.
[51] S. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp.
4768–4777.
[52] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?”:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[53] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. Müller, and W.
Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by
layer-wise relevance propagation,” PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 7, Jul. 2015,
Art. no. e0130140.
[54] D. Janzing, D. Balduzzi, M. Grosse-Wentrup, and B. Schölkopf, “Quantifying causal influences,” Ann. Statist., vol. 41, no. 5, Oct. 2013,
pp. 2324–2358.
[55] D. Dandolo, C. Masiero, M. Carletti, D. Dalle Pezze, and G. A. Susto,
“Acme—accelerated model-agnostic explanations: Fast whitening of the
machine-learning black box,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 214, Mar. 2023, Art.
no. 119115.
[56] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D.
Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradientbased localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 336–359,
Oct. 2019.
[57] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,” in
Workshop Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014.
[58] L. Cummins et al., “Explainable predictive maintenance: A survey of
current methods, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp.
57574–57602, 2024.
[59] K. Roshan and A. Zafar, “Using kernel shap XAI method to optimize
the network anomaly detection model,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Comput.
Sustain. Glob. Develop., 2022, pp. 74–80.
[60] S. S. Haneesha Samudrala, J. Thambi, S. R. Vadluri, A. Mahalingam, and P.
B. Pati, “Enhancing parkinson’s disease diagnosis using speech analysis:a
feature subset selection approach with lime and shap,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Innov. Technol., 2024, pp. 1–5.
[61] C.-H. Lin and C.-L. Liu, “Prediction of blood glucose concentration
based on optiscanner and XGBoost in ICU,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 116524–116533, 2023.
[62] R. R. Karn, P. Kudva, H. Huang, S. Suneja, and I. M. Elfadel, “Cryptomining detection in container clouds using system calls and explainable
machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
674–691, Mar. 2021.
[63] C. Hwang and T. Lee, “E-SFD: Explainable sensor fault detection in the
ics anomaly detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 140470–140486,
2021.
[64] H. Choi, D. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “Explainable anomaly detection framework for predictive maintenance in manufacturing systems,”
Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 125, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 109147.
[65] N. Aslam et al., “Interpretable machine learning models for malicious
domains detection using explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 12, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 7375.
[66] M. Mekki, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and C. Verikoukis, “XAI-enabled fine
granular vertical resources autoscaler,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Netw.
Softwarization, 2023, pp. 161–169.
[67] H. Manthena, J. C. Kimmel, M. Abdelsalam, and M. Gupta, “Analyzing
and explaining black-box models for online malware detection,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 25237–25252, 2023.
[68] H. Yuan, H. Yu, S. Gui, and S. Ji, “Explainability in graph neural networks:
A taxonomic survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no.
5, pp. 5782–5799, May 2023.
[69] Z. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Žitnik, and J. Leskovec, GNNEXPLAINER: Generating Explanations for Graph Neural Networks. Red
Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019.

[70] T. Schnake et al., “Higher-order explanations of graph neural networks via
relevant walks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 11,
pp. 7581–7596, Nov. 2022.
[71] H. Yuan, H. Yu, J. Wang, K. Li, and S. Ji, “On explainability of graph
neural networks via subgraph explorations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2021, pp. 12241–12252.
[72] L.-J. Huang and C.-T. Li, “Partial data, potential exposure: Evaluating
privacy leakage via gnnexplainer on social networks,” in Proc. 2024 Int.
Conf. Consum. Electron., 2024, pp. 355–356.
[73] M. Zhdanov, S. Steinmann, and N. Hoffmann, “Investigating brain connectivity with graph neural networks and gnnexplainer,” in Proc. 26th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 5155–5161.
[74] W. Samek, G. Montavon, S. Lapuschkin, C. J. Anders, and K.-R.
Muller, “Explaining deep neural networks and beyond: A review of
methods and applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 247–278,
Mar. 2021.
[75] D. Xu et al., “Deep multi-instance contrastive learning with dual attention for anomaly precursor detection,” Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., Jan. 2021,
pp. 91–99.
[76] M. El Amine Sehili and Z. Zhang, “Multivariate time series anomaly
detection: Fancy algorithms and flawed evaluation methodology,” in Performance Evaluation and Benchmarking, N. Raghunath, P. Meikel, Eds.,
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2024, pp. 1–17.
[77] H. Si et al., “Timeseriesbench: An industrial-grade benchmark for time
series anomaly detection models,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Int. Symp. Softw.
Rel. Eng., 2024, pp. 61–72.
[78] Q. Tang, C. Dai, Y. Wu, and H. Zhou, “Mlp-mixer based masked autoencoders are effective, explainable and robust for time series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 798–811, Nov. 2024.
[79] J. M. Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment,” J.
ACM, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 604–632, Sep. 1999.

Kevin O’Shea received the MSc degree from the
Technological University of the Shannon, Ireland,
in 2023, and works as a research assistant with the
Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics.
His research interests include graph neural networks,
large language models and generative adversarial networks, particularly in the area of music, audio, and
cloud computing.

Sen Yan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
the BEng (1st Hons) degree in Internet of Things
engineering from Shandong University, in 2018, and
the MSc (1st Hons) degree in computer science from
the Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, in
2020. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
in intelligent transportation systems with the School
of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University. He
is working in the areas of data-driven methods used
in intelligent transportation systems.

Ming Yu received the 1st-Class Honours bachelor’s
degree in data science and the 1st-Class Honours master’s degree in computer science from DCU, Ireland.
She is a research assistant working with the Insight
Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin
City University (DCU). Her research focuses on DevOps and machine learning applications in cloud
computing. As a certified Cloud Practitioner, she
possesses expertise in cloud network troubleshooting, Linux, and Site Reliability Engineering (SRE)
operations.

O’SHEA et al.: EXPLAINABLE GRAPH ENSEMBLE LEARNING FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Xianjuan Chen received the master’s degree with
first-class honours in computing, data analytics from
Dublin City University, in 2024. Her research interests include machine learning and data analysis for
applications in smart energy and cloud computing.
She is dedicated to leveraging data-driven solutions
to solve real-world challenges. Throughout her career,
she has actively contributed to research projects and
technical workshops, gaining hands-on experience
in deploying machine learning to address practical
problems.

Stefano Mauceri received the PhD degree from University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland, in
2021. His PhD thesis explored one-class time series
classification. He is currently a senior research engineer with Huawei Ireland Research Center, Dublin.
In general, he has contributed to several projects
to enable data-driven analysis and decision-making.
His current research interest includes enhancing the
observability of complex software systems to ensure
reliable software infrastructures.

Bhaskar Dhariyal received the PhD degree from
University College Dublin, in 2024, where the key focus was study of the scalable methods for multivariate
time-series classification method. He is a time-series
researcher with Huawei Ireland Research Centre. His
daily work focusses on time-series methods on cloud
applications.

Lei Xu has served as an AIOps Architect and Analytics lead with the Huawei Ireland Research Center
since 2019. His work focuses on researching and
applying AI and data analytics solutions to address
challenges in system operations, maintenance, and
architecture within the cloud domain. Before joining
Huawei, he was an experienced and dedicated applied
scientist with years of experience in the banking and
IT industries, specializing in AI, machine learning,
and cloud computing.

223

Noel E. O’Connor (Member, IEEE) was the academic director of DCU’s Research and Enterprise
Hub on Information Technology and the Digital Society, with the responsibility of coordinating multidisciplinary ICT-related research across the university. He is currently a full professor with the School
of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University
(DCU), Ireland. He is also CEO of the Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics, Ireland’s
largest publicly funded research centre. Since 1999,
he has published more than 400 peer-reviewed publications, made 11 standard submissions, and filed 7 patents. The focus of his
research is on multimedia content analysis using machine learning and AI, for
applications in security/safety, autonomous vehicles, medical imaging, ambient
assisted living, multimedia content-based retrieval, smart cities, precision agriculture, and environmental monitoring. He is a member of the ACM, an Area
Editor of Signal Processing: Image Communication (Elsevier) and an associate
editor of the Journal of Image and Video Processing (Springer).
Mingming Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
BEng (1st Hons) degree in electronic engineering
from the National University of Ireland Maynooth,
in 2011, and the PhD degree in control engineering
and decision science from the Hamilton Institute,
National University of Ireland Maynooth, in 2015. He
is an assistant professor with the School of Electronic
Engineering, Dublin City University (DCU). He is
also affiliated with the Insight Research Ireland Centre for Data Analytics as a Funded Investigator. Prior
to DCU, he worked with University College Dublin
and IBM Ireland Lab as an applied Researcher and EU H2020 project lead. He
has published more than 60 papers to date including journals “IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid”, “IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems”,
“IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering”, “IEEE Systems
Journal”, “IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification”, “IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence”, “Sustainable Cities and Society”, “Pattern
Recognition”, “Applied Energy”, and “Automatica”. He acts as an academic
editor for PLOS One and an associate editor for the Journal of Information
Systems and Operational Research (INFOR). His research interests include
control, optimisation and machine learning with applications to IoT, cloud
computing, electric vehicles, smart grids, smart transportation, and smart cities.