This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

1

Fine-grained Detection and Analysis of Unknown
Encrypted Malicious Traffic from Mixed Noisy
Labels
Qianwei Meng, Qingjun Yuan*, Meng Shen, Member, IEEE, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li, Jing Tao,
Yong Yu, Fellow, IEEE, Yongjuan Wang

Abstract—The efficacy of deep learning-based Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) is critically constrained by the
availability of high-quality labeled data. In real-world environments, datasets often suffer from mixed label noise—consisting of
both closed-set and open-set noise—which significantly distorts
decision boundaries and leads to critical security misses for
previously unknown attacks. Achieving robust classification of
known traffic while accurately detecting unknown threats in
the presence of such mixed noise remains a key challenge. In
this paper, we introduce Sieve, a robust framework designed for
the fine-grained detection and analysis of unknown encrypted
malicious traffic in mixed noise conditions. Sieve consists of
three collaborative modules: (i) a noise-resilient label correction
module that filters out mixed noise using neighbor consistency
metrics and confidence-based subset expansion; (ii) a post-hoc
detection module that employs Mahalanobis distance in a purified, compact feature space to identify unknown traffic; and (iii)
an unknown traffic labeling module that utilizes semi-supervised
clustering to facilitate efficient updates of the dataset. Empirical
evaluations across four public datasets demonstrate that Sieve
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both knownclass classification and unknown-threat detection. Notably, on
the Mal TLS2023 dataset under 50% noise conditions, Sieve
maintains robust performance, with accuracy and F1 scores
exceeding 94%. Further theoretical analyses corroborate the
superiority of the Sieve framework. The code is available at:
https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, noisy label, deep
learning, unknown attack.

This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China, No.2023YFB2705000, and the Natural Science Foundation
of Henan, No.252300420992.
Qianwei Meng, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li and Yongjuan Wang are
with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (email: mengqw20@163.com; 080lusiqi@sina.com; lgsok@163.com; pinkywyj@163.com).
Meng Shen is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn).
Jing Tao is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China (e-mail:
jtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
Yong Yu is with the School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal
University, Shaanxi 710062, China (e-mail: yuyong@snnu.edu.cn).
Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and
Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, as well as the Henan Key
Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering
University and the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security, Ministry of
Education.
Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan, gcxyuan@outlook.com, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China.

(a)

Training set

Classifier

...

KNN
CNN
RNN
...

Clean samples
Labeled as Google Traffic

Open Environment
Known
Classes

APT

Unk nown
Class

(b)
...

...

Clean samples

Closed-set noise

Labeled as Google Traffic

KNN
CNN
RNN
...

Known
Classes

APT

Unk nown
Class

APT

Unk nown
Class

(c)
...

...

... APT

Clean samples Closed-set noise Open-set noise
Labeled as Google Traffic

KNN
CNN
RNN
...

Known
Classes

Fig. 1. Detection methods for unknown malicious traffic in three different
scenarios: (a) All samples in the training set are clean. (b) Some samples in the
training set are incorrectly labeled as other known classes. (c) Some samples
of unknown categories are mixed into the training set, and these samples are
incorrectly labeled as other known classes.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

HILE machine learning and deep learning have become the mainstream solutions for encrypted traffic
analysis, their success is heavily predicated on the availability
of large-scale, high-quality labeled data [1]–[4]. However, in
practical network environments, acquiring pure and accurately
labeled datasets faces severe challenges, as the pervasive
presence of label noise—characterized by mislabeling or
inconsistencies—significantly degrades model classification
performance and reliability [5].
Label noise in encrypted traffic datasets arises from inherent
limitations in automated labeling methods [6] and subjective
errors during manual annotation [7]. In practice, this noise typically manifests in a mixed form, comprising both closed-set
noise (where a sample is mislabeled as another known class)
and open-set noise (where a sample from an unknown class
is incorrectly assigned a known label) [8], [9], as illustrated
in Fig. 1. This degradation in label quality severely constrains
the practical deployment of malicious traffic classifiers.
These two types of noise harm models differently: closedset noise leads to blurred decision boundaries between known
categories, while open-set noise misleads the model into identifying potential unknown attacks as normal traffic or known
malware, causing serious security misses. Furthermore, current
research on malicious traffic classification mainly focuses on
the closed-world assumption, making it difficult to cope with
the endless stream of unknown threats in open environments
[10]–[12]. Therefore, achieving precise classification of known

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

2

malicious traffic and acute detection of unknown malicious
traffic simultaneously under mixed noise conditions is a critical
problem.
To address the label noise problem, existing mainstream
methods typically employ sample selection strategies [5],
[13]–[17], designing screening algorithms to filter noise or
correct labels to construct a purer training subset. However,
most existing denoising methods ignore the existence of openset noise and lack targeted filtering mechanisms. On the other
hand, to detect unknown malicious traffic, existing studies
mostly integrate detection modules into the model training
process [18]–[20], which often requires complex model architectures or specific loss function designs. More importantly, in
the context of label noise, coupling the detection mechanism
directly within the training process makes it highly susceptible
to interference from noisy samples, leading to a significant
increase in the misclassification rate of unknown traffic.
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, we observe
that in the feature space, the label consistency between clean
samples and their neighbors is significantly higher than that
of noisy samples. Based on this intuition, we propose a robust
detection framework named Sieve. Sieve consists of three
collaborative modules: noisy label correction, unknown traffic
detection, and unknown traffic labeling. First, the noisy label
correction module utilizes neighbor consistency metrics and
prediction confidence to effectively screen and distinguish
clean samples, closed-set noise, and open-set noise. It corrects
the labels of closed-set noise samples, thereby constructing a
pure and class-balanced training set. Second, to avoid noise
interference with detection performance, the unknown traffic
detection module adopts a “Post-hoc Detection” mechanism.
This mechanism identifies unknown traffic using a metric
based on the Mahalanobis Distance on top of a model trained
on purified data. Finally, addressing the complex composition
of detected unknown traffic, the unknown traffic labeling
module implements efficient labeling of new attack types and
dataset updates by estimating the number of categories and
performing cluster analysis, combined with expert intervention.
Sieve is a novel framework for unknown malicious traffic
detection that explicitly handles mixed label noise, i.e., the
coexistence of closed-set and open-set noise in the training
data. In contrast to prior works that consider unknown traffic
detection together with closed-set noise handling, Sieve further
addresses open-set noise by correcting closed-set noisy labels
while rejecting open-set noisy samples. The main contributions
of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel fine-grained detection framework
tailored for low-quality labeled data, named Sieve. This
framework exhibits high model compatibility and significantly enhances the encrypted traffic classification
and detection capabilities of various supervised learning
models within noisy environments.
• We design a noise-resilient feature learning and collaborative detection mechanism. By leveraging innovative
sample screening and label correction strategies alongside a decoupled post-hoc detection mechanism, Sieve
effectively mitigates mixed noise interference, ensuring

the generation of stable feature representations for the
accurate classification of known traffic and the precise
capture of unknown threats.
• We verify the comprehensive performance of Sieve across
four public datasets. Experimental results demonstrate
that Sieve outperforms existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods in both known-class classification and unknownclass detection tasks; notably, it exhibits superior robustness in high-noise scenarios, significantly improving the
model’s accuracy and F1 score.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
reviews the related literature, and Section III formally defines
the problem. Section IV details the design of the proposed
Sieve framework, while Section V provides the supporting
theoretical justification. The approach is empirically evaluated
in Section VI, and Section VIII presents the concluding
remarks.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we will review some works related to
unknown malicious traffic detection and noise label handling.
Table I provides a summary of the related works.
A. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection
FOSS [18] employs the concept of isolation forests by
partitioning the data distribution hyperplane to achieve finegrained detection of unknown attacks. At the same time, the
model also has the capability for automatic updates. The
core idea of RoNeTC [19] is that classification results for
known traffic should have high confidence (low uncertainty).
In contrast, unknown traffic should show high uncertainty due
to a lack of prior knowledge. RoNeTC dynamically integrates
classification decisions from multiple views and evaluates
decision uncertainty to classify unknown traffic. TrafficLLM
[21] converts raw traffic into rich semantic embeddings and
leverages the traffic understanding capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to detect unknown traffic using the
classification output head of the LLM. RFG-HELAD [22]
utilizes heterogeneous ensemble learning, combining DNNs,
contrastive learning, GANs, and deep kNN to detect unknown
traffic. Its core concept is based on uncertainty quantification
and using generative adversarial networks to learn the distribution of unknown traffic dynamically. In addition, there
are some post-hoc out-of-distribution detection algorithms
[23]–[25] that are generally model-agnostic and distributionagnostic, capable of assessing whether a sample belongs
to the original distribution during inference with very low
computational cost.
FlowLens [26] introduces the Flow Marker Accumulator
data structure, which efficiently collects compact flow distribution features in the data plane of programmable switches
through quantization and truncation operations, supporting the
control plane for machine learning classification. nPrintML
[27] designs a unified aligned binary packet representation,
nPrint, and combines AutoML to automatically perform feature selection, model search, and hyperparameter tuning, significantly reducing the manual engineering cost of traffic analysis tasks. NetBeacon [28] first deploys a decision tree model

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

3

efficiently in the data plane of programmable switches under a
multi-stage sequential model architecture, enabling line-speed
flow-level feature computation and intelligent traffic analysis.
HyperVision [29] constructs a flow interaction graph to model
the interaction patterns between flows, using unsupervised
graph clustering to detect unknown encrypted malicious traffic
in real-time without labeled data.
However, the unknown traffic detection mechanisms in
the above works often participate in model training. In the
presence of label noise, these detection mechanisms perform
poorly and are relatively complex in design [30]–[32].

learning, rather than addressing existing label errors. This
fundamentally differs from the label noise problem studied
in this paper. Label noise originates from inherent errors in
the data collection and annotation process, contaminating the
supervision signal during training. This paper focuses on how
to achieve reliable model training and detection of unknown
threats under this more pervasive type of data imperfection.
TABLE I
C OMPARISON WITH PRIOR APPROACHES .

Prior Works

B. Noisy-Label Handling for Traffic Classification
Current mainstream approaches for handling traffic noise
label problems primarily focus on designing label correction
algorithms to correct noisy sample labels. FlowRefiner [13]
clusters each type of traffic into multiple subclusters, defining
a majority label for each subcluster. Labels of samples whose
annotations do not align with the majority label are deemed
noisy. It then uses maximum confidence to expand the training
subset to complete label correction for noisy samples. DSDIR
[14] designs a sample relabeling strategy based on confidence
and uncertainty metrics, addressing both noise labels and longtail distribution issues. MCRe [15] focuses on both label
correction and model robust training, designing three different
levels of attribute constraints based on traffic distribution
in the decision space. RAPIER [16] observes that normal
traffic is tightly distributed within a certain region. In contrast,
malicious traffic is spread across the feature space, indicating a
density difference between normal and malicious traffic, which
is used for label noise correction. AEGIS-Net [5] notes the
density difference between clean and noisy samples, selecting
multiple prototypes for each type of sample to infer the true
labels of noisy samples. CoLD [33] analyzes the impact of
label noise from a causal relationship perspective, using three
components: feature reordering, local joint learning, and causal
collaborative denoising, to effectively identify and filter noisy
labels.
However, the above works often only consider the existence
of closed-set noisy samples, while open-set noise also exists
in real scenarios. Existing methods do not adequately handle
this, as the true labels of open-set noise are always incorrect,
regardless of how label correction is performed [34].
C. Adversarial Noise
Research on adversarial noise focuses on attackers adding
carefully designed perturbations to input samples during the
inference stage to deceive detection models. For example,
Whisper [35] extracts robust features through frequencydomain analysis to resist adversarial packet injections, while
Wedjat [36] uses causal networks to model protocol interactions and identify adversarial patterns that violate semantics.
The core goal of such work is to improve model robustness
against adversarial examples, under the assumption that the
training data has accurate labels. Another related line of
work, such as tFusion [37], focuses on reducing labeling
costs through cross-modal feature fusion and self-supervised

Unknown Closed-set Noise Open-set Noise Code

FOSS [18]
RoNeTC [19]
TrafficLLM [21]
RFG-HELAD [22]
HyperVision [29]

"
"
"
"
"

%
%
%
%
%

%
%
%
%
%

"
%
"
"
"

AEGIS-Net [5]
FlowRefiner [13]
DSDIR [14]
MCRe [15]
RAPIER [16]
CoLD [33]

"
%
%
%
"
%

"
"
"
"
"
"

%
%
%
%
%
%

"
%
"
"
"
%

Sieve

"

"

"

"

Unknown: Unknown Traffic Detection; Closed-set Noise: Closed-set Noise
Label Handling; Open-set Noise: Open-set Noise Label Handling.

D. In summary
Current methods typically address noise correction and
unknown detection separately. More critically, they rest on
different philosophical foundations. Most prior works on label
correction operate under a closed-world assumption, aiming
to correct all noisy labels into the known set. In contrast,
by acknowledging the reality of mixed noise, our philosophy
shifts toward differentiating and treating them distinctly: it
corrects closed-set noise while actively rejecting open-set
noise, thereby purifying the training basis for unknown threat
detection.
In the presence of label noise, particularly when open-set
noise samples are mixed into the training set, the performance
of unknown traffic detection can be significantly affected. How
to design appropriate label correction strategies for closedset noisy samples, as well as screening strategies for open-set
noisy samples to minimize the impact of noisy samples on
unknown traffic detection, is the problem that this paper aims
to address.
III. T HREAT MODEL & P ROBLEM STATEMENT
A. Threat model
Fig. 2 illustrates the threat model of this work. The NIDS
is deployed at the boundary of a trusted internal network,
monitoring encrypted traffic passing through the gateway [38]–
[40]. Its purpose is to defend against various types of encrypted
malicious traffic originating from the untrusted Internet, such
as C2 communications, DDoS attacks, and so on. During the
NIDS training process (right-hand side), the system is subject

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

4

Pipeline of NIDS

Router

Internet

TABLE II
S YMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS USED IN THIS PAPER .

Detection

Notation
= {(xi , yi )}N
i=1

Internal
Network

Feature
Extractor

Model

Labeling

Training

Gateway NIDS
Label Noise

Fig. 2. Threat model: The impact of label noise on the NIDS training process.
Figure inspired by [33].

to non-adversarial label noise, meaning that the noise arises
from labeling errors rather than from deliberate data poisoning
by an attacker.
A concrete instance of such harmful open-set noise would
be the traffic of a novel, previously unseen ransomware variant
being mistakenly labeled as benign during data annotation.
This single noisy sample teaches the model to associate the
features of this new threat with normal behavior. Consequently,
when the actual ransomware attack occurs in deployment, the
model will likely misclassify it as benign traffic with high
confidence, resulting in a critical security miss.
B. Problem statement
Formally, let Ṽ = {(xi , yi )}N
i=1 be a training set with N
samples, where xi ∈ Rd is a flow sample and yi ∈ {0, 1}M is
its one-hot label for M classes. The true label of xi , denoted
as yi∗ , is unobservable. For convenience, we define the logit
label li ∈ C l = {1, 2, . . . , M } as the index where yi (j) = 1.
We categorize label noise into two types: closed-set noise,
where yi∗ 6= yi but yi∗ still belongs to the known classes, and
open-set noise, where yi∗ 6= yi and yi∗ falls outside the M
classes.
Using the noisy dataset Ṽ = (X , Y), we aim to train a
model parameterized by θ. This model consists of an encoder
F : x → z for feature extraction and a classifier Gp : z → y
for classification. Additionally, we use a non-parametric KNN
classifier Gq to help select samples. For simplicity, let Fi be
the feature of xi , pi be the output of Gp , and qi be the output of
Gq . The presence of mixed noise (both closed-set and open-set)
significantly limits the model’s ability to classify known traffic
and detect unknown threats. The symbols and definitions used
in this paper are shown in Table II.
IV. O UR A PPROACH
A. Design Philosophy and Overview
Our proposed Sieve framework, as shown in Fig. 3, operates
as a robust pipeline designed to mitigate the adverse effects
of mixed label noise while enabling the discovery of novel
threats. It consists of three integrated modules: Noisy Label
Correction, Unknown Traffic Detection, and Unknown Traffic
Labeling. Specifically, the Noisy Label Correction module
employs a neighbor consistency metric and a subset expansion

Ṽ
(X , Y)
(Xc , Yc )
(Xn , Yn )
(Xe , Ye )
(Xt , Yt )
DU
DL
Dl
Dn

Definition
Noisy training dataset.
Samples and labels in Ṽ .
Selected clean subset, where ci ≥ ξ.
Unselected subset: (X , Y) \ (Xc , Yc ).
Expanded subset from (Xn , Yn ), where max pi ≥ ζ.
Final training set: Rebalancing((Xc , Yc ) ∪
(Xe , Ye )).
Detected unknown traffic set.
Labeled reference set, i.e., (Xt , Yt ).
Known-class subset in DU .
Novel-class subset in DU , with DU = Dl ∪ Dn and
Dl ∩ Dn = ∅.

strategy to meticulously filter clean samples from mixed noise.
It specifically corrects mislabeled closed-set samples while
discarding open-set noise, thereby constructing a refined and
class-balanced training set. Building upon the feature representations learned from this purified data, the Unknown Traffic
Detection module implements a post-hoc anomaly detection
mechanism based on the Mahalanobis distance to accurately
identify unknown malicious traffic without interference from
noisy samples. Finally, the Unknown Traffic Labeling module
estimates the number of novel categories within the detected
unknown traffic. It performs semi-supervised clustering, facilitating efficient manual annotation by security experts to update
the dataset.
The Sieve framework is designed under the philosophy
of integrating and optimizing established robust learning
paradigms to address the specific challenges of mixed label
noise in encrypted traffic. We adapt and build upon several key
ideas from prior research: the neighbor consistency principle
for sample selection [41], contrastive learning for obtaining
compact representations [22], Mahalanobis distance for posthoc out-of-distribution detection [42] and semi-supervised
clustering for exploring unknown categories [43]. However, a
straightforward application of these components is insufficient
for our target setting. The core of Sieve’s contribution lies in
how these components are tailored, combined, and augmented
to specifically cope with both closed-set and open-set noise
while enabling accurate unknown traffic detection.
B. Noisy Label Correction
In the context of a training set that contains both closedset noise and open-set noise, a natural idea is to select
clean samples (i.e., samples whose annotated labels are the
correct labels) for training the model. Formally, we treat the
entire training set (X , Y) as the input for a sample selection
algorithm, aiming to obtain a clean sample subset (Xc , Yc ),
where the subscript c denotes clean.
1) Sample Selection Algorithm: Our sample selection approach is based on the idea that clean samples often share the
same labels as their neighbors [41]. For example, in balanced
binary classification, a sample x labeled 0 is considered correct
if more than half of its K-nearest neighbors also have the label
0. To quantify this, we use a neighbor consistency metric ci

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

5

Fig. 3. The architecture of Sieve consists of three components. The noisy label correction module is responsible for filtering out two types of noisy samples and
clean samples from the training set, and for correcting the labels of closed-set noisy samples. The unknown traffic detection module builds on the previously
trained model to detect unknown malicious traffic. The unknown traffic labeling module first estimates the number of categories in the identified unknown
malicious traffic, then performs clustering of the traffic. Finally, experts label the new categories of traffic.

that measures how well the noisy label yi matches the KNN
prediction qi . Samples with high ci scores are identified as
clean and selected for further training.
Specifically, we first define the similarity sij between any
two samples xi and xj , where Fi ≡ F (xi ) and we use
cosine similarity, leading to sij = cos(Fi , Fj ). Let Ni be
the index set of the K most similar samples to xi based
on sample similarity within the set X , with Ni ⊆ [N ] and
|Ni | = K. Then, for each sample xi , we can calculate
the label distribution
P from KNN voting in its neighborhood,
1
denoted as qi0 = K
n∈Ni yn . Considering the potential class
imbalance in the training set, we firstP
compute the overall label
N
distribution of the dataset as χ = i=1 yi , which allows us
to derive a balanced label distribution qi = χ−1 qi0 , where χ−1
denotes a new vector obtained by taking the reciprocal of each
element in χ. In this way, we can mitigate the effects brought
by class imbalance.
We let the vector qi represent the output of the KNN
classifier Gq . The neighbor consistency metric ci is then
calculated using the logit label li and the KNN prediction qi
as follows:
qi (li )
ci =
,
(1)
maxj qi (j)
where ci shows the ratio of the KNN prediction at label li to
the maximum value across all classes.
We validated this intuition in Fig. 4, where we observed that
both closed-set noise and open-set noise exhibited a lower
neighbor consistency metric compared to clean samples. A
higher neighbor consistency metric ci indicates that the sample
xi has more consistent labels with its neighboring samples,
which means that the annotated label yi is more likely to be
correct, and the sample xi is more likely to be clean. Based on
this, by setting a threshold ξ, the clean sample subset (Xc , Yc )
can be obtained through the following filtering strategy:
Xc , Yc = {(xi , yi ) | ci ≥ ξ} ,

(2)

In the experiments of this paper, we set ξ = 1 to obtain a
purer sample, meaning that we only consider the sample xi

as clean if its neighbor’s voting label distribution qi equals its
current annotated label yi .

Fig. 4. In the Mal TLS2023 dataset, under the conditions of 50% symmetric
noise rate and 50% open-set noisy samples, the Sieve model was trained for
10 epochs. The distribution of the neighbor consistency metric c scores for
clean samples and noisy samples (including closed-set noise and open-set
noise) showed that the mean of the neighbor consistency metric for clean
samples was 0.9777, the mean for closed-set noise was 0.1561, and the mean
for open-set noise was 0.6212.

2) Subset Expansion: Relying only on the clean subset
(Xc , Yc ) is often suboptimal because it ignores a large portion
of the data and may still contain residual noise. Furthermore,
the model must be robust against class imbalance and various
noise patterns. To leverage the unselected samples (Xn , Yn ) =
(X , Y) \ (Xc , Yc ), we propose a subset expansion mechanism
consisting of (a) initial expansion and (b) class rebalancing.
a) Initial Expansion. This step focuses on samples in Xn
where the predicted probability pi from classifier Gp exceeds
a threshold ζ. These high-confidence samples fall into two
groups: (1) samples where the annotated label matches the
prediction, likely representing missed clean samples; and (2)
samples with label-prediction mismatches, which we consider
mislabeled. For the latter, the correct labels are inferred using

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

6

the model’s predictions. The expanded subset (Xe , Ye ) is
defined as:
n
o
(Xe , Ye ) = (xi , yi0 ) | max pi ≥ ζ ,
(3)
where yi0 is the predicted label for sample xi .
The efficacy of the high-confidence threshold ζ in filtering out open-set noise stems from a fundamental difference
between closed-set and open-set noise. For a sample whose
true category is outside the known label space C l (i.e., openset noise), the classifier Gp , trained exclusively on known
categories, cannot assign a high prediction probability to any
single known class. Its predictions tend to be distributed with
low confidence across multiple known classes because the
sample’s feature representation does not align well with any
learned class centroid. In contrast, a closed-set noisy sample
or a missed clean sample, whose true label resides within C l ,
can eventually be recognized by a well-trained model, leading
to a high prediction confidence for its true class.
Experimental validation indicates that by setting a high
threshold ζ, we can ensure that the initial expanded subset
contains samples with high-accuracy labels. Moreover, as
illustrated in Fig. 5a, this mechanism can effectively avoid
selecting open-set noisy samples, as these typically lack highconfidence predictions and thus have lower max pi values.
Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 5b, as the number of training
epochs increases, the Sieve model becomes increasingly “confident” in its predictions for clean samples; the Clean curve
consistently exceeds the Noisy curve. This indicates that the
Sieve model can distinguish between clean and noisy samples.
b) Class Rebalancing. By adding the expanded subset
(Xe , Ye ) to the clean subset (Xc , Yc ), we can mitigate the
sample imbalance issue to some extent. However, the above
measures do not completely resolve the class imbalance problem. The causes of class imbalance are diverse: (1) the initial
noisy flow dataset Ṽ might be class-imbalanced, and (2) even
if Ṽ is class-balanced, the subsets obtained after applying the
sample selection algorithm and the initial expansion mechanism, (Xc , Yc ) and (Xe , Ye ), might still be class-imbalanced.
For instance, the class A samples in (Xc , Yc ) might number
1000, while class B samples could only be 50, or, in extreme
cases, there may be no samples from class B in (Xc , Yc ) at
all.
To fix class imbalance, we apply two post-hoc steps without
changing the selection algorithm. First, we check the sample
count for each class in the union (Xc , Yc ) ∪ (Xe , Ye ). For
classes with few or no samples, we add extra samples in
descending order of their neighbor consistency ci . This process
continues until the count reaches (1/M ) · Nc , where Nc is the
original size of that class in the noisy dataset and M is the total
number of classes. Finally, we oversample minority classes
to create a fully balanced set. In summary, there are various
strategies to keep the training set balanced [44]; however, we
will not elaborate on them further here. The resulting training
set (Xt , Yt ) is defined as:
(Xt , Yt ) = Rebalancing ((Xc , Yc ) ∪ (Xe , Ye )) .

(4)

3) Model Training: During the training phase, based on
the training set (Xt , Yt ) and (X , Y), we use the cross-entropy

(a)

(b)
Fig. 5. In the Mal TLS2023 dataset with 50% symmetric noise and 50%
open-set noise: (a) Prediction confidence distribution for clean, closed-set
noisy, and open-set noisy samples at epoch 20. The mean confidence values
are 0.8421, 0.7746, and 0.3829, respectively. In this paper, we set the value of
ζ to 0.93. (b) Evolution of maximum confidence over 100 epochs. The blue
and red solid lines denote the per-epoch mean confidence for clean and noisy
samples (including closed-set and open-set noise samples), respectively. The
shaded areas represent the interquartile range (IQR, Q1–Q3) for each group,
indicating the spread of the central 50% of samples.

loss function and self-supervised contrastive loss function to
update the model F and the parameterized classifier Gp .
Let l ∼ Beta(α, α), l0 = max(l, 1 − l) ≥ 0.5. We concatenate two perspectives from the labeled dataset (obtained
by swapping different feature columns) to get the sequence
2B
{(Xk , Yk )}k=1 , where B is the batch size and 2B is the total
number of samples after concatenation. We apply a random
permutation π to reorder the sequence, and then perform linear
interpolation for the inputs and labels:
x̃k = l0 xk + (1 − l0 ) xπ(k) ,

(5)

ỹk = l0 yk + (1 − l0 ) yπ(k) .

(6)

Here, x̃k and ỹk are the mixed samples and labels.
Based on the samples x̃k generated from MixUp [45], we
calculate the supervised loss to optimize the classifier. First,
we obtain the predicted probability distribution through the
encoder F and classifier head Gp :
pk = softmax (Gp (F (x̃k ))) ∈ RM ,

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(7)

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

7

where M is the number of classes and pk is a probability vector. Then, we calculate the cross-entropy loss, which measures
the difference between the predicted probabilities pk and the
mixed labels ỹk :
2B

Lce = −

M

1 XX
ỹk,c log pk,c .
2B
c=1

(8)

k=1

This loss is the average cross-entropy of all samples in the
batch, where ỹk,c is the c-th component of the soft labels.
Considering that the original training set (X , Y) contains
not only clean samples but also noisy samples, we ignore the
labels and consider using self-supervised contrastive loss to
optimize the feature space. Contrastive learning is employed
to train the Sieve model to learn an embedding space where
similar samples are close together, while dissimilar samples
are far apart.
Let
(1)
H(F(ui ))
,
vi =
(1)
kH(F(ui ))k2

(2)
H(F(ui ))
wi =
,
(2)
kH(F(ui ))k2

i = 1, . . . , B,
(9)

(1)

(2)

where ui and ui represent the two views (or augmented
views) of the i-th sample, processed by the neural network F
to generate feature representations. H(z) ∈ Rs , s = 128, is a
function to further process the features.
Let us define:
viT wi
viT wj
viT vj
s+
, svw
, svv
,
ij =
ij =
i =
τ
τ
τ
(10)
T
T
w i vj
wi wj
ww
swv
=
,
s
=
,
ij
ij
τ
τ
where these are measures of similarity between samples and
τ is the temperature parameter. s+
i is the positive similarity
between the same sample in different views, while sij denotes
the negative similarities between different samples.
The objective of contrastive learning is to maximize the similarity between positive sample pairs (vi , wi ) while minimizing
the similarity between negative sample pairs (vi , wj , i 6= j).
Let
X vw X vv
+
(1)
Di = esi +
esij +
esij ,
(11)
j6=i

j6=i

#
+
1
esi
loss(v→w) =
− log (1) .
B i=1
D
B
X

"

(12)

i

Here, loss(v→w) represents the similarity between positive and
(1)
negative samples, and Di is the normalization factor for the
positive sample and all negative samples.
Similarly, we define
X wv X ww
+
(2)
Di = esi +
esij +
esij ,
(13)
j6=i

j6=i

"
#
+
B
1 X
esi
loss(w→v) =
− log (2) .
B i=1
D

(14)

i

The loss for the w → v direction is calculated similarly to
loss(v→w) .

Thus, the overall contrastive loss is given by:

1
(15)
loss(v→w) + loss(w→v) ,
Lself =
2
indicating that the contrastive loss is bidirectional, and the
final symmetric loss is obtained by averaging loss(v→w) and
loss(w→v) .
Finally, the total loss L is a weighted sum of the supervised
cross-entropy loss and the self-supervised contrastive learning
loss:
L = Lce + λLself ,

(16)

where λ is a hyperparameter that controls the balance between
the supervised cross-entropy loss Lce and the self-supervised
contrastive loss Lself .
C. Unknown Traffic Detection
After the training phase is completed, we hope that the Sieve
model not only has the ability to classify known class traffic
but also possesses the capability to detect unknown malicious
traffic. Without changing the training mechanism of the Sieve
model, we employ a non-parametric detection mechanism to
accomplish the detection of unknown malicious traffic [46].
This is a plug-and-play module that can be applied to any
other closed-world traffic classification model [42].
Specifically, when the Sieve model finishes training, under
the optimal model parameters, the filtered clean training set
is denoted as (Xt , Yt ). We obtain the normalized feature set
|X |
{F(xi )/F(xi )k2 }i=1t and construct an index set based on this
foundation. For the traffic sample to be detected x0 ∈ Rd , we
first compute z 0 = F(x0 ), and then calculate the minimum
distance d from z 0 to the known class index set. If d is less than
the threshold τ , the sample is classified as known class traffic;
otherwise, it is classified as unknown class traffic. Formally,
the anomaly score function can be expressed as:
score(z 0 ) = min D(z 0 , ZM ),
M

(17)

where D(·, ·) is a distance metric in the feature space, and
ZM represents the M clusters formed by the known classes.
The threshold τ is set to the 95th percentile of the anomaly
scores from the filtered clean training set. This strategy ensures
that 95% of known class samples will not produce false
positives, thus effectively controlling the misclassification of
known traffic while maintaining high recall.
It should be noted that we use the Mahalanobis distance to
compute the outlier score. Specifically,
0
score(z 0 ) = min(z 0 − µM )T Σ−1
M (z − µM ),
M

(18)

where µM and ΣM denote the sample mean and sample
covariance of the features (z) from the known class clean
training data. Through the eigendecomposition of the sample
covariance, we have ΣM = QM ΛM Q−1
M , and thus:
T

T
0
score(z 0 ) = min QTM (z 0 − µM ) Λ−1
M QM (z − µM ) ,
M

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(19)

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

8

which is equivalent to using the Euclidean distance scaled by
the eigenvalues in the feature space.
In the case of Euclidean distance, that is, in the absence of
scaling, components with higher eigenvalues receive greater
weight but provide minimal discriminability. The scaling of
eigenvalues eliminates this bias, making the Mahalanobis
distance effective for detecting isolated points in the feature
space.
D. Unknown Traffic Labeling
The detected unknown samples are defined as DU =
|D |
{xui }i=1U . The labels of the samples in DL = (Xt , Yt ) are
as pure as possible but not completely correct. Our goal is
to use automatic filtering and clustering of the samples in
DU to assist in the manual annotation of new samples. It is
important to note that our unknown malicious traffic detection
mechanism cannot ensure that all detected unknown traffic
samples are from unknown categories. Hence, the labels yiu
of the samples xui in DU either belong to known classes
C l = {1, 2, . . . , M } or come from new classes C n ∈ N + .
Therefore, our objective is to reassign misclassified samples
back to C l and cluster the remaining samples in DU .
1) Unknown Traffic Clustering: The samples in DU can be
divided into two parts:
|D |

DU = {xui }i=1U = Dl ∪ Dn
= {xli | yil ∈ C l } ∪ {xnj | yjn ∈ C n },

(20)

where Dl ∩ Dn = ∅. All categories are denoted as C = C l ∪
C n with C l ∩ C n = ∅. However, we do not know the exact
number |C n |. In this paper, we first estimate the value of |C n |
as |Cˆn |, and then use the samples and labels in DL = (Xt , Yt )
as known information together with the semi-supervised Kmeans++ algorithm [43] to filter and cluster the samples in
DU . The semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm first utilizes
DL to determine the cluster centers for |C l | known classes, and
ˆ − C l cluster centers based
selects the remaining |Cˆn | = |C|
on the distance from features to the nearest cluster center. In
each iteration, we enforce that the data in DL maps to the true
labels.
|D |
Finally, let the labels assigned to DU = {xui }i=1U by the
 u |DU |
semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm be yˆi i=1 , where
yˆiu ∈ C l ∪Ncentroids , and Ncentroids denotes the new centroids
for Cˆn clusters. Samples in DU belonging to clusters from
l
Ncentroids and their corresponding predicted labels form DU
.
l
ˆ
l
l ˆl |DU |
l
l
Let DU = {(xi , yi )}i=1 , where xi ∈ DU and yi ∈
Ncentroids . The goal of manual annotation is to correct and
label each cluster.
At this point, network security engineers begin to intervene in the cluster labeling process. They will inspect the
original traffic samples corresponding to each cluster (not
just the abstract feature vectors) and identify and remove
any obvious “anomalous” or “discordant” instances from each
cluster. These discordant instances are manually moved to their
rightful belonging clusters.
Since the unknown traffic detection model Sieve is not
perfect, some instances that originally belong to known categories C l may be misidentified as unknown traffic and mixed

l
into the new category set DU
. Network security engineers
need to identify these “fake new class” instances and remove
l
them from DU
as much as possible to avoid label noise in
subsequent learning.
If the estimated number of new categories |Cˆn | does not
match the reality:
n
• If the true number of categories is greater |C | > |Cˆn |,
new clusters need to be manually created to split the
categories that have not been properly separated.
n
• If the true number is less |C | < |Cˆn |, several clusters
that should belong together must be merged.

Finally, a true Ground-Truth label is assigned to each
corrected and semantically clear cluster, resulting in a final
labeled dataset for incremental learning of new categories.
This step significantly reduces the cost and workload of manual labeling. Labelers only need to perform efficient quality
checks and fine-tuning, rather than starting from scratch with
tedious organization work, hence greatly reducing labor costs.
2) Class Number Estimation: The purpose of estimating
the number of categories is to determine the parameter k for
the semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm, i.e., |C|.
Inspired by [47]–[49], we do not know the exact number of
|C|, but we have a labeled sample set DL = (Xt , Yt ). We can
partition DL into a probe set and a validate set.
Specifically, we first divide DL = (Xt , Yt ) into a probe set
probe
val
with Clprobe categories and a validate set DL
with Clval
DL
probe
probe
val
l
categories, where Cl
∪ Cl = C , and |Cl
| : |Clval | =
probe
probe
val
val
2 : 1, and Cl
.
∩ Cl = ∅. Thus, DL = DL
∪ DL
We then launch the Brent algorithm [50] over the range
(|Clprobe |, |Clmax |] and use the semi-supervised K-means++
probe
val
∪ DU until convergence. Here,
algorithm on DL
∪ DL
max
|Cl | is the expected maximum total number of categories,
which can be set to a larger value. During semi-supervised
probe
learning, samples in DL
are forced to comply with the
val
are treated as additional
true labels, while samples in DL
val
and
“unlabeled” data. The clustering performance on DL
DU is assessed using average clustering accuracy (ACC) and
the Davies-Bouldin index (DB index) [51] as follows. At the
same time, Brent’s algorithm optimizes to maximize the ACCDB objective. Finally, Brent’s algorithm terminates with the
ˆ The class number estimation process
optimal estimation |C|.
of DU is shown in Algorithm 1
Average Clustering Accuracy (ACC): ACC is applicable to
val
labeled classes in the validate set DL
and is given by the
formula:


val
|DX
L |
n

o

 1
ˆ
1 yival = σ yival
ACC = max  val
,
DL
σ∈S (Clval )
i=1
(21)
ˆ represent the true labels and the cluster
where yival and yival

val
labels assigned to feature xval
reprei , respectively. S Cl
sents the permutation group of elements in Clval . The ACC
metric focuses on evaluating the clustering accuracy of labeled
known data by solving the label matching problem to quantify
clustering quality fairly.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

9

Davies-Bouldin Index (DB): DB is an unsupervised clustering evaluation metric that does not require true labels, relying
only on the data itself and the clustering results. The core idea
of the DB index is to measure the compactness (similarity
of samples within a cluster) and separability (differences
between clusters). A smaller value indicates better clustering
performance (tighter clusters, better separation between them),
while a larger value indicates poorer clustering performance.
It is defined as:


|Ĉ|
si + sj
1 X
(22)
max
DB =
,
ˆ
j6=i
dij
|C|
i=1
ˆ denoted as C1 , C2 , . . . , C ˆ ,
where the number of clusters is C,
|C|
and for each cluster Ci , we define:
1 X
kx − µi k,
si =
(23)
|C |
i

x∈Ci

where µi is the centroid of cluster Ci . The distance between
clusters is measured as dij = kµi − µj k, where k · k typically
denotes the Euclidean distance.
Algorithm 1 Class Number Estimation
Input: Labeled dataset DL = (Xt , Yt ) with |C l | known
|D |
classes; unknown sample set DU = {xui }i=1U ; maximum
max
expected number of classes |Cl |
ˆ
Output: Estimated total number of classes |C|
1: Extract features of DL and DU using F
2: Step 1: Split labeled dataset
probe
3: Partition DL by class into probe set DL
and validate
val
set DL such that:
probe
val
4:
1) DL = DL
∪ DL
probe
val
5:
2) |Cl
| : |Cl | = 2 : 1
6:
3) Clprobe ∩ Clval = ∅
7: Step 2: Define evaluation function f (k)
8: function f (k)
9:
1. Apply semi-supervised K-means++ on dataset D =
probe
val
∪ DU with k clusters:
DL
∪ DL
probe
10:
- Constrain DL
samples to their true labels
val
11:
- Treat DL and DU as unlabeled
12:
2. After convergence, compute:
val
13:
- ACC: Average clustering accuracy on DL
14:
- DB: Davies-Bouldin index on D
15:
3. return f (k) = −(ACC − DB)
16: end function
17: Step 3: Find optimal k using Brent’s algorithm
probe
18: Run Brent’s algorithm on interval (|Cl
|, |Clmax |] to
minimize f (k)
19: Let k ∗ be the k that minimizes f (k)
ˆ = k∗
20: Set optimal estimate |C|
ˆ
21: return |C|

V. T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION
In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis of the proposed Sieve framework from an information-theoretic perspective. Specifically, we prove three theorems to elucidate how

Sieve prevents information collapse, avoids label blindness,
and optimizes intra-class compactness for effective unknown
traffic detection1 .
Theorem 1. (Proof in Appendix A): Let Zce be the feature
representation learned by minimizing only the cross-entropy
loss, and Zsieve be the representation learned by Sieve with
a self-supervised contrastive loss weight λ > 0. Under the
idealized Information Bottleneck framework, as the compression coefficient β → ∞, Zce converges to a minimal sufficient
statistic of Y , resulting in the asymptotic loss of detectionrelevant information, i.e., I(Zce ; T |Y ) = 0. Conversely, under
the assumption of non-vanishing structural information, the
optimization objective of Sieve provides a theoretical basis for
a strictly positive lower bound for detection information, i.e.,
I(Zsieve ; T |Y ) > 0.
Theorem 2. (Proof in Appendix B): Let Ys be the proxy target
for self-supervised learning. Assuming the Label Blindness
Condition I(Ys ; Y ) = 0 holds, the unsupervised feature
Zssl satisfies I(Zssl ; Y ) = 0. Sieve aims to overcome this
blindness condition by introducing the neighbor-consistency
corrected label Yc . Under the Manifold Smoothness Assumption and the condition of high-purity filtering, I(Zsieve ; Y )
asymptotically approaches the label entropy H(Y ), thus enabling the detection of adjacent unknown samples.
Theorem 3. (Proof in Appendix C): Let Z follow a classconditional distribution with covariance matrix Σk . The selfsupervised optimization objective of Sieve (Lself ) is mathematically equivalent to minimizing the trace of the intra-class
covariance matrix Σk , i.e., Tr(Σk ) → 0. Under the assumption
of a class-conditional Gaussian distribution, this implies that
the determinant det(Σk ) → 0. In the asymptotic limit, this
compactness causes the eigenvalue amplification factor of the
Mahalanobis distance metric to tend towards infinity, thereby
minimizing the theoretical bound of the Open Set Risk.
The empirical findings presented in Section VI provide
robust validation for the information-theoretic foundations of
the Sieve framework. Consistent with Theorem 1, ROC analysis demonstrates that Sieve achieves AUC values reaching
99.92%, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods
in unknown threat detection scenarios. Furthermore, the experimental results substantiate Theorem 2 as the framework
successfully overcomes label blindness; this is evidenced by
the direct positive correlation between label accuracy and
model generalization, combined with a robust capability to
reject open-set noise. Finally, the intra-class compactness
predicted by Theorem 3 is visually confirmed by t-SNE
visualizations where known categories form well-defined and
compact clusters; this geometric refinement results in the
distinct gap observed in anomaly score distributions, allowing
Mahalanobis-based detection to minimize open-set risk more
effectively than variants like Sieve-MSP or Sieve-Energy.

1 See repository https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve/tree/master/theory

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

10

VI. E VALUATION
In this section, we conducted comprehensive experiments
on multiple publicly available traffic datasets to demonstrate
the superiority and effectiveness of our proposed Sieve model.
Specifically, these experiments aim to address the following
questions:
• RQ1. How does the Sieve model perform in detecting
known malicious traffic compared to SOTA methods
under different noise conditions?
• RQ2. How does the Sieve model perform in detecting
unknown malicious traffic compared to SOTA methods
under different noise conditions?
• RQ3. What is the effectiveness of the analysis of detected
unknown traffic samples?

external datasets are incorrectly assigned labels from the
current set. We define the total noise ratio as the overall
proportion of noisy samples in the dataset, while the openset noise ratio refers to the portion of open-set samples
within the noisy subset. For brevity, experimental settings are
denoted by their ratios and types : for instance, “0.3Sym” and
“0.4Asym” represent 30% symmetric and 40% asymmetric
noise , respectively, while “0.3Sym 0.5Open” indicates a 30%
total noise ratio with a 50% open-set component.
3) Experimental Settings: The experimental setup is summarized in Table III. For the Mal TLS2023 dataset, we use
three randomly selected types of traffic from CipherSpectrum
as open-set noise samples, and all categories in CipherSpectrum as unknown traffic. For the DDoS2019 dataset, we use
benign traffic from IDS2018 as open-set noise samples and all
traffic from IDS2018 as unknown traffic.

A. Setup
1) Dataset: The experiments are based on four public
datasets.
Mal TLS2023 [52]: This dataset contains TLS 1.2 encrypted traffic generated by 23 malware families. We segment
raw packet traces into flows using the standard five-tuple and
extract one-dimensional statistical features from each TLS
flow. The feature extraction code is available in our repository2 . After processing, the dataset contains 92,034 flows.
CipherSpectrum [53]: This dataset contains TLS 1.3
encrypted web traffic using three mandatory/recommended
cipher suites: AES-128-GCM, AES-256-GCM, and
CHACHA20-POLY1305. Each traffic type contains 2,010
flows, resulting in 82,410 flows in total. Since it is also
TLS encrypted traffic, we apply the same feature extraction
pipeline as Mal TLS2023.
DDoS2019 [54]: This dataset includes various reflective
DDoS attacks, such as PortMap, NetBIOS, LDAP, MSSQL,
and SNMP. We treat all attack traffic as malicious and real
background traffic as benign. We use CICFlowMeter3 to
extract flow-level statistical features. After processing, it contains 523,831 attack flows and 106,626 benign flows, totaling
630,457 flows.
IDS2018 [55]: We use traffic from two days, i.e.,
3.2 and 2.16, and select DoS attacks-Hulk, DoS attacksSlowHTTPTest, and Bot as malicious traffic, while treating
the remaining benign traffic as normal. Following DDoS2019,
we use CICFlowMeter to extract the same statistical features.
The processed dataset contains 1,074,342 benign flows and
290,089 malicious flows, totaling 1,364,431 flows.
2) Noise Settings: To simulate realistic data corruption,
we include three noise types: symmetric, asymmetric, and
open-set. Symmetric noise is created by randomly replacing
labels across all classes using a uniform distribution. In
contrast, asymmetric noise models semantic confusion by
swapping labels between similar categories. For example, in
the CipherSpectrum dataset, traffic from googleapis.com
or googletagmanager.com is randomly relabeled as
google.com. Open-set noise occurs when samples from
2 https://github.com/niebikong/Sieve
3 https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter

TABLE III
E XPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT SETUP.
Characteristics

Mal TLS2023

DDoS2019

# Attack types

23

DDoS variants

# Normal samples

0

106,626

92,034

523,831

# Attack samples
Task
Open-set noise classes
Unknown classes

Multi-class

Binary

Randomly select 3 classes

Benign

CipherSpectrum

IDS2018

4) Compared Methods: To comprehensively evaluate Sieve,
we compare it with state-of-the-art methods from two closely
related but distinct research lines, since there is no published
baseline specifically designed for the joint setting of mixed
label noise and unknown traffic detection.
• Noise-Robust Learning Methods (e.g., DSDIR [14],
MCRe [15], and RAPIER [16]) are designed to learn
from training sets corrupted by closed-set label noise,
and are mainly evaluated on known-class classification
performance. Comparing Sieve with them verifies its
robustness to noisy labels in known traffic classification.
• Unknown Attack Detection Methods (e.g., AEGIS-Net
[5], FOSS [18], and RFG-HELAD [22]) aim to identify
samples from unseen classes, but usually assume a clean
training set. Comparing Sieve with them evaluates its
ability to detect unknown malicious traffic in the presence
of label noise.
For a fair comparison, all baseline methods are evaluated
under the same experimental protocol as Sieve, using the same
flow-level feature vectors, preprocessing pipeline, train/test
split, and noise injection settings. Although some baselines
were originally designed with different feature extraction procedures, their inputs can be represented as one-dimensional
feature vectors; thus, we use the unified feature representation
for all compared methods to avoid biases caused by inconsistent inputs or data partitions. We follow the original papers or
publicly available implementations of the baselines as closely
as possible and retain their default parameter settings. In Sieve,
the CNN-based deep residual network is used as the feature
encoder to learn compact and robust representations.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

11

TABLE IV
T HE CLOSED - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE M AL TLS2023 DATASET.
0.1Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.1Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

RAPIER
MCRe
DSDIR
FOSS
RFG-HELAD
CNN

86.54
85.23
94.52
70.45
91.04
93.94

85.66
83.66
93.75
63.14
89.19
93.82

83.26
69.72
94.17
74.11
91.37
91.38

83.78
67.24
92.86
69.39
89.60
91.13

81.43
54.53
93.53
71.19
91.23
90.91

81.32
49.73
92.23
64.85
89.65
90.67

85.73
88.00
94.82
84.26
91.79
93.29

85.56
86.98
93.65
82.09
90.61
93.16

84.10
81.09
94.08
76.17
91.88
91.99

84.57
79.12
92.51
71.05
90.54
91.89

80.74
74.25
93.73
69.72
92.60
89.36

80.39
72.28
92.40
63.57
91.82
89.34

Sieve

95.45

95.19

95.40

95.12

94.96

94.75

94.85

94.59

95.20

94.95

95.25

95.01

Methods

Note: The CNN model represents the model without the noise correction module in the Sieve, trained only with the cross-entropy loss function.
The noise setting format is [total noise ratio][noise type] [open-set noise ratio]Open.
TABLE V
T HE CLOSED - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE DD O S2019 DATASET.
0.1Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.1Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

RAPIER
MCRe
DSDIR
FOSS
RFG-HELAD
CNN

76.66
96.59
87.33
82.93
97.93
94.74

84.73
96.49
65.81
75.19
97.93
94.78

78.87
89.91
84.97
82.93
97.93
89.94

86.48
89.09
54.75
83.90
97.93
89.84

72.42
74.87
83.35
77.42
97.72
86.77

82.02
64.12
45.52
75.19
97.72
86.12

70.86
94.95
91.60
84.54
97.93
95.75

80.24
94.69
87.27
78.79
97.93
95.86

67.06
85.16
88.75
83.86
97.93
88.87

77.71
83.31
83.75
77.33
97.93
88.90

68.06
74.76
89.45
84.72
97.89
86.82

78.03
70.60
84.59
79.19
97.89
86.23

Sieve

98.48

98.48

98.51

98.51

98.58

98.58

99.12

99.12

99.07

99.07

99.05

99.06

Methods

The noise setting format is [total noise ratio][noise type] [open-set noise ratio]Open.

5) Training Details: The Sieve model utilizes a CNN-based
deep residual neural network for feature extraction, with a
standard SGD optimizer featuring a momentum of 0.9 and
a weight decay of 5e-4. The learning rate is set to 0.001
with a cosine learning rate schedule, and the total training
epoch is 100. The batch size is 256. The parameters ξ and ζ
are selected from {0.91, 0.92, . . . , 1.0}. The parameters K in
KNN voting and the λ are chosen via grid search on a heldout validation set, with K ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100, 150, 200} and
λ ∈ {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. The optimal values, determined by
maximizing validation performance, are ξ = 1.0, ζ = 0.93,
K = 100, and λ = 1.0. All reported results are averaged
over experiments conducted with five different random seeds
to ensure robustness.
B. Known Malware Traffic Classification Experiments (RQ1)
To comprehensively evaluate the classification performance
of the Sieve model on known malware traffic in a closed-world
scenario, especially in a complex environment characterized
by the simultaneous presence of closed-set noise and open-set
noise, we compared Sieve with current SOTA methods. The
comparison methods include: noise label handling methods
(RAPIER, MCRe, DSDIR); unknown traffic detection methods
(FOSS, RFG-HELAD); and a baseline model (standard CNN
neural network without a noise processing module). Through
the analysis of Table IV and Table V, we arrived at the
following in-depth conclusions:
(1) Multiclass Classification Performance Analysis. Experimental results on the Mal TLS2023 multi-classification
dataset demonstrate that Sieve possesses significant advantages

in handling mixed noise. As shown in Table IV, the Sieve
model achieved optimal performance under all noise settings
(both symmetric and asymmetric), with average Accuracy and
F1 scores exceeding 94%. Notably, even under extremely high
noise rates—such as the 0.5Sym 0.5Open scenario, where
50% of labels are incorrectly flipped, and 50% of unknown
class samples are mixed in—Sieve’s performance experienced
only a minor decline. This proves that its neighbor consistency selection mechanism and subset expansion strategy
can effectively isolate high-confidence clean samples within
the feature space. Regarding the standard CNN, it shows a
certain degree of resistance to label noise. Among the noise
label handling methods, DSDIR performs best because it
is a two-stage method where each stage promotes a purer
training subset. Conversely, the MCRe method gradually loses
effectiveness in high-noise scenarios. FOSS and RFG-HELAD
perform relatively poorly as they lack noise label processing
modules; however, RFG-HELAD outperforms FOSS because
it incorporates frequency domain features and adversarial
training mechanisms, which enhance the robustness of feature
expression.
(2) Binary Classification Performance Analysis. In the
DDoS2019 binary classification task, the data distribution
imbalance and the characteristics of attack traffic make the task
unique. As shown in Table V, Sieve’s accuracy remains stable
above 98.4% across all scenarios, and even reached 99.06%
under the 0.5Asym extreme asymmetric noise setting. This
indicates that Sieve’s sample screening mechanism is not only
suitable for multi-classification but is also extremely precise in
binary boundary determination, remaining unaffected by open-

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

12

set background traffic interference. A significant finding is
that while DSDIR performs excellently in multi-classification,
its performance collapses severely in binary classification
under high noise scenarios. RFG-HELAD demonstrates strong
stability in this task, second only to Sieve. This is attributed
to its heterogeneous ensemble learning architecture, which
effectively captures the inherent patterns of attack flows when
processing large-scale DDoS traffic, maintaining good discriminability even in the presence of label noise.
(3) Label Correction Capability Analysis. The core advantage of Sieve lies in its powerful noise label correction
and screening capabilities, which directly determine the performance of the subsequent classifier. Fig. 6 illustrates the
dynamic screening of the training subset by Sieve during the
training process on the Mal TLS2023 dataset. In the initial
stage of training, the model mainly relies on initial features; as
the Epoch increases, the proportion of the purple area (closedset noise samples) decreases significantly and continuously.
For example, in the 0.3Sym 0.5Open scenario, the proportion
of closed-set noise drops substantially, while the corresponding
blue area (clean samples) increases significantly. This indicates
that Sieve successfully identified and corrected the mislabeled
known-class samples. It is worth noting that the proportion
of the red area (open-set noise samples) remains almost
constant throughout the entire training cycle and is never
incorrectly “corrected” into clean samples. This proves that
Sieve possesses an extremely strong rejection capability—it
not only corrects wrong labels but also identifies open-set
noise that does not belong to any known category and excludes
it from model updates, thereby preventing open-set data from
polluting the decision boundary.
Fig. 7 displays the synchronous trend of Label Accuracy and
Testing Accuracy. As training progresses, the label correction
module continuously improves the purity of the training data,
directly driving the performance improvement of the model
on the test set. This positive correlation strongly proves
that Sieve’s label correction module is a key component for
enhancing the model’s generalization ability.

(a) MAL_TLS2023 0.3Sym_0.5Open

(b) MAL_TLS2023 0.3Asym_0.5Open

(c) DDoS2019 0.3Sym_0.5Open

(d) DDoS2019 0.3Asym_0.5Open

Fig. 7. The changes in label accuracy and model test accuracy across different
scenarios with respect to the number of training epochs.

accuracy across most categories. Despite the presence of
50% open-set noise and 10% label flipping, Sieve effectively
extracts core features of malicious traffic without significant
category confusion. Notably, minor mutual misclassification
between Class 6 and Class 7 arises from their inherent
semantic similarity in TLS-encrypted traffic features rather
than noise-induced chaos. This localized confusion confirms
that Sieve’s feature learning preserves the clustering structure
and maintains robust discriminability, with misclassifications
limited to edge samples with highly similar characteristics.

(a) Mal_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(b) Mal_TLS2023 0.3Sym_0.5Open

(c) Mal_TLS2023 0.5Sym_0.5Open

Fig. 8. The confusion matrix of the Sieve model in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open
scenario on the Mal TLS2023 dataset.
Fig. 6. The changes in the proportions of three types of samples during the
training process of the Sieve model on the Mal TLS2023 dataset.

C. Unknown Malware Traffic Detection Experiments (RQ2)

(4) Confusion Matrix Analysis. The confusion matrix
for the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario (Fig. 8) exhibits a distinct diagonal-dominant pattern, reflecting high classification

To evaluate the capability of the Sieve model in detecting
unknown malicious traffic, we conducted a series of experiments. The following performance analysis regarding Sieve’s

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

13

0.1Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Sym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.1Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.3Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

0.5Asym 0.5Open
Acc
F1

Mal TLS2023

FOSS
RFG-HELAD
AEGIS-Net
Sieve-MSP
Sieve-Energy
Sieve-Cosine
Sieve

97.02
85.93
96.64
77.50
82.83
84.38
97.57

95.38
87.69
94.52
74.06
78.19
76.40
96.10

52.40
88.13
97.07
90.20
87.46
82.73
98.05

56.36
89.41
96.73
86.78
83.13
76.35
96.89

40.21
88.08
85.25
72.02
81.93
81.03
98.19

50.71
89.37
80.79
69.68
77.77
73.14
97.12

98.36
80.44
95.60
61.99
73.58
82.78
97.20

97.40
83.67
92.70
62.85
68.52
76.83
95.48

74.33
84.79
97.80
73.22
82.07
84.15
97.87

70.55
86.82
96.48
70.58
77.99
83.52
96.60

49.73
87.29
98.19
83.47
86.62
76.89
98.12

54.98
88.75
97.13
79.57
81.86
79.57
97.00

DDoS2019

TABLE VI
T HE OPEN - WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON M AL TLS2023 AND DD O S2019 DATASET.

FOSS
RFG-HELAD
AEGIS-Net
Sieve-MSP
Sieve-Energy
Sieve-Cosine
Sieve

97.68
61.66
52.28
95.11
90.55
74.65
98.81

96.09
71.25
53.98
92.09
82.95
60.49
97.98

92.75
60.98
36.44
94.16
89.97
77.34
99.23

88.72
70.89
47.00
90.85
83.42
58.68
99.62

53.41
61.37
33.50
94.49
85.69
74.29
99.54

55.02
71.09
45.94
91.31
77.12
57.51
99.92

85.87
60.30
49.97
91.37
90.85
72.55
99.15

80.13
70.53
53.32
86.74
84.42
61.10
98.57

67.56
60.23
37.13
94.53
89.15
72.08
98.61

63.75
70.49
47.72
91.28
80.83
59.01
98.44

33.47
61.00
33.16
95.06
86.25
73.10
98.12

46.14
70.90
46.01
92.23
73.71
55.18
98.12

Dataset

Methods

Note: Acc and F1 are calculated after determining the detection threshold τ . Sieve-MSP, Sieve-Energy, and Sieve-Cosine are variants of Sieve that
replace the Mahalanobis distance metric with different OOD scoring mechanisms.
Sieve-MSP: Uses the Maximum Softmax Probability of the classifier’s logits to measure detection confidence [56].
Sieve-Energy: Calculates the Energy score based on the LogSumExp of the output logits [57].
Sieve-Cosine: Measures the maximum cosine similarity between the normalized test sample feature and the training feature bank [58].

unknown traffic detection capabilities is derived from the
results:
(1) Comparative Analysis of Unknown Traffic Detection
Performance. Table VI presents the performance of various
models in open-world scenarios under different noise settings on the Mal TLS2023 and DDoS2019 datasets. Across
all tested noise scenarios, Sieve consistently achieved the
highest Accuracy and F1 scores. Notably, under high noise
ratios, Sieve maintained F1 scores above 97% (Mal TLS2023)
and 98% (DDoS2019), demonstrating exceptional robustness.
Although FOSS is specifically designed for unknown traffic
detection, it performed poorly on training sets containing label
noise. Its performance degraded significantly as the noise
ratio increased; for instance, on Mal TLS2023, the F1 score
dropped from 97% to approximately 50%. This indicates that
FOSS lacks an effective noise filtering mechanism, causing
the boundaries of “known classes” to be severely distorted
by noise. AEGIS-Net and RFG-HELAD performed acceptably under low noise conditions but struggled to effectively
distinguish between known and unknown classes under high or
asymmetric noise, resulting in a decline in detection rates. Furthermore, Sieve outperformed its variants—Sieve-MSP, SieveEnergy, and Sieve-Cosine. This substantiates that utilizing the
Mahalanobis distance for anomaly detection, following the
compaction of the feature space, is the most effective strategy.
(2) Analysis of ROC Curves and AUC Metrics. Fig. 9
illustrates the ROC curves for unknown traffic detection by
various models under different datasets and noise settings. The
ROC curve of Sieve (solid red line) is consistently positioned
in the upper-left corner, encompassing the largest area (AUC
value). For example, under the 0.1Sym 0.5Open setting of
Mal TLS2023, Sieve achieved an AUC of 99.92%, surpassing
comparative methods such as FOSS and RFG-HELAD. The

morphology of the ROC curves indicates that Sieve can attain
a very high True Positive Rate (TPR) while maintaining an
extremely low False Positive Rate (FPR). This implies that
Sieve can accurately identify the vast majority of unknown
attacks without frequently misclassifying normal traffic or
known attacks. In contrast, the detection capabilities of RFGHELAD and AEGIS-Net in novel attack intrusion detection
scenarios approach random guessing.

(a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open

(d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open

Fig. 9. ROC curves for the unknown malware traffic detection in Mal TLS
2023 and DDoS2019 dataset.

(3) Analysis of Anomaly Score Distribution and Thresholds. Fig. 10 visually presents the distribution of anomaly

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

14

scores calculated by Sieve for known and unknown traffic.
It is clearly observable that the anomaly scores for known
traffic are concentrated in the lower numerical range (left
blue region) with a highly compact distribution, whereas the
anomaly scores for unknown traffic are distributed in the
higher numerical range (right orange region). There is a
distinct “gap” or minimal overlap between the two. The dashed
line in the figure represents the detection threshold, which
successfully isolates the vast majority of unknown traffic to
the right. For instance, in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario of
Mal TLS2023, the threshold effectively distinguishes most
unknown traffic. This demonstrates that Sieve, by optimizing
intra-class compactness, causes known classes to be extremely
convergent in the feature space, thereby enabling the easy
detection of unknown classes as anomalies via a distance
threshold.

(a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open

(d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open

TABLE VII
FPR U NDER D IFFERENT N OISE S CENARIOS WITH T UNABLE TPR
T HRESHOLD .

0.95

TPR
0.97 0.99

1.0

Mal TLS2023

0.1Sym 0.5Open
0.3Sym 0.5Open
0.5Sym 0.5Open
0.1Asym 0.5Open
0.3Asym 0.5Open
0.5Asym 0.5Open

3.56
3.35
3.78
3.57
3.37
3.15

2.80
2.32
3.11
2.72
2.83
2.90

2.52
1.03
3.00
2.34
2.48
2.96

0.58
0.18
2.09
1.25
1.16
0.35

DDoS2019

0.1Sym 0.5Open
0.3Sym 0.5Open
0.5Sym 0.5Open
0.1Asym 0.5Open
0.3Asym 0.5Open
0.5Asym 0.5Open

9.35
8.64
6.95
6.15
6.12
6.49

6.76
6.07
4.77
4.12
3.89
4.09

3.89
3.35
2.35
1.62
1.40
1.53

0.56
0.39
0.08
0.06
0.01
0.00

Datasets

Scenarios

each known category (clusters of different colors) clusters
very tightly in the feature space, forming distinct, well-defined
clusters. This is attributed to the compression of intra-class
distances by the contrastive learning loss function. Unknown
traffic is effectively pushed away from the distribution regions
of known classes and scattered in low-density areas of the
feature space. Compared to models without Sieve optimization, Sieve maintains a clear structure of the feature space
even under high noise interference, avoiding the blurring of
category boundaries caused by noisy samples. This provides
a solid feature foundation for distance-based unknown traffic
detection.

Fig. 10. Distribution of anomaly scores.

(4) False Positive Analysis. Table VII shows the impact
of the TPR parameter in the Sieve framework on controlling
the false positive rate (FPR). Increasing the TPR can systematically and significantly reduce the FPR. For example,
in the 0.1Sym 0.5Open noise scenario of the MalTLS2023
dataset, raising the TPR from 0.95 to 1.0 reduces the FPR
dramatically from 3.56% to 0.58%. This pattern holds consistently across all tested noise configurations. This occurs
because the TPR directly determines the strictness of the
model’s decision threshold for distinguishing known classes
from unknown classes. Increasing the TPR implies adopting a
stricter threshold, thereby more effectively protecting knownclass samples from being misclassified as unknown threats,
which in turn directly reduces false positives. This design
provides crucial operational value for practical deployment:
in production environments where alert-handling resources are
limited and tolerance for false positives is low, operators can
proactively set a high TPR to suppress the FPR to an extremely
low level, ensuring the manageability of alert volume [59],
[60].
(5) t-SNE Visualization Analysis of Feature Space. Fig.
11 visualizes the distribution of known and unknown classes
in the feature space by mapping high-dimensional features
onto a two-dimensional plane using the t-SNE algorithm [61],
[62]. The visualization results show that after Sieve training,

(a) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(b) DDoS2019 0.1Sym_0.5Open

(c) MAL_TLS2023 0.1Asym_0.5Open

(d) DDoS2019 0.1Asym_0.5Open

Fig. 11. Comparison of t-SNE.

D. Class Number Estimation and Clustering Analysis (RQ3)
To validate the efficacy of the Sieve framework during the
unknown traffic labeling phase, we conducted class number
estimation and clustering experiments on the IDS2018 dataset.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

15

The unknown traffic detector is trained in the DDoS2019
dataset under the 0.1Sym 0.5Open scenario.

NMI (Normalized Mutual Information) is used to measure
the correlation between clustering results and ground truth
labels. The Overall NMI (0.704) is at a relatively high level,
indicating that the clustering results are highly consistent with
TABLE VIII
the true distribution. The Novel NMI (0.215) is relatively
D ESCRIPTION OF THE UNKNOWN TRAFFIC SELECTED FROM THE IDS2018
DATASET.
lower, which is similarly constrained by the cluster splitting
resulting from the overestimation of the class number. The
ARI (Adjusted Rand Index) measures the difference between
Attack Name
Date
Attack Start Time Attack Finish Time
the clustering results and a random partition. A score of
DoS-Hulk
Fri-16-02-2018
13:45
14:19
0.656 indicates that Sieve’s clustering results are significantly
DoS-SlowHTTPTest Fri-16-02-2018
10:12
11:08
superior to random guessing and effectively aggregate similar
Bot
Fri-02-03-2018
10:11
11:34
flows.
Bot

Fri-02-03-2018

14:24

15:55

(1) Analysis of Class Number Estimation Accuracy. In
this experiment, the DDoS2019 dataset was employed as the
known traffic, while traffic from two specific days—February
16, 2018 (Friday) and March 2, 2018 (Friday)—within the
IDS2018 dataset was selected as the unknown traffic. As
indicated in the Table VIII, the attack traffic on these two
days primarily consists of DoS-Hulk, DoS-SlowHTTPTest,
and Bot. According to the official dataset documentation, the
Bot traffic comprises two distinct botnet variants: Zeus and
Ares. Consequently, including the background benign traffic,
the total number of Ground Truth classes in this experimental
scenario is 5 (4 attack classes + 1 benign class).
In the experiment, we set the upper bound of the search
to |Clmax | = 10. The Prior-Guided Class Number Estimation
module of Sieve utilizes the Brent algorithm to optimize
the ACC-DB objective function, ultimately estimating the
number of unknown traffic classes to be 6. Although there
is a deviation of one class compared to the ground truth (5
classes), this indicates that Sieve tends towards a finer-grained
division (over-segmentation). In the field of cybersecurity, the
cost of misclassifying variants of the same attack into two
classes is significantly lower than that of confusing two distinct
attacks into a single class (under-segmentation). Therefore, this
estimation result is acceptable in practical applications and
facilitates subsequent manual merging.
(2) In-depth Analysis of Clustering Performance Metrics. Based on the estimated class number k = 6, we
employed the semi-supervised K-means++ algorithm to cluster
the unknown traffic encoded by the encoder. Fig. 12 presents
the detailed quantitative evaluation metrics. The clustering
accuracy of the Sieve model for known categories approaches
100%. This demonstrates that while exploring unknown categories, Sieve avoids catastrophic forgetting and perfectly
retains its discriminative capability for known traffic. The
Novel Acc is 0.418; the primary reason for this relatively low
metric is that the estimated number of classes (6) exceeds
the ground truth (5). This results in a specific class of real
attack traffic being split into two clusters, thereby incurring a
penalty during the purity calculation. The harmonic mean of
the accuracy for known and unknown classes is 0.589. This
metric comprehensively reflects the clustering performance of
the model across the entire feature space, indicating that the
model achieves a balance between maintaining performance
on known classes and discovering new ones.

Fig. 12. Performance evaluation of unknown traffic clustering on the IDS2018
Dataset in terms of accuracy and quality Metrics.

(3) t-SNE Visualization Analysis. To intuitively demonstrate the feature learning and clustering effectiveness of
Sieve for unknown traffic, we generated t-SNE visualization
plots. Fig. 13(a) displays the distribution of raw traffic in
the dimensionality-reduced feature space prior to clustering.
The blue points (representing known malicious and benign
samples from the training set) form well-defined and extremely compact clusters in the space. This is attributed to
the compression of intra-class distances achieved by the Sieve
contrastive learning module. The red points (representing the
detected unknown traffic) are not mixed with known classes;
instead, they form multiple independent, high-density clusters.
This visually demonstrates that the features extracted by
Sieve possess strong discriminative power, capable of naturally
separating semantically distinct unknown attacks within the
feature space.

(a) Before clustering

(b) After clustering

Fig. 13. t-SNE visualization of feature distributions on the IDS2018 Dataset:
(a) Ground truth distribution of known and detected unknown traffic, and (b)
Clustering results of unknown traffic.

Fig. 13(b) illustrates the clustering results after applying
the estimated class number (k = 6), where different colors
represent different clusters. It can be clearly observed that the
unknown traffic is partitioned into 6 distinct clusters. Although

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

16

there are only 5 ground truth classes, causing one type of
attack to be split into two clusters of similar colors (i.e., oversegmentation), distinct margins are still maintained between
the clusters. These visualization results indicate that, despite
the minor deviation in class number estimation, Sieve successfully decouples different attack behaviors within the semantic
space. Security analysts need only review the centroid samples
of these 6 clusters to quickly merge the two clusters belonging
to the same attack type, thereby efficiently completing the
labeling of new attacks.

E. Sensitivity Analysis
In this subsection, we perform sensitivity analysis on the
critical hyperparameters in Sieve.

Fig. 15. Impact of hyperparameters K on Sieve performance.
TABLE IX
T HE ABLATION STUDY OF KEY COMPONENTS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE
SCENARIOS .

Fig. 14. Impact of hyperparameters ξ and ζ on Sieve performance.

(1) Effect of ξ and ζ.
Fig. 14 shows the impact of ξ and ζ on unknown traffic detection. Fixing ξ = 1.0 and varying ζ yields better
performance than fixing ζ and varying ξ, indicating that the
purity of the initially selected subset is more important than
sample quantity. This high-purity subset provides reliable class
centroids for subsequent expansion and detection.
The best performance is obtained when ζ = 0.93, which
balances sample recall and noise rejection. A lower ζ may
admit ambiguous open-set noise, while a higher ζ may discard useful clean samples. In practice, when different classes
exhibit strong feature overlap, ξ can be slightly relaxed while
ζ should be increased accordingly to maintain the purity of
the expanded subset.
(2) Effect of K. Fig. 15 illustrates the impact of neighbor
count K on classification performance. While known class
accuracy remains stable at approximately 95.5% across the
testing range, unknown detection accuracy oscillates (97.1%–
97.4%) for K < 100 before peaking at 97.6% at K = 100 and
plateauing. This performance surge suggests that K = 100
optimally aligns with the feature space’s geometric density,
providing a receptive field large enough to smooth noise
and establish a robust consensus without inducing crosscategory confusion. This alignment enables more precise intraclass compactness calculation, directly enhancing Mahalanobis
distance-based unknown traffic detection.

w/o LC

Method
w/o SE w/o CL

Full

Mal TLS2023

0.1Sym 0.5Open
0.3Sym 0.5Open
0.5Sym 0.5Open
0.1Asym 0.5Open
0.3Asym 0.5Open
0.5Asym 0.5Open

93.94
93.38
90.91
93.29
91.99
89.36

95.18
94.89
94.56
94.88
94.20
94.18

94.72
94.78
93.88
93.82
94.03
94.67

95.45
95.40
94.96
94.85
95.20
95.25

DDoS2019

0.1Sym 0.5Open
0.3Sym 0.5Open
0.5Sym 0.5Open
0.1Asym 0.5Open
0.3Asym 0.5Open
0.5Asym 0.5Open

94.74
89.94
86.77
95.75
88.87
86.82

98.06
98.08
98.06
98.10
98.02
98.09

99.14
97.90
97.12
98.97
98.22
97.87

98.48
98.51
98.58
99.12
99.07
99.05

Datasets

Scenarios

F. Ablation Study
To verify the individual contribution of each component
within the Sieve framework, we conduct a comprehensive
ablation study. We evaluate four configurations: (1) Full, the
complete Sieve framework; (2) w/o LC, which removes the
noisy label correction module; (3) w/o SE, which excludes the
subset expansion mechanism; and (4) w/o CL, which omits the
self-supervised contrastive loss. These experiments are carried
out across various noise ratios and types on the Mal TLS2023
and DDoS2019 datasets to assess how each module influences
the model’s classification accuracy.
The experimental results, summarized in Table IX,
clearly demonstrate that every designed component is vital for maintaining robustness under mixed noise conditions. The Full model consistently achieves the highest accuracy across all scenarios, particularly in extreme cases
like 0.5Asym 0.5Open. We observe that removing the label correction module results in the most significant performance collapse—dropping by over 12% in the DDoS2019
0.5Asym 0.5Open scenario—which underscores its foundational role in purifying the training set. Furthermore, the
performance declines in the w/o SE and w/o CL variants
indicate that subset expansion successfully recaptures valuable

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

17

samples, while contrastive loss is essential for learning the
compact, noise-resistant feature representations necessary for
precise detection.

VII. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
Over-Segmentation in Unknown-Traffic Labeling. The
reliability of the unknown-traffic labeling module depends on
the purity of the detection output. As observed in the experiments, imperfect detection can lead to over-segmentation
(e.g., one true attack class being split into two clusters) and
increases the need for manual cluster merging. To reduce this
reliance on expert intervention, future work could explore:
(1) automated post-processing heuristics that merge clusters
based on centroid distance or distribution similarity metrics,
and (2) semi-automated validation workflows that present
only the most uncertain candidate merges to security experts,
thereby focusing human effort on the most critical decisions.
Limitations of Synthetic Unknown-Traffic. This study
evaluates unknown traffic by treating classes from external
datasets as unknown. While this controlled strategy enables
reproducible benchmarking, it has inherent limitations compared to real-world operations: (1) real unknown attacks may
not form coherent, well-separated semantic clusters and may
exhibit more scattered or anomalous feature patterns; (2) in
practice, open-set noise samples are likely intertwined with
closed-set noise in a far more complex manner than the clean
batch-wise injection simulated here; and (3) the static protocol
cannot assess model adaptation to gradual concept drift over
time. Therefore, generalizing to the more chaotic, real-world
unknown threats remains an important direction for future
research.

VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose the Sieve model, which effectively addresses the challenges of known traffic classification
and unknown threat detection in scenarios with mixed label
noise through a threefold collaborative mechanism. The Sieve
framework consists of three closely cooperating modules: the
noise label correction module utilizes neighborhood consistency metrics and prediction confidence analysis to accurately
distinguish noisy samples and build a clean training set; the unknown traffic detection module employs Mahalanobis distance
metrics to achieve accurate identification of unknown traffic in
an optimized feature space; the traffic labeling module combines semi-supervised clustering with expert verification to
support dynamic updates of the dataset. These three modules
form a complete technical loop, ensuring the stability and
adaptability of the framework in noisy environments. Comprehensive tests on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that
Sieve maintains outstanding performance even under various
noise conditions. Theoretical analysis further confirms that the
framework effectively prevents information loss, eliminates
label blind spots, and minimizes open set risks by optimizing
the intra-class feature distribution to the greatest extent.

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust
detection of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2025.
[2] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal
framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic detection,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, 2024, pp.
1608–1619.
[3] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting
website fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in
32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), 2023, pp.
607–624.
[4] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Cbseq: A
channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 18,
pp. 5011–5025, 2023.
[5] Q. Meng, Q. Yuan, J. Tao, P. Wang, S. Lu, G. Li, Y. Wang, and X. Guan,
“When unknown threat meets label noise: A self-correcting framework,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2025.
[6] M. Kim and I. Lee, “Human-guided auto-labeling for network traffic
data: The gelm approach,” Neural networks, vol. 152, pp. 510–526,
2022.
[7] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough:
Challenges in labeling network traffic,” Computers & Security, vol. 120,
p. 102810, 2022.
[8] R. Sachdeva, F. R. Cordeiro, V. Belagiannis, I. Reid, and G. Carneiro,
“Evidentialmix: Learning with combined open-set and closed-set noisy
labels,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, 2021, pp. 3607–3615.
[9] B. Van Rooyen and R. C. Williamson, “A theory of learning with
corrupted labels,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 18, no.
228, pp. 1–50, 2018.
[10] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne,
“Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,”
Computer Networks, vol. 236, p. 109991, 2023.
[11] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid of the
unseen: a siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic discovery,”
in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[12] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE,
2020, pp. 397–405.
[13] M. Zhan, R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Xue, Q. Li, Z. Liu, G. Cheng, and K. Xu,
“Flowrefiner: A robust traffic classification framework against label
noise,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
[14] G. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Sun, L. Xing, and Y. Zhang, “Dsdir: A two-stage
method for addressing noisy long-tailed problems in malicious traffic
detection,” in ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2025, pp.
1–5.
[15] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “Mcre: A
unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels based
on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2023.
[16] Y. Qing, Q. Yin, X. Deng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, K. Sun, K. Xu, J. Zhang, and
Q. Li, “Low-quality training data only? a robust framework for detecting
encrypted malicious network traffic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.04798,
2023.
[17] X. Luo, C. Liu, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, L. Guo, and
B. Fang, “Baptism: A robust framework for encrypted malicious traffic
identification with low-quality training data,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 21, pp. 960–975, 2025.
[18] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, X. Xie, J. Yu, F. Zhang, R. Zhang, B. Chen, X. Luo,
M. Hu, and W. Ma, “Foss: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 2024.
[19] X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Lai, Z. Hao, and A. X. Liu, “Reliable openset network traffic classification,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, 2025.
[20] Q. Yang, W. He, M. Chen, H. Du, S. Shao, F. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Ji,
and K. Ren, “End-to-end open-set semi-supervised learning for finegrained encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2026.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3697849

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES

18

[21] Y. Ginige, B. Silva, T. Dahanayaka, and S. Seneviratne, “Trafficllm:
Llms for improved open-set encrypted traffic analysis,” Available at
SSRN 5074974.
[22] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “Rfg-helad: A robust finegrained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heterogeneous
ensemble learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 2024.
[23] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and
M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and
out-of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.14051, 2021.
[24] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult,
“Toward open set recognition,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, 2012.
[25] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 1563–1572.
[26] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. Ramos, and
A. Madeira, “Flowlens: Enabling efficient flow classification for mlbased network security applications.” in NDSS, 2021.
[27] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions in
automated traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC
conference on computer and communications security, 2021, pp. 3366–
3383.
[28] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
intelligent network data plane,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 23), 2023, pp. 6203–6220.
[29] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, 2024.
[30] Q. Meng, J. Tao, Q. Yuan, G. Li, Y. Wang, B. Gao, and S. Lu,
“Detection of unknown attacks through encrypted traffic: A gaussian
prototype-aided variational autoencoder framework,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, 2025.
[31] Q. Yuan, Q. Meng, J. Tao, G. Li, J. Fei, B. Lu, and Y. Wang, “Multiagent for network security monitoring and warning: a generative ai
solution,” IEEE Network, 2025.
[32] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp.
2046–2059, 2020.
[33] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, and E. C. Ngai, “Cold: Collaborative
label denoising framework for network intrusion detection,” 2026.
[34] X. Xia, B. Han, N. Wang, J. Deng, J. Li, Y. Mao, and T. Liu, “Extended
t t: Learning with mixed closed-set and open-set noisy labels,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 45,
no. 3, pp. 3047–3058, 2022.
[35] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[36] L. Gao, C. Fu, X. Deng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Wedjat: Detecting sophisticated evasion attacks via real-time causal analysis,” in Proceedings of
the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining V. 1, 2025, pp. 342–353.
[37] C. Fu, Q. Li, E. Bertino, and K. Xu, “Training with only 1.0‰
samples: Malicious traffic detection via cross-modality feature fusion,”
in Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2025, pp. 3930–3944.
[38] M. Shen, J. Wu, J. Ai, Q. Li, C. Ren, K. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Swallow:
a transfer-robust website fingerprinting attack via consistent feature
learning,” in Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2025, pp. 1574–1588.
[39] M. Shen, K. Ji, J. Wu, Q. Li, X. Kong, K. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Realtime website fingerprinting defense via traffic cluster anonymization,”
in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2024,
pp. 3238–3256.
[40] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[41] C. Feng, G. Tzimiropoulos, and I. Patras, “Ssr: An efficient and robust
framework for learning with unknown label noise,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.11288, 2021.
[42] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “Ssd: A unified framework for selfsupervised outlier detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12051, 2021.

[43] J. Yoder and C. E. Priebe, “Semi-supervised k-means++,” Journal of
Statistical Computation and Simulation, vol. 87, no. 13, pp. 2597–2608,
2017.
[44] J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on deep learning with
class imbalance,” Journal of big data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2019.
[45] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[46] B. Liu, L. Zhan, Z. Lu, Y. Feng, L. Xue, and X.-M. Wu, “How good are
llms at out-of-distribution detection?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10261,
2023.
[47] K. Han, S.-A. Rebuffi, S. Ehrhardt, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman,
“Autonovel: Automatically discovering and learning novel visual categories,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 6767–6781, 2021.
[48] F. Gao, W. Zhong, Z. Cao, X. Peng, and Z. Li, “Opengcd: Assisting open
world recognition with generalized category discovery,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.06926, 2023.
[49] S. Vaze, K. Han, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Generalized category
discovery,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 7492–7501.
[50] K. R. Gegenfurtner, “Praxis: Brent’s algorithm for function minimization,” Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 560–564, 1992.
[51] D. L. Davies and D. W. Bouldin, “A cluster separation measure,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, no. 2, pp.
224–227, 2009.
[52] Q. Yuan, C. Liu, W. Yu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, Y. Wang, and G. Gou,
“Boau: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based on boundary
augmentation,” Computers & Security, vol. 131, p. 103300, 2023.
[53] N. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “Sok:
Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in 2025
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2025, pp. 1825–
1843.
[54] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (ddos) attack dataset
and taxonomy,” in 2019 international carnahan conference on security
technology (ICCST). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[55] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, A. A. Ghorbani et al., “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.”
ICISSP, vol. 1, no. 2018, pp. 108–116, 2018.
[56] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for
detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[57] W. Liu, X. Wang, J. Owens, and Y. Li, “Energy-based out-of-distribution
detection,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33,
pp. 21 464–21 475, 2020.
[58] W. Zhou, F. Liu, and M. Chen, “Contrastive out-of-distribution detection
for pretrained transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08812, 2021.
[59] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic
via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proceedings of
the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2024, pp. 3659–3673.
[60] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ml-based
malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2023, pp. 1005–1019.
[61] Y. Yan, Q. Yuan, W. Niu, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Y. Wang, “Fcal: An
asynchronous federated contrastive semi-supervised learning approach
for network traffic classification,” in International Conference on Information and Communications Security. Springer, 2025, pp. 419–437.
[62] K. Chen, Q. Yuan, Q. Meng, D. Li, Y. Zhu, G. Yu, X. Wang, and
Y. Wang, “Robust intrusion detection in cps: A pre-training-based multiview feature collaboration and correlation analysis method,” Computer
Networks, p. 112129, 2026.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.