This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

1

FORM-IDS: A Lightweight yet High-Fidelity Intrusion Detection
Framework via Formal Verification and Knowledge Distillation
Huale Li, Yanwei Chen, Dingzhong Cai, Zhaobin Wang, Hualong Wu, Arun Kumar Sangaiah

Abstract—In practical IoT and IIoT deployments, intrusion
detection faces significant challenges due to overlapping feature
distributions of mixed attack vectors and the scarcity of computational resources on edge devices. Conventional deep learningbased detectors often struggle with instability across diverse
environments and high false alarm rates. To address these issues,
this paper proposes FORM-IDS, a lightweight yet high-fidelity
intrusion detection framework tailored for resource-constrained
edge scenarios. By integrating multi-teacher relational knowledge
distillation, our approach effectively transfers complex decision
patterns from large-scale ensembles into a compact student
network, ensuring high detection capability without the computational burden. Furthermore, a novel runtime formal verification
module is introduced to enforce logical safety constraints, rigorously filtering spurious alerts and enhancing decision reliability.
Extensive experiments on multiple heterogeneous datasets show
that FORM-IDS achieves competitive classification performance
and robust temporal generalization against both the DTLIDS lineage baselines and two additional recent IDS baselines.
Crucially, the framework significantly suppresses false positives
while maintaining low inference latency, making it a promising
option for real-time edge security.
Index Terms—IoT, intrusion detection system, knowledge distillation, formal verification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N recent years, the rapid development of the Internet of
Things (IoT) and Industrial IoT (IIoT) has enabled largescale deployment of heterogeneous devices in critical sectors.
These devices support real-time connectivity and cross-domain
collaboration, improving operational efficiency in scenarios
such as smart transportation, energy management, and public
infrastructure [1]–[3]. However, this trend introduces significant security challenges. IoT devices typically operate with
limited computing and storage resources, often running simplified communication stacks. Consequently, they are highly
exposed to malicious scanning, botnet enrollment, and distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks [4]. Given these

I

This work were funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62406251), Natural Science Foundation of Gansu
(No.26JRRA256).
Huale Li and Zhaobin Wang are with the School of Information Science
and Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. (e-mail: lihuale@lzu.edu.cn; wangzhb@lzu.edu.cn)
Yanwei Chen is with the Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China. (e-mail: chenyanwei@impcas.ac.cn)
Dingzhong Cai is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an 710000, China. (e-mail: caidz@mail.nwpu.edu.cn)
Hualong Wu is with School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.(Corresponding author, email: wuhl@stu.hit.edu.cn)
Arun Kumar Sangaiah is with the International Graduate Institute of
Artificial Intelligence, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology,
Yunlin, Taiwan.(e-mail: aksangaiah@ieee.org)

constraints, building effective network-side intrusion detection
mechanisms is essential for maintaining system security.
Early Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) mainly relied on
signature-based or rule-based detection. While these methods are easy to interpret, they struggle to detect novel or
evolving attacks, such as those employing obfuscation or
multi-stage strategies [5]. To overcome these limitations, deep
learning-based approaches, particularly Convolutional Neural
Networks, have become a dominant direction in IoT security
research [6]–[9]. Deep learning models can automatically
extract discriminative patterns from high-dimensional traffic
data, reducing reliance on handcrafted features. Despite their
potential, deploying deep learning-based IDS in practical IoT
environments faces three major obstacles. First, network traffic
often contains mixed attack vectors and rare benign behaviors.
This causes feature distributions to overlap, leading to unstable
performance and reduced class separability across different environments. Second, a critical trade-off exists between model
performance and computational cost. High-capacity models
require significant resources that are unavailable on edge
devices, whereas lightweight models often lack the structural
depth to capture complex attack patterns. Third, deep neural
networks typically operate as black boxes. They lack logical constraints on their decision-making process. In highassurance scenarios like industrial control, relying solely on
probabilistic outputs is risky, as even a low false positive rate
can trigger disruptive defensive actions.
Although knowledge distillation (KD) and rule-based verification are individually known methods, existing KD-based
IDS frameworks focus exclusively on model compression
through logit-level transfer, without addressing the trustworthiness of detection decisions. Meanwhile, formal verification
in security remains confined to offline, design-time analysis,
disconnected from runtime detection. To the best of our
knowledge, no prior work has systematically bridged these
paradigms. FORM-IDS fills this gap by introducing Relational Knowledge Distillation (RKD) into the multi-teacher
IDS distillation pipeline, preserving inter-sample structural
relationships in the feature space rather than merely transferring individual prediction distributions, and by compiling
formally verified Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) properties into
a lightweight runtime monitor that acts as a post-hoc decision
filter. This integration yields a lightweight and trustworthy
framework in which the distilled student model ensures high
detection sensitivity, while the verification module enforces
logical safety constraints to suppress false alarms. These capabilities cannot be achieved by either component in isolation.

0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

To address these issues, this paper proposes FORM-IDS,
an enhanced intrusion detection framework evolved from the
DTL-IDS architecture and tailored for resource-constrained
IoT and IIoT networks [10]. The framework utilizes a multiteacher relational knowledge distillation strategy. This approach allows a compact student model to inherit not only
the prediction accuracy but also the structural feature relationships from a high-capacity teacher ensemble. Furthermore,
we integrate a lightweight formal verification module into the
detection pipeline. Unlike traditional offline verification, this
module performs runtime logical checks on detection outcomes, effectively filtering false alarms and enforcing safety
constraints without compromising inference speed.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose FORM-IDS, utilizing multi-teacher RKD to
compress complex decision patterns into a compact CNN,
balancing high accuracy with minimal computational
overhead.
• We integrate a logical verification module to enforce
safety constraints on model predictions, effectively filtering transient false alarms and ensuring decision reliability.
• Extensive evaluations across four heterogeneous datasets
and multiple IDS baselines demonstrate that FORMIDS maintains strong generalization and stability under
diverse IoT/IIoT network environments.
II. R ELATED WORKS
This section reviews the literature on IDS for IoT environments, focusing on the specific technologies integrated into
our proposed framework.
A. CNN-based Architectures and Automated Optimization
Recent research has increasingly prioritized Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) and hybrid architectures to address
the complexity of modern network environments. To leverage
both spatial and temporal feature extraction, Bamber et al. [11]
proposed a hybrid CNN–LSTM system. They evaluated this
approach against a range of deep learning models, including
ANN, LSTM, BiLSTM, GRU, and BiGRU, using the NSLKDD dataset after applying Recursive Feature Elimination.
Their comparative analysis demonstrated that the CNN–LSTM
architecture yields superior performance, achieving 95% accuracy, 0.89 recall, and a 0.94 F1-score. Shifting the focus
toward operational efficiency in IIOT, Arsalan et al. [12]
introduced a lightweight one-dimensional CNN. This model
was specifically tailored to classify nine types of cyberattacks with minimal computational overhead. It achieved an
accuracy of 99.90%, effectively validating the capability of
streamlined CNN architectures to maintain high fidelity in
resource-constrained industrial settings.
Beyond standard detection tasks, CNN-based frameworks
have evolved to tackle emerging challenges such as data
privacy and wireless security. Torre et al. [13] addressed
the privacy concerns in distributed networks by proposing
a federated learning IDS built upon a 1D-CNN backbone.
Their approach integrates robust cryptographic techniques,

2

including Differential Privacy, Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange,
and Homomorphic Encryption, to secure sensitive data during training. Extensive evaluation across seven public IoT
datasets, such as TON-IoT, IoT-23, and Edge-IIoT, confirmed
the framework’s robustness, delivering an average accuracy of
97.31% and an F1-score of 92.69%. Similarly, in the context of
wireless sensor networks, Yesodha et al. [14] optimized a CNN
classifier using Fuzzy Temporal rules and an Artificial Bee
Colony algorithm (FT-ABC-CNN). When compared against
traditional CNN, LSTM, and RNN classifiers, the FT-ABCCNN model demonstrated a significant reduction in false
positive rates, highlighting the importance of domain-specific
optimization in noisy wireless environments.
Despite these architectural advances, relying on manual
model design often limits scalability and robustness. Consequently, recent studies have pivoted toward automated Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) and Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) to enhance deployment efficiency. Latif et al.
[10] proposed DTL-IDS, a framework that employs Genetic
Algorithms (GA) to fine-tune transfer learning models, followed by ensemble aggregation to improve generalization
across heterogeneous IIoT scenarios. In a similar vein, Ahmad
et al. [15] utilized Random Search-based HPO to optimize
multiple CNNs on the Edge-IIoT dataset. By combining the
best-performing models via ensemble learning and applying
quantization, they achieved a balance between improved accuracy and reduced inference costs. Moving beyond simple
parameter tuning, Lu et al. [16] proposed BPSO-AHDL-IDS,
which jointly optimizes hyperparameters and hybrid CNN–
RNN structures using Binary Particle Swarm Optimization.
This approach enables fully automated IDS design without
expert intervention. Extending this work, Lu et al. [17] further
introduced a multi-objective framework based on discrete
extremal optimization. This method automatically constructs
lightweight CNNs, explicitly addressing the trade-off between
detection performance and computational complexity in IIoT
networks.
B. Knowledge Distillation
Complementing HPO and automated model design, Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a pivotal strategy for
deploying IDS on resource-constrained IoT and IIoT devices.
By focusing on reducing model complexity, KD enables highfidelity detection on hardware with limited computational
capacity. Wang et al. [18] addressed the efficiency challenge by
proposing a lightweight CNN-based IDS that leverages selfadaptive temperature scaling. Their approach facilitates the
transfer of discriminative representations from a deep teacher
to a shallow student, significantly reducing the parameter count
without compromising detection accuracy.
Umair et al. [19] showed that KD can support both
lightweight deployment and model interpretability in resourceconstrained consumer devices. Using teacher–student training
on the N-BaIoT and CIC-IDS 2023 datasets, their framework
retained near-teacher detection performance while reducing
parameter count, model size, and inference latency. With
SHAP-based analysis, they also showed that a distilled IDS

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

can preserve useful feature-level explanations while remaining
efficient.
To further enhance the stability of this knowledge transfer,
Xie et al. [20] introduced DTKD-IDS, a dual-teacher framework that combines prototype and complementary distillation.
This mechanism allows the student model to selectively absorb
structurally aligned knowledge, ensuring robust performance
even under complex attack scenarios. Moving beyond centralized training paradigms, Shen et al. [21] integrated ensemble
knowledge distillation within a federated learning framework.
By distilling locally trained models into a global student,
their strategy effectively mitigates data heterogeneity across
distributed clients while preserving user privacy.
KD has also been adapted for graph-based anomaly detection. Zhou et al. [22] designed a reconstructed graph
neural network utilizing global–local distillation to transfer
both structural and traffic-level representations. This design
achieves lightweight anomaly detection by minimizing computational overhead. Liu et al. [23] proposed a Dynamic Gradient
Distillation method for graph neural networks, where gradient
mapping and fusion let the student inherit part of the teacher’s
learning dynamics rather than only its final outputs. Although
their work targets node classification rather than intrusion
detection, it reflects a broader shift from simple logit imitation
toward richer structural and process-aware knowledge transfer.
This perspective is relevant to IDS, where preserving intersample relationships helps model heterogeneous attack behaviors. These advancements indicate that KD now serves purposes far beyond mere model compression, increasingly supporting explainability, heterogeneity mitigation, and structureaware knowledge transfer across lightweight security models.

3

or offline analysis tool, remaining largely decoupled from
the dynamic operation of data-driven IDS. The systematic
integration of formal methods, specifically using verified invariants or model-checked properties to constrain learningbased models, remains an underexplored frontier. Bridging this
gap by embedding formal logic into the runtime decision loop
is essential for providing safety guarantees and defining strict
decision boundaries for otherwise opaque detection models.
III. T HE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed FORM-IDS framework
systematically transforms raw network traffic into reliable
detection outcomes through a structured, three-stage pipeline:
1) Data Preprocessing: Raw consecutive packet streams are
first organized into sliding windows and synthesized into
2D color images, capturing spatial-temporal traffic features
while balancing the distribution of rare attack classes. 2)
Model Training and Distillation: In the offline phase, a diverse
ensemble of large-scale teacher CNNs is trained. Their derived
relational knowledge (inter-sample structural features) and
logit-level probabilities are then distilled into an ultra-compact
Student CNN. The teacher-model candidates are optimized
with a Genetic Algorithm during teacher selection, while the
student distillation hyperparameters remain fixed. 3) Runtime
Formal Verification: During the online deployment phase, the
standalone Student CNN performs initial feature extraction
and classification. Its probabilistic outputs are immediately
intercepted by a lightweight, NuSMV-verified runtime monitor. This module enforces deterministic LTL safety equations
(e.g., timeliness, confidence guards) on the decision logic,
effectively filtering out transient false alarms before finalizing
the block/monitor action.

C. Formal Verification in Security Systems
Formal verification and model checking have become indispensable in safety-critical domains, including IoT, automotive
systems, and programmable networks, where they are primarily used to rigorously analyze system behaviors and uncover
design-time vulnerabilities. In the context of IoT and cyberphysical systems, Toman et al. [24] applied formal methods
such as Event-B modeling to reason about physical-layer
vulnerabilities. Their work enabled the construction of security
proofs for specific threats, such as jamming and spoofing,
under strict system assumptions. Similarly, in the automotive
sector, Krichen et al. [25] demonstrated the integration of
model checking and theorem proving across the development
lifecycle, verifying security properties and system resilience
against both faults and attacks.
At the network control level, formal verification has been
leveraged to model protocol behaviors in SDN controllers.
This approach facilitates the automatic discovery of feasible
attack paths, revealing previously unknown vulnerabilities
within the control logic [26]. Addressing the complexity of
large-scale ecosystems, Krichen et al. [27] further explored
abstraction and modularization techniques to improve the scalability of model-based testing for smart city infrastructures.
Despite these advances, a critical disconnect remains: formal verification is predominantly treated as a design-time

A. Data Preprocessing and Augmentation
In the FORM-IDS framework, we inherited the data preprocessing workflow from DTL-IDS and enhanced the image synthesis process to tackle the issue of uneven data distribution. In
DTL-IDS, 285 consecutive samples are combined into a single
image. While this approach works well for most datasets, when
dealing with imbalanced sample sizes, certain attack types may
be scarce, hindering the model’s ability to effectively learn
their characteristics during training. To address this challenge,
we incorporated a sliding window technique during the data
preprocessing stage. By increasing the number of samples for
rare attack types, we bolstered the model’s learning capacity
for these specific attacks.
Specifically, we maintain the window size of 285 samples
for image synthesis. However, by reducing the sliding step
size to 90, we generate a significantly larger number of image
samples from the original data. This method generates approximately three times the original sample size. Consequently, it
greatly enhances the model’s ability to identify rare attacks.
However, adopting the sliding window method introduces
certain trade-offs. With a step size of 90, successive windows
have a significant overlap. This means that generated images
share a large portion of their underlying data with adjacent
samples. Although this approach increases the size of dataset,

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

4

Fig. 1. The overall framework of FORM-IDS. The pipeline integrates sliding-window data preprocessing, genetic algorithm-optimized multi-teacher relational
distillation for lightweight model training, and a runtime formal verification module to filter transient false alarms.

the generated instances are created via offsets of existing traffic
records rather than capturing new behaviors. Consequently,
they may lack the diversity found in independently collected
samples.
To preserve the temporal integrity of the evaluation, the
dataset is first partitioned according to the original occurrence
timeline. The sliding-window augmentation is then applied
exclusively to the training subset to amplify rare attack signatures. Meanwhile, the test set remains unaugmented and
contains only temporally subsequent, non-overlapping streams,
ensuring that the model is evaluated under realistic conditions
without data leakage.

B. Teacher Models
To support the knowledge distillation stage in FORM-IDS,
we first train and select a set of high-quality teacher models.
We train and evaluate multiple CNN models with different
architectures, then select the best models to form a teacher
ensemble. This ensemble provides supervision for the later
distillation stage. The teacher ensemble is utilized exclusively
during the offline training phase on high-performance servers.
Since these heavy models do not participate in runtime inference, they impose no computational burden on the target
hardware, allowing only the lightweight student CNN to be
deployed on resource-constrained edge devices.

We consider several widely used CNN architectures as
candidates. They include Generic CNN, Xception, VGG16,
VGG19, Inception, InceptionResNetV2, EfficientNetB7, and
EfficientNetV2L. These models differ in depth, feature extraction style, and parameter size. This architectural diversity ensures that discriminative traffic patterns are captured
from varying receptive fields and abstraction levels. For each
architecture, we use a Genetic Algorithm to optimize key
hyperparameters. This reduces reliance on manual tuning. It
also improves the stability of model performance.
After optimization, each model is first pre-trained on the
source-domain data. It is then fine-tuned on the target dataset
with transfer learning. This step adapts the model to the IoT
intrusion detection task. In addition, we train a Generic CNN
from scratch on the target dataset. This model serves as a
baseline without transfer learning. Finally, we compare all
candidates on the validation set. We select the top 5 models
to construct the teacher ensemble for multi-teacher relational
knowledge distillation.
C. Student CNN
In the FORM-IDS framework, Student CNN serves as the
core detection model for the final deployment and inference
stage. Its design necessitates a reasonable balance between
model complexity and detection performance. Specifically,
the Student CNN must meet the following requirements: 1)

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

Efficiency: Its computational overhead and parameter count
must be significantly lower than the baseline models in DTLIDS. This ensures adaptability to resource-constrained IoT
and edge computing scenarios. 2) Baseline Performance: Even
without auxiliary mechanisms like distillation, its standalone
detection capability should not degrade significantly. This
provides a stable performance lower bound for subsequent
optimization. 3) Distillation Compatibility: The architecture
must support explicit access to intermediate feature maps and
output logits. This capability is essential for implementing
knowledge distillation and enforcing relational constraints
during the training phase.
The aforementioned requirements dictate that the design
of Student CNN cannot be achieved simply by reducing
network depth or pruning channel numbers. Although an
overly simplified model can significantly reduce the number of
parameters, it often weakens the ability to represent complex
attack patterns, thereby limiting overall detection performance.
Therefore, in terms of model structure design, we have adopted
a compromise approach that maintains necessary feature abstraction capabilities while controlling the scale of parameters.
Specifically, the Student CNN employs a progressively
deeper hierarchy with stacked convolutional and pooling layers. This structure enables the extraction of multi-level feature
representations from input traffic images. At the same time,
by maintaining a small channel size in the early layers and
gradually increasing the channel count only in the higher
layers, the overall growth of model parameters is effectively
limited. Additionally, the model uniformly adopts 3x3 convolutional kernels. This design ensures layer-wise expansion of
the receptive field while controlling computational complexity
and enhancing structural stability.
At the end of the network, the Student CNN explicitly
incorporates a feature representation layer and a logits output
layer. This design enables the model to make final classification decisions while providing necessary intermediate
representations for distillation loss and relationship constraints
during training. This structural design lays the foundation for
the subsequent multi-teacher knowledge distillation process,
while the Student CNN itself merely serves as a base model
for carrying distilled knowledge. The mechanism behind its
performance improvement will be further explored in the next
section.
To provide a clear understanding of the network’s compactness and design rationale, Tables I and II present the
architectural details for the baseline Generic CNN (included
in the teacher ensemble) and our proposed lightweight Student
CNN, respectively. By reducing the convolutional kernel size
from 5 × 5 to 3 × 3 and streamlining the repetitive block
structures into a progressively deeper but narrower hierarchy,
the student model drastically minimizes computational load
and memory requirements. This optimized configuration is
designed to reduce inference cost and support low-latency
operation in resource-constrained IoT edge settings.
D. Multi-Teacher Relational Knowledge Distillation
Under strict lightweight constraints, the student model often
struggles to extract discriminative information from complex

5

TABLE I
A RCHITECTURAL D ETAILS OF THE G ENERIC CNN (T EACHER )
Structure
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Pooling
Feature Layer
Logits Output

Configuration
Conv2D(32, 5 × 5)
Conv2D(32, 5 × 5) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
Conv2D(128, 5 × 5)
Conv2D(128, 5 × 5)
GlobalAvgPool2D
Dense(256) + Dropout(p = 0.1)
Dense(C)

TABLE II
A RCHITECTURAL D ETAILS OF THE S TUDENT CNN (P ROPOSED )
Structure
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Pooling
Feature Layer
Logits Output

Configuration
Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
Conv2D(32, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
Conv2D(64, 3 × 3) + MaxPool(2 × 2)
Conv2D(128, 3 × 3)
GlobalAvgPool2D
Dense(128) + Dropout(p = 0.1)
Dense(C)

attack patterns. Relying solely on its own supervision signals is frequently insufficient for capturing these intricacies.
Knowledge distillation offers an effective approach to enhance
detection performance while controlling model size by transferring knowledge from high-performance teacher models to
structurally constrained student models. Compared to training
methods based solely on hard labels, the distillation approach
leverages soft-label information from teacher model outputs
to guide the student model in learning relative relationships
between categories, thereby achieving smoother and more
discriminative decision boundaries.
In the context of IoT malicious traffic detection, different
model architectures often exhibit distinct perception preferences toward attack signatures, making it difficult for a
single teacher model to comprehensively characterize complex and diverse attack behaviors. Based on this observation,
FORM-IDS adopts a multi-teacher-single-student distillation
framework, integrating multiple performance-complementary
teacher models to provide the student model with more
stable and information-rich supervision signals. Additionally,
to constrain the student’s representation structure in the feature space, we introduce Relational Knowledge Distillation
alongside output-layer distillation, as outlined in Algorithm 1.
This mechanism enables the student model to inherit not only
the prediction distributions of individual samples but also the
relative structural relationships between samples modeled by
the teachers.
1) Multi-Teacher Distillation: Let the training sample be
x, and assume there are K teacher models {T1 , T2 , . . . , TK }.
The k-th teacher produces the corresponding logits z Tk (x).
To reduce the impact of prediction bias from a single teacher,
FORM-IDS fuses the outputs of multiple teachers using mean
ensembling. The ensemble logits are defined as:
K

z T (x) =

1 X Tk
z (x)
K
k=1

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(1)

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 1 Multi-Teacher Relational Knowledge Distillation
Training
Input: Training dataset D, Teacher ensemble T
=
{T1 , . . . , TK }, Student model S, Total epochs N , Temperature τ , RKD weight γ, Dynamic weight bounds
αstart , αend .
Output: Optimized Student Model parameters θS .
1: Initialization: Randomly initialize student parameters θS .
2: for epoch t = 1 to N do
3:
Calculate dynamic distillation weight:
end )·t
4:
α(t) ← αstart − (αstart −α
N
5:
for each mini-batch (x, y) in D do
6:
Get logits z Tk and feature maps E Tk from each
teacher Tk ∈ T
PK
1
Tk
7:
Compute ensemble logits: z T ← K
k=1 z
T
8:
Compute teacher soft labels q using softmax with
τ (Eq. 2)
9:
Get logits z S and feature maps E S from student
S(x; θS )
10:
Compute student soft probabilities q S using softmax
with τ (Eq. 3)
S
11:
Lstudent ← CrossEntropy(z
, y)
▷ Hard label loss
P T
2
T
12:
Ldistill ← τ · q log(q /q S )
▷ KL Divergence
loss
e T and D
eS
13:
Calculate normalized distance matrices D
(Eq. 5 6)
eT , D
e S ) ▷ Structural relational loss
14:
LRKD ← Huber(D
15:
Compute total loss:
16:
Ltotal ← Lstudent + α(t)Ldistill + γLRKD
17:
Update θS via backpropagation: θS ← θS − η∇Ltotal
18:
end for
19: end for
20: return θS

6

training, rather than relying only on the hard constraints
provided by ground-truth labels.
2) Relational Knowledge Distillation: Although logit-level
distillation can effectively transfer class-level discriminative
information, it still ignores the structural relationships among
samples in the feature space. To further constrain feature learning, FORM-IDS incorporates a relational knowledge distillation mechanism. This ensures that the student preserves intersample relations in the feature space, maintaining structural
consistency with the teacher models.
Let the feature representations of the teacher and the student for a mini-batch be E T ∈ RB×d and E S ∈ RB×d ,
respectively, where B is the batch size and d is the feature
dimension. For any sample pair (i, j), the Euclidean distances
are defined as:
T
Dij
= EiT − EjT

2

,

S
Dij
= EiS − EjS 2

To mitigate the effect of scale differences, the distance
matrices are normalized by their mean values:
eT =
D

DT
,
µ(DT )

eS =
D

DS
µ(DS )

where C denotes the total number of attack classes. Correspondingly, let the logits produced by the student model be
z S (x), and its soft-label distribution is:

exp ziS (x)/τ
S
(3)
qi (x) = PC

S
j=1 exp zj (x)/τ
Based on the above soft-label distributions, the distillation
loss is measured by the KL divergence:

Ldistill = τ 2 · KL q T (x) ∥ q S (x)
= τ2

C
X
i=1

qiT (x) log

qiT (x)
qiS (x)

(6)

where µ(·) denotes the mean of all matrix entries. The relational distillation loss is computed using the Huber function:


eT , D
eS
LRKD = Huber D
(7)
The Huber loss formulation enforces global structural consistency while being more robust to abnormal distances, which
helps stabilize the training process of the student model.
3) Overall Training Objective: By jointly considering supervision from ground-truth labels, logit-level distillation, and
relational distillation, the overall training loss of FORM-IDS
is defined as:
Ltotal = Lstudent + α(t)Ldistill + γLRKD

Given a temperature parameter τ , the soft-label distribution of
the teacher is defined as:

exp ziT (x)/τ
T
qi (x) = PC
(2)

T
j=1 exp zj (x)/τ

(5)

(8)

where Lstudent is the cross-entropy loss based on ground-truth
labels, and γ is the fixed weighting coefficient for the relational
distillation loss. The term α(t) denotes the dynamic distillation
weight, which balances the contribution of teacher supervision.
To facilitate effective knowledge transfer, we adopt a linear
decay strategy defined as:
(αstart − αend ) · t
(9)
T
where αstart and αend represent the initial and final weight
values, respectively, t is the current epoch index, and T is the
total number of training epochs. This strategy encourages the
student model to prioritize teacher guidance during the early
stages of optimization while gradually shifting focus towards
ground-truth labels as the training converges.
α(t) = αstart −

(4)

where the squared temperature term τ 2 is used to compensate
for the change in gradient scale. Minimizing the divergence
Ldistill enables the student model to learn the class-similarity
information implicitly captured by the teacher models during

E. Lightweight Formal Verification
Although deep learning-based detection models show strong
capabilities in recognizing complex attack patterns, their
decision-making process is essentially a data-driven blackbox inference. Consequently, they are vulnerable to noisy
samples, distribution shifts, and model uncertainty in practical

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

deployments. This issue is particularly evident in IoT and IIoT
scenarios, where frequent false alarms not only increase the
burden on operation and maintenance but may also trigger
unnecessary defensive actions that disrupt normal business
processes. Therefore, relying solely on classification confidence is often insufficient to meet practical requirements for
reliability and safety.
To mitigate these issues, FORM-IDS introduces a
lightweight formal verification module following the deep
detection model. This module checks logical consistency
and enforces safety-property constraints on suspected attack
events. It does not aim to verify the internal weights of
the neural network. Instead, it abstracts detection outcomes
into finite-state behaviors and enforces runtime constraints
through formal logic rules, as detailed in Algorithm 2. In this
way, potential false alarms can be filtered effectively while
maintaining low system overhead.
Rather than statically proving the mathematical properties
of internal neural network weights, which often leads to
severe state-explosion problems on high-dimensional data, our
framework performs runtime verification of the decision logic.
By abstracting the continuous stream of deep learning outputs
into a sequence of discrete events within a finite-state machine,
formally verified properties can be used to dynamically filter
the neural network’s decisions.
1) Security Property Modeling: The core of the formal
verification module is an explicit specification of behavioral
constraints for the IDS. Considering practical intrusion detection requirements, we define key safety properties covering
timeliness, access control, and false-alarm suppression. These
properties are formally described using Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL).
First, to ensure a timely response, once an attack is confirmed, the system must complete the flagging operation within
a bounded time window:
G(attack → F≤∆t flagged)

Algorithm 2 Runtime Formal Verification and Decision Logic
Input: Real-time traffic sample xt , Trained Student Model S,
High-assurance threshold θ, Persistence limit ∆t.
Output: Final Decision Action At ∈ {Pass, Monitor, Block}.
1: Initialization: System State Q ← Normal, Attack Counter
c ← 0.
2: while System is Active do
3:
Receive new packet xt at time step t
4:
Get prediction ŷ and confidence score σ from S(xt )
5:
if ŷ = Benign then
6:
Q ← Normal
7:
c←0
8:
At ← Pass
9:
else
10:
if σ < θ then
11:
Q ← Suspect
▷ Low confidence, hold alert
12:
c←c+1
13:
if c > ∆t then
14:
Q ← Flagged ▷ Check Property 1: Timeliness
15:
else
16:
At ← Monitor
17:
end if
18:
else
19:
Q ← Flagged
▷ High confidence triggers
immediate flag
20:
end if
21:
end if
22:
if Q == Flagged then
23:
Logic Check: flagged → ¬control granted
24:
Revoke Control Privileges()
25:
Q ← Blocked
26:
At ← Block
27:
end if
28:
Execute Action At
29: end while

(10)

where ∆t denotes the maximum acceptable response delay in
logical steps.
Second, to prevent further propagation, the system must revoke control privileges immediately after an attack is flagged:
G(flagged → ¬ control granted)

7

(11)

Finally, to suppress misclassification of benign traffic (false
positives), we introduce a constraint based on detection confidence. Unlike standard formulations that rely on asymptotic
probabilities, we enforce a deterministic guard on the decision
boundary:
G((model output = attack ∧ confidence < θ) → ¬ flagged)
(12)
where θ is a strict confidence threshold. This property ensures
that uncertain predictions remain in the suspect state rather
than triggering an immediate alarm. Together, these properties
provide a rigorous logical basis for constraining detection
outcomes.
The choice of the confidence threshold θ essentially governs
the trade-off between system sensitivity and false positive

rates. A higher θ establishes a conservative decision boundary
requiring strong neural network certainty before transitioning a
sample to the flagged state, effectively suppressing false alarms
but potentially delaying the detection of stealthy attacks.
Conversely, a lower θ promotes agility at the risk of allowing
transient noise to trigger unwarranted defensive actions. In
our experiments, θ is selected by validation-set grid search
to match the dataset-specific confidence distribution.
2) State-machine Abstraction and Verification Workflow:
To make formal verification executable, FORM-IDS abstracts
the detection process as a finite-state machine with the following state set: {normal, suspect, flagged, blocked}.
The workflow operates as follows: The model output first
triggers the transition from normal to suspect. To prevent
transient noise from causing false alarms, the system enters
the flagged state only if the attack pattern persists or the confidence score exceeds the high-assurance threshold θ. Finally,
after control constraints are satisfied, the system moves to the
blocked state to execute defensive actions.
This abstraction simplifies the handling of complex model
outputs and provides clear semantics for verification. At

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

the implementation level, FORM-IDS utilizes the NuSMV
model-checking tool. We define a comprehensive SMV model
that captures the aforementioned state machine alongside the
three core LTL properties as LTLSPEC declarations. Running NuSMV performs offline consistency verification of the
state machine against these specific properties. During our
evaluation, all three LTL specifications were verified as true,
confirming that the rule set is free of logical conflicts or
deadlocks. Once theoretically sound, the verified behavioral
rules are compiled into a lightweight runtime monitor. This
monitor is embedded directly into the detection pipeline. It
acts as a deterministic filter, applying real-time, step-by-step
checks and constraint enforcement on the incoming sequence
of neural network outputs.
It should be emphasized that the formal verification module
does not replace the deep detection model. Instead, it serves
as a post hoc logical filtering and constraint layer. By formally
constraining the output behaviors, FORM-IDS effectively reduces the false alarm rate with negligible additional computational cost, exhibiting stable detection behavior across multiple
datasets. This design allows the overall framework to retain
the sensitivity of deep models while significantly improving
trustworthiness in high-security scenarios.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
This section evaluates the performance of FORM-IDS
across four heterogeneous datasets. We first outline the experimental setup and baselines, followed by a detailed analysis
of detection accuracy. Finally, we validate the effectiveness of
the relational knowledge distillation strategy and the formal
verification module in reducing false alarms and computational
overhead.
A. Implementation Platform
All experiments in this study were conducted on a cloud
computing infrastructure. The experimental environment was
configured with Python 3.10 running on Ubuntu 22.04, and
CUDA 11.8 was used to enable GPU acceleration. The hardware configuration includes a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU
(24 GB) and a 16-vCPU Intel Xeon Platinum 8352V processor
clocked at 2.10 GHz. This setup ensures efficient training and
evaluation for all deep learning models.
Unless otherwise specified, the data preprocessing pipeline
and training procedures strictly follow those adopted in DTLIDS, ensuring fair and consistent comparisons. All models
were trained for a fixed number of 25 epochs under the same
experimental settings. After training, model performance was
evaluated on the corresponding test sets for each dataset. This
unified implementation platform and configuration guarantee
that the observed performance differences are attributable to
the proposed framework rather than variations in the experimental environment.
B. Datasets and Baselines
To comprehensively evaluate the detection performance and
generalization capability of FORM-IDS under diverse network

8

environments and attack scenarios, this paper conducts experiments on four representative public datasets: Edge-IIoTset,
UNSW-NB15, TON-IoT, and PowerDuck. Specifically, EdgeIIoTset targets edge-computing and IoT settings and covers
multiple typical IoT attack types [28]. UNSW-NB15 provides
a rich and well-structured collection of network attack samples
and is widely used to assess the multi-class classification capability of IDS models [29]–[33]. TON-IoT focuses on integrated
IoT and industrial-system scenarios and thus reflects higher
environmental complexity [34]–[41]. PowerDuck characterizes
anomalies and attack behaviors in power systems and is used to
validate model applicability in critical-infrastructure contexts
[42]. By performing evaluations across multiple datasets with
different scales, domains, and distribution characteristics, we
aim to verify the stability and robustness of the proposed
framework under cross-scenario conditions.
For comparison, we consider two groups of baselines. First,
DTL-IDS is selected as the primary lineage baseline [10].
Since FORM-IDS is built upon the DTL-IDS framework, both
methods share the same preprocessing pipeline, ensuring a
controlled environment for comparison. DTL-IDS integrates
multiple large-scale CNN models and therefore serves as a
high-accuracy but high-cost reference point.
Given that DTL-IDS has a parameter size several orders of
magnitude larger than FORM-IDS, we additionally include the
Generic CNN from the DTL-IDS suite as a compact lineage
baseline. This model follows the same input representation and
training procedure. With a model size closer to our proposed
student network, the Generic CNN provides a more equitable
baseline for evaluating detection capability under constrained
model capacity.
Second, we include two recent IDS baselines, Fed PCA
[43] and DIDS-MFL [44], to broaden the comparison beyond the DTL-IDS family. Whereas DTL-IDS and Generic
CNN provide a controlled comparison within the same design
lineage, Fed PCA and DIDS-MFL offer additional reference
points from different methodological directions. Their results
are incorporated into the main performance plot in Fig. 2.
C. Evaluation Metrics
To comprehensively evaluate the classification capability
and security-related behavior of FORM-IDS in attack detection
tasks, this paper assesses the model from two perspectives,
namely classification performance metrics and security-related
metrics. All metrics are computed based on the confusion
matrix entries: true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false
positives (FP), and false negatives (FN).
Accuracy measures the overall correctness of the model
across all samples and reflects its overall predictive performance. It is defined as:
TP + TN
(13)
Accuracy =
TP + TN + FP + FN
Precision measures the proportion of true attack samples
among the samples predicted as attacks, and it reflects the
credibility of detection results. It is defined as:
Precision =

TP
TP + FP

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(14)

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

 )   6 F R U H

 $ F F X U D F \

     

     

     

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1

 ' 7 /  , ' 6

 ) H G  3 & $

 ' , ' 6  0 ) /

     
     
     
     
     

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1

  D 
  ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W
 )   6 F R U H

 $ F F X U D F \

    

     

    

     

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

 ' 7 /  , ' 6

 ) H G  3 & $

 ' , ' 6  0 ) /

 )   6 F R U H

     
     
     
     
     

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1

  F 
  7 2 1  , R 7

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1

 5 H F D O O

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

    

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1

 ' , ' 6  0 ) /

      
      
      
      

    

    

 ) H G  3 & $

      
      
      
      

    

    

 ' 7 /  , ' 6

 3 U H F L V L R Q

      
      
      
      

 3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

     

      
      
      
      

 5 H F D O O

      
      
      
      

 3 U H F L V L R Q

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1

  E 
  8 1 6 :  1 %  

    

      
      
      
      

 3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

 $ F F X U D F \

      
      
      
      

      
      
      
      

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6  0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1  0 L Q L  & 1 1

      
      
      
      

     

      
      
      
      

     

      
      
      
      

     

     

      
      
      
      

     

 )   6 F R U H

      
      
      
      

     

 5 H F D O O

      
      
      
      

     

 3 U H F L V L R Q

      
      
      
      

 3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

     

     

      
      
      
      

 5 H F D O O

      
      
      
      

 3 U H F L V L R Q

     

      
      
      
      

 3 H U I R U P D Q F H  6 F R U H

 $ F F X U D F \

9

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1

 ' 7 /  , ' 6

 ) H G  3 & $

 ' , ' 6  0 ) /

  G 
  3 R Z H U ' X F N

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of the evaluated models across the four datasets.

FP
(17)
FP + TN
By jointly considering the above metrics, we conduct a
systematic evaluation of FORM-IDS and baseline methods
from both classification performance and security practicality.
FPR =

    
    

 0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6

    
    
    

 ) 3 5

Recall evaluates the coverage of real attack samples, i.e.,
the proportion of attacks that are successfully detected. It is
computed as:
TP
Recall =
(15)
TP + FN
F1-score is the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, and
it balances the two metrics. It is defined as:
2 · Precision · Recall
(16)
F1 =
Precision + Recall
For security-related evaluation, the False Positive Rate
(FPR) measures the proportion of benign traffic that is incorrectly classified as attacks. It is a key indicator of practical
deployability for IDS. It is defined as:

    
    
    
    
    
    

 7 2 1  , R 7

 3 R Z H U ' X F N

Fig. 3. FPR Comparison on TON-IoT and PowerDuck.

D. Results and Discussion
In this section, we present a comprehensive empirical evaluation of the proposed FORM-IDS framework. The analysis is
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1
 0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1

    
    

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6
 ' 7 /  , ' 6

 0 R G H O  6 L ] H   0 % 

   

   
  

  
 
 
 
 
 ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W

 8 1 6 :  1 %  

 7 2 1  , 2 7

 3 R Z H U ' X F N

Fig. 4. Model Size (MB) Comparison Across Datasets.

 * H Q H U L F  & 1 1
 0 X O W L  5 . '  & 1 1

 , Q I H U H Q F H  7 L P H   P V  V D P S O H 

   

 ) 2 5 0  , ' 6
 ' 7 /  , ' 6

   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W

 8 1 6 :  1 %  

 7 2 1  , 2 7

 3 R Z H U ' X F N

Fig. 5. Inference Time (ms/sample) Comparison Across Datasets.

 ( G J H  , , R 7 V H W
 8 1 6 :  1 %  
 7 2 1  , 2 7
 3 R Z H U ' X F N

 U L F  &

 * H Q H

 1 1

  
 9 * *

  

 9 * *

 W L
 , Q F H S

 R Q 9 

 ; F H S

 /
 W 9 
 W L R Q
 H W % 
 H W 9 
 H V 1 H
 L H Q W 1
 L H Q W 1
 W L R Q 5
 ( I I L F
 ( I I L F
 , Q F H S

Fig. 6. Selected Backbone Models for Each Dataset.

10

strictly designed to validate the system’s effectiveness, robustness, and operational efficiency within resource-constrained
IoT environments. To provide a structured and in-depth discussion, we organize our evaluation to systematically address
the following four key research questions (RQs):
• RQ1 (Detection Performance): Does FORM-IDS achieve
strong detection accuracy and generalization capability
compared to the selected baselines across heterogeneous
datasets?
• RQ2 (Ablation Study): What are the contributions of
the knowledge distillation strategy to the student model’s
performance?
• RQ3 (Verification Effectiveness): Can the lightweight formal verification module effectively suppress false alarms
and enforce safety constraints without compromising
detection sensitivity?
• RQ4 (Operational Efficiency): Is the proposed framework
computationally efficient enough to support real-time
deployment on resource-constrained edge devices?
1) Classification Performance: As illustrated in Fig. 2,
FORM-IDS demonstrates consistently robust classification
performance across all four datasets. Beyond the DTL-IDS
family, the comparisons with Fed PCA and DIDS-MFL further show that the proposed framework remains competitive
under a broader benchmark setting. FORM-IDS consistently
surpasses Fed PCA across all four datasets. Compared with
DIDS-MFL, FORM-IDS achieves higher accuracy on every
dataset and higher F1-scores on Edge-IIoTset, UNSW-NB15,
and TON-IoT, while remaining essentially tied on PowerDuck
(0.9888 vs. 0.9890). In both Edge-IIoTset and UNSW-NB15
(Fig. 2a, b), our framework achieves perfect metrics (1.0000)
across all indicators, mirroring the performance of the heavyweight DTL-IDS baseline. This confirms that the proposed
lightweight distillation strategy successfully preserves the detection capability of large-scale ensembles in standard scenarios.
On the more complex TON-IoT (Fig. 2c) and PowerDuck (Fig. 2d) datasets, FORM-IDS maintains high fidelity,
achieving accuracies of 99.56% and 99.02%, respectively.
While DTL-IDS exhibits a marginal advantage in PowerDuck
(99.78%), this comes at the cost of massive computational
overhead. In contrast, FORM-IDS delivers comparable precision with significantly reduced complexity, highlighting its
efficiency advantage in resource-constrained edge scenarios.
2) Effectiveness of Knowledge Distillation: To isolate the
specific contribution of our distillation strategy, we benchmark
the Multi-RKD CNN against a baseline Mini CNN trained
from scratch. As evident in Fig. 2, eliminating the distillation
process results in sharp performance degradation on complex
datasets. Most notably on UNSW-NB15, the standalone Mini
CNN struggles to generalize, with accuracy plummeting to
87.27% and the F1-score dropping to 84.94%. Similarly, on
TON-IoT, its accuracy falls to 96.53%.
In stark contrast, the Multi-RKD CNN effectively recovers
this capability. It restores accuracy to a perfect 100% on
UNSW-NB15 and boosts TON-IoT performance to 98.04%.
Even on the Edge-IIoTset, the distilled model maintains a
clear advantage over its scratch-trained counterpart (99.92%

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

11

TABLE III
R EPRESENTATIVE O NE -FACTOR S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF D ISTILLATION H YPERPARAMETERS ON TON-I OT (M ULTI -RKD CNN)

Setting
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Default (τ = 8, αstart = 0.5, αend = 0.2, γ = 0.15)
0.9804
0.9816
0.9804
0.9808
γ=0
0.9689
0.9734
0.9689
0.9705
τ =4
0.9760
0.9789
0.9760
0.9769
τ = 12
0.9671
0.9702
0.9671
0.9681
αstart = 0.3
0.9742
0.9769
0.9742
0.9751
αstart = 0.7
0.9751
0.9758
0.9751
0.9753
αend = 0
0.9724
0.9722
0.9724
0.9721
αend = 0.1
0.9787
0.9796
0.9787
0.9790
* Each row changes one parameter at a time around the default setting while keeping the remaining settings fixed.

TABLE V
TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 4.

TABLE IV
TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 3.
Model
Multi-RKD CNN
FORM-IDS

TON-IoT
0.017
0.003

PowerDuck
0.074
0.041

vs. 99.32%). Crucially, these results demonstrate that the
lightweight network inherently possesses sufficient representational capacity; however, it requires the rich, structural
supervision provided by the teacher ensemble to successfully
navigate the complex decision boundary.
Together, the Mini CNN, Multi-RKD CNN, and full FORMIDS form a three-stage ablation that isolates the contributions of distillation and formal verification. The Mini CNN
establishes the lower-capacity baseline, the Multi-RKD CNN
captures the benefit of relational distillation, and the complete
FORM-IDS reflects the additional suppression of false alarms
brought by verification. Following the DTL-IDS setting, the
teacher ensemble size is uniformly set to K = 5. To keep
the training objective consistent across datasets, the distillation
hyperparameters are fixed at τ = 8, αstart = 0.5, αend = 0.2,
and γ = 0.15. The verification threshold θ is selected by
validation-set grid search for each dataset, yielding θ = 0.9
for Edge-IIoTset and UNSW-NB15, θ = 0.8 for TON-IoT,
and θ = 0.85 for PowerDuck.
To further examine the robustness of the distillation phase, a
one-factor sensitivity analysis was conducted on the challenging TON-IoT dataset using the Multi-RKD CNN (excluding
the formal verification module to isolate distillation effects).
By varying one parameter at a time around the aforementioned
default settings, the sensitivity metrics reported in Table III
confirm that the default configuration yields the optimal F1score of 0.9808. Notably, setting γ = 0 or increasing the temperature to τ = 12 results in the most pronounced degradation,
validating the necessity of relational distillation and moderate
temperature scaling. Meanwhile, the student model remains
highly stable against minor tuning variations in the dynamic
weight bounds (αstart and αend ).
3) Impact of Formal Verification: To address RQ3, we
explicitly evaluate the impact of the formal verification module
by contrasting the full FORM-IDS framework against the
standalone Multi-RKD CNN. Fig. 3 visualizes the FPR on
the two most complex datasets. The integration of logical

Dataset
Edge-IIoTset
UNSW-NB15
TON-IOT
PowerDuck

Generic CNN
2.20
2.20
2.20
2.20

Multi-RKD CNN
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50

FORM-IDS
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50

DTL-IDS
670.22
1041.60
793.07
507.86

TABLE VI
TABULAR DATA C ORRESPONDING TO F IG . 5.
Dataset
Edge-IIoTset
UNSW-NB15
TON-IOT
PowerDuck

Generic CNN
3.54
11.38
3.84
1.96

Multi-RKD CNN
2.57
5.68
1.67
1.26

FORM-IDS
2.58
5.68
1.68
1.27

DTL-IDS
22.69
134.07
21.11
9.72

constraints results in a substantial suppression of false alarms:
on TON-IoT, the FPR is slashed from 0.017 to a mere 0.003,
while on PowerDuck, it decreases from 0.074 to 0.041. For
completeness, the exact numerical values corresponding to
Fig. 3 are also reported in Table IV. This sharp reduction
empirically confirms the module’s capability to filter out
spurious, transient noise in dynamic environments.
4) Computational Efficiency: Crucially, this rigorous filtering enhances overall decision reliability without sacrificing
sensitivity. As corroborated by Fig. 2(c), FORM-IDS achieves
superior Precision and F1-scores compared to the unverified
Multi-RKD model. Notably, on TON-IoT, the F1-score improves from 0.9808 to 0.9942. These findings affirmatively
answer RQ3, demonstrating that the formal verification module successfully purifies the decision boundary, eliminates
inconsistent predictions, and enforces safety constraints while
preserving the system’s acute ability to detect genuine attacks.
Finally, we assess the computational advantage of FORMIDS. As summarized in Fig. 4, DTL-IDS requires storage
ranging from 507 MB to 1041 MB depending on the datasetspecific ensemble. The specific composition of these ensembles is visualized in Fig. 6, where dark cells denote the
five backbone architectures selected for each dataset, while
light cells indicate excluded models. This reliance on multiple
heavy backbones results in substantial overhead. In contrast,
FORM-IDS maintains a fixed, ultra-compact size of 0.50 MB
across all scenarios, corresponding to a reduction of three orders of magnitude. The exact numerical values corresponding
to Fig. 4 are summarized in Table V.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

This compactness translates directly to inference speed (Fig.
5). On UNSW-NB15, FORM-IDS reduces the inference time
per sample from 134.07 ms (DTL-IDS) to just 5.68 ms.
Even compared to the Generic CNN (11.38 ms), FORM-IDS
achieves a 2x speedup due to its optimized architecture. The
exact numerical values corresponding to Fig. 5 are summarized
in Table VI. These results show that FORM-IDS balances
strong security performance with the efficiency needed for
edge-oriented IoT deployment.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed FORM-IDS, a lightweight intrusion detection framework tailored for resource-constrained
IoT environments. By synergizing multi-teacher relational
distillation with runtime formal verification, our approach reconciled the inherent trade-off between detection performance
and deployment cost. Experimental evaluations confirmed that
FORM-IDS achieved competitive classification performance
against both the DTL-IDS lineage baselines and the broader
IDS baselines considered in our experiments, while significantly reducing computational overhead and inference latency.
Beyond this specific task, the integration of data-driven learning and symbolic reasoning offers a promising direction for
building trustworthy and verifiable AI at the network edge.
Future research will explore adaptive thresholding mechanisms
to dynamically calibrate formal verification bounds against
real-time concept drift. Additionally, we aim to deploy the
FORM-IDS pipeline on varied physical edge hardware to
profile energy constraints, and to investigate adaptive feature
alignment for seamless cross-dataset transfer learning across
disparate IoT traffic structures.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

12

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Son, J. Jang, J. Park, A. Balog, P. Ballantyne, H. R. Kwon,
A. Singleton, and J. Hwang, “Leveraging advanced technologies for
(smart) transportation planning: A systematic review,” Sustainability,
vol. 17, no. 5, p. 2245, 2025.
[2] P. J. Ganesh, B. M. Sundaram, P. K. Balachandran, and G. B. Mohammad, “Intdem: an intelligent deep optimized energy management
system for iot-enabled smart grid applications,” Electrical Engineering,
vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 1925–1947, 2025.
[3] B. O. Sanusi, “Smart infrastructure: Leveraging iot and ai for predictive
maintenance in urban facilities,” SAMRIDDHI: A Journal of Physical
Sciences, Engineering and Technology, vol. 17, no. 02, pp. 26–37, 2025.
[4] M. Driss, D. Hasan, W. Boulila, and J. Ahmad, “Microservices in iot
security: current solutions, research challenges, and future directions,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 192, pp. 2385–2395, 2021.
[5] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A survey on intrusion detection system:
feature selection, model, performance measures, application perspective,
challenges, and future research directions,” Artificial Intelligence Review,
vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 453–563, 2022.
[6] H. Dong and I. Kotenko, “Cybersecurity in the ai era: analyzing the
impact of machine learning on intrusion detection,” Knowledge and
Information Systems, pp. 1–52, 2025.
[7] I. Rakine, A. Oukaira, K. El Guemmat, I. Atouf, S. Ouahabi, M. Talea,
and T. Bouragba, “Comprehensive review of intrusion detection techniques: Ml and dl in different networks,” IEEE Access, 2025.
[8] A. K. Desta, S. Ohira, I. Arai, and K. Fujikawa, “Rec-cnn: In-vehicle
networks intrusion detection using convolutional neural networks trained
on recurrence plots,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 35, p. 100470,
2022.
[9] M. A. Haq, M. A. Rahim Khan, and T. AL-Harbi, “Development of
pccnn-based network intrusion detection system for edge computing.”
Computers, Materials & Continua, vol. 71, no. 1, 2022.
[10] S. Latif, W. Boulila, A. Koubaa, Z. Zou, and J. Ahmad, “Dtl-ids: An
optimized intrusion detection framework using deep transfer learning
and genetic algorithm,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 221, p. 103784, 2024.
[11] S. S. Bamber, A. V. R. Katkuri, S. Sharma, and M. Angurala, “A hybrid
cnn-lstm approach for intelligent cyber intrusion detection system,”
Computers & Security, vol. 148, p. 104146, 2025.
[12] M. Arsalan, M. Mubeen, M. Bilal, and S. F. Abbasi, “1d-cnn-ids: 1d
cnn-based intrusion detection system for iiot,” in 2024 29th International
Conference on Automation and Computing (ICAC), 2024, pp. 1–4.
[13] D. Torre, A. Chennamaneni, J. Jo, G. Vyas, and B. Sabrsula, “Toward
enhancing privacy preservation of a federated learning cnn intrusion
detection system in iot: Method and empirical study,” ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol., vol. 34, no. 2, Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695998
[14] K. Yesodha, M. Krishnamurthy, M. Selvi, and A. Kannan, “Intrusion
detection system extended cnn and artificial bee colony optimization in
wireless sensor networks,” Peer-to-peer Networking and Applications,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1237–1262, 2024.
[15] B. Ahmad, Z. Wu, Y. Huang, and S. U. Rehman, “Enhancing the security
in iot and iiot networks: An intrusion detection scheme leveraging deep
transfer learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 305, p. 112614, 2024.
[16] K.-D. Lu, Y.-W. Yang, G.-Q. Zeng, C. Peng, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng,
“Bpso-ahdl-ids: Binary particle swarm optimization-based automated
hybrid deep learning model for intrusion detection of internet of things,”
IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp.
15 859–15 877, 2025.
[17] K.-D. Lu, J.-C. Huang, G.-Q. Zeng, M.-R. Chen, G.-G. Geng, and
J. Weng, “Multi-objective discrete extremal optimization of variablelength blocks-based cnn by joint nas and hpo for intrusion detection in
iiot,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 22,
no. 4, pp. 4266–4283, 2025.
[18] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-f. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion
detection model based on cnn and knowledge distillation,” Applied Soft
Computing, vol. 165, p. 112118, 2024.
[19] M. Umair, M. S. Khan, W. Al Malwi, F. Asiri, I. Nafea, F. Saeed,
and J. Ahmad, “Knowledge distillation for lightweight and explainable
intrusion detection in resource-constrained consumer devices,” IEEE
Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 2025.
[20] B. Xie, Z. Wang, Z. Zeng, D. He, and S. Chan, “Dtkd-ids: A dual-teacher
knowledge distillation intrusion detection model for the industrial internet of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 174, p. 103869, 2025.

13

[21] J. Shen, W. Yang, Z. Chu, J. Fan, D. Niyato, and K.-Y. Lam, “Effective
intrusion detection in heterogeneous internet-of-things networks via
ensemble knowledge distillation-based federated learning,” in ICC 2024
- IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp. 2034–
2039.
[22] X. Zhou, J. Wu, W. Liang, K. I.-K. Wang, Z. Yan, L. T. Yang, and Q. Jin,
“Reconstructed graph neural network with knowledge distillation for
lightweight anomaly detection,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11 817–11 828, 2024.
[23] K. Liu, S. Yang, C.-D. Wang, Y. Chen, and Z. Huang, “A novel
knowledge distillation method for graph neural networks with gradient
mapping and fusion,” Information Fusion, p. 104163, 2026.
[24] Z. H. Toman, L. Hamel, S. H. Toman, M. Graiet, and D. C. G. Valadares,
“Formal verification for security and attacks in iot physical layer,”
Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 73–91,
2024.
[25] M. Krichen, “Formal methods and validation techniques for ensuring
automotive systems security,” Information, vol. 14, no. 12, p. 666, 2023.
[26] B. Yuan, C. Zhang, J. Ren, Q. Chen, B. Xu, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, D. Zou,
F. Zhang, and H. Jin, “Toward automated attack discovery in sdn
controllers through formal verification,” IEEE Transactions on Network
and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3636–3655, 2024.
[27] M. Krichen, “Improving formal verification and testing techniques for
internet of things and smart cities,” Mobile networks and applications,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 732–743, 2023.
[28] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
“Edge-iiotset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
iot and iiot applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEe
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40 281–40 306, 2022.
[29] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),”
in 2015 military communications and information systems conference
(MilCIS). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[30] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
systems: Statistical analysis of the unsw-nb15 data set and the comparison with the kdd99 data set,” Information Security Journal: A Global
Perspective, vol. 25, no. 1-3, pp. 18–31, 2016.
[31] N. Moustafa, G. Creech, and J. Slay, “Big data analytics for intrusion
detection system: Statistical decision-making using finite dirichlet mixture models,” in Data Analytics and Decision Support for Cybersecurity:
Trends, Methodologies and Applications. Springer, 2017, pp. 127–156.
[32] N. Moustafa, J. Slay, and G. Creech, “Novel geometric area analysis
technique for anomaly detection using trapezoidal area estimation on
large-scale networks,” IEEE transactions on big data, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
481–494, 2017.
[33] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow
datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” in International Conference on Big Data Technologies and
Applications. Springer, 2020, pp. 117–135.
[34] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T.
Den Hartog, “Ton iot: The role of heterogeneity and the need for
standardization of features and attack types in iot network intrusion data
sets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, 2021.
[35] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “Ton iot
telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot for data-driven
intrusion detection systems,” Ieee Access, vol. 8, pp. 165 130–165 150,
2020.
[36] J. Ashraf, M. Keshk, N. Moustafa, M. Abdel-Basset, H. Khurshid, A. D.
Bakhshi, and R. R. Mostafa, “Iotbot-ids: A novel statistical learningenabled botnet detection framework for protecting networks of smart
cities,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 103041, 2021.
[37] N. Moustafa, “A systemic iot–fog–cloud architecture for big-data analytics and cyber security systems: A review of fog computing,” Secure
Edge Computing, pp. 41–50, 2021.
[38] N. Moustafa, “New generations of internet of things datasets for
cybersecurity applications based machine learning: Ton iot datasets,”
in Proceedings of the eResearch Australasia Conference, Brisbane,
Australia, 2019, pp. 21–25.
[39] N. Moustafa, M. Ahmed, and S. Ahmed, “Data analytics-enabled intrusion detection: Evaluations of ton iot linux datasets,” in 2020 IEEE 19th
International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing
and Communications (TrustCom). IEEE, 2020, pp. 727–735.
[40] N. Moustafa, M. Keshky, E. Debiez, and H. Janicke, “Federated ton iot
windows datasets for evaluating ai-based security applications,” in 2020
IEEE 19th international conference on trust, security and privacy in
computing and communications (TrustCom). IEEE, 2020, pp. 848–
855.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3694426

JOURNAL OF IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. , NO. , FEBRUARY 2026

[41] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating ai-based
security systems at the edge: Network ton iot datasets,” Sustainable
Cities and Society, vol. 72, p. 102994, 2021.
[42] S. Zemanek, I. Hacker, K. Wolsing, E. Wagner, M. Henze, and M. Serror,
“PowerDuck: A GOOSE Data Set of Cyberattacks in Substations,” in
Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation
and Test. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2022, pp. 49–53.
[43] T.-A. Nguyen, L. T. Le, T. D. Nguyen, W. Bao, S. Seneviratne, C. S.
Hong, and N. H. Tran, “Federated PCA on grassmann manifold for IoT
anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 32,
no. 5, pp. 4456–4471, 2024.
[44] C. Qiu, G. Nan, H. Xia, Z. Weng, X. Wang, M. Shen, X. Tao, and
J. Liu, “Disentangled dynamic intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 11, pp.
10 528–10 545, 2025.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

14