4970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

FSLog: Adversarial Margin for Cross-System
Few-Shot Log Anomaly Detection
Jiyu Tian , Mingchu Li , and Jianyuan Gan

Abstract—Log-based anomaly detection (LAD) is imperative
to ensure both the reliability and security of software systems.
Although many deep learning approaches have been designed to
capture complex and diverse anomaly patterns from log files, they
heavily rely on large-scale annotated data. However, collecting sufficient labeled data is impractical when a software system has just
been deployed. In this paper, we propose a cross-system few-shot
learning log-based anomaly detection approach, namely FSLog,
to solve the abnormal label scarcity problem, which is the main
challenge of recent LAD research. Specifically, we leverage a pretrained model from source system to enrich feature representations
so that data instances from target system can also be effectively
represented. To this end, we introduce a novel adversarial margin
loss to enhance our feature distinguishability while preserving their
generalizability. Further, we also develop a masked interactive
temporal network for robust feature extraction of temporal relationships for log samples. We evaluate the proposed FSLog on three
publicly available datasets based on a standard few-shot learning
setup protocol. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves the best performance in detecting abnormal logs when
compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms—Log anomaly detection, few-shot learning, finetuning, Softmax, margin.

I. INTRODUCTION
OG data is a valuable source for security analysis, fault diagnosis, and troubleshooting. To reduce system downtime
and improve system reliability, log anomaly detection, enabling
rapid problem localization, abnormal behavior identification,
and attack tracking, has been an active research topic [1], [2],
[3]. Recently, various deep learning-based methods are proposed
for this log analysis task. They include unsupervised approaches,
e.g., DeepLog [4] and LogAnomaly [5], supervised approaches,
e.g., LogRobust [6] and LightLog [7], semi-supervised approaches, e.g., PLELog [8], transfer learning-based approaches,
e.g., LogTransfer [9].

L

Received 24 January 2025; revised 28 October 2025; accepted 14 December
2025. Date of publication 2 January 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China under Grant 625B2031, Grant 62466025 and Grant T2350710232, and
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant DUT20GJ205. (Corresponding author: Mingchu Li.)
Jiyu Tian and Jianyuan Gan are with the School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail:
tianjiyu@mail.dlut.edu.cn).
Mingchu Li is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Jiangxi Normal
University, Nanchang 330022, China, and also with the School of Software
Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail:
mingchu@jxnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3647445

Fig. 1.

An illustration of the division of datasets in few-shot learning.

Despite its valuable applications, detecting anomalous logs is
still a challenging task. Since there are various software systems
(e.g., operating system CentOS, database system SQL Server,
and distributed file system HDFS), it is impractical to establish
a unified log anomaly detection model that can be applied to all
software systems. While re-training a new log anomaly model
in a new software system (i.e. target system) is also difficult
because labeled logs in the target system are rare and may present
different patterns when compared to the log data in the original
software system (i.e. source system). We illustrate this research
gap in Fig. 1.
Existing log anomaly detection models have not fulfilled
the performance requirement due to the following reasons:
supervised learning methods for log anomaly detection heavily
rely on large-scale labeled training data, which is expensive to
obtain and requires tedious manual work. Thus, it is difficult to
apply them to any new systems or dynamically evolved systems;
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning methods alleviate
the labeling problem. However, they are extremely susceptible
to log parsing errors since they are unable to adequately learn
explicit anomaly features and perform poorly in terms of detection accuracy [10]; transfer learning methods leverage rich
prior knowledge from the source system and fine-tune with a
few supervisions from the target system to achieve cross-system
detection. However, insufficient supervised samples make these
methods vulnerable to overfitting. Few-shot learning provides a
novel solution for LAD in label-scarce scenarios. However, the
detection performance of existing few-shot detection methods
is still limited either by the generalization and distinguishability
of the model or by the robustness of noisy logs. The research
challenges we address in this paper are formalized as:
r Generalization and Discrimination: are conflicting objectives in model training. In our study, we found that existing
methods only focus on either of them, thus compromising

1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

their overall performance. For instance, LogTransfer [9]
focuses on the syntax and noise problems of cross-system
logs and only shares the output layer during the fine-tuning
stage, while MetaLog [2] pays more attention to global
semantic consistency and generalization, ignoring the discriminability of representations. If an effective fine-tuning
strategy cannot be designed, the model is likely to over-rely
on the prior knowledge of the source system, which leads
to a degradation of the model’s performance.
r Roubustness: Existing methods are difficult to process
the inherent temporal dependencies and noise in log time
sequences. For example, MetaLog [2] uses a GRU network
with an attention mechanism to extract features without
considering the effect of noise, while Log-MatchNet [11]
combines log timestamps with the Bert model, aiming to
capture temporal dependencies and semantic relationships,
but the Transformer in Bert is more sensitive to noise. Log
noise may not only mask useful features but also mislead
the model to learn erroneous patterns, thus weakening the
robustness of detection.
To address the challenges above, in this paper, we propose a
novel few-shot learning-based log anomaly detection method,
which aims to improve the transferability of novel classes
by fuzzing the decision boundary with an adversarial margin.
As shown in Fig. 1, following the fine-tuning-based few-shot
learning framework, we establish an explicit support set for
the target system based on the ”N-way K-shot” principle in
meta-learning [12], which serves as the training set for the
fine-tuning process. Specifically, (i) first, we innovatively create
an adversarial margin cosine softmax (AMCS) loss function for
both training and fine-tuning phases, i.e., using cosine softmax with an adaptive rescaling factor to update the feature
extractor during pre-training to ensure representational discriminability, and utilizing appropriate negative margins during
fine-tuning to ensure generalization to the novel samples; (ii)
furthermore, we design a mask-based interactive temporal convolutional network (MITNet) for extracting temporal features
of log samples while effectively mitigating noise. Compared
to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) log anomaly detection methods [4], [5], [6], [13], [8], [9], [2], [11] proposed in recent
years, our approach achieves better performance on classification and generalizability in the presence of scarce annotated
samples.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
r We proposed a few-shot log anomaly detection method
based on the fine-tuning framework for overcoming the
reliance of existing methods on large-scale supervision.
With sufficient prior knowledge of the base classes from
the source system, the novel classes in the target system
can be classified using a limited number of samples.
r We designed a novel adversarial margin cosine softmax
loss function that balances the transferability and distinguishability of log samples during both the training and
fine-tuning phases.
r We introduce a masked interactive temporal network
as a backbone for extracting temporal and semantic

4971

relationships of log sequence samples while ensuring the
robustness of the representations.
r We provided a method to construct few-shot datasets for
base training and fine-tuning corresponding to log anomaly
detection based on HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird datasets
and conducted extensive experiments on four few-shot
datasets to demonstrate the usability and superiority of our
model.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
discusses related works. Section III describes the proposed
approach. Section IV presents the designed adversarial margin
cosine softmax loss. Section V reports the evaluation results
of the proposed approach and compares it with advanced approaches. Section VI discusses the advantages and limitations
of our approach. Finally, the work is concluded in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Log-Based Anomaly Detection
Existing approaches that use log data for anomaly detection
can be grouped into two broad categories: traditional machine
learning-based approaches [14], [15] and deep learning-based
approaches [16], [17], [18], [9], [13], [19], [11]. Classical machine learning-based approaches require hand-crafted features
and a combination of expert knowledge to classify anomalous
events in the logs. These methods, such as the PCA-based
method [15] and invariant mining (IM) based method [14],
required a lot of manual effort in the modeling process and have
limited performance in detecting anomalies.
Deep learning-based models have been dominant in log
anomaly detection. DeepLog [4] first utilized One-Hot encoding
to vectorize the templates during log representation and converts
the log sequences into a sparse matrix that contains no semantic
information. Noting the semantic information hidden in the log
templates, LogAnomaly [5] then modeled log detection as a
natural language sequence prediction problem by introducing
quantitive vectors and the word2vec algorithm. The LogRobust [6] combined TF-IDF with FastText to counteract evolutionary and parsing noise and introduced an attention mechanism in
Bi-LSTM to capture contextual information in log sequences
based on the supervised learning framework. LightLog [7]
significantly reduced floating-point computation and detection
time by introducing semantic vector dimensionality reduction
and designing a lightweight TCN network. PLELog [8], which
is based on semi-supervised learning, incorporated knowledge
of historical anomalies through probabilistic label estimation
and designed an attention-based GRU neural network to detect
anomalies. LogTransfer [9] used the similarity of logs between
different systems and applied transfer learning to transfer the
knowledge of anomalies from one software system to another.
MetaLog [2] combines globally consistent semantic embedding modules and meta-learning methods to improve the generalization ability of cross-system anomaly detection models.
Log-MatchNet [11] extracts the features of log vectors using
Bert’s model and achieves anomaly detection by calculating
the distances between test samples and positive and negative
samples through a matching network. Le et al. [10] presented a

4972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

unified parsing and grouping of logs, as well as a fair comparison of sophisticated log anomaly detection methods (including
DeepLog, LogAnomaly, LogRobust, PLELog, and CNN [20])
on the same platform, pointing out that existing methods still
face challenges such as limited labeled data, early detection,
evolving systems, and relations among log events.
Recent research has made progress in addressing the challenges of early detection with limited computing power, as
described in [7]. The out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem caused
by log evolution as well as parsing noise has also been tackled
in the research of [21] and [6] respectively. Experimental results
presented in [10] demonstrated that the accuracy of unsupervised
and semi-supervised models is difficult to guarantee, especially
in the presence of parsing noise. The transfer methods neglected
the issue of overfitting during cross-system fine-tuning, which
still leads to subpar detection performance. However, given the
diversity of log types and the significant differences between
software systems, initiating detection projects in scenarios with
extremely limited labeled data and log noise remains an urgent
problem.
B. Few-Shot Learning
Few-shot learning refers to the training of a model using a
limited number of data to achieve good generalization performance on new tasks or novel classes [22]. Existing few-shot
learning algorithms can be roughly categorized as either: finetuning [23], [24], meta-learning [25], [26], and metric learning [27], [28], [12].
Fine-tuning methods follow the standard transfer learning
procedure, which consists of pre-training with base classes and
fine-tuning with novel classes. The baseline algorithm and baseline++ algorithm [23], which are widely used for performance
comparison, are both implemented based on fine-tuning. The
primary distinction between these two algorithms resided in
their loss functions, with the baseline algorithm employing the
standard softmax and the baseline++ algorithm utilizing the
cosine softmax. Meta-learning methods perform a meta-training
on multiple subtasks constructed from the base classes during
the training phase to enable the learned model can quickly
adapt novel tasks during the test phase. MAML [25] is a typical
representative of meta-learning in few-shot learning, which does
not rely on any specific model architecture. By training a model
on multiple related tasks, it can quickly adapt to new tasks
with minimal data. Metric-learning methods directly compare
the similarities between the query samples and support classes
through one single feed-forward pass. Xie et al. [28] proposed a
deep brownian distance covariance (DeepBDC) method, which
measures the difference between the joint characteristic functions of embedded features and the product of their marginals to
learn image representations for few-shot classification.
Few-shot based log anomaly detection methods are a relatively novel subject. To the best of our knowledge, there are
almost no few-shot related studies available for comparison on
current log anomaly detection methods, and there are no suitable
datasets for the benchmark. Introducing few-shot learning is a
pioneering and innovative solution in the situation where it is

difficult to generalize existing supervised log anomaly detection
approaches.
C. Margin-Based Loss Function
Margin plays a critical role for achieving adequate discrimination between feature representations, and the margin-based
softmax loss function has been widely studied [29], [30], [31].
Wen et al. [32] proposed to minimize intra-class variation
as much as possible while ensuring that different class features
are distinguishable. To encourage intra-class compactness and
inter-class separability, Liu et al. [33] proposed a generalized
large-margin softmax (L-Softmax) to adjust the decision boundaries. In their further research [34], they proposed to impose
discriminative constraints on the hypersphere manifold, that is,
to restrict the angular margin (A-Softmax). Deng et al. [29]
proposed additive angular margin loss (ArcFace) to further solve
the problem of unstable training and difficult convergence in
A-Softmax, and significantly improve the discrimination power.
Wang et al. [35] reformulated the softmax loss as a cosine
loss by normalizing both features and weights to remove radial
variations and proposed a large-margin cosine loss (LMCL) to
maximize the decision margin in the angular space.
Contrary to the common practice in previous studies, Liu
et al. [30] found that the positive margin would expand the intraclass variance of the novel class. Accordingly, the appropriate
negative margin would better achieve discriminability and transferability of the model in few-shot learning (Negcos). However,
simply introducing negative margins in the pre-training phase
ignores the validity of the feature representation. This research
inspired us to rethink the discriminability and representativeness
of features in few-shot learning.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Problem Definition
Conventional log anomaly detection approaches typically
focus on using a binary classifier to determine labels for log
samples. When the number of annotated samples is small, the
traditional useful models applied to the problem will encounter
overfitting. In the above scenario, learning deep representations
driven on base logs and fine-tuning the classifiers with a few
support logs of novel classes is an effective research line.
For a few-shot log anomaly detection task, the dataset consists
of a base set Dbase with sufficient labeled logs from the source
system and a novel set Dnovel containing only a few supervisions
from the target system. In a task, base samples (source-system
samples) can form a base set B, which can be expressed as (Bi ,
YiB ), where Bi ∈ Rd , i={1, 2, ..., I}, YiB ={1, 2, ..., Y}. The
novel samples (target-system samples) can constitute a support
set S and a query set Q. Given N classes, each of which has
K samples of the same type (N-way K-shot), S can be further
S
), where Sj,k ∈ Rd , j={1, 2, ..., N}, k={1,
denoted as (Sj,k , Yj,k
S
2, ..., K}, Yj,k is the corresponding label. The samples with
labels to be verified constitute a query set. The main objective
of few-shot log anomaly detection is to accomplish the binary
classification task by learning Dbase and Dnovel in steps to

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

4973

Fig. 2. Overview of FSLog approach, which consists of two phases: the pre-training phase to learn a feature extractor fθ () with sufficient labeled logs sequences
on base classes from source system, and the fine-tuning phase to learn a new classifier C( |Wb ) on novel classes with few labeled log samples from target system.

obtain the ultimate detection model. Firstly, the pre-training
phase trains a detection backbone fθ ()(using MITNet as a
feature extractor, parametrized by the network parameters θ)
with the logs in Dbase and fixes its weights fθ () after training
to construct the feature representation xi . Here, ω represents a
fixed parameter operation. Formally,
fθ () = ω(fθ (Dbase )) = ω(fθ (Bi ), YiB )

(1)

The classifier C( |Wb ) is then fine-tuned with a few labeled
novel samples (support set S) to distinguish the unlabeled instances (Query set Q) from novel classes, updating the weights
Wb by
C(|Wb ) = C(WbT  ω(fθ (Dsupport )))
S
)
= C(WbT  ω(fθ (Sj,k )), Yj,k

(2)

For the general log anomaly detection task, the target of the
classification results is expected to match the novel log instance,
by minimizing the following loss
S
arg min Lce (σ(WbT , ω(fθ (Sj,k )), Yj,k
)

(3)

Where σ is used to obtain the similarity between the two
inputs, Lce denotes the cross-entropy loss between predictions
and truth labels.
B. Cross-System Few-Shot Log Anomaly Detection Framework
The proposed FSLog aims to achieve cross-system log
anomaly detection by utilizing an effective feature extractor
trained with sufficient labeled data from the source system
and constructing a classification model with limited supervision
from the target system. As illustrated in Fig. 2, following the
standard transfer learning paradigm, the FSLog detection model
consists of two phases: pre-training and fine-tuning. In the pretraining phase, we utilize sufficiently labeled base class samples

from the source system to train a MITNet model capable of
extracting robust temporal features, and fix the network parameters as a feature extractor for the next phase. In the fine-tuning
phase, we obtain the feature representations of the novel samples
through the feature extractor and train the classifier using a
limited number of labeled samples from the target system,
while introducing adversarial margin to adjust the intra-class
and inter-class distances to eliminate the heterogeneity between
different log sets.
Pre-training with Sufficient Labeled Data From Source System: The pre-training phase aims to train an effective backbone fθ () with abundant annotated log sequences from the
base classes. Logs are semi-structured semantic data in the
form of text, accompanied by noise and evolution, and require
specific processing. Specifically, the original log messages are
first parsed into structured templates, then sequenced based on
session, sliding, and fixed grouping algorithms. Finally, the templates are mapped into semantic vectors to form a log semantic
matrix Bi containing semantic information as input to the feature
extractor. It is worth noting that different types of logs usually
differ in syntax. Therefore, for cross-system knowledge transfer,
it is important to evaluate the similarity of logs between the
source system and the target system. LogTransfer provides a
cross-system log processing method that not only extracts local
contextual information but also takes into account the global
word co-occurrence information of template sets, thus reliably
measuring the similarity of cross-system logs. (As this is not the
focus of this paper, details are provided in [9].) Inspired by [7],
the fully convolutional network MITNet fθ () is able to extract
temporal features more quickly and efficiently, compensating
for the slow computation of LSTM and the inability of standard
CNN to capture causality in time-series data (details are provided
in Section III.C). During pre-training, first of all, the samples
are input into the backbone to obtain their feature map xi .
Afterwards, the method utilizes the AMCS Φ1 as a loss function

4974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

to gradually update the MITNet weights while extracting more
discriminative representations for fine-tuning (more details are
provided in Section IV.C).
Fine-tuning with Few Supervision for Target System LAD:
With insufficient supervised log samples in the newly deployed
system, the few novel classes cannot effectively transform the
backbone during fine-tuning [36]. Thus, fine-tuning follows the
meta-learning framework, using only a limited number of novel
classes to update the classifier parameters. Similar to the pretraining process, the raw logs in the target system are also parsed,
grouped, represented, and finally transformed into log semantic
matrices based on cross-system log data processing. During
fine-tuning, the samples from the novel classes are divided into
two sets: the support set S and the query set Q. The support
set consists of a few labeled samples from the novel classes,
which are used to update the classifier parameters. The query set
consists of unlabeled test samples, which are used to evaluate the
performance of the updated model. Exactly, in the LAD field,
the classification task only involves two classes: normal and
abnormal. Therefore, we set N to 2, meaning that K samples are
selected from each of the normal and abnormal classes to form
a support set with 2∗K samples. Then, the support set is fed
into the feature extractor with fixed parameters as the training
samples for the fine-tuning phase. The AMCS Φ2 Loss Function
is introduced to fuzz the inter-class variance, which significantly
improves the generalization performance of the classifier (details
are provided in Section IV.C). Eventually, we use the fine-tuned
classifier to detect the query samples and obtain the exact labels.
C. Feature Extraction Backbone MITNet
It has been widely demonstrated that temporal relations,
semantic relations, and parsing noise between logs. Therefore,
we develop the MITNet feature extractor for log data and introduce it into a fine-tuning-based few-shot learning framework
to extract robust temporal semantic representations. As shown
in Fig. 3, MITNet consists of four main parts: patch-positional
embedding, time masking, dilated convolution, and interactive
convolution. Among them, the patch-positional embedding and
interactive convolution blocks are a continuation of
TSLANet [37], while the event masking and dilated
convolution [38] are enhancement modules that we introduce
for log data. The specific implementation of MITNet is as
follows:
Patch-Positional Embedding: To preserve the temporal dependencies between log events, we employ a positional embedding method. Given an input log time series sample, we first
divide it into M patches of length |p| ( is rounded down)
using convolution and map each patch to another embedding
vector. Then, the positional embedding is summed with each
patch to preserve its temporal order.
Event Masking: first, unlike the continuous values of a standard time series, log samples are discrete values composed of log
events in chronological order. Second, log noise is mainly caused
by log incorrect parsing, so denoising methods for frequency
components become infeasible. Inspired by [39], we adopt a
randomized masking patch approach to generate robust features.

Fig. 3. The MITNet architecture contains four key components: patchpositional embedding, event masking, dilation convolution, and interaction
convolution. For the log semantic matrix consisting of log event semantic
vectors in temporal order, MITNet uses the following strategies for processing:
patch-positional embedding is used to keep temporal ordering; event masking
is used to ensure robustness of the representation; dilated convolution is used to
expand the receptive field; and interaction convolution is used to extract and fuse
features from different scales. After feature extraction, MITNet flattens the 300
× 300 log sequence into 1 × n-dimensional features for input to the downstream
classifier.

Specifically, we randomly mask the hidden vectors after patch
and position embedding along the time axis with a binary mask.
Since each patch covers multiple log events, masking the patches
is equivalent to removing some of the information, which motivates the feature extractor to ensure robust feature extraction in
the face of missing information (e.g., incorrect parsing).
Dilated Convolution: To obtain long and effective memories,
standard CNN typically require a deep network and a large filter.
However, dilated convolution offers an alternative approach that
involves the inclusion of a dilation rate d, i.e., interval sampling
of the input during convolution. As the depth of the network
increases, the receptive field size expands exponentially. Thus,
as shown in the figure, the 2-layer dilation convolution that we
introduce enables MITNet to obtain long temporal dependencies.
Interactive convolution: consists of two parallel 1D convolutional layers that use different-sized kernels to interact with
local features and remote dependencies. Specifically, the first
convolutional layer uses a smaller convolutional kernel (e.g.,
Kernel=1) to capture fine-grained local patterns in the data. The
second convolutional layer, on the other hand, uses a larger convolutional kernel (e.g., Kernel=3) to recognize long-duration
dependencies. These two features are activated by GELU, fused
by multiplication and addition operations, and fed into additional
convolutional layers for feature extraction and interactive fusion
across different scales.
Overall, compared with the following TSLANet [37] approach, MITNet addresses the problem of log discrete events

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

and parsing noise by adopting a random event masking strategy
to simulate parsing anomalous scenarios, forcing the model to
learn robust feature representations, effectively solving the interference of log noise; second, MITNet introduces a double-layer
dilated convolution that exponentially expands the filter field
with lower computation to capturing long term dependencies.
These two improvements enhance the performance in terms of
robustness and model efficiency, respectively.

4975

performance, while adding an appropriate negative margin could
achieve a better tradeoff between the discriminability and transferability. Hence, combining LMCL, the Negcos breaks with the
inherent understanding that the margin can only be restricted to
a positive integer by redefining the softmax loss with margin
(m<0) as follows:

ϕ1 = β · σ xi , WyTi − m

IV. ADVERSARIAL MARGIN COSINE SOFTMAX LOSS
In this section, we begin with a review and standardization of
existing softmax-based loss functions. Then, we analyze the differences between the proposed function and existing functions.
Finally, we elaborate on the proposed loss function AMCS.

(6)

⎛

⎞

⎜
Li = − log ⎜
⎝

⎟
e ϕ1
⎟

βσ (xi ,WjT ) ⎠
e

e ϕ1 +

(7)

j=1,j=yi

A. Softmax Loss Function Revisited
We denote i-th input samples as zi and its corresponding
label as yi . Combined with feature extractor fθ (), the feature
representations of deep networks can be indicated as xi =
fθ (zi ), xi ∈ Rd . Based on the problem definition in Section
III-A, we provided a unified and standardized explanation of
Softmax, LMCL [35], and Negcos [30].
Softmax The most widely used classification loss function,
standard softmax loss, can be formulated as follows:
⎞
⎛
T
Wb,y
 xi cos(θyi )
i
e
(4)
Li = − log ⎝  W T  x cos(θ ) ⎠
i
j
b,j
e
j
where weight vector WyTi is the yi -th column of W, b is a bias
term (for simplicity, it will be omitted next). The inner product
between WjT and xi can be expressed as ||WjT || ||xi || cos(θyi ),
where θj is the angle between the vector WjT and xi .
LMCL: However, the standard softmax loss function does not
explicitly encourage intra-class compactness and inter-class separability, which results in degeneration for classification performance under large intra-class variations. LMCL is proposed to
increase intra-class similarity and inter-class diversity. To eliminate radial variation, the method performs L2 -normalization of
the feature and weight vectors. Additionally, a decision margin
is generated by introducing a positive number m (m>0), which
makes the classification more rigorous. Since replacing the inner
product by the cosine similarity between two feature vectors
leads to better performance, this means that the norm of xi 
does not contribute to the scoring function, the method fixes the
normalized WjT  to 1 and redefines xi  to s, respectively.
Therefore, the altered loss function reinforces the discrimination of learned features by encouraging an extra margin in the
decision. Formally, the general formulation of LMCL is defined
as
⎞
⎛
es(cos(θyi )−m)
⎟
⎜
Li = − log ⎝ s(cos(θ )−m)
 scos(θ ) ⎠
yi
j
e
+
e

(5)

j=yi

Negcos: Nevertheless, when LMCL is used for few-shot
classifications, adding a positive margin instead can hurt the

Where σ denotes the similarity function between two input
vectors and can be either the inner product or the cosine. β denotes the temperature parameter [40] which could help to apply
the appropriate concentrated level around the largest scores and
avoids models falling into local optimum solutions.
B. Analysis of AMCS
Few-shot learning can solve the problem of supervision
deficits, but the implicit contradiction between the base class
and the novel class is ignored, i.e., there is feature heterogeneity between different log sets. Specifically, there are not only
similarities but also distributional differences between the base
log samples of the source system and the novel log samples
of the target system. Similarities between the base and novel
log samples may exist due to the presence of common system
components, standardized APIs, and shared libraries. In contrast, changes in system functionality, configurations, and user
interaction behaviors lead to differences in log sequence patterns
between base and novel samples. Therefore, the model trained on
the base classes gains outstanding feature discrimination ability
and instead fails to fit the novel classes well.
As mentioned in Negcos, when implementing few-shot
learning using LMCL, the intra-class variance on the base class
decreases and the model becomes more distinguishable on the
base class as the positive margins increase during training.
However, the dissimilarity between the base class and the new
class of samples instead leads to an increase in the intra-class
variance of the novel class. Based on the log samples from
different systems, we also verified this phenomenon. This is
because as the positive margins increase, the model focuses more
on correctly classifying existing categories, but lacks sufficient
learning and generalization ability for novel categories. In
addition, the increase in positive margins can also lead to
overfitting of the model, further affecting the classification
performance of novel categories. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 4,
the ideology of Negcos is to weaken the distinguishability of the
model on the base class samples by adding appropriate negative
margins in the pre-training phase to avoid overfitting for better
transferability. However, using a negative margin in the training
process does not achieve separability between classes of

4976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

target domain, a feature extractor freezing strategy is used and a
negative Margin mechanism for label scarcity is introduced. This
mechanism relaxes the decision boundary from strict inequality
cos(θyi ) ≥ cos(θj + m) to allow the target domain samples and
the source domain to generate controlled overlap in the boundary
region, thus effectively mitigating the inter-domain distribution
gap Ps − PT H .
C. Adversarial Margin Cosine Softmax Loss

Fig. 4. Decision boundaries of different loss functions under binary classification. (a) margin=0 (e.g., standard Softmax) lacks generalization in few-shot
scenarios; (b) margin>0 (e.g., LMCL) increases inter-class separation but may
cause overfitting; (c) margin<0 (e.g., NegCos) applies a negative margin during
pretraining, which weakens feature discriminability for base model; (d) the
proposed method uses margin=0 during pretraining (left) to learn clear and
discriminative boundaries from source system data, and introduces a small
negative margin (margin<0) during fine-tuning (right) to blur boundaries and
improve generalization to novel classes in the target system.

samples and obtain distinguishable feature representations [35].
Consequently, Negcos faces challenges in effectively learning
prior knowledge from the base class. Log sequence samples
exhibit complex temporal and semantic relationships with one
another, making it difficult for feature extractors with limited
distinguishability to capture anomalous log patterns accurately.
To resolve the contradiction between generalization and distinguishability in Negcos, our approach focuses on achieving
distinguishable but not overfitted feature extractors using sufficient base class samples in the pre-training phase and generalizing the classifier using limited labels from novel classes
in the fine-tuning phase. Exactly, by following this approach,
the feature extractor learns sufficient prior knowledge from the
base class while using the classifier to combat the distributional
differences between the new class and the base class. As shown
in Fig. 4, different from the single-stage softmax-based loss
function, we set the margin to 0 in the pre-training phase and
set the margin to negative in the fine-tuning phase. In the pretraining phase, since a positive margin can overfit the model and
a negative margin does not guarantee the effectiveness of feature
extraction, we do not manipulate the margin to ensure that the
extractor achieves distinguishability without hindrance. In the
fine-tuning phase, we fix the parameters of the feature extractor
and use negative margins to fuzzy the boundaries of the classifier
to make the model more transferable.
Theoretically, in the pre-training stage of the source domain,
minimizing the softmax cross-entropy loss function is equivalent
to accomplishing the dual optimization task described above,
expanding both the inter-class distance and compressing the
intra-class distribution. Thus, according to Fisher principle, the
loss function of the first stage trains a representation model on
the source domain that satisfies the following condition, i.e.,
maxfθ (.) (SB /SW ), where SB stands for inter-class variance
and SW for intra-class variance. In the fine-tuning stage of the

In this subsection, we give specific AMCS loss function implementation details. In AMCS, we introduce a negative margin
in stages to counteract the overfitting of the model, i.e., adjusting
the margin is incorporated into the fine-tuning process of the
classifier. Since the work we followed (i.e., Negcos) introduces
the training strategy of temperature parameters [40] when implementing margin-based few-shot learning, it effectively helps
to apply appropriate concentration levels around the maximum
score, providing more options for parameter optimization during
training. Inspired by Negcos, we further introduce two temperature parameters, g1 and g2 , to achieve optimization during model
training. For a uniform description, we still use zi for i-th input
log samples and xi for the corresponding feature representation,
where zi ∈ {Bi , Sj,k }, the remaining cosine similarity is
σ(WyTi , xi ) =

WyT fθ (zi )
i

 WyT 2 fθ (zi )2
i

=

WyT xi
i

 WyT 2 xi 2

= cos(θyi )

(8)

i

In the training phase, we use cosine softmax with parameter
scalar to implement the feature extractor, decoupling the direction and length of the vectors. As described in IV-B, the margin
of this stage is fixed to 0 to ensure effective feature extraction
and avoid overfitting. Additionally, we add a learnable rescaling
factor g1 [23] as an adaptive temperature parameter for training
(this is the first time that g1 has been introduced in a marginbased loss function). Unlike the fixed temperature parameter
in Negcos, our strategy can provide adaptive control based on
the smoothness and sharpness of the probability distribution,
avoiding falling into local optima and allowing the model to
converge faster. The general loss formula in the training phase
is defined as
⎞
⎛
⎜ eg1 cos(θyi ) ⎟
Φ1 = − log ⎝  g cos(θ ) ⎠
yi
e1

(9)

j

In the fine-tuning phase, we appropriately introduce a negative
margin to fuzz the decision boundary of the classifier to make
the model better generalized to novel classes. It is worth noting
that log samples are time series data consisting of log events.
Consequently, anomalous samples usually overlap with normal
samples in the feature space, which makes samples that are
close to the classification boundary sharing high similarity and
indistinguishable from each other. To solve the problem, we
use a very small temperature parameter g2 at the fine-tuning
process to make the distribution sharper, giving difficult negative

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

4977

TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF LOG DATASETS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS

samples a larger gradient to separate from positive samples. As a
consequence, the classifier can better capture the heterogeneity
between the base class and the novel class and interfere with
the features of the novel instances in an adversarial manner. The
general loss formula for the fine-tuning phase is defined as
⎞
⎛
⎜
Φ2 = − log ⎜
⎝

TABLE II
RESULTS OF THE EXISTING UNSUPERVISED AND SEMI-SUPERVISED LAD
APPROACHES

⎟
e g2 (cos(θyi )−m)
⎟(10)
1

⎠
1

cos(θ
)−m
(
)
yi
g
(cos(θ
))
g2
2
j
e
e
+
1

j=1,j=yi

Combining (9) (10), the formula (11) implements the margin
equilibrium for base class transferability and novel class discriminability.
Li,p =

Φ1 , zi ∈ fθ (B)
Φ2 , zi ∈ fθ (S)

(11)

V. EXPERIMENT
In our study, we evaluate our approach by answering the
following research questions.
RQ1: How does the FSLog method perform in terms of
effectiveness in label scarcity scenarios?
RQ2: How does the FSLog method perform in terms of
advancement?
RQ3: How robust does the FSLog method perform in terms
of noise scenarios?
RQ4: How sensitive is the FSLog method to hyperparameters?
RQ5: How does each component contribute to FSLog?
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: In the field of log anomaly detection, the widely
used datasets include various sources. However, there is no
suitable public dataset available for few-shot log anomaly detection. To evaluate the proposed method, we consider the raw
log messages contained in HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird as
the data sources, and then reconstruct the few-shot datasets as
HDFS-FS-Session (HF), BGL-FS-Session (BS), BGL-FS-Time
(BT), and TBird-FS-Time (TB). The details of each raw dataset
are as follows:
The HDFS dataset [15] consists of 11,175,629 logs produced
from more than 200 Amazon EC2 nodes. These log messages
form different log samples according to their block ID, including 575,059 normal log sequences and 16,838 abnormal log
sequences (2.8%).

The BGL Dataset [42] consists of 4,747,963 logs generated
by a supercomputing system Blue-Gene/L. As shown in Table I,
we use the session window and sliding window to divide the log
sequence respectively and label the log sequence as abnormal
if there are any faulty logs in the sequence. When using the
session window, we construct 69,252 log sequences based on
its node ID, of which 31,429(45.4%) log sequences are labeled
as malfunctions. When using the sliding window, we set the
size of the sliding window to 300 and the step size to 100, a
total of 6,007(12.7%) abnormal sequences were obtained by this
method.
The thunderbird dataset (TBird): [42] consists of more than
200 million logs collected from a Thunderbird supercomputer
at Sandia National Labs (SNL). As presented in Table I, we
set the window size to 300 and the step size to 100, use the
sliding window to divide the logs, and obtain 41,780 anomalous
sequences (41.9%).
The reconstruction of the dataset first requires log processing.
The use of Spell [41] to parse the logs was in response to the high
susceptibility of the unsupervised learning approach to noise as
mentioned in Section II-A. We follow up the work in [6], [7],
hence the dimension d of the semantic vectors is 300, and the
window size w is also 300. After parsing, grouping, and semantic

4978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

representation, the length of each log sequence d∗w is 300 ∗ 300
(Note that d=w is not a strict requirement, and the introduced
MITNet can effectively process input dimensions and unequal
input lengths).
Next, according to the specific conditions of different data
sources, the four few-shot datasets HF, BS, BT, and TB were
constructed. Every few-shot dataset contains normal and abnormal sequences. For each type of set, we chronologically selected
2,000 samples as the data source to construct few-shot query
sets for testing. Each detection task was defined as a few-shot
binary classification task to distinguish between normal samples
and abnormal samples from the same dataset, i.e., N in N-way
K-shot is 2.
Experiments are conducted on four few-shot datasets separately. For HF and BS, they contain two types of log sequences
that are grouped by session, respectively. We utilize BS as the
data source for the base set and the remaining one as the data
source for the novel set. Conversely, predictions for BS using
HS as the base class also hold. Correspondingly, BT and TB can
be used as base sets for each other. Hence, there are four combinations, providing four sets of experiments. A sufficient number
of training and testing tasks are constructed for experiments.
The model has to learn from the K (K=5, 20) samples using
chronological selection, performing the real few-shot detection
of normal and abnormal log sequences.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To measure the effectiveness of models in anomaly detection, we use Precision (PRE), Recall (REC),
False Positive Rate (FPR), and F1 score (F1) as detection
metrics. Among them, precision is the proportion of all log
sequences identified as anomalous that are correctly identified
P
as anomalous. Precision = T PT+F
P Recall is the proportion
of all log sequences that are correctly identified as anomalous.
P
Recall = T PT+F
N FPR is the proportion of misclassified normal
P
samples to all normal log sequences. FPR = T NF+F
P F1 score
is the summed average of precision and Recall. F1 score =
2∗P recision∗Recall
P recision+Recall

TP: is the number of abnormal samples correctly detected as
abnormal. FN is the number of abnormal samples that are not
detected by the model. TN is the number of normal samples that
are correctly detected as normal samples. FP is the number of
normal samples wrongly identified as abnormal.
3) Implementations and Environments: In our experiments,
we process the log data and conduct log-based anomaly detection as follows: we adopt the implementations of log parsing
provided by open source [10] and log representation based on
FastText. We use SGD as the optimizer, set the learning rate
to 0.01, the momentum of 0.9 for 100 iterations in fine-tuning,
weight_decay to 0.0005, set the number of epochs to 50. Furthermore, the classifiers being compared are all implemented
using the scikit-learn library. We set neighbors = 5 for KNN,
kernel to linear in SVM, and tuned C in the interval [0,1], and
other classifier hyperparameters as default.
To complete the testing of the method, the experiments are
performed using the following hardware and software platforms:
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30 GHz, CPU cores 16,
256 GB RAM, NVIDIA Tesla V100-PCIE-32 GB∗2, CentOS

Linux release 7.9, CUDA 11.7, cuDNN 7.6.5, Python 3.7.12,
and PyTorch 1.7.0. All of the conducted experiments took about
two months to complete, using two physical GPUs.
B. RQ1: Comparison With Different Log Anomaly Detection
Approaches
This section compares the proposed few-shot detection
method with the existing unsupervised and semi-supervised
baseline methods DeepLog, LogAnomaly and PLELog in
Table II, as well as the supervised and transfer learning baseline methods LogTransfer, NeuralLog, LogRobust, LogGroup,
Log-MatchNet and MetaLog in Fig. 5. Except for the methods
proposed in this paper, none of the other considered approaches
are the few-shot detection ones. Please note that to fairly simulate
the scarce scenario of anomalous samples, in the conducted
experiments, the normal samples of the novel sets available
for each unsupervised and semi-supervised learning method are
sufficient, while the samples for the supervised and transfer
methods adhered to the N-way K-shot limitation and we rotate
the training and testing types of samples. Taking Fig. 5 as an
example, the first experiment (Test on HF) uses the samples of
the BS dataset as base classes for pre-training, and the samples
of the HF dataset as novel classes for fine-tuning and testing.
Since the feature extractor was trained on a large number of
BS samples, the labeled samples in the HF dataset represent the
support set and are only used to fine-tune the classifier using a
limited number of K (K=5 or 20, i.e., 2-way 5-shot or 2-way
20-shot) samples.
When K=5, the FSLog achieves the best accuracy among the
five methods, having an averaged F1 of 96.7 percentage points
(abbreviated as pp hereafter) on the BS dataset, 89.1 pp on the
BT dataset, 76.6 pp on the HF and 77.5 pp on the TB dataset as
illustrated in Fig. 5. As shown in Table II, DeepLog, PLELog,
and LogAnomaly show significant advantages on the HF and BS
datasets and even achieve an F1 of over 99.0 pp on the BS dataset
with a false alarm rate of less than 0.5 pp. However, on the other
two datasets based on chronological selection, these methods
fail to achieve effective detection. This demonstrates that unsupervised and semi-supervised learning methods still cannot be
applied in to newly deployed software systems. The detection
performance of the metric-based few-shot learning method LogMatchNet, while higher than supervised and transfer learning
methods, is lower than that of FSLog, and even slightly lower
than that of meta-learning methods in most scenarios.
When K=20, the FSLog has significantly improved, having
an averaged F1 of 96.9 pp on the BS dataset, 92.8 pp on
the BT dataset, 86.1 pp on the HF dataset, and 80.3 pp on
the TB-FS dataset as illustrated in Fig. 5. Even compared to
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning models trained on
sufficient labels as shown in II, our method still has an absolute
advantage. Obviously, the transfer and supervised methods used
for comparison still suffer from overfitting. This indicates that
existing methods are still powerless for application scenarios
such as cross-system cold starts, even with a slight increase
in supervision. Moreover, despite outperforming other methods
in terms of detection performance, FSLog still reaches a 20%

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 5.

4979

Comparison with the existing supervised LAD approaches.

TABLE III
DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF EXISTING LAD METHODS

and is more suitable for the cold start phase of the system with
limited labels and less demanding requirements on detection
efficiency.
C. RQ2: Comparison With the State-of-The-Art Few-Shot
Learning Approaches

false alarm rate on TB, hindering the online deployment of
the detection model. However, our approach is still effective
in coping with the cold-start phase where samples are scarce.
The proposed few-shot approach provides a feasible solution to
this challenge of cross-system detection.
In addition, Table III demonstrates the significant differences
between the models in terms of inference time, floating point
operations (FLOPs), and number of parameters (Params). In
terms of inference time, LogRobust has a clear advantage,
being almost 760 times faster than the slowest Log-MatchNet.
The supervised inference framework makes LogRobust highly
efficient, while the matching network-based inference model
leads to high computational consumption and low computational
efficiency of Log-MatchNet. Although the inference speed of
FSLog is slower than that of methods such as LogRobust, it
has the lowest FLOPs (5.9 M) and parametric count (105.7 K),
which are only 0.02% and 0.12% of that of Log-MatchNet, and
it can be adapted to most of the practical application scenarios.
Moreover, it has obvious advantages in detection performance

Table IV compares FSLog and current few-shot classification
methods on four datasets. According to novel classes on HF
dataset, for the 5-shot task, FSLog achieved the best detection
results on all three evaluation metrics. On the comprehensive
evaluation criterion F1, FSLog outperforms RFS, which is also
based on fine-tuning, by 6.6 pp, even exceeding the baseline
by 21.5 pp. With the increase of labeled samples in the support
set, the detection rate of FSLog is further improved. We achieve
86.0/86.3/86.1 pp for 20-shot tasks on each of the three evaluation criteria, outperforming R2D2 85.4/86.0/85.7 pp (based on
meta-learning, the second-best result). Several few-shot learning
methods based on metric learning have not achieved impressive
results.
From BS dataset, our methods are high-ranking across the
board. Compared to RENet (based on metric learning), the gains
of FSLog are 0.4 pp and 0.2 pp on F1 for the 5-shot/20-shot
task, respectively. Using HF as the base set for the prediction of
BGL-FS-Session, FSLog outperforms even a detection model
trained with sufficient labeled samples. Furthermore, all four
fine-tuning-based methods exceed 90 pp. The results for BT
dataset are shown in Table IV. For the 5-shot task, FSLog results
are the best. But for the 20-shot task, RFS is very competitive
and is much better than the other methods except R2D2 and
ours. We are slightly inferior to RFS, being only 0.3 pp below

4980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENT RESULTS OF FEW-SHOT LEARNING APPROACHES ON DIFFERENT FEW-SHOT DATASETS

it on the F1. From TB dataset, the baseline is superior among
our competitors. However, for the 20-shot task, our REC, FPR,
and F1 still reached 80.7pp, 0.7pp, and 80.3pp respectively.
This does not prevent our method from having the best overall
detection performance.
In summary, it can be observed that the fine-tuning-based
few-shot learning approaches are more suitable for log anomaly
detection, which is also the basis for our improvement direction.
These comparisons demonstrate that our models have stronger
domain transfer capability.
D. RQ3: Robustness Analysis
To verify the robustness of FSLog to parsing noise, we conduct
experiments using different log parsers and zero-vector injection. First, following [10], we employ multiple log parsers (Spell,

AEL, Drain, Brain) to demonstrate FSLog performance under
different parsing noise. Additionally, to simulate the worst-case
scenario where parsed logs completely lose semantic information, we randomly replace a certain percentage of events in the
log sequence samples with zero vectors (which lose sample
information to varying degrees) to evaluate the sensitivity of
the detection model to missing noise.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, FSLog exhibits extremely high robustness on all datasets. The detection performance of FSLog
remains stable in the log data generated by different parsers. In
particular, the F1 of FSLog is basically the same for the three log
data parsed by Spell, Drain, and Brain. On the log data parsed
by AEL, the detection performance of FSLog is slightly lower
than the other three parsers, but the performance drop is not
significant.

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 6.

4981

Impact of Injection Noise and Parsing Noise on Detection Performance.

In the noise-injected scenario, when K=5 and the noise ratio
is increased from 0% to 10%, the F1 scores of FSLog on the
HF, BS, BT, and TB datasets decrease by 1.9 pp, 1.1 pp, 2.6
pp, and 3.2 pp, respectively. When K = 20 and the noise ratio
is similarly increased from 0% to 10%, the F1 score of FSLog
decreases by 1.4 pp, 1.2 pp, 3.3 pp, and 3.2 pp. It is worth noting
that for the HF and BS datasets, the detection performance of
FSLog is almost unaffected by noise. For the BT and TB datasets,
although the detection performance slightly decreases when
the noise reaches 10%, FSLog still maintains a good detection
performance compared to the existing methods shown in Fig.
5, which indicates that FSLog has excellent robustness to deal
with log noise effectively.
E. RQ4: Comparison With Different Classifiers and Window
Size
In this study, the LAD framework is built upon a fine-tuned
implementation of classifiers based on the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) structure. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
classifier, a comparative analysis is conducted using different
classifiers in addition to those employed in this study. The experimental results are elaborated in Fig. 7. For ease of comparison,
we use the Baseline++ model that applies ResNet18 as ConvNet
to feature extraction and use cosine similarity as the metric. In
addition, the size of the sliding window affects the detection
performance. To better investigate the effect of window size on
FSLog, we use window size as a hyperparameter and test the
sensitivity of FSLog under four different window sizes: 300,
100, 50, and 20.
To assess the overall performance of the classifiers, we conduct feature extraction using the MITNet with fixed parameters. The extracted features are then inputted into five different

classifiers, namely KNN, SVM, GaussianNB, and AdaBoost, for
anomaly detection. The experimental results depicted in Fig. 7
provide compelling evidence that the classifier when paired with
AMCS, attains superior performance. Particularly, when K=5,
our classifier outperforms the other classifiers by a significant
margin on the BT dataset, demonstrating the capability to approach a commendable 90.0pp in the comprehensive evaluation
metric F1, while the F1 of KNN, SVM, GaussianNB, and
AdaBoost are 75.9 pp, 64.6 pp, 73.3 pp and 75.2 pp respectively,
which are more than 15 pp lower than the proposed classifiers.
On the other three datasets, our classifier consistently maintains
its advantage and achieves an FPR of 3.3 pp on the BS dataset.
When K=20, a noteworthy improvement in performance is
observed across all classifiers.
As shown in Fig. 8, for different window sizes, on the BT
dataset, the detection performance of FSLog remains basically
the same when w is 300, 100, and 50, respectively. When w = 20,
the F1 of FSLog decreases by 1 pp and 0.8 pp in the scenarios
with K = 5 and K = 20, respectively. on the TB dataset, the
performance of FSLog is similar at w = 300 and w = 20, but
the performance shows a clear decrease at w = 100 and w =
50. In particular, when K = 5 and w = 50, the F1 of FSLog
decreases by 3 pp compared to w = 300, which shows that
FSLog is sensitive to the time window size. However, compared
with the existing methods in Table II and Fig. 5, FSLog maintains
leading performance under different windows.
F. RQ5: Ablation Studies
To investigate the effects of core components in FSLog,
we conduct extensive ablation studies either in the absence of
each component or by replacing them with others and compare
the results in the 5-shot and 20-shot settings. In Table V, the

4982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 7.

Comparison with different classifiers.

Fig. 8.

Comparison with different window size.

√
indicates that each component is utilized in the experiments,
while the ✗indicates that the component is not employed.
As log sequences contain both temporal and semantic information, we introduce MITNet with dilated and denosing convolutional network to capture the relatedness between logs. As
shown in Table V, compared to ResNet18, when using MITNet
as the feature extractor, although the detection performance is
slightly lower for the TB dataset, there is an improvement on
the other three few-shot datasets. Especially on the BS dataset,
the highest F1 has achieved 96.8 pp (for 5-shot) and 97.0 pp (for
20-shot).
For each fine-tuning task of FSLog based on the meta-learning
framework, we need to build and train a new classifier that introduces new parameters. In Table V, we quantify the classifiers
constructed with several different loss functions. The proposed
AMCS loss function outperforms all baseline methods (e.g.,
Cosine, LMCL, Arcface, and Negcos) in the detection accuracy

by a staged margin. However, the TB dataset is not learned by
the model using the Negcos loss, and accordingly, the detection
results are very poor, even similar to random guessing. This
further indicates that only fuzzing the decision boundary of the
classifier during fine-tuning is more suitable for heterogeneous
and diverse log data.
Notably, in the experimental results in Table V, the combination of AMCS and MITNet achieved the best performance
in five out of the eight test scenarios (4 datasets × K = 5/20).
However, in the remaining three scenarios, MITNet+ArcFace
and ConvNet+AMCS slightly outperform FSLog, respectively.
The possible reasons are: the target domain anomaly samples
of the HF dataset contain relatively simple log types, and the
classification strategy of ArcFace by increasing the interclass
distance may be more adapted to this kind of scenario; AMCS
may slightly blur the classification boundary, leading to a slight
underperformance of FSLog’s detection performance. However,

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

4983

TABLE V
RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS WITH FSLOG

when the K value was increased to 20, FSLog countered the
MITNet+ArcFace combination. In addition, when AMCS and
MITNet are used as a single component, the detection performance is significantly improved either in combination with
existing modules such as ConvNet or ArcFace, which potentially
demonstrates the generalization of the proposed components.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Why Does FSLog Work?
There are two main reasons why FSLog outperforms stateof-the-art methods in cross-system log anomaly detection. First,
recognizing that fuzzy classification boundaries are beneficial
for the generalization of novel system log data, we design an
innovative adversarial margin cosine loss function to enhance the
discriminative and generalization performance of the detection
model. Second, noting that existing feature extractors are not
robust enough and difficult to represent temporal relationships
when facing log data effectively, we design a novel feature
extraction module that can simultaneously achieve temporal
relationship extraction, anti-noise interference, receptive field
expansion, and multi-scale feature fusion.
Notably, meta-learning methods have also been used to address the generalizability problem of log anomaly detection, but
we are motivated to use fine-tuning-based few-shot learning and
achieve leading detection performance for the following reasons:
First, fine-tuning-based few-shot learning utilizes sufficient data
from the source domain to adequately learn generalized log
patterns and establish strong representation ability. However,

meta-learning (e.g., MetaLog and MAML) relies on task generalization capabilities and needs to simulate multidomain task
distributions during the training phase, but cross-domain differences in logs are difficult to cover by limited meta-tasks. Second,
fine-tuning-based few-shot learning adjusts only the lightweight
classifiers by freezing the backbone network parameters without
having to relearn the global features, whereas meta-learning
requires adjusting all the parameters in the stage of adapting
to the target-domain data, which is susceptible to log noise.
Our study demonstrates the effectiveness of FSLog in crosssystem log anomaly detection, though limitations exist. First,
when high log parsing error rates cause significant information
loss, the MITNet event masking mechanism struggles to extract
features from severely noisy sequences. Second, minimal semantic overlap between target and source system logs hinders
knowledge transfer from source to target systems. Furthermore,
FSLog is more suitable for cold-start phases with scarce target
samples, while its accuracy remains insufficient for large-scale
data. Given unsupervised models inherent limitations in precision and robustness, O&M personnel can use FSLog to leverage
source system prior knowledge for initial training with minimal
target system labeled data.
B. Threats to Validity.
Data quality: Although the HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird
datasets have been widely used and publicly available in past
studies, they all originate from before 2007 and may not cover
the latest features and patterns of current syslogs. Therefore,

4984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

conclusions relying on these datasets may be biased and their
general applicability in real-world environments cannot be fully
guaranteed.
Tool comparison: We implemented log anomaly detection methods including DeepLog, LogAnomaly, PLELog and
LogRobust based on literature [10]. For LogTransfer and NeuralLog, we used their public source code for implementation.
For LogGroup, MetaLog, and Log-MatchNet, we reproduced
them based on the original papers and confirmed that the results
are highly consistent with the reported values. Meanwhile, the
few-shot learning method uses the open source code from the
literature [22]. However, there may be errors or inconsistencies
in the conversion process, which could potentially affect the
fairness and accuracy of the tool comparisons.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented FSLog, a method based on the
fine-tuning framework to implement cross-system few-shot log
anomaly detection. FSLog adopts cosine softmax with adaptive
re-scaling factors to train the feature extractor MITNet and
pursues the balance between feature transferability and distinguishability by introducing an adversarial margin. To evaluate FSLog, we constructed four datasets based on public data
sources. Experimental results show that our approach achieves
a significant advantage in initialization scenarios with scarce
labels.
Our research still has limitations, as compared to supervised
learning models based on sufficient label training, few-shot models exhibit a relatively higher false positive rate. Nonetheless, the
application of FSLog in the cold start scenario can effectively
avoid the problems of untrainable and overfitting caused by a
lack of samples compared to current methods. In our future
work, we will further explore how to achieve online deployment
of few-shot models.

REFERENCES
[1] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 6, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 130, doi: 10.1145/3460345.
[2] C. Zhang, T. Jia, G. Shen, P. Zhu, and Y. Li, “MetaLog: Generalizable
cross-system anomaly detection from logs with meta-learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1899–1910.
[3] J. Tian, M. Li, L. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Nie, and J. Qin, “SSDALog:
Semi-supervised domain adaptation for incremental log-based anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 6607–6619,
2025.
[4] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA, 2017,
pp. 1285–1298, doi: 10.1145/3133956.3134015.
[5] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
[6] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Foundations Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817.
[7] Z. Wang, J. Tian, H. Fang, L. Chen, and J. Qin, “LightLog: A lightweight
temporal convolutional network for log anomaly detection on the edge,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. 108616. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128621005119

[8] L. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via probabilistic label estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.,
2021, pp. 1448–1460.
[9] R. Chen et al., “LogTransfer: Cross-system log anomaly detection for
software systems with transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Symp.
Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 37–47.
[10] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep learning: How far are we?,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
pp. 1356–1367, doi: 10.1145/3510003.3510155.
[11] C. Han, B. Guan, T. Li, D. Kang, J. Qin, and Y. Wu, “Few-shot log
anomaly detection based on matching networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2909–2925, Jun. 2024.
[12] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[13] J. Li, H. He, S. Chen, D. Jin, and J. Yang, “LogGraph: Log event graph
learning aided robust fine-grained anomaly diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1876–1889, Jul./Aug., 2024.
[14] J.-G. Lou, Q. Fu, S. Yang, Y. Xu, and J. Li, “Mining invariants from console
logs for system problem detection,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. USENIX Annu.
Tech. Conf., 2010, pp. 1–14.
[15] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. ACM
SIGOPS 22nd Symp. Operating Syst. Princ., New York, NY, USA, 2009,
pp. 117–132.
[16] H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating
system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148, Sep./Oct. 2021.
[17] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., 2022,
pp. 492–504.
[18] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust anomaly detection and localization for interleaved unstructured logs,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2762–2780, Jul./Aug. 2023.
[19] J. Tian, M. Li, Z. Wang, L. Chen, J. Qin, and R. Zhang, “OMLog: Online log
anomaly detection for evolving system with meta-learning,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 12, no. 15, pp. 30142–30155, Aug. 2025.
[20] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in Big Data
system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int.
Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Int. Conf. Pervasive
Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput. Cyber Sci. Technol.
Congr., 2018, pp. 151–158.
[21] W. Meng et al., “A semantic-aware representation framework for online
log analysis,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw., 2020,
pp. 1–7.
[22] W. Li et al., “LibFewShot: A comprehensive library for few-shot learning,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 14938–14955,
Dec. 2023.
[23] W.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, Z. Kira, Y.-C. F. Wang, and J.-B. Huang, “A closer
look at few-shot classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2019, pp. 1–16.
[24] K. Zheng, H. Zhang, and W. Huang, “DiffKendall: A novel approach for
few-shot learning with differentiable Kendall’s rank correlation,” in Proc.
37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.. Red Hook, NY, USA:Curran
Associates Inc., 2024, pp. 49403–49415.
[25] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
pp. 1126–1135.
[26] J. Oh, H. Yoo, C. Kim, and S. Yun, “BOIL: Towards representation change
for few-shot learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021,
pp. 1–24.
[27] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook,
NY, USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 4080–4090.
[28] J. Xie, F. Long, J. Lv, Q. Wang, and P. Li, “Joint distribution matters:
Deep Brownian distance covariance for few-shot classification,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7962–7971.
[29] J. Deng, J. Guo, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular margin loss
for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2018, pp. 4685–4694.
[30] B. Liu et al., “Negative margin matters: Understanding margin in few-shot
classification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.>, 2020, pp. 438–455.
[31] M. Kim, A. K. Jain, and X. Liu, “AdaFace: Quality adaptive margin for face
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2022, pp. 18729–18738.

TIAN et al.: FSLOG: ADVERSARIAL MARGIN FOR CROSS-SYSTEM FEW-SHOT LOG ANOMALY DETECTION

[32] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning
approach for deep face recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.>,
2016, pp. 499–515.
[33] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, and M. Yang, “Large-margin softmax loss for
convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
New York, New York, USA, 2016, pp. 507–516.
[34] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, M. Li, B. Raj, and L. Song, “SphereFace: Deep hypersphere embedding for face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 6738–6746.
[35] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 5265–5274.
[36] B. Li, B. Yang, C. Liu, F. Liu, R. Ji, and Q. Ye, “Beyond max-margin: Class
margin equilibrium for few-shot object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 7359–7368.
[37] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, and X. Li, “TSLANet: Rethinking
transformers for time series representation learning,” in Proc. 41st Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 12409–12428.
[38] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018.
[39] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
inProc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8980–8987.
[40] F. Wang and H. Liu, “Understanding the behaviour of contrastive
loss,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
pp. 2495–2504.
[41] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in Proc.
IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 859–864.
[42] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
[43] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, D. Krishnan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and P. Isola, “Rethinking
few-shot image classification: A good embedding is all you need?,” in Proc.
16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., Glasgow, U.K.:
Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 266–282.
[44] L. Bertinetto, J. F. Henriques, P. Torr, and A. Vedaldi, “Meta-learning
with differentiable closed-form solvers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–15. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=HyxnZh0ct7
[45] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. Torr, and T. M. Hospedales,
“Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 1199–1208.
[46] R. Hou, H. Chang, B. MA, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Cross attention network
for few-shot classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
pp. 4003–4014.
[47] D. Kang, H. Kwon, J. Min, and M. Cho, “Relational embedding for fewshot classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
pp. 8802–8813.

4985

[48] P. Goyal et al., “Accurate, large minibatch SGD: Training imagenet in 1
hour,” 2017, arXiv:1706.02677.
[49] K. Lee, S. Maji, A. Ravichandran, and S. Soatto, “Meta-learning with
differentiable convex optimization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 10649–10657.

Jiyu Tian received the master’s degree in cyberspace
security from Dalian University, Dalian, China, where
he is currently working toward the PhD degree. His
current research interests include log anomaly detection and cyberspace security.

Mingchu Li received the doctorate degree in mathematics from the University of Toronto, in 1998. He
was with the School of Software, Tianjin University,
as a full professor from 2002 to 2004, School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology,
as a full professor and the vice dean from 2002 to
2023. He has been with Jiangxi Normal University
as a full professor since 2024. His main research
interests include theoretical computer science and
information security, trust models, and cooperative
game theory.

Jianyuan Gan received the BS and MS degrees in
science from Nanchang Hangkong University, Nanchang, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively. He
is currently working toward the EngD degree with
the Dalian University of Technology. His research
interests include traffic engineering and AI.