84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

GCB-PPO2: A Hybrid Deep Reinforcement Learning
Intrusion Detection System for Under-Represented
Attack Categories in SDN
Chen Jue , Tao Hongyu, Cui Meng, Peng Haidong, and Qiu Xihe

Abstract—The centralized control plane inherent in SDN architecture creates critical security dependencies, where malicious
exploitation of controller vulnerabilities could propagate systemic
network failures. The Intrusion Detection System (IDS) effectively counters cyber threats, and Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) can enable the IDS to dynamically adapt to the constantly
evolving attack patterns through autonomous environmental interaction and real-time policy optimization. However, the current
DRL based IDS face the limitations of minority-class detection,
generalization gap, and tuning complexity. This paper propose
GCB-PPO2 (Generative Adversarial Networks CNNA-BiLSTM
Proximal Policy Optimization 2), a hybrid DRL system with the
following three innovations: (1) We design a C-GAN (Conditional
Generative Adversarial Networks) architecture to generate targeted under-represented attack samples for the SDN scenario
intentionally, improving the recognition accuracy of the model
for minority classes significantly. (2) We propose a PPO2-based
DRL framework with a CNN-LSTM shared network to optimize
dynamic policy adaptation while capturing spatio-temporal patterns, enhancing generalization ability to different environmental
dynamics. (3) We embed a Bayesian optimization as a dedicated
hyper-parameter auto-tuner, systematically resolving sensitivity
bottlenecks and ensuring robustness in fluctuating environments.
Experimental results demonstrate that GCB-PPO2 model achieves
remarkable accuracy of 99.92% and 99.01% for binary and multiple classification scenarios, respectively, with F1-scores exceeding
85.91% for under-represented attack categories in InSDN dataset.
Moreover, the model proves its strong generalization capability for
maintaining over 98.65% accuracy on another dataset, while confirming its improved training efficiency for surpassing conventional
hybrid deep learning models by more than 22.27% in training time.
Index Terms—Software define network, intrusion detection,
deep reinforcement learning, proximal policy optimization,
generative adversarial network, convolutional neural network,
long short term memory.

I. INTRODUCTION
OFTWARE Defined Network (SDN), characterized by its
decoupled control plane and data plane architecture alongside logically centralized network management [1], addresses

S

Received 21 March 2025; revised 30 May 2025; accepted 16 June 2025.
Date of publication 20 June 2025; date of current version 21 November 2025.
This work was supported by the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102241. Recommended for
acceptance by Dr. Ali Kashif Bashir. (Corresponding author: Chen Jue.)
The authors are with the Shanghai University of Engineering Science, School
of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai 201620, China (e-mail:
jadeschen@sues.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3581689

the limitations on scalability and flexibility of traditional networks, while catalyzing transformative advancements in network technology [2]. However, this architectural paradigm introduces heightened security risks inherent in its centralized control
mechanisms [3]. In conventional distributed networks, security
vulnerabilities typically exhibit localized impact, constrained
by their decentralized topology structure [4]. Conversely, the
logical centralization of SDN enables various risks such as single
point of failure, protocol degradation attacks, and malicious
logic implantation at the application layer. Each of these may
lead to severe damage to the availability and integrity of the
entire network. For instance, the degradation attacks against
TLS (Transport Layer Security)/OpenFlow can force controllers
to use insecure plain text channels, thereby eavesdropping or
implanting malicious rules [5]. These systemic security implications necessitate that SDN protection constitutes a critical
research priority [6].
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have emerged as critical
infrastructure for real-time network threat mitigation [7], particularly as conventional security measures like firewalls and
heuristic analysis struggle to differentiate sophisticated attack
patterns from legitimate traffic [8]. The integration of machine
learning methodologies has revolutionized this domain through
probabilistic modeling and statistical inference frameworks
trained on extensive network behavioral datasets [4]. Representative implementations include the hybrid IDS architecture
proposed by Al-Yaseen et al., which integrates Support Vector
Machine (SVM) with extreme learning machine to optimize
attack detection throughput [9]. Nevertheless, current machine
learning-driven IDS implementations confront two fundamental
limitations: intrinsic feature homogeneity across evolving attack
variants and suboptimal feature representation capabilities in existing algorithms, which collectively induce incomplete pattern
recognition and elevated false positive rates [10], [11].
Deep learning demonstrates superior efficacy over traditional
machine learning in IDS, attributable to its automated feature
abstraction capabilities and scalable data processing efficiency
empowered by parallel computation architectures like Graphics Processing Units (GPU) [12], [13]. Our previous research
develops the CNNA-BiLSTM (Convolutional Neural Network
with Attention-Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory) framework, which is benchmarked on the InSDN dataset, a standardized SDN intrusion detection corpus. Experimental evaluations
demonstrate accuracies of 99.86% and 96.66% for binary and

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

multiple classifications, respectively, validating the architecture’s discriminative capacity [14]. Nevertheless, deep learning
implementations exhibit stringent dependency on voluminous
high-quality training data with balanced class distributions [15].
Analysis of the InSDN dataset reveals extreme class imbalance,
where high-volume attacks dominate, while low-frequency attacks are severely under-represented. In this paper, DoS (Denial
of Service), DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service), and Probe
are classified as high-volume attacks, and U2R (User to Root),
BFA (Brute Force Attack), Botnet, and Web are categorized as
under-represented attacks. For instance, DoS attacks account
for 24.90% of the total samples, whereas U2R attacks comprise
merely 0.013% of the total samples, resulting in a three-order-ofmagnitude disparity [16]. This skewed data distribution directly
compromises the CNNA-BiLSTM model’s detection efficacy
for minority classes, particularly manifesting in complete failure
to identify U2R intrusion patterns during validation trials.
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) synergistically integrates the perceptual sophistication of deep neural network
with the dynamic decision-making paradigms inherent to reinforcement learning [17], [18], thereby intrinsically mitigating
inherent data dependency constraints [19], [20]. However, the
related works on applying DRL to intrusion detection face the
following critical challenges.
r Minority-class Detection: Under-represented attack categories exhibit sample scarcity, which are difficult for DRL
models to classify correctly. For instance, the true-positive
rate for U2R of the AESMOTE (Adaptive Enhanced Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique) model is only
0.07% [21], while other three DRL models only conduct
binary classification experiments [22], [23], [24], [25].
r Generalization Gap: Existing studies have only proposed
single-modal networks, including actor-critic [22], double
DQN (Deep Q Learning) [21], or deep deterministic policy gradient [23], and have evaluated their performances
on single datasets, including Gas Pipeline dataset [22],
NSL-KDD (Network Security Laboratory Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining) [21], CIC-IDS2017 (Canadian
Institute for Cybersecurity Intrusion Detection Systems
2017) [24], [25], or self-generated dataset [23], thereby
failing to demonstrate sufficient generalization capability
across diverse network environments or attack patterns.
r Tuning Complexity: Conventional DRL implementations
rely on static hyper-parameters, causing instability in fluctuating environments. For instance, the hyper-parameters
in papers [21], [23] are determined through manual trial and
error combined with empirical selection, while papers [22],
[24], [25] do not mention parameter setting.
To overcome the limitations of aforementioned related works,
this study introduces GCB-PPO2 (Generative Adversarial Networks CNNA-BiLSTM Proximal Policy Optimization 2), a
novel framework to improve the detection accuracy for minority
class attacks, enhance the generalization ability, and reduce the
tuning complexity for SDN intrusion detection. This framework
dynamically assimilates network traffic patterns through three
innovation pathways: (1) temporal-spatial feature co-learning
via CNNA-BiLSTM hybrid architectures, (2) adaptive reward

85

shaping mechanism through PPO2 [26], and (3) minority class
augmentation by C-GAN (Conditional Generative Adversarial
Networks) [27].
The main contributions and novelties of this paper are summarized as follows.
r We develop a customized C-GAN architecture to strategically augment under-represented attack categories for
the InSDN dataset. Existing C-GAN based methods focus on traditional networks [28] or Autonomous Aerial
Vehicles [29], [30], whereas our C-GAN is tailored for
SDN-specific attack patterns and addresses the unique class
imbalance in InSDN dataset. Moreover, as far as we know,
we are the first paper to apply C-GAN to InSDN dataset
without data pollution. This approach yields augmentation
of under-represented attack instances with ratios ranging
from 30.80× to 288.75× for the training set, while preserving the test set’s original imbalance for fair evaluation,
which is helpful for improving the recognition accuracy of
the model for minority classes significantly.
r We propose a framework which integrates CNNABiLSTM architecture as a shared feature extractor within
the PPO2 reinforcement learning paradigm. The combination of CNN and LSTM can model spatial correlation
and temporal dynamics simultaneously, reducing the risk
of overfitting caused by a single modal feature. The shared
feature extractors of PPO2 framework enable reinforcement learning strategies to directly utilize optimized spatiotemporal features to enhance the generalization ability to
different environmental dynamics.
r We pro-actively introduce Bayesian optimization as an
autonomous hyper-parameter tuning module, building a
probabilistic model of the objective function and then using
this model to select the next most promising combination
of hyper-parameters to find the optimal solution in as few
iterations as possible. This strategy not only eliminates
redundant feature processing layers to improve computational efficiency, but also enhances model robustness in
dynamic network environments.
r We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the
GCB-PPO2 model’s capabilities through five key aspects:
ablation studies confirming the individual contributions of
C-GAN, PPO2, and shared network components; benchmark comparisons against traditional and state-of-the-art
models showing consistent accuracy improvements; crossdomain evaluations on independent dataset verifying generalization capacity,
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed GCBPPO2 model’s triple advantages in SDN intrusion detection:
high classification accuracy, strong generalization ability, and
improved training efficiency.
r High Classification Accuracy: GCB-PPO2 model obtains
the accuracies of 99.92% and 99.01% for binary and multiple classifications, respectively, and elevates the F1-score
of under-represented attacks to over 85.91% for InSDN
dataset.
r Strong Generalization Ability: GCB-PPO2 model maintains cross-domain effectiveness on NSL-KDD dataset,

86

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

achieving the accuracies of 99.66% and 98.65% for binary
and multiple classifications, respectively.
r Improved Training Efficiency: GCB-PPO2 model shows
22.27% faster convergence speed than conventional hybrid
deep learning models.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
concludes related works on IDS, including machine learning,
deep learning, and DRL based methods. Our main contributions
are described in the following two sections. Sections III and IV
illustrate our proposed GCB-PPO2 model in detail, including
phases of data augmentation and attack classification. In order
to prove the effectiveness of GCB-PPO2 model, the simulation
results of two phases are depicted in Sections V and VI, respectively. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORKS
The harm of cyber attacks to modern society should not be
underestimated. Malicious intruders can undermine industrial
control systems and trigger the shutdown of critical infrastructure. For instance, in September 2016, the Mirai botnet launched
a large-scale DDoS attack on OVH company in France, with a
peak traffic of 1 Tbps, completely crushing its network throughput capacity [31]. The IDS analyzes real-time traffic, captures
abnormal behavior, and matches threat features, thereby issuing
warnings in the initial phase of attacks. This enables emergency
responders to secure the golden time window for mitigation [32].
In recent years, IDSs based on machine learning have developed
rapidly and become increasingly mainstream due to its ability
to handle complex data and adapt to new types of attacks [33].
Their technical frameworks can be refined into traditional machine learning, deep learning, and deep reinforcement learning
models.
A. Related Works on Machine Learning Models
Due to its high accuracy, efficiency, and scalability, machine
learning based models have gained an increasingly important
role in modern network security protection [34]. Hadem et al.
introduce a model combining SVM with selective logging for
IP traceback, achieving a detection accuracy of 95.98% on the
NSL-KDD dataset. Thereinto, selective logging is performed
at the in-memory structure of controllers to save resources
and enhance performance [35]. Yang et al. propose Griffin,
an unsupervised machine learning model, raising the accuracy
by at most 19% when compared with existing models. Griffin
constructs feature extraction framework to capture sequential
features, utilizes cluster analysis to reduce feature scales, and
builds an ensemble auto-encoder to detect both known and
zero-day intrusion attacks [6]. Lee et al. design a programmable
switch based Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) on which machine learning algorithms run through utilizing switch CPU
and pipeline to detect malware. Simulation results show that
the proposed IPS increases the throughput and reduces the
response time by 183X and 99.99% than SDN-based IPS, respectively [36]. El et al. make use of a boosting feature selection
algorithm to select relevant Smart Grid (SG) based features, and
put forward an ensemble learning model by combining several

machine learning techniques together to detect SG based attacks,
validating its efficiency on both NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15
datasets [37]. Ahuja et al. import machine learning technique to
classify benign traffics from DDoS attacks by combining SVM
with random forest. Experiments depict that the proposed model
classifies traffic with an accuracy of 98.8% along with a very low
false alarm rate [38].
Although above mentioned works achieve certain effects in
intrusion detection, there are still limitations when applying machine learning based models. Firstly, machine learning models
often rely on artificially designed feature extractors which may
not be able to fully cover all possible attack patterns, resulting in limited detection effectiveness [39]. Secondly, machine
learning models may encounter challenges in computational
complexity and storage requirements when faced with massive,
high-dimensional network traffic data [40]. Thirdly, machine
learning models may perform poorly at identifying unknown or
novel types of attacks as they often learn based on characteristics
of known attack patterns [41].

B. Related Works on Deep Learning Models
Unlike traditional machine learning, deep learning can overcome these disadvantages to some extent. Firstly, deep learning
models can automatically learn feature representations from
raw data, reducing the reliance on manual feature engineering [42]. Secondly, deep learning models can handle large
datasets more efficiently with the help of distributed computing
and GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) acceleration, speeding up
the training process and improving detection performance [43].
Thirdly, deep learning models usually have a stronger generalization ability to identify new types of attacks due to their
deep neural network structure and complex nonlinear mapping
capability [44].
Zainudin et al. present a model for detecting DDoS attacks
in Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) networks, which apply
the extreme gradient boosting for feature selection and a hybrid CNN-LSTM for attack classification. Performance results
show that the model achieves the accuracy of 99.50% in CICDDoS2019 (Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity Distributed
Denial of Service 2019) dataset [45]. Chanu et al. propose a
voting-based hybrid feature selection technique which is crossanalyzed by three correlation methods, and then deploy a classifier combining multi-layer perceptron with genetic algorithm.
Simulation results show that the model furnishes the accuracy
and false positive rate by 98.8% and 0.6%, respectively [46].
Mhamdi et al. introduce a hybrid deep auto-encoder with a
random forest classifier model to enhance intrusion detection
performance. Moreover, authors design a three-layer framework
for detecting and preventing attacks, consisting of an entropybased detection method and aforementioned model running on
the control plane as well as a proactive service monitoring
program running on the application plane. Experiments depict
that the framework achieves the anomaly detection rates by more
than 98% [47]. Shu et al. utilize a collaborative IDS to detect
abnormal network behaviors for the Vehicular Ad hoc Network

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

(VANET), and conduct GAN models on multiple SDN controllers to jointly train a global intrusion detection model [48].
As one of our previous works, we put forward a hybrid deep
learning based IDS, which uses the genetic algorithm to extract
positive features, and CNNA-BiLSTM model to classify different intrusion types, achieving accuracies of 99.86% and 96.66%
on binary and multiple classifications, respectively [14].
It can be deduced that deep learning has a wider application and better performance in the field of intrusion detection
when compared with traditional machine learning. However,
deep learning still has shortcomings that need to overcome.
Firstly, deep learning models often require large amounts of
labeled data for training, which may be difficult to obtain or
expensive to label, especially because network attack means
are constantly updating [49]. Secondly, deep learning models,
especially complex neural networks, often struggle to explain
decision-making process, which makes it difficult to further
optimize models [50]. Thirdly, deep learning models are prone
to overfitting when faced with complex network environments
and variable intrusion behaviors, leading to poor detection performance in practical applications [51].
C. Related Works on Deep Reinforcement Learning Models
Reinforcement learning, as an important branch of machine
learning, has a stronger learning ability when compared with
deep learning [52]. It is a multi-layer neural network similar
to the structure of human brain, which can learn features from
original data in different environments automatically, resulting
in the achievement of optimal strategy [53]. Through combing
deep learning with reinforcement learning, DRL has the abilities
of strong perception and powerful decision-making simultaneously, which are beneficial to IDS [54]. On one hand, DRL
models can learn optimal policies by interacting with environments, allowing it to adapt to changing network circumstances
and intrusion behaviors [55]. On the other hand, DRL models
can optimize response strategies by maximizing cumulative
rewards, helping to make more accurate judgements in intrusion
detection [24].
Wang et al. propose a DRL based model to detect abnormal
flows for industrial control systems, which extracts features
through neural networks and adjusts learning strategy according
to reinforcement learning. Experimental results show that the
model achieves the accuracy of 98.06% [22]. Ma et al. present an
anomaly detection framework combining reinforcement learning with class-balance techniques, which uses the reinforcement
learning to implement auto-learning and introduces an adapted
Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) to address the class-imbalance problem. Simulation results on NSLKDD dataset show that the accuracy and F1 score are greater than
82.0% and 82.4%, respectively [21]. Kim et al. build a secure
network system by adopting the DRL to inspect network traffic
and shuffling-based moving target defense technique to mitigate
threats [23]. Yungaicela-Naula et al. provide a framework for
detecting and mitigating slow-rate DDoS attacks automatically.
The framework uses deep learning and reinforcement learning to
detect and mitigate attacks, respectively, and includes a network

Fig. 1.

87

Workflow diagram of GCB-PPO2.

function virtualization-assisted moving target defense mechanism to enhance the performance [24], [25].
Table I provides a structured comparison of state-of-the-art intrusion detection approaches, including their datasets, machine
learning paradigms, and model architectures. By explicitly contrasting their advantage and limitations, the table underscores
the methodological advancements of our work. The major differences in this research findings with already published works
are summarized as follows.
r We propose a framework which integrates CNNABiLSTM architecture as a shared feature extractor within
the PPO2 reinforcement learning paradigm to make full
use of both techniques to achieve a high classification
accuracy and an improved training efficiency. In contrast,
existing DRL based IDSs only apply single-modal networks, including actor-critic [22], double DQN [21], and
deep deterministic policy gradient [23], to detect or classify
network attacks.
r We adopt the Bayesian optimization to implement automated hyper-parameter tuning to make the model more
accessible and reliable. In contrast, existing DRL based
IDSs employ random search for hyper-parameter optimization [24], [25] or rely on manual parameter tuning [21],
[23].
r We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate
our model’s performance on both the binary and multiple classification scenarios, as well as for both common
and under-represented attack categories. In contrast, existing DRL based IDSs do not consider multiple classification [22], [23], [24], [25] or cannot classify underrepresented attacks efficiently [21].
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY OF DATA AUGMENTATION
The overall workflow diagram of our proposed GCB-PPO2 is
shown in Fig. 1. Each SDN controller runs a network monitoring
service to capture data traffic from OpenFlow switches through
TCPDump and Wireshark tools, including malicious and benign
traffics. Prior to providing data to attack classification model,
three steps are required to ensure optimal data quality. Firstly,
data preprocessing is performed including data cleaning and
standardization to improve data consistency. Secondly, genetic
algorithm is applied to select potential features and reduce
feature dimension, thus significantly reducing the model complexity. Readers can refer to our previous work in [14] for more

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE I
COMPARISON TABLE AMONG RELATED WORKS

details of these two steps. Thirdly, data augmentation based
on C-GAN is conducted to expand the dataset by generating
samples of under-represented attack categories intentionally,
which can overcome the class imbalance problem, thus beneficial for further raising the accuracy of detecting minority
class traffics. The core module of this system is the attack
classification model by constructing a DRL environment based
on PPO2 which takes CNNA-BiLSTM as the shared network,
thus achieving high performance of identifying and classifying
network attacks. The details of data augmentation and intrusion
detection will be introduced in the following two sections,
respectively.
Unbalanced data is a non-negligible factor reducing the classification performance of IDS. For instance, our previously
proposed CNNA-BiLSTM model cannot detect U2R, Botnet,
and Web attacks effectively, as inadequate number of samples
result in inadequate training [14]. The common idea to counter
this problem is to generate data for minority classes through data
generation algorithms, so as to balance the dataset by means
of expansion and reconstruction. Data augmentation algorithms

usually include Variational Auto Encoders (VAE) and GAN.
VAE generates samples by learning potential representations of
data, often producing samples which are highly consistent with
the distribution of original samples. However, network attacks
aiming at SDN are complex and changeable, while attack samples generated by VAE often lack sufficient diversity, potentially
leading to overfitting problem during the training process [56].
GAN, on the other hand, uses real data as input and generates
synthetic data through a generator, which is often applied to
scenarios where obtaining data is difficult, time-consuming,
or expensive. Two key components constitute GAN: a generator and a discriminator. Generator is responsible for processing input data and generating more synthetic data, with
the goal of simulating the patterns and characteristics of real
data. While discriminator is a classifier whose job is to identify
whether the input data is real or synthetic, and to output a
probability representing the authenticity of samples. The probability close to 1 means samples are more likely to be real,
while the probability close to 0 means samples are probably
generated [57].

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

In traditional GAN, the generator generates samples only
based on random noise and has no control over the class or
properties of generated samples. In contrast, C-GAN guides the
generation process by adding conditional variables such as class
labels, resulting in more controlled samples [58]. Therefore,
C-GAN has stronger control and interpretability. On closer
analysis, there are existing research works which allows CGAN based attack dataset generation for various use cases.
For instance, Zeng et al. introduce the Conditional Tabular
GAN (CT-GAN) to generate synthetic samples to enhance the
diversity and representativeness of Autonomous Aerial Vehicles
(AAV) dataset [29], [30]. Wang et al. use CT-GAN to expand
the small category traffic samples and balance the dataset to
improve the malicious traffic identification rate for traditional
networks and the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [28]. As far as we know,
there is only one paper applying C-GAN to SDN intrusion
detection [12]. However, authors of [12] fundamentally mix
synthetic and real-world data during testing phase, creating
artificial data distribution overlaps that systematically overestimate model performance, and violating the essential machine
learning principle of strict train-test separation when dealing
with generative models.
In contrast, our work presents three key contributions on
applying C-GAN to SDN based IDS.
r We are the second research initiative exploring C-GAN
applications in SDN environments for cybersecurity purposes, addressing the notable research gap in this emerging
domain.
r We design a C-GAN framework to synthesize targeted
under-represented attack samples intentionally for InSDN
dataset, resolving extreme class imbalance and enabling
models to learn discriminative features of minority class
samples. Unlike prior work [12] that forcibly balance the
sample size, which might introduce problems such as distribution distortion, noise interference and evaluation bias.
r We confine synthetic data strictly to the training phase, with
original test data preserved, eliminating performance inflation from data leakage and ensuring credible evaluations,
which is absent in prior work [12].
As a result, the generated samples are expected to improve
the classification performance of minority class samples, as
validated in Section VI-B.
InSDN dataset is uniquely designed for SDN environments,
capturing the distinct architecture of SDN with its centralized
control plane and separate data plane. It collects real network
traffic and covers common attack types in SDN networks, reflecting the specific control and forwarding behaviors of SDN
networks. On the other hand, the distribution of different attack
types in the dataset is highly unbalanced, reflecting the attack
distribution in the actual network. Moreover, InSDN dataset
is widely used in the performance evaluation of IDS, and its
design is in line with the actual operation and maintenance
requirements.
Facing the InSDN dataset, the workflow diagram of C-GAN
is shown in Fig. 2. Firstly, the dataset has gone through data preprocessing and feature selection steps, which are omitted in this
figure. Then the dataset is divided into two parts: attack samples

Fig. 2.

89

Workflow diagram of C-GAN.

of under-represented categories and those of other categories.
Thirdly, C-GAN is constructed, whose generator receives not
only random noise but also label information of specific class
samples as conditional input, while the discriminator receives
both real and generated data as well as their corresponding label
information.
During training process, the goal of the generator is to generate samples of synthetic data similar to real data, and its loss
function can be expresses as:
LG = −Ez,c [log D (G(z, c))]

(1)

where z represents random noise, which is used as the input
of the generator and can be understood as the seed or random
factor for generating malicious traffics, c represents a tag, and
G(z, c) represents samples generated by the generator based on
the random noise and label. On that basis, D(G(z, c)) outputs
a probability to judge whether the sample G(z, c) is real, and
Ez,c [·] denotes the expectation of the joint distribution of random
noise and label. As a result, the formula aims to maximize
the probability that discriminator determines that the generated
sample is real. Through training, the generator tries to generate
samples more realistic, so that the discriminator cannot tell them
apart from real ones.
On the other hand, the discriminator attempts to distinguish
between real data and generated data for under-represented attack samples. As the generator learns through repeated iterations
how to generate more realistic samples of under-represented
attack categories, the discriminator continues to adjust to better
identify the difference between real data and synthetic data. The
loss function of discriminator can be expressed as:
LD = −Ex,c [log D(x, c)] − Ez,c [log (1 − D (G(z, c), c))] ,
(2)
where x represents a known real sample, including normal
or attack sample, and D(x, c) outputs a probability to judge
whether the sample is real. log(1 − D(G(z, c), c)) is responsible
for calculating the logarithm of the probability that the generated
sample is judged to be false. As a result, the first and second
expected value terms denote the discriminator’s correct classification probabilities for real samples and generated samples, respectively, and the loss function is used to train the discriminator
with the goal of maximizing their sum. Moreover, the dropout
layer is added and placed after the fully connected layer in the
discriminator as a means of regularization to prevent it from

90

relying too heavily on certain specific features, improving the
models’s ability to generalize and avoiding overfitting problem.
Conditional labels implicitly divide the feature space to ensure
that generated samples of different categories form separate
clusters in the feature space. The generator learns the feature
distribution of different attack categories through conditional
labels pgen (x|c). Through adversarial training, the generator is
forced to approximate the conditional distribution of real data
pdata (x|c). Mathematically, the degree of proximity between the
generated distribution and the true distribution can be measured
by KL (Kullback-Leibler) divergence:


pdata (x|c)
KL (pdata (x|c)  pgen (x|c)) = Ex∼pdata log
. (3)
pgen (x|c)
When the adversarial training converges, the KL divergence approaches 0, indicating that the generated samples can represent
the statistical characteristics of the real data.
In C-GAN, the generator and discriminator are optimized
through adversarial training, with the goal of making the generated samples as close as possible to the real data distribution.
According to the Nash Equilibrium theory in game theory,
C-GAN will converge to a Nash equilibrium under ideal circumstances. At this equilibrium point, the generator can no longer
“deceive” the discriminator by generating different samples, and
the discriminator can no longer effectively distinguish between
real data and generated data. Therefore, the distribution of the
generated samples will cover that of the real data, achieving
a “match” between the generated samples and the real data.
The pseudo-code of our proposed C-GAN is illustrated in
Algorithm 1.
IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY OF ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
As one of DRL algorithms, Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) is proposed by Google DeepMind and OpenAI in 2018,
which aims to improve convergence speed and sampling efficiency while maintaining stability. PPO is composed of four
components, including advantage function, proximal policy optimization, multi-step sampling and importance sampling, which
are illustrated as follows.
r Advantage Function: PPO adopts it to evaluate the degree
of advantage of taking an action relative to the average
situation, so as to guide the direction of policy update.
r Proximal Policy Optimization: PPO uses a method of cutting to limit the amplitude of each policy update.
r Multi-Step Sampling: PPO typically chooses it to estimate
the value of an action, which helps to improve sampling
efficiency.
r Importance Sampling: PPO often imports it to estimate the
expected benefits of policy updates to make better use of
historical data.
In a conclusion, PPO algorithm achieves stable training in
DRL tasks by limiting the update amplitude, increases convergence speed by maximizing the advantage function at each time,
and improves sampling efficiency by combining multi-step sampling with importance sampling [59]. As an improved version of
PPO, PPO2 mainly optimizes the clipping mechanism, objective

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Algorithm 1: Pseudo Code of C-GAN for UnderRepresented Attack Categories of InSDN Dataset.
Require:
primary InSDN dataset Dreal , generator network G (see
Table IV), discriminator network D (see Table V),
learning rate α, batch size m, latent dimension zdim ,
epochs N , save interval k (e.g. every 100 epochs)
Ensure: augmented dataset Daug
1: initialize G and D parameters;
2: for epoch = 1 to N do
3: shuffle Dreal to create random batches;
4: for each mini-batch sampled from Dreal do
5:
sample random noise;
6:
sample conditional labels;
7:
generate fake data using G;
8:
compute loss for real data;
9:
compute loss for fake data;
10:
update D by back-propagating combined real and
fake data;
11:
sample new random noise and conditional labels;
12:
generate new fake data;
13:
compute loss for G;
14:
update G by back-propagating loss to improve
generated data’s realism;
15: end for
16: if epoch mod k = 0 then
17:
save checkpoint of G (and optionally D);
18: end if
19: end for
20: choose desired number naug of synthetic minority
samples;
naug
and conditional labels
21: sample random noise {zj }j=1
naug
{cj }j=1 ;
22: generate fake data;
23: combine generated data with real data;
24: return Daug ;

function, and implementation details, thus further improving
the performance and stability of the algorithm. Based on the
above considerations, this paper constructs a PPO2 based DRL
environment for intrusion detection of SDN.
PPO2 is an actor-critic based algorithm, and the loss function
of policy network can be expressed as:



∧
∧
∧
A_loss = E min ratio × At , clip (ratio, 1−ε, 1+ε) At ,
(4)
where ratio and Ât represent the strategy ratio and
advantage function, which will be introduced later.
clip(ratio, 1 − ε, 1 + ε) denotes the clipping operation,
limiting the policy ratio to the range [1 − ε, 1 + ε] to avoid
instability caused by excessive policy update. Thereinto,
ε represents a hyper-parameter controlling the magnitude
of policy updates. In all, this loss function implements the
policy update by selecting the minimum of two terms: (1) the

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

untrimmed policy update item ratio × A∧ t , which represents
the advantage function adjusted by the current policy ratio; (2)
the trimmed policy update itemclip(ratio, 1 − ε, 1 + ε)A∧ t ,
which controls the update amplitude by restricting the policy
ratio within a bounded range. This design enhances the stability
of policy updates.
In formula (4), A∧ t represents the advantage function, which
is used to estimate the advantage at time step t, measuring how
good or bad the current action is relative to other possible actions.
It can be calculated through the difference value of action value
function and state value function by Generalized Advantage
Estimation (GAE):
Ât = Qπ (s, a) − Vπ (s).

pθ (at |st )
,
pθold (at |st )

TABLE II
ACTION SPACE OF BINARY CLASSIFICATION

(6)

which is the probability ratio of new and old strategies to choose
action a in a given state s at time step t. Here, the numerator
and denominator represent the new and old strategies to choose
action a in a given state s, respectively.
As a result, the clipping mechanism of PPO2 ensures that the
proportion of each policy update does not exceed a set range,
thereby guaranteeing the monotonic improvement of each update. In PPO2, the objective function measures the effectiveness
of the update by comparing the probability ratio between the
old and new strategies. When the probability ratio exceeds the
set threshold, the objective function will be trimmed to limit
the update range, thereby avoiding excessive policy updates.
According to the monotonic improvement theorem of PPO2,
this clipping mechanism ensures the stability of policy updates
and prevents performance deterioration caused by policy updates. Through this pruning mechanism, PPO2 can maintain the
stable improvement of the strategy in multiple training steps and
eventually converge to an optimal strategy.
On the other hand, the loss function of critic network can be
calculated through the mean squared error:

 
(7)
C− loss = mean square Ât .
Finally, the loss function for the whole PPO2 algorithm is:
P P O_loss = A_loss + 0.5 × C_loss ,

Workflow diagram of PPO2’s interaction stage.

(5)

This formula measures how good or bad it is to take a particular
action a in state s relative to the average (given by Vπ (s)) in that
state. ratio represents the strategy ratio, and can be calculated
through:
ratio =

Fig. 3.

91

(8)

which needs to be minimized through optimization algorithms
to update parameters of policy network.
In this paper, the DRL process of PPO2 algorithm is divided
into two stages: interaction stage and learning stage. The main
purpose of the interaction stage is to collect training data. In this
stage, agents interact with the environment, collect information
about the current state, and make decisions based on it and existing policies. At the same time, the environment provides agents
with rewards and information about the next state. This process
is repeated several times to gather enough data for the learning

stage. The workflow diagram of PPO2’s interaction stage is
shown in Fig. 3. The main purpose of the learning stage is to use
the data collected during the interaction stage to update policies
to improve agents’ performance, that is, agents learn and update
the policy network based on sample data from experience pool
containing previous states, current states, policies and rewards.
The “state” of DRL refers to the environment information
observed by the agent at each step, that is, the input data provided
by the environment to the agent. In this paper, the “state” is
extracted from every row of data (except the label column) in
the dataset. As mentioned in our previous work [14], after data
preprocessing and feature selection, 12 features are reserved for
CNNA-BiLSTM model, including “Bwd Pkt Len Min”, “Bwd
Pkt Len Std”, “Flow Byts/s”, and so on. For instance, “Bwd
Pkt Len Min” means reverse minimum packet length, which
indicates the minimum length of a single packet in the reverse
traffic direction. It is obtained by aggregating the minimum
length of all reverse packets in the session flow, and is used
to capture extreme events in response traffic, such as control
commands or tiny packets. If very small packets frequently
appear in reverse traffic, it may indicate covert communication
behaviors, such as network scanning and heartbeat detection,
which are commonly seen on the botnet control channel. As a
result, each state vector is an eigenvector of data with 12 features
after normalization, representing relevant features of network
traffic once, and the agent’s goal is to make the right decision
based on these features.
The definitions of “action” differ in binary and multiple classification scenarios. In binary classification, the defined action
space is shown in Table II. In multiple classification, the defined
action space is shown in Table III. It can be observed that an
action is the classification result of an intrusion detection.
The PPO2 algorithm used in this paper is based on actor-critic
algorithm, in which intrusion detection agents train policy network as actors and predict the policies that should be executed
at present, with the goal of maximizing the future cumulative

92

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE III
ACTION SPACE OF MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION

Algorithm 2: Pseudo Code of GCB-PPO2 Algorithm.
Require:
expanded InSDN dataset, policy network, critic network
1: for each iteration do
2: initialize intrusion detection environment and collect
initial state s0 ;
3: initialize empty experience pool;
4: for each step in episode do
5:
output action at ∼ πθ (at |st );
6:
execute at and observe st+1 , rt ;
7:
store (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into experience pool;
8:
update state st to st+1 ;
9: end for
10: if sufficient data in experience pool then
11:
sample a batch of transitions from experience pool;
12:
compute action value and state value functions
Qπ (s, a) and Vπ (s) for each transition;
13:
compute advantage function Ât based on Qπ (s, a)
and Vπ (s) using GAE;
14:
compute clipped surrogate loss A_loss ;
15:
update policy network pθ to minimize A_loss ;
16:
compute loss function of critic network C_loss ;
17:
update critic network to minimize C_loss ;
18: end if
19: set pθold to be pθ ;
20: end for

rewards. In order to update neural networks in time, it is necessary to fuse policy network with critic network, so that our
previously proposed CNNA-BiLSTM is shared between two
networks, and the weights of two networks can be shared and
updated at the same time. Moreover, PPO2 uses a fixed-length
trajectory segment, representing a sequence of states and actions.
In each iteration, N parallel agents collect T steps of data, and
the loss function is constructed on N T steps and optimized by a
small-lot gradient descent or Adam optimizer. The pseudo-code
of PPO2 algorithm is described in Algorithm 2.
Even though our previously proposed CNNA-BiLSTM
achieves good classification results in intrusion detection and
classification of SDN, it still needs to be improved especially
when facing under-represented attack categories. In this paper,
we innovatively combine DRL with deep neural network to make
advantage of both techniques, i.e., constructing a PPO2 environment which uses CNNA-BiLSTM as the shared network. Unlike supervised learning methods like CNNA-BiLSTM, PPO2

TABLE IV
STRUCTURE OF GENERATOR

constantly updates its strategy through interaction with environment to learn how to make optimal decisions in a changing
environment without the need to define fixed rules or structures in advance. As a result, PPO2 is appropriate to unknown
or fast-changing environments through its online learning and
continuous improvement. For instance, once PPO2 has been
trained well in InSDN dataset, it can be ported to other intrusion
detection datasets adaptively.
Moreover, CNNA-BiLSTM is very efficient at extracting spatial features (by CNN) and temporal information (by BiLSTM)
from high-dimensional data. After integrating CNNA-BiLSTM
into PPO2, agents can better understand spatial and temporal
characteristics of input data when dealing with complex and
time-dependent environments, so as to make more intelligent
decisions and enhance the overall performance. Moreover, joint
feature extraction by CNNA-BiLSTM can reduce the data dimension and make the input information processed by PPO2
more compact, thus reducing the computational burden. As
CNNA-BiLSTM completes deep feature extraction in advance,
so that PPO2 only needs to learn the strategy and does not
need additional complex feature learning layer, thus reducing
the calculation amount of the strategy network. As a result, this
shared network can promise a high classification accuracy as
well as an improved training efficiency.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS OF DATA AUGMENTATION
A. Experimental Setup of Whole System
In terms of hardware environment, all the deep learning and
DRL models used in this paper are trained and tested under the
support of GPU on the CentOS operating system, with the CPU
being Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5118 CPU @ 2.30 GH, and GPU
being Nvidia GeForce RTX 2080Ti 11 GB. In terms of software
environment, we choose Python language and use Conda to
manage Python environments and dependency packages. The
implementation is primarily based on PyTorch deep learning
framework with CUDA acceleration for GPU computing. For
reinforcement learning components, we utilize Stable-Baseline
library, which provides a range of easy-to-use and efficient
algorithm implementations designed to simplify the process of
setting, training, and evaluating. Moreover, the machine learning
pipeline incorporates scikit-learn for data preprocessing and
performance evaluation.
The structures of the generator and discriminator of C-GAN
are summarized in Tables IV and V, respectively. In terms of
the generator architecture, the network begins with an input
layer accepting 1000-dimensional vectors (batchsize = 64).
The core structure contains four consecutive fully connected

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

93

TABLE V
STRUCTURE OF DISCRIMINATOR

layers with ReLU activation. The first dense layer expands the
feature dimension to 128, followed by progressive expansion
to 256, 512, and finally the last layer outputs 19-dimensional
features. Notably, the layer expansions do not strictly follow
the “doubling” pattern described, with the final layer actually
performing dimension reduction.
In terms of the discriminator design, the network begins with a
19-dimensional input layer (batchsize = 64) that receives both
real and generated samples. The core architecture comprises
three sequential fully connected layers with ReLU activation,
where the first two layers are accompanied by dropout regularization. The feature dimension evolves through 512, 256,
and 128 neurons in the hidden layers. The last layer of the
discriminator is still the fully connected layer with Sigmoid as
the activation function used for identifying the authenticity of
samples.
Considering that the performance of our proposed GCB-PPO2
relies heavily on specific hyper-parameters, we adopt Bayesian
optimization, i.e., one of the automated hyper-parameter tuning methods, to make the model more accessible and reliable.
Bayesian optimization works by building a probabilistic model
of the objective function (usually a Gaussian process) and then
using this model to select the next most promising combination
of hyper-parameters to find the optimal solution in as few iterations as possible. Compared to grid search or random search,
it is more efficient, especially in high-dimensional spaces and
complex dependencies. Moreover, Bayesian optimization is also
expected to enhance the robustness of GCB-PPO2 model by systematically selecting hyper-parameters resistant to perturbations
for the following two reasons. On one hand, the Gaussian process surrogate identifies wide, high-performance regions, where
small parameter perturbations cause minimal performance drop.
On the other hand, the acquisition function favors parameters
with low validation accuracy variance, ensuring consistent performance under environmental noise.
We choose Optuna as the Bayesian optimization library, as
it is more modern and is easier to integrate with existing code.
In order to perform hyper-parameter optimization, the training
process needs to be wrapped into an objective function that
takes in hyper-parameters and returns evaluation metrics. The
Bayesian optimizer then continuously calls this objective function, adjusting the parameters to maximize metrics. Fig. 4 shows
the model’s validation accuracy at each successive Bayesian optimization trail, It can be observed from Fig. 4(j) that after a few
initial exploratory trials where accuracy fluctuates apparently,
the optimizer quickly homes in on high-performing regions:
most subsequent trials achieve accuracies above 0.95. Although

Fig. 4.

Trial-wise accuracy during bayesian optimization.

TABLE VI
HYPER-PARAMETER SETTING OF GCB-PPO2 FRAMEWORK

Fig. 5.

Loss curve of generator.

there are occasional small dips, the overall trend is convergent,
with the best trails reaching 0.9899 achieved. Finally, the derived
hyper-parameters are summarized in Table VI.
B. Experimental Results of Data Augmentation
As mentioned before, this paper adopts C-GAN to generate
under-represented attack class samples to expand InSDN dataset
after data preprocessing and feature selection. The loss curve
of generator for the training process is shown in Fig. 5. It can
be observed that at the beginning of training (around the first
1500 epochs), the loss value rises rapidly from about 0.5 to 4.0,
which indicates that the model is trying to find a better generation
strategy, thus increasing losses. Between 1500 and 2500 epochs,
the loss value fluctuates greatly between 1.5 and 3.5, which
means that generator faces challenges in adversarial training

94

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON BINARY CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 6.

Loss curve of discriminator.

VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS OF ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
A. Ablation Experiments on Binary Classification

TABLE VII
NUMBER OF SAMPLES BEFORE AND AFTER C-GAN

against discriminator, resulting in large fluctuations in the quality
of generated samples. After 2500 epochs, the loss value shows a
certain tendency to oscillate but generally stabilizes between
about 2.0 and 2.5, achieving a relatively good result, which
depicts that the model has reached a state of equilibrium where
adversarial training makes it difficult for generator to improve
performance further.
The loss curve and accuracy curve of discriminator for the
training process are shown in Fig. 6. Similarly with the generator, it can be observed that after 2500 epochs, the loss value
stabilizes, staying between 0.1 and 0.4. As shown in the accuracy
curve, at the beginning of training (around the first 500 epochs),
the accuracy rate rises from about 0.5 to close to 1.0 sharply,
indicating that discriminator quickly learns to distinguish between real data and generated data. Between 500 and 2500
epochs, the accuracy rate fluctuates greatly between 0.6 and 1.0,
which is a common phenomenon in adversarial training, where
generator and discriminator compete against each other. After
2500 epochs, the accuracy rate is stable around 0.95, showing
that the discriminator improves the performance significantly
with training, thus can accurately distinguish between real data
and generated data.
Table VII lists the numbers of samples for each category
before and after the expansion by C-GAN. It can be observed
that the original sample sizes of BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R are
insufficient, while data augmentation increases these samples
in the training set intentionally and significantly, with ratios
ranging from 30.80× to 288.75×. However, data of testing set
has not changed, which helps to maintain the consistency of
testing set and provide a stable standard for model evaluation. In
all, through data augmentation, our proposed model is expected
to perform better in processing unbalanced dataset and improve
the identification accuracy of various types of attacks, especially
for under-represented attack categories.

As GCB-PPO2 model uses our previously proposed CNNABiLSTM as the shared network, then the ablation experiments to
compare GCB-PPO2 with CNN, CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM
as well as CNNA-BiLSTM are essential. More specifically,
we conduct comprehensive ablation studies through progressive
architectural comparisons and generative enhancement validation. The architectural evolution analysis begins with a baseline CNN model using pure convolutional layers, subsequently
enhanced by incorporating unidirectional temporal dependencies in CNN-LSTM, then upgraded to bidirectional context
modeling in CNN-BiLSTM, and ultimately integrated with attention mechanisms to form the CNNA-BiLSTM variant. To
specifically isolate the impact of C-GAN, we further compare
the full GCB-PPO2 model (leveraging C-GAN synthesized
under-represented class samples) against its ablated version
CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 trained solely on original data. This
dual-axis evaluation strategy enables systematic quantification
of both architectural innovations and data augmentation effects,
particularly in addressing class imbalance challenges.
The binary classification effect of six models is shown in
Table VIII. It can be concluded that GCB-PPO2 model achieves
the best performance among six models on accuracy, precision, and F1. GCB-PPO2 model performs better than CNNABiLSTM-PPO2 on accuracy, precision, and F1, which reflects
the advantage of C-GAN, that is, it can alleviate the problem of
class imbalance by generating diversified attack traffic samples
and improve the ability to identify under-represented attack
categories.
In order to better demonstrate the performance of six models,
the confusion matrixes are drawn and shown in Fig. 7. It can
be observed that the true positive rate of anomaly packets by
GCB-PPO2 model is 1.0, indicating that all samples which are
malicious traffics are correctly identified as attacks. As a result,
GCB-PPO2 model can detect all samples of attacks sensitively.
As models become more complex, the training time to be
consumed is expected to increase in theory. However, PPO2
framework is introduced in this paper to speed up the convergence speed. The training time of six models is summarized
in Table IX. It can be observed that the training time of the
pure CNN model is only 714 seconds, which takes the shortest
time among these models. However, as models become more
complex, the training time required increases rapidly, and the
longest time reaches 5842 seconds by CNN-LSTM model.
Compared with other models, GCB-PPO2 model has the most
complicated structure, while its training time is only higher than

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

Fig. 7.

95

Confusion matrixes of ablation experiments on binary classification.

TABLE IX
TRAINING TIME OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON BINARY CLASSIFICATION

that of CNN and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, and obviously less
than that of CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNA-BiLSTM
models by 50.29%, 32.95%, and 22.27%, respectively. Moreover, GCB-PPO2 model consumes only 2.25% more training
time than CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, which is negligible.
The reason why our proposed GCB-PPO2 model effectively
reduces the required training time than CNN-LSTM based deep
learning models can be explained as follows. Firstly, GCB-PPO2
model employs CNNA-BiLSTM as a shared network among
multiple tasks and data streams, thus reducing computational
redundancy as the same feature extraction layer does not need
to be computed for multiple times. Secondly, GCB-PPO2 model
utilizes the parallel computing techniques, such as N parallel
agents collecting T steps of data in each iteration, to speed up the
training process. Thirdly, GCB-PPO2 model adopts the sample
reuse techniques such as experience pool to reduce the need for
collecting new data and optimize the training time.

TABLE X
PERFORMANCE OF TRAFFIC TYPES BY GCB-PPO2 MODEL

B. Ablation Experiments on Multiple Classification
Table X lists the precision, recall, and F1 of each
traffic type when applying our proposed GCB-PPO2
model. It can be observed that GCB-PPO2 model
achieves good results on each indicator for each category,
including under-represented attack categories, i.e., BFA,
Botnet, Web, and U2R attacks. More specifically, the precision,
recall, and F1 of these minority classes are more than 86.36%,
84.28% and 85.91%, respectively. In other words, GCB-PPO2
model can identify all kinds of intrusion detection attacks with
high performance.
On the basis of binary classification, we conduct ablation
experiments of multiple classification to compare GCB-PPO2
model with five models mentioned in the last subsection. The
simulation results are shown in Table XI. As depicted from the
table, GCB-PPO2 model achieves the best performance among

96

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Confusion matrixes of ablation experiments on multiple classification.

TABLE XI
PERFORMANCE OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION

TABLE XII
TRAINING TIME OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION

six models, with the accuracy being 99.01%, which is higher
than that of other models by up to 2.42%.
The training time of six models on multiple classification is
summarized in Table XII. When compared with CNN-LSTM
based deep learning models, GCB-PPO2 model still consumes
much less training time. More specifically, its training time
is less than that of CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNABiLSTM models by 50.86%, 33.72%, and 29.73%, respectively.
Simultaneously, GCB-PPO2 model consumes only 9.62% more
training time than CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2, which is acceptable.
In a conclusion, GCB-PPO2 model consumes much less training
time than traditional deep learning models effectively by at
least 22.27% and 29.73% in binary and multiple classification
scenarios, respectively, demonstrating improved computational

efficiency. It can be attributed to the online learning ability of
GCB-PPO2 model. Moreover, we have also integrated Bayesian
optimization to fine-tune PPO2 hyper-parameters, further improving training stability and reducing computation cost.
In order to analyze the simulation results more deeply, we
draw confusion matrixes for six models, which are shown in
Fig. 8, and we list a table to display the F1 score of six models
on each traffic type, which is shown in Table XIII. It can be
observed from the confusion matrixes that GCB-PPO2 model
correctly detects all the U2R attack samples, while other four
deep learning models cannot detect this type at all. Moreover,
GCB-PPO2 model correctly detects 88% of Web attack samples,
while CNN, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM models cannot
detect Web traffics at all, and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 model only
detects 7% of Web traffics.
As shown in the confusion matrixes, CNN, CNN-LSTM,
CNN-BiLSTM, and CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 models mistake
Web attacks as BFA traffics, and the former three models mistake
U2R attacks as normal traffics. On one hand, Web attacks
try different attack tactics (such as SQL injection, cross-site
scripting) to find a system’s weakness, while BFA attacks try all
possible password combinations to find the right cipher. Both
attacks exhibit persistent attempts to access system resources.
When models detect a large number of repeated login or access
attempts, they may classify these actions as BFA attacks. On the
other hand, attackers of U2R attacks perform malicious actions
by obtaining system permissions with the characteristics of small
number of packets, large packet size, low traffic fluctuations
and strong purpose of access, which are similar to normal user
behaviors, so it is easy to be mistaken as normal traffics.
Table XIII demonstrates that the GCB-PPO2 model excels in
detecting all the traffic types, achieving an F1 score of at least

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

97

TABLE XIII
F1 OF TRAFFIC TYPES IN ABLATION EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 9.

Policy latent space.

85.91%. Notably, it performs exceptionally well in identifying
all the under-represented attack categories, including BFA, Botnet, U2R, and Web attacks, with F1 scores of 94.99%, 85.91%,
86.47%, and 87.86%, respectively. On the contrary, CNN, CNNLSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM fail to detect U2R and Web attacks.
CNNA-BiLSTM shows limited success, obtaining F1 scores
of 0% and 48.91% for U2R and Botnet, respectively. While
the CNNA-BiLSTM-PPO2 effectively detects most traffic types
with F1 scores of more than 77.80%, its performance on Web
attacks is notably weak, with an F1 score of only 12.50%.
The sample sizes for BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R are only
1405, 192, 164 and 17, respectively, accounting for merely
0.44%, 0.06%, 0.05% and 0.004% of all samples. This severe
class imbalance poses a significant challenge to intrusion detection models. Five models for comparison do not solve data
imbalance problem effectively. Due to the limited number of
minority class samples, these models cannot fully learn the
features of abnormal traffics during training, resulting in the
lack of sufficient recognition ability when facing new malicious
flows. As a result, it is difficult for these five models to identify
BFA, Web, Botnet, and U2R attacks.
In order to investigate classification results more intuitively,
we use t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)
method to draw a graph to visualize the policy latent space of
GCB-PPO2 model, as shown in Fig. 9. The data points in this
figure are represented by t-SNE after dimensionality reduction,
with the original high-dimensional feature space mapped to a
two-dimensional space, helpful for observing the distribution
of different categories of data more conveniently. In general,

different categories of data still maintain good clustering
form after dimensionality reduction, indicating that GCB-PPO2
model can distinguish different types of network traffic effectively.
More specifically, the following conclusions can be derived
from this figure. (1) Normal, DDoS, and DoS traffics form
a certain clustering for each, indicating that these traffics are
relatively stable and can be clearly distinguished from other
attack categories. (2) The distribution of Probe attacks is wide,
indicating that this traffic mode is diverse. When traffic of Probe
attacks is running at a low rate, it is difficult to detect directly
from traffic patterns. (3) There are few data points for Web,
U2R, Botnet, and BFA attacks. The distribution is scattered,
and no obvious clustering is formed. As the samples of Web,
U2R, Botnet, and BFA are very few, their detection effects are
limited.

C. Contrast Experiments With Traditional Algorithms
In this subsection, we compare our proposed GCB-PPO2
model with traditional machine learning models on accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 to observe the difference between
machine learning and DRL models on the performance of
intrusion detection. Machine learning models for comparison
include Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machine (SVM),
Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), and Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost). The
simulation results are shown in Table XIV.
It can be concluded that the performance difference between
traditional machine learning and DRL is not obvious when
applying to binary classification tasks, while there is a huge gap
when conducting multiple classification tasks. In multiple classification scenario, compared with other models, GCB-PPO2
model improves accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 by at least
5.68%, 4.53%, 5.85%, and 5.17%, respectively. This is because
in multiple classification problems, the increase of categories is
usually accomplished by the increase of problem complexity.
Due to the multi-layer network structures and activation functions of deep learning, GCB-PPO2 model has higher expressiveness to capture category differences and more powerful handling
ability to solve nonlinear mapping problems, resulting in the best
performance when applying to complex classification boundary
problems.

98

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE XIV
CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS WITH TRADITIONAL ALGORITHMS

TABLE XV
CONTRAST EXPERIMENTS WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART ALGORITHMS
(2021-2025) ON MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION

On the other hand, DT, MLP, and KNN demonstrate the
effectiveness in multiple classification, with the accuracy of
more than 92.10%. It can be attributed to the following three
reasons. (1) These models have nonlinear modeling capability.
For instance, DT directly constructs nonlinear decision boundaries through tree splitting. (2) These models can process high
dimensional data effectively. For instance, MLP fuses multidimensional features through the fully connected layer. (3)
These models are robust to noise. For instance, KNN adjusts
the number of neighbours by the K value to balance noise
effects. As a result, these three models achieve competitive
performance, while remain substantially inferior to GCB-PPO2
model.
Secondly, the performance of SVM, RF, and AdaBoost is
acceptable. However, these three methods have limitations on
model structures and defects on data adaptation. For instance,
SVM requires manual selection of kernel functions, and RF
voting mechanism fails when classes are unbalanced. As a result,
they do not perform as well as the first three models. Finally,
the performance metrics of LG and SGD are lowest among all
the models, as both of them are suitable for dealing with linear
data, leading to poor performance in dealing with nonlinear and
multiple classification problems.
D. Contrast Experiments With State-of-the-Art Algorithms
In order to further demonstrate the superiority of our proposed GCB-PPO2 model, we conduct experiments to compare
it with other state-of-the-art algorithms on multiple classification
scenarios for InSDN dataset. The compared models include the
model proposed in [60], D-GSAGE-MARC [61], AE-CNN [62],
J48 [63], CNN-MLP [64], DCGAN [65], FELIDS [66], and
ByteSGAN [67]. These studies were published between 2021
and 2025, representing recent advancements in this filed. The

comparison results are shown in Table XV.1 The results demonstrate that the GCB-PPO2 model consistently outperforms the
other eight models, achieving improvements of up to 15.56%,
16.27%, 15.11%, and 15.68% in accuracy, recall, precision, and
F1, respectively.
As shown in Table XV, CNN-RF, CNN-MLP and FELIDS
exhibit the lowest performance among all models across the
four metrics. On one hand, CNN-RF combines the advantages
of deep learning and ensemble learning, but the collaborative efficiency of the two may be insufficient. CNN is good
at extracting local spatial features, while RF relies on global
feature classification. Using the output of CNN as the input
of RF may lead to incomplete feature representation, thereby
resulting in the degradation of intrusion detection performance.
On the other hand, CNN-MLP and FELIDS belong to federated
learning based IDSs, which need to be trained on multiple nodes.
However, data distribution on each node may be uneven, making
it difficult for these models to learn features of global data,
and further affecting the generalization ability and classification
accuracy of models. Moreover, technologies such as differential
privacy may be introduced to protect sensitive data, which may
negatively affect model performance and reduce classification
accuracy. As a result, the performance of federated learning
models in intrusion detection tasks may be inferior to that of
centralized learning models.
E. Cross-Domain Experiments on NSL-KDD Dataset
In this study, C-GAN is used as a data enhancement tool
aimed at improving the fairness of our proposed GCB-PPO2
model for classifying different traffic types by generating more
diverse samples of attacks. Specifically, C-GAN helps the model
avoid the bias to common attack types in the training process
by generating samples of under-represented attack types, thus
improving the model’s ability to identify various traffic types.
Meanwhile, we should discuss the potential bias introduced by
data augmentation techniques, and confirm whether C-GAN
overfits specific types of attacks. In this subsection, we apply
GCB-PPO2 model to another dataset named “NSL-KDD” to
test the performance of the model on a different dataset as well
as to explore the applicability in various network conditions and
environments.
Similarly, both binary and multiple classification experiments
are designed to evaluate the performance of the GCB-PPO2
1 The precision of D-GSAGE-MARC is not provided.

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

TABLE XVI
CROSS-DOMAIN EXPERIMENTS ON NSL-KDD DATASET BY GCB-PPO2
MODEL

TABLE XVII
PERFORMANCE OF TRAFFIC TYPES ON NSL-KDD DATASET BY GCB-PPO2
MODEL

model in distinguishing normals traffic from abnormal attacks,
and to verify the generalization ability of the model for complex
traffic types. The corresponding accuracy, recall, precision, and
F1 are shown in Table XVI. It can be concluded that GCB-PPO2
model performs well in binary classification tasks, with all
the four metrics reaching above 99.61%. In multi-classification
tasks, the performance of the model decreases slightly, while
the overall level still remains high, as all the four metrics are
higher than 98.86%, verifying its robustness in complex network
environment.
On that basis, we measure the fine-grained classification
performance of GCB-PPO2 model on NSL-KDD dataset, which
is summarized in Table XVII. It can be concluded that the F1
of GCB-PPO2 model for all the five types of traffics is above
93.47%, further verifying its multi-classification capability. The
simulation results verify that GCB-PPO2 model still achieves
a high accuracy on a different dataset, indicating that C-GAN
successfully maintains diversity and representativeness when
generating samples, and does not lead to bias in specific attack types. Moreover, the results also indicates that GCB-PPO2
model can adapt to different data distributions and has strong
generalization ability.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we present GCB-PPO2, a deep reinforcement
learning based hybrid intrusion detection system for SDN environments that synergistically optimizes classification performance and training efficiency through two integrated innovations: (1) C-GAN based adversarial generation of underrepresented attack synthesis to counteract class imbalance, and
(2) enhanced PPO2 reinforcement learning incorporating our
prior CNNA-BiLSTM architecture for spatio-temporal feature
fusion. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that GCB-PPO2
model achieves the accuracy of 99.92% and 99.01% in binary
and multiple classification scenarios, respectively, and elevates
the F1 of under-represented attack detection to over 85.91%.
Moreover, GCB-PPO2 model proves cross-domain efficacy
with 98.65% accuracy on NSL-KDD benchmark, and achieves
22.27% faster convergence than conventional hybrid models.

99

To strengthen the practical applicability and ethical accountability of GCB-PPO2 model, we plan to integrate this model
as a component or module of the controller(s). Future research
will focus on following three aspects: technical optimization,
theoretical optimization, and scenario expansion.
r Technical Optimization: Transferring the knowledge of
GCB-PPO2 to a lightweight model to streamline training
complexity and apply to resource limited SDN controllers.
Integrating the adversarial perturbation penalty term into
the reward function of PPO2 to enhance the robustness to
adversarial attacks.
r Theoretical Optimization: Using the causal reasoning
model to identify the causal path between the attack features and the classification results to improve the interpretability.
r Scenario Expansion: Designing an unsupervised anomaly
scoring module and training it jointly with the existing
supervised learning to deal with zero-day attacks.
To improve the performance of GCB-PPO2 model, both the
data augmentation strategy and the intrusion detection model
can be enhanced. While C-GAN effectively addresses class
imbalance, integrating it with other techniques such as SMOTE
and contrastive learning could further diversify synthetic samples, especially for extremely low frequency categories (e.g.,
U2R attacks). Exploring transformer-based modules or Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) could better capture hierarchical dependencies in network traffic. For example, a spatial-temporal
transformer might replace the CNNA-BiLSTM to model longrange correlations in attack patterns. These advancements aim
to push the performance boundaries of SDN IDS in evolving
threat landscapes.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Kumar, U. Venkanna, and V. Tiwari, “Optimized traffic engineering
in software defined wireless network based IoT (SDWN-IoT): State-ofthe-art, research opportunities and challenges,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 49,
Aug. 2023, Art. no. 100572.
[2] C. Li, K. Jiang, and Y. Luo, “Dynamic placement of multiple controllers based on SDN and allocation of computational resources based on
heuristic ant colony algorithm,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 241, Apr. 2022,
Art. no. 108330.
[3] J. Chen, Y.-J. Xiong, X. Qiu, D. He, H. Yin, and C. Xiao, “A cross entropy
based approach to minimum propagation latency for controller placement
in software defined network,” Comput. Commun., vol. 191, pp. 133–144,
Jul. 2022.
[4] Z. Mustafa, R. Amin, H. Aldabbas, and N. Ahmed, “Intrusion detection
systems for software-defined networks: A comprehensive study on machine learning-based techniques,” Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw.
Tools Appl., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 9635–9661, Oct. 2024.
[5] Y. Zhang, C. Jue, W. Liu, and Y. Ma, “GRAN: A SDN intrusion detection
model based on graph attention network and residual learning,” Comput.
J., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 241–260, Oct. 2024.
[6] L. Yang, Y. Song, S. Gao, A. Hu, and B. Xiao, “Griffin: Real-time network
intrusion detection system via ensemble of autoencoder in SDN,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2269–2281, Sep. 2022.
[7] A. Javadpour, P. Pinto, F. Ja’fari, and W. Zhang, “DMAIDPS: A distributed
multi-agent intrusion detection and prevention system for cloud IoT environments,” Cluster Comput.- The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl., vol. 26,
no. 1, pp. 367–384, Feb. 2023.
[8] E. Hooper, “Intelligent detection and response strategies for complex
attacks,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 3–12,
Nov. 2007.

100

[9] W. L. Al-Yaseen, Z. A. Othman, and M. Z. A. Nazri, “Multi-level hybrid
support vector machine and extreme learning machine based on modified
k-means for intrusion detection system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 67,
pp. 296–303, Jan. 2017.
[10] I. Ahmad, M. Basheri, M. J. Iqbal, and A. Rahim, “Performance comparison of support vector machine, random forest, and extreme learning
machine for intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 33789–33795,
2018.
[11] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R.
Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classification model
for anomaly-based intrusion detection in IoT backbone networks,” IEEE
Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 314–323, Apr.–Jun. 2019.
[12] B. Swathi, S. S. Kolisetty, G. V. Sivanarayana, and S. R. Battula,
“Efficientnetv2-RegNet: An effective deep learning framework for secure
SDN based IoT network,” Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 10653–10670, Nov. 2024.
[13] Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. He, and S. Chan, “Intrusion detection methods based
on integrated deep learning model,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 102177.
[14] M. Cui, J. Chen, X. Qiu, W. Lv, H. Qin, and X. Zhang, “Multi-class
intrusion detection system in SDN based on hybrid BiLSTM model,”
Cluster Comput.-The J. Netw. Softw. Tools Appl., vol. 27, pp. 9937–9956,
May 2024.
[15] M. Buda, A. Maki, and M. A. Mazurowski, “A systematic study of the
class imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 106, pp. 249–259, Oct. 2018.
[16] M. S. Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, and A. D. Jurcut, “InSDN: A novel SDN
intrusion dataset,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165263–165284, 2020.
[17] C. Liang, L. Liu, and C. Liu, “Multi-UAV autonomous collision avoidance
based on PPO-GIC algorithm with CNN-LSTM fusion network,” Neural
Netw., vol. 162, pp. 21–33, May 2023.
[18] X. Zhang, H. Zong, and W. Wu, “Cooperative obstacle avoidance of
unmanned system swarm via reinforcement learning under unknown environments,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, Art. no. 7500615.
[19] M. Li, S. Deng, H. Zhou, and Y. Qin, “A path selection scheme for detecting
malicious behavior based on deep reinforcement learning in SDN/NFVenabled network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 110034.
[20] B. Darabi, M. Bag-Mohammadi, and M. Karami, “A micro reinforcement
learning architecture for intrusion detection systems,” Pattern Recognit.
Lett., vol. 185, pp. 81–86, Sep. 2024.
[21] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with
smote for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 943–956, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[22] W. Wang et al., “Abnormal flow detection in industrial control network
based on deep reinforcement learning,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 409,
Nov. 2021, Art. no. 126379.
[23] S. Kim et al., “DIVERGENCE: Deep reinforcement learning-based adaptive traffic inspection and moving target defense countermeasure framework,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4834–4846,
Dec. 2022.
[24] N. M. Yungaicela-Naula, C. Vargas-Rosales, J. A. Perez-Diaz, and D.
F. Carrera, “A flexible SDN-based framework for slow-rate DDoS attack
mitigation by reinforcement,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 205, Sep. 2022,
Art. no. 103444.
[25] N. M. Yungaicela-Naula, C. Vargas-Rosales, and J. A. Perez-Diaz,
“SDN/NFV-based framework for autonomous defense against slow-rate
DDoS attacks by using reinforcement learning,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst.-The Int. J. Escience, vol. 149, pp. 637–649, Dec. 2023.
[26] W. Chen et al., “CIPPO: Contrastive imitation proximal policy optimization for recommendation based on reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 5753–5767, Nov. 2024.
[27] P.-L. Dallaire-Demers and N. Killoran, “Quantum generative adversarial
networks,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 98, no. 1, Jul. 2018, Art. no. 012324.
[28] J. Wang, X. Yan, L. Liu, L. Li, and Y. Yu, “CTTGAN: Traffic data
synthesizing scheme based on conditional GAN,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 14,
2022, Art. no. 5243.
[29] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Leveraging human-in-the-loop machine learning and GAN-synthesized data for intrusion detection in Autonomous Aerial Vehicles networks,” in Proc. ICC 2024-IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun., 2024, pp. 1557–1562.
[30] Q. Zeng and F. Nait-Abdesselam, “Enhancing UAV network security: A
human-in-the-loop and GAN-based approach to intrusion detection,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 20870–20884, Jun. 2025.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[31] Center for Internet Security, “The Mirai botnet: Threats and mitigations,”
CISecurity Blog, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisecurity.org/
insights/blog/the-mirai-botnet-threats-and-mitigations
[32] A. Javadpour, F. Jafari, T. Taleb, M. Shojafar, and C. Benzaid, “A comprehensive survey on cyber deception techniques to improve honeypot
performance,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103792.
[33] A. Yazdinejadna, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha, and M. S. Khan, “A
kangaroo-based intrusion detection system on software-defined networks,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 184, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 107688.
[34] J. Cho, T. Shon, K. Choi, and J. Moon, “Dynamic learning model update
of hybrid-classifiers for intrusion detection,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 522–526, May 2013.
[35] P. Hadem, D. K. Saikia, and S. Moulik, “An SDN-based intrusion detection
system using SVM with selective logging for IP traceback,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 191, May 2021, Art. no. 108015.
[36] A. Y. P. Lee, M. I. C. Wang, C.-H. Hung, and C. H. P. Wen, “PS-IPS:
Deploying intrusion prevention system with machine learning on switch,”
Future Gener. Comput. Syst.-The Int. J. Escience, vol. 152, pp. 333–342,
Mar. 2024.
[37] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Ensemble learning for intrusion
detection in SDN-based zero touch smart grid systems,” in Proc. 2022 47th
IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2022, pp. 149–156.
[38] N. Ahuja, G. Singal, D. Mukhopadhyay, and N. Kumar, “Automated DDoS
attack detection in software defined networking,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 187, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103108.
[39] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for intrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5,
pp. 21954–21961, 2017.
[40] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, Feb. 2020,
Art. no. 105124.
[41] Y. Cui et al., “Towards DDoS detection mechanisms in softwaredefined networking,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 190, Sep. 2021,
Art. no. 103156.
[42] C. Fan, J. Cui, H. Jin, H. Zhong, I. Bolodurina, and D. He, “Auto-updating
intrusion detection system for vehicular network: A deep learning approach based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 15372–15384, Oct. 2024.
[43] O. Elnakib, E. Shaaban, M. Mahmoud, and K. Emara, “EIDM: Deep
learning model for IoT intrusion detection systems,” J. Supercomputing,
vol. 79, no. 12, pp. 13241–13261, Aug. 2023.
[44] J. Singh and S. Behal, “Detection and mitigation of DDoS attacks in
SDN: A comprehensive review, research challenges and future directions,”
Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 37, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 100279.
[45] A. Zainudin, L. A. C. Ahakonye, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee,
“An efficient hybrid-DNN for DDoS detection and classification in
software-defined IIoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10,
pp. 8491–8504, May 2023.
[46] U. S. Chanu, K. J. Singh, and Y. J. Chanu, “A dynamic feature selection
technique to detect DDoS attack,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 74, May 2023,
Art. no. 103445.
[47] L. Mhamdi and M. M. Isa, “Securing SDN: Hybrid autoencoder-random
forest for intrusion detection and attack mitigation,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 225, May 2024, Art. no. 103868.
[48] J. Shu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Collaborative intrusion
detection for VANETs: A deep learning-based distributed SDN approach,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4519–4530, Jul. 2021.
[49] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[50] A. Sharma and M. Singh, “Batch reinforcement learning approach using
recursive feature elimination for network intrusion detection,” Eng. Appl.
Artif. Intell., vol. 136, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 109013.
[51] A. Alotaibi and A. Barnawi, “Securing massive IoT in 6 G: Recent solutions, architectures, future directions,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023,
Art. no. 100715.
[52] J. Ye, J. Lv, G. Xu, and T. Liu, “Leaky cable perimeter intrusion detection
based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 22616–22627, Jun. 2024.
[53] Z. Li, C. Huang, S. Deng, W. Qiu, and X. Gao, “A soft actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithm for network intrusion detection,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 135, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 103502.

JUE et al.: GCB-PPO2: A HYBRID DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING IDS FOR UNDER-REPRESENTED ATTACK CATEGORIES IN SDN

[54] J. F. M. Cevallos, A. Rizzardi, S. Sicari, and A. C. Porisini, “Deep
reinforcement learning for intrusion detection in Internet of Things: Best
practices, lessons learnt, and open challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 236,
pp. 1–24, Nov. 2023.
[55] S. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Shen, G. Wu, S. Yu, and S. Shen, “Novel intrusion
detection strategies with optimal hyper parameters for industrial Internet
of Things based on stochastic games and double deep Q-networks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 17, pp. 29132–29145, Sep. 2024.
[56] C. Liu, R. Antypenko, I. Sushko, and O. Zakharchenko, “Intrusion detection system after data augmentation schemes based on the VAE and
CVAE,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1000–1010, Jun. 2022.
[57] L. Yuan, S. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Duan, and K. Li, “A data balancing approach
based on generative adversarial network,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.The Int. J. Escience, vol. 141, pp. 768–776, Apr. 2023.
[58] H. Zhang, V. Sindagi, and V. M. Patel, “Image de-raining using a conditional generative adversarial network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3943–3956, Nov. 2020.
[59] E. Shereen, K. Kazari, and G. Dán, “A reinforcement learning approach to
undetectable attacks against automatic generation control,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 959–972, Jan. 2024.
[60] J. Ma and W. Su, “Collaborative DDoS defense for SDN-based AIoT
with autoencoder-enhanced federated learning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 117,
May 2025, Art. no. 102820.
[61] S. Saidane, F. Telch, K. Shahin, and F. Granelli, “Deep GraphSAGE enhancements for intrusion detection: Analyzing attention mechanisms and
GCN integration,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 90, May 2025, Art. no. 104013.
[62] Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Fu, Y. Ye, and P. Wang, “Network traffic classification based on federated semi-supervised learning,” J. Syst. Architecture,
vol. 149, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103091.
[63] J. Ma, W. Su, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, and Z. Zhang, “Synchronizing real-time and
high-precision LDoS defense of learning model-based in AIoT with programmable data plane, SDN,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 229, Sep. 2024,
Art. no. 103916.
[64] A. Zainudin, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee, “Federated learning inspired low-complexity intrusion detection and classification technique for
SDN-based industrial CPS,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 2442–2459, Sep. 2023.
[65] Z. He et al., “Edge device identification based on federated learning and
network traffic feature engineering,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1898–1909, Dec. 2022.
[66] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, K.-K. R. Choo, and M.
Nafaa, “FELIDS: Federated learning-based intrusion detection system for
Internet of Things,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 165, pp. 17–31,
Jul. 2022.
[67] P. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “ByteSGAN: A semi-supervised
generative adversarial network for encrypted traffic classification in SDN
edge gateway,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 108535.

Chen Jue received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China, in 2018. He is currently a Lecturer with the
Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai. He has authored or coauthored multiple papers
in referred journals and conferences, including Computer Communications (JCR region 1 journal). His
research interests include software defined network
and artificial intelligence. Dr. Chen is also an Active
Reviewer of several international journals, including
ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems.

101

Tao Hongyu received the B.S. degree in 2022 from
the Shanghai University of Engineering Science,
Shanghai, China, where he has been working toward
the M.S. degree in electronic information since 2023.
His main research interests include software defined
network and intrusion detection.

Cui Meng received the M.S. degree in control science and engineering from the Shanghai University
of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China, in 2024.
His main research interests include software defined
networks and intrusion detection.

Peng Haidong received the B.S. degree in 2023
from the Shanghai University of Engineering Science,
Shanghai, China, where he has been working toward the M.S. degree in electronic information since
2024. His main research interests include software
defined network, artificial intelligence, and intrusion
detection.

Qiu Xihe received the Ph.D. degree from the National
University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2018. She is
currently an Associate Professor with the School of
Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, China. Her
research interests include intelligent clinical decision
support and deep reinforcement learning.