IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

925

Generative Adversarial Networks Based Low-Rate
Denial of Service Attack Detection and Mitigation
in Software-Defined Networks
Manjuluri Anil Kumar , Balaprakasa Rao Killi , Senior Member, IEEE, and Eiji Oki , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Low-rate Denial of Service (LDoS) attacks use short,
regular bursts of traffic to exploit vulnerabilities in network
protocols. They are a major threat to network security, especially in Software-Defined Networking (SDN) frameworks. These
attacks are challenging to detect and mitigate because of their
low traffic volume, making it impossible to distinguish them from
normal traffic. We propose a real-time LDoS attack detection
and mitigation framework that can protect SDN. The framework
incorporates a detection module that uses a deep learning model,
such as a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), to identify
the attack. An efficient mitigation module follows detection,
employing mechanisms to identify and filter harmful flows in real
time. Deploying the framework into SDN controllers guarantees
compliance with OpenFlow standards, thereby avoiding the
necessity for additional hardware. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed system achieves a detection accuracy of
over 99.98% with an average response time of 8.58 s, significantly
outperforming traditional LDoS detection approaches. This study
presents a scalable, real-time methodology to enhance SDN
resilience against LDoS attacks.
Index Terms—LDoS, SDN, GAN, attack detection and mitigation, OpenFlow.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE CONVENTIONAL control and data plane architecture of devices imposes constraints on the adaptability
of network infrastructure, thereby restricting its capacity
for innovation and expansion. Software-Defined Networking
(SDN) is a networking method that separates the control
plane, which determines the path of network traffic, from the
requesting entity and the forwarding of data inside the network
structure. The separation of the control plane from the data
plane in SDN enables programmability, thereby simplifying
the use of software for network configuration and control.
Because of its centralized control methodology, SDN presents
various security vulnerabilities. The centralized controller in
a network is susceptible to significant attacks, as a single
point of failure can cause the entire system to malfunction.

T

Received 17 February 2025; revised 15 August 2025; accepted 21
October 2025. Date of publication 24 October 2025; date of current version
29 December 2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was P. Papadimitriou. (Corresponding author:
Manjuluri Anil kumar.)
Manjuluri Anil kumar and Balaprakasa Rao Killi are with the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology at
Warangal, Warangal 506004, India (e-mail: ma23csr2r05@student.nitw.ac.in).
Eiji Oki is with the Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3625278

Vulnerabilities in the southbound interface can result in the
exploitation of protocols and man-in-the-middle attacks, which
can compromise the controller. These vulnerabilities in the
data layer place the entire network at risk. Further, policy
conflicts can lead to vulnerabilities that allow for illegal or
restricted traffic. Failure to effectively manage configuration
and policies results in security vulnerabilities. Low visibility
and monitoring can lead to delays in the identification of
risks and increase their consequences. However, it also raises
security issues, particularly in relation to Distributed Denial
of Service (DDoS) attacks.
A DDoS attack is a type of Denial of Service (DoS) attack
where attackers launch multiple attacks on a target, disrupting
legitimate users’ operations. Over the past two decades, DDoS
attacks have evolved and undergone classification based on
protocol vulnerabilities, resource focus, attack magnitude,
and timing. They can use network-layer and transport-layer
protocols, as well as application-layer protocols. DDoS attacks
can be volumetric or non-volumetric, continuous, pulse-wave,
periodic, or low-stealthy [1].
Low-rate Denial of Service (LDoS) attacks are a particular
type of DoS attack. These LDoS attacks disrupt and degrade
the service performance at the victim’s end with minimal
resource usage [2]. Three characteristics distinguish LDoS
attacks from traditional DoS attacks. First, LDoS attacks target
widespread adaptive mechanisms. These adaptive mechanisms
effectively respond and adjust to LDoS attacks, exposing the
target to a continuous attack without their knowledge. Second,
LDoS attacks are highly concealed. The average volume
of LDoS attack traffic is usually minimal due to the short
burst duration. The resultant attack traffic closely resembles
the brief bursts generated by benign applications. Finally,
LDoS attacks are cost-effective. Unlike flooding attacks, LDoS
attacks transmit minimal data and can be carried out by a
single-source attacker [3]. LDoS attacks are harder to detect
than DoS attacks because they are more discreet and can evade
conventional defense mechanisms.
LDoS attacks target the hosts and critical services within
the control plane to degrade the overall Quality of Service
(QoS) in the SDN. Hosts in the SDN are vulnerable to LDoS
attacks. LDoS attacks disrupt the normal Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) operation by sending intermittent bursts of
high-speed data at a very low average rate. This keeps TCP
in slow starts or fast retransmission stages. The intermittent
bursts in regular network activity can efficiently conceal LDoS

1932-4537 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

attacks among background traffic. TCP-targeted LDoS attacks
can also disrupt the southbound TCP interface between the
control plane and the data plane, affecting the performance of
the data plane. Detecting LDoS attacks within overall network
traffic is challenging, particularly when the SDN controller
has access to comprehensive traffic data. Consequently, an
additional application is required to detect and mitigate LDoS
attacks. The management of the entire network may be
compromised when LDoS attacks target the SDN control
plane. LDoS attacks have the potential to cause more damage
than those in conventional networks if the control plane is
unable to promptly identify and modify the network state.
Current detection approaches for DoS attacks lack the ability
to differentiate LDoS attack traffic from regular traffic. The
identification and prevention of LDoS attacks continue to pose
challenges due to their resemblance to authorized user access
and flash event attacks.
Existing signature-based and behavior-based attack detection techniques rely on prior knowledge of attack patterns
and network activity and require regular upgrades to protect against evolving attack methods [4], [5]. However,
creating new signatures or updated profiles for these detectors requires significant time and resources, often requiring
network administrative skills. To address these challenges,
several advanced detection methods have been developed,
including supervised, unsupervised, and mixed anomaly detection approaches [6]. Unsupervised learning-based anomaly
detection methods assume a normal distribution of the data.
Any data point that is significantly different from the expected
pattern is considered an anomaly [7]. Supervised anomaly
detection involves training a classifier using a dataset classified
as either “anomaly” or “normal” [8]. However, this requires
thorough training of both “anomaly” and “normal” observations, making it difficult for systems to accurately detect and
recognize these patterns.
Deep learning methods like Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are utilized
to achieve favorable outcomes in anomaly detection tasks [9].
Nevertheless, these methods face difficulties in efficiently
working in network anomaly detection situations because
of the large number of normal samples and shortage of
anomalous samples. The data imbalance and lack of previous
information pose significant challenges in the detection process, especially for zero-day attacks. The rapid advancement
of 5G/6G networks and cloud services led to a significant
increase in cyber-attack data flow, making real-time identification and consistent detection increasingly difficult [10].
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are flexible
methods for generating high-quality data and classifying
information. They consist of a generator and a discriminator
to detect anomalies in time series data. GANs have become
prevalent due to their ability to handle imbalanced datasets
through adversarial learning principles. Motivated by this,
we propose a Low-rate Denial of service Attack Detection
and Mitigation (LDADM) framework to detect LDoS attacks.
The model trains over epochs, generates sequences with
predetermined length, step size, and batch size, and obtains
an anomaly score. An LDoS attack is detected if the score

is above a predefined threshold. After detecting an attack, it
filters the attack traffic based on mitigation measures. These
measures ensure temporary blocking and prevent unwarranted
disruption of valid traffic. The contributions of this paper are
as follows:
1) We propose a framework that utilizes GANs for identifying LDoS attacks in a real-time SDN environment.
2) We develop an efficient mitigation technique to prevent
detected LDoS attacks before they cause significant
damage. The temporary blockage of harmful IPs and the
control of their removal after a specific amount of time
permits legitimate communication.
3) We conducted comprehensive experiments to evaluate
the effectiveness of LDADM. It achieves high accuracy
in real-time attack detection and mitigation, outperforming existing techniques.
We organize the rest of this work as follows: Section II
offers an overview of SDN, LDoS attacks, and GAN, encompassing the core principles and background details. Section III
provides an overview of the existing research in the field.
Section IV introduces the proposed system and methodologies.
Section V contains comprehensive information regarding the
experimental configuration and the procedure employed to
create the dataset. It also presents the results of the experiment
and assesses the model’s performance using those outcomes
and Section VI functions as the conclusion of the entire work.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Software-Defined Networking
The architecture of SDN is illustrated in Figure 1. It
consists of three planes: the control plane, the data plane,
and the application plane. The control plane is responsible for
the management of data packet routing within the network.
The SDN controller functions as the network’s core decisionmaking authority for routing and establishing communication
with network devices such as switches and routers. The
forwarding devices that make up the data plane are responsible
for processing, forwarding, and aggregating network packets.
The application plane encompasses a variety of network
applications and services. The application plane aims to create
and implement network services that can adapt to changing
conditions, improving overall efficiency and adaptability.
When the switch gets a packet header that does not match
with the existing flow rules, it initiates packet_in and
packet_out events. The SDN controller transmits flow rules
to switches using the OpenFlow protocol through the southbound interface. Applications communicate with the SDN
controller via the northbound interface to request network
resources or provide services such as network administration,
security, and traffic monitoring.
B. LDoS Attacks
LDoS attacks target network protocols and routing queue
management systems by sending small amounts of traffic to a
TCP/IP network, disrupting its regular operation. LDoS attacks
are identifiable by the regular occurrence of frequent pulses;
hence, they are also called pulsing attacks [11]. These attacks

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

Fig. 1.

927

Software-defined networking architecture.

Fig. 3.

LDoS attacks targeting RTO mechanism.

C. TCP-Targeted LDoS Attacks

Fig. 2.

LDoS attack scenario.

interfere with harmless TCP flows by employing square wave
pulses, as shown in Figure 2. The size and duration of the
pulses determine the severity of the attack’s effect. Each pulse
measures the attack traffic over time.
Commonly used Internet systems are the primary target
of LDoS attacks. They aim to lower the rates at which
specific protocols or applications consume resources. LDoS
attackers intentionally direct valid traffic toward the target.
This prompts the target’s system to generate adverse responses,
thereby disrupting or deteriorating service quality. Currently,
LDoS attacks mostly focus on systems that include centralized
services and devices, such as cloud computing and big data
service platforms.
LDOS attacks generate traffic that displays intermittent
patterns and maintains a consistently low average rate. This
makes them a greater threat to SDN compared to traditional
networks. A rapid surge in attack traffic overwhelms the
victim’s switches, causing packet loss in regular TCP flows
and requiring repetitive retransmission cycles. Attackers often
leverage network measurement tools [12], [13] to analyze
bottleneck links, which are narrow bandwidth lines used for
both control and data traffic. The attacker intentionally sends
attack data traffic to overload the bottleneck buffer. This leads
to a significant increase in the usage rate of the connection
and causing severe disruption to network services. Identifying
LDoS attacks is crucial because they pose a significant danger
to both network operators and end users.

LDoS attacks specifically target two TCP characteristics: Retransmission TimeOut (RTO) and Additive Increase
Multiplicative Decrease (AIMD). The RTO mechanism is a
congestion control approach in TCP that functions by utilizing
a window established at the data sender. The congestion window regulates the amount of data that a network can transmit
before requiring an acknowledgment from the recipient. Every
time a TCP sender sends a message, the RTO mechanism starts
a timer. When the timer expires without an acknowledgment,
it indicates that the message may not have reached the receiver
due to packet loss or network issues, prompting the sender to
retransmit. This indicates that there is a high level of network
congestion, which requires the TCP protocol to switch to
the slow-start state. That is, if an acknowledgment does not
arrive within the specified delay period, it resets the congestion
window to 1, initiating a slow start phase for retransmission. In
real-world scenarios, the RTO is adjusted based on the RoundTrip Time (RTT). It often ranges from 10 to 100 milliseconds
in real networks. It is computed as shown in (1), where G
represents the time scale, SRTT represents the smoothed RTT,
and VRTT represents the smoothed RTT variation. Usually, the
RTT and SRTT values, including G and four times the VRTT,
are extremely low. Therefore, according to (1), the value of
RTO is often equivalent to RTOmin .
RTO = min(RTOmax ,
max(RTOmin , SRTT + max(G, 4 × VRTT))) (1)
LDoS attacks exploit the vulnerability of TCP congestion
management systems, causing TCP senders to repeatedly
switch between congestion and recovery states. While using
the RTO method, attackers send LDoS pulses during each
retransmission event. This stops retransmissions and keeps the
TCP congestion window (cwnd) value constant. The attacker
begins an attack pulse that lasts for a specific duration, as
shown in Figure 3. The attacker then waits for a retransmission

928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 5.

LDoS attack model.

decrease in the congestion window. The intensity of the attack
and network congestion determine this variation.
D. LDoS Attack Model

Fig. 4.

LDoS attacks targeting AIMD mechanism.

time out before initiating another pulse. The attacker exhibits
this behavior with the intention of causing the victim network
to exit the RTO state. This allows for a more efficient attack
while maintaining the unchanged attack cycle.
TCP uses the AIMD as a mechanism to control network
congestion. When the network is not experiencing congestion,
AIMD gradually increases the cwnd. When a packet loss
is detected, AIMD multiplicatively decreases the cwnd. The
balance between aggressive bandwidth usage and conservative
load avoidance guarantees equity among competing TCP
flows. Several TCP versions and other network protocols
extensively employ AIMD to ensure efficient and stable data
delivery throughout networks. Equations (2) and (3) describe
the principle of AIMD, where I represents the additive increase
of cwnd when ACK packets are received within an RTT. Wt is
the value of cwnd at time t, R represents RTT, and Wt+R
represents the value of cwnd after one RTT. D represents the
multiplicative decrease, and α, β are the parameter values
typically set to 1 and 0.5, respectively [14].

To assess the identification and countermeasures for LDoS
attacks, it is important to create an LDoS attack model and
establish its attack attributes. The LDoS attack model consists
of three essential parameters: attack cycle, attack pulse length,
and attack rate. Adjusting these parameters may change the
attack’s impact and limit the amount of traffic transmitted
during each cycle to stay below bandwidth capacity. The LDoS
attack model is depicted in Figure 5. T represents the attack
cycle, t represents the duration of an individual attack pulse,
R represents the attack rate of a single attack, B represents the
bottleneck bandwidth, and Rmean indicates the average attack
rate within one attack cycle.
To initiate an LDoS attack, it is essential to ensure that
the rate of data transmission (R) exceeds the capacity of the
bottleneck bandwidth, as depicted in (4). This will overload
the targeted connection. However, it is essential that the
total amount of attack data transferred during each attack
period, known as Attack Cost (AC), stays below the bandwidth
capacity, as indicated in (5).
R>B

R×t
<1
AC =
Bandwidth ×T

(4)
(5)

E. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
I:
D:

Wt+R ← Wt + α,
Wt+R ← β × Wt ,

α>0
0<β<1

(2)
(3)

While using the AIMD mechanism, attackers send periodic
bursts to continuously decrease cwnd, reducing it to half
its previous size. When attacks are silent, cwnd increases
by 1 per RTT and then suffers new bursts, as illustrated in
Figure 4. The recipient provides congestion feedback in the
form of duplicate ACKs. The sender then uses this information
to reduce the congestion window in accordance with the
congestion avoidance method.
Both the RTO and AIMD mechanisms control the congestion window of a TCP sender on real networks. Therefore,
the consequences of an attack vary between these two effects.
During the attack, there may be instances where it leads to a
timeout and RTO effect, while in other cases, it may produce a

A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is a learning
model that is capable of operating in unsupervised, supervised,
and reinforcement learning contexts. The model comprises a
generator (G) and a discriminator (D) that learn concurrently.
The generator produces samples sufficiently realistic to fool
the discriminator. The discriminator differentiates between real
and fake data. Figure 6 illustrates the architecture and training
process of a GAN. The model transforms raw data (z) into
synthetic data G(z), with the discriminator classifying the
data sources as genuine or fake based on the distribution of
the real data. The generator seeks to create synthetic data
that closely resembles real data (x), which is evaluated by
the discriminator. Iterative tuning improves performance, and
once D’s discriminative ability reaches a threshold, G can
deduce that it understands the genuine data distribution. Back
Propagation can adjust the parameters of both the generator

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

Fig. 6.

The structure of GANs.

and discriminator, improving their functions and generating
realistic data.
III. R ELATED W ORK
This section provides an overview of the literature on
detection approaches for DDoS and LDoS attacks in SDN,
along with GAN-based approaches to detect and mitigate
them.
A. DDoS Attack Detection Approaches
Wang et al. presented a defense system to detect and
mitigate DDoS attacks in SDN by employing hybrid deep
learning techniques and IP traceback [15]. The authors of [16]
presented a framework to enhance high-speed network intrusion detection and address DDoS attack challenges in SDN by
utilizing the Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK). Ling et al.
introduced a real-time DDoS detection technique based on
the hurst index [17]. In [18], a mechanism was introduced
to identify and mitigate DoS attacks in SDN by reducing the
rate of control packets and retransmission during attacks. A
DDoS detection framework based on deep neural networks
was presented in [19]. The authors of [20] investigated
advancements in DDoS attack detection and future directions
for improved security in SDN environment. A collaborative
source-side DDoS attack detection framework using Long
Short-Time Memory (LSTM) to address the limitations of
target-side detection techniques was presented in [21].
B. LDoS Attack Detection Approaches for SDN
An algorithm that utilizes source IP addresses to detect
real-time LDoS attacks by monitoring traffic fluctuations was
presented in [22]. The authors of [23] investigated a Gramian
angular summation field transformation-based LDoS detection
and mitigation framework for SDN. An adaptive Kohonen
network-based fine-grained LDoS detection model that leverages the Smith-Waterman algorithm and cluster analysis
was presented in [24]. An online monitoring and mitigation
architecture was developed for SDN that efficiently prevents
LDoS attacks without requiring any changes to switches or
protocols [25]. The study in [26] presented a framework that
uses histogram-based gradient boosting and peak detection to
detect and mitigate LDoS attacks in real time. In [27], a realtime framework was introduced to identify and mitigate LDoS
attacks in SDN. It uses machine learning to monitor traffic

929

performance and evaluate flow features. A mitigation system
for SDN that uses decision trees and dynamic sliding window
algorithms to protect against LDoS attacks was presented
in [28]. A security solution that effectively counters low-rate
TCP attacks by monitoring data transfer rates was developed
in [29].
An online attack detection and mitigation system for
SDN that uses traffic features and a Lightgbm classifier
was introduced in [14]. Liu et al. presented a real-time
anomaly protection framework to detect and reduce TCPtargeted LDoS attacks in SDN [30]. A two-phase detection
system was developed by combining lightweight detection
in the data plane with in-depth identification using Bayesian
voting in the control plane [31]. An LDoS attack detection
algorithm that integrates an optimization-based heuristic algorithm with a backpropagation neural network was presented
in [32]. Chen et al. introduced an online real-time LDoS
detection system that employs CNN and dynamic time
warping (DTW) algorithms [33]. Liu et al. developed a twostep self-adjusting support vector machine to identify LDoS
attacks [34]. Deng et al. introduced a system to detect real-time
LDoS attacks in SDN environments by leveraging the Extreme
Gradient Boosting technique [35]. An ensemble model to
identify LDDoS threats by utilizing CNN and a bidirectional
LSTM network was presented in [36].
Existing LDoS mitigation frameworks in [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27],
[28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36] employ a
multi-stage process to identify the victim and trace the attacker.
Then, they employ port-level or flow-level drop restrictions to
mitigate the attacks. However, these solutions have limitations
such as, high computational overhead, delayed mitigation, and
inability to adapt to new LDoS strategies. Further, aggregate
port/flow-based action could cause collateral damage to legitimate traffic. In contrast, the proposed mitigation strategy is a
lightweight, flow-aware, and adaptive methodology. It implements targeted mitigation at the flow level (src_ip → dst_ip)
immediately upon receiving an attack alert. This enables finegrained control without affecting legitimate traffic. Further, the
proposed strategy employs a time-restricted blocking method
that automatically unblocks flows after a specified duration.
This approach improves flexibility and prevents legitimate
sources from permanently being disrupted.
C. GAN-Based Attack Detection Approaches
The study in [37] investigated the impact of data imbalance on DDoS attack detection. It also demonstrated that
using synthetic GAN-generated data to balance the dataset
significantly improves classification accuracy. A GAN-based
approach with dual discriminators to detect adverse DDoS
traffic was presented in [38]. Mustapha et al. designed an
architecture for DDoS detection that uses Wasserstein GAN
(WGAN) to generate adversarial attacks [39]. The authors
of [40] introduced an unsupervised framework that utilizes
WGAN with Gradient Penalty (WGAN-GP) and an encoder
for DDoS detection and mitigation in SDN. The work
in [41] employed GANs to generate realistic IoT traffic data

930

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE I
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF G AN -BASED ATTACK D ETECTION
A PPROACHES W ITH THE P ROPOSED W ORK

few studies address mitigation, often treating it as a postprocessing task or depending on external systems such as
firewalls, IDS, etc., rather than incorporating it into the
detection pipeline. This separation limits quick responses to
LDoS attacks. In contrast, the proposed LDADM framework
is an SDN-native solution that integrates real-time detection
and mitigation. It employs a GAN-based model for LDoS
attack detection and incorporates dynamic flow rule management within a controller to implement rapid mitigation
actions.
IV. P ROPOSED S YSTEM AND M ETHODOLOGY

for DDoS attack detection in smart home environment. A
Conditional GAN (CGAN)-based DDoS detection technique
was developed for SDNs by utilizing conditional training and
flow table features [42]. Abdelaty et al. introduced an adversarial training method based on WGAN-GP [43]. Their method
improved system robustness and reduced undetected malicious
flows by generating fake benign samples that disrupt real
attacks.
Shieh et al. employed CycleGAN to generate realistic
malicious traffic [44]. They highlighted the threat posed by
adversarial DDoS attacks capable of bypassing ML/DL-based
detection. A privacy-preserving framework for DDoS detection
in multi-domain networks by employing Federated Learning
and GAN was presented in [45]. Saka et al. investigated
a Conditional Tabular GAN (CTGAN), Tabular Variational
Autoencoder (TVAE), and CopulaGAN for the synthesis of
tabular data to improve DDoS detection [46]. The work
in [47] combined Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with a GAN
discriminator to detect volumetric DDoS attacks in SDN. The
authors of [48] presented a GRU-enhanced GAN that uses flow
and entropy-based features for unsupervised DDoS detection
in SDN. Chauhan and Shah Heydari introduced a GAN-based
methodology in [49] for generating polymorphic adversarial
DDoS attacks that can bypass ML-based Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDSs).
The comparative analysis of existing GAN-based attack
detection approaches with the proposed LDADM approach
is presented in Table I. Although prior work in [37], [38],
[39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48],
[49] employed GANs, none of these works investigated
the GAN-based model for the detection and mitigation of
real-time LDOS attacks for SDN environment. Most of the
existing works focus on conventional DDoS attacks instead
of stealthy LDoS attacks. Various studies are implemented
in non-SDN environments that lack centralized control and
programmability for adaptive mitigation. Most existing studies employ offline detection techniques, hence limiting their
effectiveness in dynamic, real-time networks. Furthermore,

This section presents LDADM, a framework for the realtime detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks. It also provides
a detailed discussion of GAN-based algorithms used for the
efficient detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks.
Figure 7 illustrates the proposed LDADM framework for
detecting and mitigating LDoS attacks in an SDN environment. The framework consists of three layers: the data layer,
the SDN controller, and the application layer. The data layer
processes both legitimate user traffic and malicious attack
traffic from OpenFlow-enabled switches or users. It also
collects flow data and transmit it to the SDN controller for
analysis. The SDN Controller serves as the central intelligence,
consisting of two main modules: detection and mitigation. The
controller utilizes the southbound interface to get flow statistics
such as packet counts, byte counts, and flow durations, etc.,
from switches. These flow statistics are transmitted to the
detection module of the controller. This module performs
comprehensive traffic analysis to transform raw data into traffic
features. These features undergo extraction and selection for
the training of the GAN model. The trained GAN model
analyzes incoming real-time traffic to determine whether each
flow is normal or malicious, producing detection results.
Upon detection of an attack, control moves to the mitigation
module. It records the detected malicious flows, determines
the attacker’s IP address, identifies the victim, and develops
mitigation strategies. The mitigation strategy employs a timerestricted blocking mechanism that automatically unblocks
flows after a specified duration. It implements flow rules
through the northbound interface, which are then deployed to
the switches for enforcement. The application layer interfaces
with external systems using REST APIs. It provides detection and mitigation results while enabling dynamic network
monitoring and control.
A. Attack Detection Module
The attack detection module includes two algorithms: GANbased model training and real-time attack detection in SDN
environments.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the training of GAN-based model
to detect LDoS attacks in real-time environments. It takes
as input data comprising traffic sequences, sequence length
seq_len, step size, number of epochs and batch size. The
algorithm begins by preprocessing the input data and initializes
an empty list of sequences. It iteratively extracts data segments

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

Fig. 7.

931

LDADM framework.

Algorithm 1 GAN Model Training
Input: data, seq_len, step, epochs, batch_size
Output: Discriminator, Generator
1: Preprocess data
2: Initialize sequences ← []
3: for i ← 0 to len(data) − seq_len, step do
4:
temp ← data[i: i + seq_len]
5:
Append temp to sequences
6: end for
Construction of GAN:
7: Generator ← build_generator()
8: Discriminator ← build_discriminator()
9: Compile and evaluate GAN by combining Generator and
Discriminator
Training of GAN:
10: for epoch ← 1 to epochs do
11:
for each batch in sequences do
12:
Train Discriminator on real and fake sequences
13:
Train Generator
14:
Compute loss for both Discriminator and Generator
15:
Update Discriminator and Generator
16:
end for
17: end for
18: return Discriminator, Generator

of length seq_len using the specified step size from raw data
and adds them to the sequences list. This procedure transforms
the continuous data stream into fixed-length segments for
better analysis over time. The seq_len parameter defines the
number of time steps or observations in each input sequence.
This parameter also defines the volume of data that the model
concurrently evaluates for generating predictions or finding

abnormalities. The step parameter ensures that the sequences
overlap by one time step. This overlap allows the model
to identify deeper changes and patterns in the data. After
preparing the sequences, the algorithm constructs the GAN
model, which comprises a generator that creates synthetic
sequences and a discriminator that differentiates between real
and fake sequences. The GAN model undergoes a training
phase for a predefined number of epochs. For each batch
in the sequence, the model trains discriminator (D) and
generator (G). The batch size parameter denotes the number
of sequences that the model concurrently processes in each
iteration. The training begins with the generator producing
fake data using random noise sampled from latent space.
The discriminator is evaluated on the real data from the
sequences and fake data produced by the generator. Then,
loss functions are computed for discriminator and generator
networks. Finally, the generator and discriminator networks
are updated through backpropagation. The hyperparameters
utilized in the algorithm are presented in Table II.
Algorithm 2 defines a real-time LDoS attack detection
mechanism employing a discriminator to categorize traffic as
either legitimate or malicious depending on a predetermined
threshold. It requires a real-time flow for assessment, a
discriminator to classify the flow as either legitimate or an
attack, and a threshold.
The algorithm begins with the extraction of features from
the input data flow. The feature vector is then passed to
the discriminator, which computes a score to determine the
probability that the input flow is legitimate or an attack. If the
score exceeds a predetermined threshold, it is categorized as an
attack. If it is below or equal to the threshold, it is categorized
as legitimate traffic. The attack_flag is set to 1 upon
detection of an attack and 0 when the traffic is considered to be

932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE II
H YPERPARAMETERS

Algorithm 2 GAN-Based Attack Detection Algorithm
Input: flow, Discriminator, threshold
Output: attack_flag
1: feature_vector ← extract_features(flow)
2: score ← Discriminator(feature_vector)
3: if score > threshold then
4:
Print “Attack detected from source IP”
5:
attack_flag ← 1
6: else
7:
Print “Legitimate traffic detected from source IP”
8:
attack_flag ← 0
9: end if
10: return attack_flag

legitimate. The algorithm’s final result is the attack_flag,
indicating the identification of an LDoS attack.
B. Mitigation Module
Algorithm 3 describes the mitigation strategy to counter
LDoS attacks through the use of defensive measures against
malicious IP addresses. It takes as input a traffic flow, a
specified block duration, and the outcome of the detection
algorithm on the traffic flow, which is represented as an attack
flag. The algorithm initializes an empty list of malicious_ips
to store the IP addresses of sources identified as malicious.
If the src_ip of the traffic flow detected as an attack is not
present in the malicious_ips list, then it is appended to the
list and records the action as blocking the src_ip address.
The algorithm then creates a flow rule that aims to prevent
packets from the malicious IP. The match field of the flow
rule corresponds to packets with ipv4_src specified as src_ip
and eth_type specified as IPv4. The corresponding action for
these matched packets is to drop them. The add_flow_entry()
method incorporates the flow entry into the network switch.
This method requires parameters including the match field,
priority, action, and the datapath object. The algorithm generates a message confirming that the src_ip is blocked for the
designated block duration. If the src_ip is already included
in the malicious_ips list, then the algorithm alerts that the IP
is currently blocked. The algorithm continually updates the

Algorithm 3 Mitigation of LDos Attacks
Input: Traffic sequence flow, block_duration, detection
result attack_flag
Output: Defense Rule
1: Initialize malicious_ips ← []
2: Function: handle_mitigation()
3: if attack_flag == 1 then
4:
if src_ip not in malicious_ips then
5:
Log “Blocking IP: src_ip”
6:
Add src_ip to malicious_ips
7:
Construct flow rule to block packets from src_ip
8:
Match ← {ipv4_src =src_ip, eth_type =
IPv4}
9:
Action ← Drop
10:
add_flow_entry(Match, priority,
actions, datapath)
11:
Print “src_ip is blocked for block_duration seconds”
12:
Wait untill block_duration to release src_ip later
13:
else
14:
Print “src_ip is already blocked”
15:
end if
16: end if
17: Function: release_blocked_ips()
18: for each src_ip in malicious_ips do
19:
if block_duration has expired for src_ip then
20:
Remove src_ip from malicious_ips
21:
Print Released src_ip
22:
end if
23: end for
24: return Action

list of blocked IPs by releasing IPs from the malicious_ips
list after the expiration of their blocking period. That is, the
algorithm traverses all blocked IPs and verifies whether the
block duration for an IP is lapsed. It removes the src_ip
lapsed blocking period from the malicious_ips list and records
the release of the src_ip. Finally, the algorithm produces an
action that signifies the implementation of a defense rule to
mitigate identified malicious activities. This algorithm ensures
the temporary blocking of harmful IPs, thereby preserving the
network’s operational integrity and protecting it from potential
LDoS attacks.
V. R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
This section presents the experimental setup, traffic generation, evaluation metrics, evaluation of LDADM framework,
and performance comparison of the LDADM with existing
methods.
A. Experimental Setup
The LDADM is evaluated using Linux operating system
and SDN environment created by Mininet [50] and Ryu
controller as illustrated in Table III. We considered the Abilene
topology from the Internet Topology Zoo [51] as shown in
Figure 8. It consists of 25 links, 11 switches, and 11 hosts.
We have obtained the topology as a graphic file with. gml

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

TABLE III
S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT

933

samples. To measure the effectiveness of mitigation, we
utilized six metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, false
positive rate (FPR), and response time (RT).
1) Accuracy: This metric measures the degree to which
detection results correspond to true values. It is calculated as
follows:
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(6)

2) Precision (P): It computes the percentage of positives
that are accurately detected during LDoS attacks. It is
expressed as follows:
P=

TP
TP + FP

(7)

3) Recall: It is a measure of the proportion of true positives
correctly detected. It is calculated as follows:
Recall =

TP
TP + FN

(8)

4) F1-Score: This metric measures the balance between
precision and recall in a classification model. It is computed
by obtaining the harmonic mean of the precision and recall
values of the model. It is calculated as follows:
F1-score = 2 ×
Fig. 8.

The network topology.

extension and used Python code to convert it into Mininet
file with. mn extension. The topology uses OpenFlow v1.3
and OpenVSwitches that implement the OpenFlow protocol
(OpenVSwitch v2.5.5). The bandwidth between switches is
set to 1.92 Gbps, while the bandwidth between a switch and
a host is set to 10 Gbps. All switches are interconnected
by a solitary remote Ryu controller. The IP addresses of all
network devices are configured within the 10.0.0.1/11 network
segment, ensuring connectivity between hosts.
B. Traffic Generation
The background traffic is generated by the iperf3 tool and
LDoS attack traffic is generated through a Python script. The
traffic collection and recording module interacts in real time
with switches connected to the Ryu controller to obtain flow
table data. The module reads incoming messages and extracts
relevant information.
C. Evaluation Metrics
The LDoS attack detection and mitigation framework categorizes time periods as positive samples during attacks and
negative samples during normal network conditions. True
positives (TP) are the number of accurately detected positive
samples, whereas false positives (FP) are negative samples that
are incorrectly labeled as positive. False negatives (FN) are
positive samples that are incorrectly categorized as negative,
whereas true negatives (TN) are accurately detected negative

Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall

(9)

5) False Positive Rate (FPR): It estimates the percentage
of negative cases that are mistakenly identified as positive. It
is determined as follows:
FPR =

FP
TN + FP

(10)

6) Response Time (RT): This metric measures how quickly
a system detects and reacts to an attack. It is calculated as
follows:
RT = MitigationTime − AttackStartTime

(11)

D. Comparison Approaches
The performance of the LDADM is compared with three
state-of-the-art approaches: PeakSAX [25], HGB-FP [26], and
GASF-IPP [23]. We briefly describe these approaches below.
1) PeakSAX: This approach uses a traffic symbolization
technique to detect LDoS attacks and classifies attacks
based on peak attributes using a random forest classifier.
Then, mitigation is performed by blocking malicious
traffic using flow rules.
2) HGB-FP: This framework employs a histogram-based
gradient boosting for the detection of LDoS attacks. The
mitigation process involves applying the peak finding
technique and blocking malicious traffic by implementing flow rules.
3) GASF-IPP: This approach identifies LDoS attacks using
the Gramian angular summation field transformation
technique. It mitigates attacks by using IP-Port analysis
and implementing flow rules to block malicious traffic.

934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 9.

Traffic distribution of the generated dataset.

Fig. 10.

Generator loss vs discriminator loss.
Fig. 11.

Visual summary of classification metrics.

E. Performance Evaluation
The distribution of traffic within a dataset is crucial for
understanding network traffic balance, particularly for the
detection of anomalies and performance evaluation. Figure 9
illustrates the traffic distribution in our generated dataset.
It consists of 21,71,852 total values with 15,12,389 representing normal traffic and 6,59,463 indicating attack traffic.
A majority of normal traffic results in an imbalance. Class
imbalance significantly affects the accuracy and efficacy of
LDoS attack detection. The proposed LDADM framework
manages class imbalance by prioritizing the modeling of
normal traffic instead of requiring large volumes of attack
data. During training, the generator learns to mimic legitimate
traffic patterns and the discriminator is able to distinguish
between real and generated data. This process enhances the
discriminator’s ability to identify normal traffic, enabling it to
identify LDoS attacks even when these occurrences are rare or
new. Instead of generating fake attack samples or oversampling
the minority class, the proposed LDADM framework trains
its discriminator to thoroughly comprehend normal behavior.
Focusing on normal traffic patterns reduces the risk of bias
and overfitting, leading to more robust and reliable detection
of LDoS attacks.
Figure 10 represents the training behavior of the proposed
LDADM in terms of discriminator loss and generator loss.
These losses represent the specific functions optimized by
the discriminator and generator, respectively. These losses are
vital for maintaining a balance between the generator and
discriminator. They force the generator to produce realistic
data and test the discriminator’s ability to differentiate between
real and generated inputs. The discriminator loss measures

how well the discriminator can classify inputs as real or fake.
It is often improved using binary cross-entropy to help the
discriminator learn to differentiate between real and generated
data. As the discriminator gets better at distinguishing real and
fake inputs, it supplies more accurate feedback to help the
generator create more realistic synthetic data. The generator
loss measures how well the generator can create synthetic
data that misleads the discriminator, pushing the generator
to produce outputs that look like real data. The generator is
designed to produce samples that the discriminator erroneously
identifies as real, hence enhancing the reality of the generated
data over successive iterations. This adversarial relationship is
essential to GAN training.
The loss patterns exhibited three distinct phases of learning
during training. In the initial phase (epochs 0–50), the generator’s loss increased, while the discriminator’s loss decreased.
This signified the discriminator’s initial dominance, as the
generator at this stage produced inconsistent traffic patterns
that the discriminator could easily identify as fake. During
the intermediate phase (epochs 50–200), the generator and
discriminator maintained a balanced and competitive adversarial dynamic, exhibiting fluctuations in their loss patterns.
During the final phase of convergence (epochs 200-250), both
networks reached a state of relative equilibrium, with their
losses stabilizing and fluctuations becoming minimal. The
reduced volatility at this stage indicates the convergence of the
adversarial training process, suggesting that additional training
is likely to yield only minimal qualitative enhancements.
Figure 11(a)
represents
the
Receiver
Operating
Characteristic (ROC) curve alongside its associated Area

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

935

TABLE V
ATTACK PARAMETERS S ETTING

Fig. 12.

Anomaly distribution.

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

Under the Curve (AUC) value. The GAN model employs
a neutral threshold of 0.5 to avoid sensitivity bias. The
ROC curve demonstrates the network’s predictive confidence,
with elevated AUC values signifying effective class
differentiation.
The confusion matrix illustrated in Figure 11(b) indicates
that the model effectively identifies attack traffic. It shows a
high number of accurately classified attacks and normal traffic
samples. The model incorrectly categorizes a fraction of actual
attacks as normal traffic, indicating the missed detection of
some attacks. However, it incorrectly categorizes a fraction of
normal traffic as an attack.
The distribution of anomaly scores depicted in Figure 12
illustrates the variation of anomaly scores over time. The
neutral threshold is indicated in a horizontal black line, and an
anomaly score beyond the threshold, indicated in red, signifies
attack traffic. The lower scores indicated in green represent
normal traffic.
It provides a clear differentiation between normal and
anomalous classes, hence increasing the model’s confidence
and improving its accuracy.
1) Detection Performance: Table IV illustrates the detection performance of the LDADM in comparison to
state-of-the-art approaches, namely PeakSAX [25], HGBFP [26], and GASF-IPP [23]. The LDADM results in a 7.35%,
9.85%, and 10.96% higher accuracy compared to PeakSAX,
HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively. The framework also
achieves high precision by minimizing false positives and
effectively managing dataset imbalance. It achieves a 9.77%,
9.80%, and 9.84% higher precision compared to PeakSAX,
HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively. Moreover, the LDADM
yields 8.64%, 9.82%, and 11.01% higher recall rates than
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively, showing that
it is better at finding attack traffic. Further, the LDADM
achieves a 7.47%, 8.30%, and 9.86% higher F1-Score than
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP, respectively.

2) Mitigation Performance: To verify the effectiveness of
the LDADM under different real-world conditions, we carry
out eight sets of simulations under attacks with different
parameters, as illustrated in Table V. It consists of attack
cycle (T), burst duration (t), attack rate (R), attack time, and
attack cost. The possible t values vary from 0.1 to 0.5, while
the possible T values range from 1 to 5. Changes in attack
parameters enable the framework to handle a wide range of
attack patterns, reflecting real-world LDoS behavior. Table V
also illustrates the influence of various attack parameters on
the cost of an attack. As t or R increases, the cost increases,
demonstrating that reduced values of t and R yield lower costs.
Figure 13 illustrates the network traffic patterns recorded
during each simulation set executed with the LDADM
deployed on the controller. Network traffic is recorded using
Wireshark at a sampling period of 0.1 seconds. The blue
traffic pattern denotes TCP traffic, whereas the green traffic
pattern indicates UDP traffic. The red dotted line indicates
the beginning of the attack, the green dotted line denotes the
mitigation of the attack, and the gray region represents the
network under attack.
We conduct experiments on each set of attack scenarios
ten times and record the maximum and minimum response
times, as illustrated in Table VI. It consists of Set No.,
R, t, T values, min, max, and average response times for
eight attack scenarios. Note that the attack rate (R), burst
duration (t), and cycle time (T) influence response times.
The response time for all sets varies from 0.12 seconds to
21.39 seconds. Consequently, the LDADM can efficiently
identify and mitigate LDoS attacks with an average response
time of 8.58s.
Table VI shows that the order of response time depends
on the combination of attack rate (R), burst duration (t), and
cycle time (T). High attack rates, such as 60 to 100 Mbps,
impose considerable load on the system, resulting in longer
response times, whereas reduced attack rates, such as 20 to 30
Mbps, generate less traffic load, leading to faster responses.
Reduced cycle times, like T = 1, lead to more frequent bursts,
which gives the system less recovery time and a faster response
than longer cycles, like T = 2. This is the case if the attack
rates of any two attack scenarios are equal and also have the
same burst times. Moreover, even though the attack rate of 20
Mbps is lower than 25 Mbps, longer burst durations (t = 0.3 s)
make the system more vulnerable to attack traffic and result

936

Fig. 13.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Attack scenarios.

TABLE VI
M ITIGATION R ESPONSE T IMES

in slower responses compared to shorter bursts (t = 0.1 s).
These combinations demonstrate how quickly the LDADM
can detect and respond to attacks.
Figure 14 illustrates the 95% confidence interval for the
average response time of the LDADM compared to the
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP approaches. The x-axis
denotes the set number ranging from 1 to 8, whereas the
y-axis represents the response times in seconds. Each model
is denoted by a distinct color and the average response time is
indicated by a dot. We can observe that the LDADM results
in the lowest average response time compared to the state-ofthe-art approaches. The average response time of the LDADM
varies from 0.15 to 17.69 for different set numbers. The
LDADM achieves a reduction in the response time of 17.89%,
21.71%, and 27.71% compared to PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and
GASF-IPP, respectively. The confidence intervals for the
LDADM are narrower, indicating improved stability and consistency in performance. This makes the framework quicker
and more reliable for the evaluated scenarios, outperforming
PeakSAX, HGB-FP, and GASF-IPP in response time and
stability.
The state-of-the-art approaches, such as GASF-IPP and
PeakSAX, utilized temporal compression methods and symbolic approximation approaches to handle class imbalance.

Fig. 14.

Response time comparison.

The proposed LDADM framework employs a GAN to handle class imbalance. The GAN improves the discriminator’s
learning ability by producing synthetic minority-class attack
samples. This preserves the statistical characteristics of actual
traffic. Hence, facilitating the detection of complex LDoS
patterns frequently ignored by the state-of-the-art approaches.
Moreover, HGB-FP is limited by the absence of a generative
process and dependence on manually engineered features.
These constraints limit its adaptability in dynamic or imbalanced traffic conditions, limiting its effectiveness in addressing
evolving network scenarios. The proposed LDADM framework is further differentiated by its seamless integration with
the SDN control plane. This facilitates real-time flow-level feature extraction and rapid mitigation through dynamic flow rule
updates, which is absent in GASF-IPP and PeakSAX. This significantly decreases detection latency and enhances response to
evolving traffic conditions. We additionally integrate detailed
statistical features, including entropy, inter-arrival time variance, and packet burst characteristics. This facilitates enhanced
LDoS detection compared to the aggregated or symbolic
information employed in state-of-the-art approaches. These
architectural and algorithmic advancements together results

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

in the continuously improved performance evaluation metrics
and faster mitigation response for the proposed LDADM
framework.
3) Resource Consumption: Memory consumption refers to
the amount of memory utilized by a program during its
execution. The memory utilization of the proposed LDADM
compared to state-of-the-art PeakSAX, HGB-FP and GASFIPP approaches is illustrated in Figure15(a). The proposed
LDADM framework exhibits marginally higher memory utilization when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. Two
deep neural networks, the generator and the discriminator,
which are trained simultaneously, increase storage requirements of the proposed LDADM framework. However, this
increase is marginal and well within acceptable operational
limits. Specifically, the proposed LDADM framework exhibits
average memory usage of 8.8%, which is only 1-2% higher
than memory utilization of the state-of-the-art approaches.
GASF-IPP exhibits moderate memory utilization, with average
memory consumption of 7.5%. HGB-FP demonstrates slightly
lower consumption, with an average memory utilization of
6.8%. Finally, PeakSAX exhibits minimal resource utilization,
with average memory consumption of 6.5%. The additional
memory required by the proposed LDADM framework is
feasible and can be managed by SDN controllers operating
within standard resource constraints. The minor increase in
memory utilization does not affect the controller’s ability
to manage network events or regulate flows. This indicates
that enhanced detection capabilities can be achieved without
compromising the overall stability of the system.
The CPU consumption of a certain process measures
the extent to which the processor is utilized by that process. Figure 15(b) illustrates the CPU utilization of the
proposed LDADM framework compared to the state-of-the-art
PeakSAX, HGB-FP and GASF-IPP approaches. The proposed
LDADM framework exhibits marginally higher CPU utilization when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. The
synthetic samples generated in each training iteration of the
proposed framework add extra CPU computation. The discriminator and generator are updated alternately also increases
CPU workload. However, these increases are marginal and
well within acceptable operational limits. Specifically, the
proposed LDADM framework exhibits an average CPU usage
of 3.1%, which is only 1-2% higher than CPU utilization of
the state-of-the-art approaches. GASF-IPP exhibits moderate
CPU utilization, with average consumption of 2.7%. HGB-FP
demonstrates slightly lower consumption, with an average
CPU utilization of 2.4%. Finally, PeakSAX exhibits minimal
utilization, with an average CPU consumption of 1%, respectively. The CPU utilization of the proposed framework remains
below acceptable operational limits for the majority of SDN
controller implementations, despite occasional surges during
GAN activity. This additional overhead does not slow down
performance or create bottlenecks in the data layer. The results
indicate that the enhanced detection capabilities of the GAN
can be achieved with minimal additional utilization of control
plane resources. The small trade-off in computational overhead
is justified by the significant performance gains achieved. This
makes the proposed method a practical and efficient choice

Fig. 15.

937

Comparative analysis of computational resource utilization.

for real-world deployment where detection performance is
critical.
The proposed LDADM framework for detecting and
mitigating LDoS attacks is specifically designed for SDN environments. Its effectiveness relies heavily on the architectural
principles of SDN. The absence of centralized control in nonSDN environment leads to fragmented and device-level data,
which significantly reduces detection accuracy and increases
response latency. The lack of programmable APIs in non-SDN
devices prevents retrieving fine-grained flow-level statistics or
deploying mitigation rules quickly. It must rely on indirect
methods like polling or manual configuration, which is slower
and inconsistent. The packet-based or interface-based monitoring in non-SDN environment requires extra hardware/software
to reconstruct flows. This significantly increases processing
overhead and delay of the LDoS attack detection. Moreover,
in non-SDN networks, relying on offline methods limits the
real-time responsiveness necessary to counter stealthy LDoS
attacks. Each network device operates on its own, which
makes it difficult to analyze data thoroughly and respond
quickly, both of which are important for the effectiveness
of the proposed framework. Hence, limitations of traditional
non-SDN environments significantly limit the practicality and
effectiveness of implementing the proposed approach.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This study proposed a real-time GAN-based framework for
the detection and mitigation of LDoS attacks. We utilized a
GAN model to identify the LDoS attacks based on a neutral
threshold. The LDADM also identifies the attack flows by
examining sudden spikes from the source. The mitigation
module in the LDADM protects SDN by continuously monitoring and identifying malicious traffic from attackers’ IP
addresses and enforcing mitigation flow rules on switches.
Consequently, the mitigation module adds the attackers’ IP
addresses to the blocklist and halts the attack traffic for a
specific duration through the controller, and executes flow regulations. Simulation results indicate that the LDADM achieves
higher performance measures, enabling effective detection of
LDoS attacks and quick mitigation response in an average of
8.58 seconds.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Li et al., “A comprehensive survey on DDoS defense systems:
New trends and challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 233, Sep. 2023,
Art. no. 109895.

938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

[2] M. Guirguis, A. Bestavros, and I. Matta, “Exploiting the transients of
adaptation for RoQ attacks on Internet resources,” in Proc. 12th IEEE
Int. Conf. Netw. Protoc., 2004, pp. 184–195.
[3] M. U. Rahman, Z. U. Rahman, M. Fayaz, S. Abbas, and R. K. ShahSani,
“Performance analysis of TCP/AQM under low-rate denial-of-service
attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Invent. Comput. Technol. (ICICT), vol. 3,
2016, pp. 1–5.
[4] P. Lin, K. Ye, and C.-Z. Xu, “Dynamic network anomaly detection
system by using deep learning techniques,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud
Comput., 2019, pp. 161–176.
[5] J. Dromard and P. Owezarski, Study and Evaluation of Unsupervised
Algorithms Used in Network Anomaly Detection, K. Arai, R. Bhatia, and
S. Kapoor, Eds., San Francisco, CA, USA: Springer Int. Publ., 2020,
pp. 397–416.
[6] A. Smiti, “A critical overview of outlier detection methods,” Comput.
Sci. Rev., vol. 38, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 100306.
[7] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276,
Apr. 2019.
[8] A. Boukerche, L. Zheng, and O. Alfandi, “Outlier detection: Methods,
models, and classification,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, pp. 1–37,
Jun. 2020.
[9] X. Xia et al., “Gan-based anomaly detection: A review,” Neurocomput.,
vol. 493, pp. 497–535, Jul. 2022.
[10] S. Alnawayseh, W. Al-Sit, and T. Ghazal, “Smart congestion control in
5G/6G networks using hybrid deep learning techniques,” Complexity,
vol. 2022, pp. 1–10, Oct. 2022.
[11] X. Luo and R. Chang, “On a new class of pulsing denial-of-service
attacks and the defense,” in Proc. NDSS Symp., 2005, pp. 1–19.
[12] J. Cao et al., “The crosspath attack: Disrupting the SDN control channel
via shared links,” in Proc. 28th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019, pp. 19–36.
[13] H. Liu, “A new form of DoS attack in a cloud and its avoidance
mechanism,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur. Workshop,
2010, pp. 65–76.
[14] D. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Yan, D. Zhang, and H. Zhao, “ADMS: An
online attack detection and mitigation system for LDoS attacks via
SDN,” Comput. Commun., vol. 181, pp. 454–471, Jan. 2022.
[15] J. Wang and L. Wang, “SDN-defend: A lightweight online attack
detection and mitigation system for DDoS attacks in SDN,” Sensors,
vol. 22, p. 8287, Oct. 2022.
[16] J. E. Varghese and B. Muniyal, “An efficient IDS framework for DDoS
attacks in SDN environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 69680–69699,
2021.
[17] Y. Ling et al., “Real-time detection of DDoS attacks based on hurst
index,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. AI (INSAI), 2022, pp. 42–45.
[18] L. F. Eliyan and R. D. Pietro, “DeMi: A solution to detect and mitigate
DoS attacks in SDN,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 82477–82495, 2023.
[19] V. Hnamte, A. A. Najar, H. Nhung-Nguyen, J. Hussain, and
M. N. Sugali, “DDoS attack detection and mitigation using deep neural
network in SDN environment,” Comput. Secur., vol. 138, Mar. 2024,
Art. no. 103661. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167404823005710
[20] H. Wang and Y. Li, “Overview of DDoS attack detection in softwaredefined networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 38351–38381, 2024.
[21] S. Yeom, C. Choi, and K. Kim, “LSTM-based collaborative source-side
DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 44033–44045, 2022.
[22] D. Tang, C. Gao, X. Li, W. Liang, S. Xiao, and Q. Yang, “A detection
and mitigation scheme of LDoS attacks via SDN based on the FSS-RSR
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1952–1963,
Jul./Aug. 2023.
[23] D. Tang, S. Wang, B. Liu, W. Jin, and J. Zhang, “GASF-IPP: Detection
and mitigation of LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3373–3384, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[24] D. Tang, X. Wang, X. Li, P. Vijayakumar, and N. Kumar, “AKNFGD: Adaptive kohonen network based fine-grained detection of LDoS
attacks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 273–287, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[25] D. Tang, Z. Zheng, X. Wang, S. Xiao, and Q. Yang, “PeakSAX: Realtime monitoring and mitigation system for LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3686–3698, Sep. 2023.
[26] D. Tang, S. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Real-time detection
and mitigation of LDoS attacks in the SDN using the HGB-FP algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3471–3484,
Nov./Dec. 2022.

[27] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance
and features: Mitigating the low-rate TCP-targeted DoS attack via
SDN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444,
Jan. 2022.
[28] Q. Wang, Y. Tian, L. Huang, J. Chen, C. Zheng, and Y. Lu, “SDN-based
LDoS mitigation system,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Comput.
Inf. Technol. (AICIT), 2023.
[29] R. Xie, M. Xu, J. Cao, and Q. Li, “SoftGuard: Defend against the lowrate TCP attack in SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
2019, pp. 1–6.
[30] B. Liu, D. Tang, J. Chen, W. Liang, Y. Liu, and Q. Yang, “ERT-EDR:
Online defense framework for TCP-targeted LDoS attacks in SDN,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 254, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 124356.
[31] M. Yue, Q. Yan, Z. Lu, and Z. Wu, “CCS: A cross-plane collaboration
strategy to defend against LDoS attacks in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3522–3536, Jun. 2024.
[32] X. Li, N. Luo, D. Tang, Z. Zheng, Z. Qin, and X. Gao, “BA-BNN:
Detect LDoS attacks in SDN based on bat algorithm and BP neural
network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big
Data Cloud Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Soc. Comput. Netw.
(ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 2021, pp. 300–307.
[33] J. Chen, Y. Tian, L. Huang, J. Jiao, Q. Wang, and C. Tang, “Detection
of LDoS system based on periodic comparison and CNN,” in Proc. 2nd
Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Comput. Inf. Technol. (AICIT), 2023, pp. 1–4.
[34] B. Liu, D. Tang, Y. Yan, Z. Zheng, S. Zhang, and J. Zhou, “TSSVM: Detect LDoS attack in SDN based on two-step self-adjusting
SVM,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput.
Commun. (TrustCom), 2021, pp. 678–685.
[35] J. Deng, L. Cheng, H. Yuan, K. Zheng, X. Li, and Q. Li, “An online
detection system for LDoS attack based on XGBoost,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl., Big Data
Cloud Comput., Sustain. Comput. Commun., Soc. Comput. Netw.
(ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 2023, pp. 1083–1088.
[36] Z. Liu, J. Yu, B. Yan, and G. Wang, “A deep 1-D CNN and bidirectional
LSTM ensemble model with arbitration mechanism for LDDoS attack
detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 6,
pp. 1396–1410, Dec. 2022.
[37] C.-S. Shieh et al., “Detection of adversarial DDoS attacks using
generative adversarial networks with dual discriminators,” Symmetry,
vol. 14, p. 66, Jan. 2022.
[38] V. G. Da Silva Ruffo, L. F. Carvalho, J. Lloret, and M. L. Proenca,
“Unsupervised DDoS detection using entropy features and f-AnoGAN
in software-defined networks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Defined
Syst. (SDS), 2024, pp. 35–41.
[39] A. Mustapha et al., “Detecting DDoS attacks using adversarial neural
network,” Comput. Secur., vol. 127, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103117.
[40] R. I. Nekvi, S. Saha, Y. A. Mtawa, and A. Haque, “Examining generative
adversarial network for smart home DDoS traffic generation,” in Proc.
Int. Symp. Netw., Comput. Commun. (ISNCC), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[41] Liu, Luo, Jiang, Wang, Li, and Jia, “A CGAN-based DDoS attack
detection method in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile
Comput. (IWCMC), 2021, pp. 1030–1034.
[42] Liu, Luo, Jiang, Wang, Li, and Jia, “A CGAN-based DDoS
attack detection method in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Wireless
Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC), 2021, pp. 1030–1034,
doi: 10.1109/IWCMC51323.2021.9498840.
[43] M. Abdelaty, S. Scott-Hayward, R. Doriguzzi Corin, and D. Siracusa,
“GADoT: Gan-based adversarial training for robust DDoS attack
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS), 2022,
pp. 119–127.
[44] C.-S. Shieh, T.-T. Nguyen, W.-W. Lin, M.-F. Horng, T.-V. Nguyen,
and D. Miu, “Generating adversarial DDoS attacks with cyclegan
architecture,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Technol. (ICCTech), 2022,
pp. 64–69.
[45] L. H. De Melo, G. D. C. Bertoli, M. Nogueira, A. L. Dos Santos,
and L. A. Pereira, “Anomaly-flow: A multi-domain federated generative
adversarial network for distributed denial-of-service detection,” IEEE
Netw., early access, May 5, 2025, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2025.3567251.
[46] S. Saka, A. Al-Ataby, and V. Selis, “Generating synthetic tabular data
for DDoS detection using generative models,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd
Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), 2023,
pp. 1436–1442.
[47] M. Komarchesqui, D. M. B. Lent, V. G. Da Silva Ruffo, L. F. Carvalho,
J. Lloret, and M. L. Proenca, “Explainable AI feature selection
in generative adversarial networks system aiming to detect DDoS
attacks,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Softw. Def. Syst. (SDS), 2024,
pp. 27–34.

ANIL KUMAR et al.: GANs-BASED LDoS ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION IN SDNs

939

[48] D. Lent, V. Ruffo, L. Carvalho, J. Lloret, J. Rodrigues, and M. Proença,
“An unsupervised generative adversarial network system to detect DDoS
attacks in SDN,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 70690–70706, 2024.
[49] R. Chauhan and S. Shah Heydari, “Polymorphic adversarial DDoS
attack on IDS using GAN,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Netw., Comput.
Communications (ISNCC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[50] “Mininet.” 2022. [Online]. Available: http://mininet.org/
[51] S. Knight, H. Nguyen, N. Falkner, R. Bowden, and M. Roughan, “The
Internet topology zoo,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 9,
pp. 1765–1775, Oct. 2011.

Balaprakasa Rao Killi (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and
engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati. He is currently an Assistant Professor
with the National Institute of Technology at
Warangal, Warangal, India. His research interests
include network function virtualization, softwaredefined networks, AI enabled networks, and network
optimization.

Manjuluri Anil Kumar received the B.Tech. and
M.Tech. degrees in computer science and engineering from Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University,
Kakinada, India. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, National Institute of Technology
at Warangal, Warangal, India. His research interests
include software-defined networks and AI enabled
networks.

Eiji Oki (Fellow, IEEE) is a Professor with Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. He was with Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation Laboratories,
Tokyo, from 1993 to 2008, and the University of
Electro-Communications, Tokyo, from 2008 to 2017.
From 2000 to 2001, he was a Visiting Scholar
with Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
His research interests include routing, switching,
protocols, optimization, and traffic engineering in
communication and information networks.