IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

1831

Guest Editorial
Enhancing Edge-Based Consumer
Electronics Devices and IoT Ecosystem
With Post-Quantum Cryptosystem:
Security Challenges and Solutions
I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE conventional Internet of Things (IoT) architectures
typically transmit a substantial amount of data to centralized cloud systems for processing that could strain bandwidth
and introduce latency problems. Edge/fog computing model
may shift an extensive portion of data processing to edge
nodes at the network periphery. This local processing approach
mitigates reliance on central cloud datacenters by forwarding
only essential data from consumer IoT or edge computing (EC)
devices to these datacenters. EC devices store and process
sensitive data in a distributed manner that could expose it to a
range of various threats. We can witness numerous edge-based
intelligent security solutions designed for classical comparchitectures. Recent progress in the quantum computing paradigm
severely imperils the widely adopted classic public-key cryptosystems as well as the enciphered data employing those
algorithms.
Quantum computers can be used to efficiently solve
mathematical problems that are considered computationally
intractable for classical systems, intractable on the classical computing paradigm—thereby compromising widely
adopted public-key cryptographic systems. The integration
of post-quantum cryptography (PQC) into EC-assisted consumer IoT (EACI) environments presents a promising path for
enhancing the security of consumer data by ensuring resilience
against the quantum-aided adversaries. Most of the consumer
IoT devices operate over extended lifespans that could last for
decades—the need for long-term data safety becomes more
challenging in the face of future quantum threats due to the
quantum revolution.
To address these emerging challenges, this special issue
explores quality research papers on PQC algorithms, protocols,
theories, and hardware to curb emerging security threats for
edge/fog-enabled EACI frameworks following the forthcoming
quantum computing developments.
II. A RTICLES I NCLUDED IN THIS S PECIAL S ECTION
This Special Section of IEEE T RANSACTION ON C ON SUMER E LECTRONICS comprises various aspects of enhancing the security of edge-based consumer electronics devices
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3628198

and the IoT ecosystem engaging post-quantum cryptography
algorithms and protocols. With the tremendous advancements
in quantum computing, this Special Section is timely, as it
has drawn a large number of submissions. Out of these submissions, 12 high-quality research papers have been accepted,
which explore the security aspects of the integration of
PQC solutions with existing cloud, edge, and fog computing
hardware technologies.
In [A1], Sharma and Rani strengthen the resistance of
IoT to classical and quantum-based cyber attacks by integrating deep learning (DL) with PQC algorithms. For the
provision of real-time anomaly detection and response expediency, it suggests a hybrid lightweight security framework
with the combination of optimized PQC algorithms and a
DL-assisted intrusion detection system (IDS) for deployment
in a resource-constrained edge-based IoT ecosystem. The
proposed methodology ensures secure data exchanges linked
to quantum threats against IoT systems with the help of
continuous learning through IDS models for adapting to novel
attack vectors.
In [A2], Badar et al. suggested a novel secure communication paradigm for EC-enabled consumer devices and IoT-based
smart grid ecosystem by integrating PQC for ensuring resilient
data integrity and access control against the classical as well
as quantum-assisted threats. The suggested framework uses a
lightweight consortium blockchain with the use of the hyperledger fabric framework for maintaining tamper-proof records
of authentication logs and energy-based transactions. For this
purpose, regional edge gateways (REGs) are introduced to
execute local crypto-operations and minimize computational
requirements on resource-deficient IoT nodes. In addition,
an AI-driven real-time IDS promotes the resilience of the
suggested framework.
In [A3], Huang and Sharma suggest a lightweight group
signcryption authentication scheme by using lattice cryptography to meet the increasing security requirements of resource
resource-constrained edge-based IoT ecosystems. The scheme
improves the key generation efficiency with the use of an
optimized trapdoor diagonal matrix, supporting simultaneous
signing as well as encryption through signcryption in a single
logical step, and the leftover hash-based lemma. The proposed
scheme introduces a low-interaction access control technique
for group-based access authentication.

1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

In [A4], Ahmed and Anisi suggested a post-quantum secure
federated learning framework for cross-domain vehicle-to-grid
(V2G) authentication, since the reliance of existing crossdomain V2G access control mechanisms on centralized
authorities may lead to a single point of failure and computational bottlenecks. This paper presents a lightweight
quantum-resistant authentication protocol (LQAP) with the
use of a hybrid extended Merkle signature scheme (XMSS)
and a lightweight Merkle signature (LMS) system. A decentralized hierarchical federated learning (HFL) architecture at
the edge layer supports distributed anomaly detection and
secure hardware-assisted entity identification using physically
unclonable functions (PUFs), without reliance on centralized
data aggregation.
In [A5], Bagchi et al. suggested a ring-LWE-based multiauthority CP-ABE (MA-CP-ABE) protocol for addressing
privacy and single-point failure problems in blockchain-based
edge-IoT aided healthcare systems. The security of the protocol is enhanced against quantum threats with threshold
secret-sharing by Shamir and the Lagrange interpolation
formula. The protocol was implemented for CE-based IoTenabled smart healthcare applications employing blockchain
technology as a secure storage.
In [A6], Aneesh Kumar et al. contribute a hybrid architecture with the combination of quantum key distribution (QKD),
chaos-based encryption, and PQC for securing multimedia
data in IoT-oriented consumer electronic networks. The intent
was to address the challenges posed by quantum technology
to classical image encryption algorithms. This integrates a
2-D-logistic sine coupling map (2D-LSCM) with the keys
generated from QKD and the NTRU algorithm. In this manner,
the scheme largely enhances image processing speeds, the
performance of the chaotic map, confidentiality, and sensitivity
values.
In [A7], Farouk et al. suggest a quantum blockchain
framework for scalable and secure integration with 6G networks. The scheme employs temporally entangled GHZ
states, promoting inherent quantum encoding of block linkage and integrity, and a four-qubit blockchain data structure
implemented with the use of IBM Q quantum processors.
The system largely ensures quantum-resilient block integrity
and tamper resistance against quantum threats, supporting useful 6G consumer applications like telemedicine, IoT
authentication, and decentralized finance.
In [A8], Seno et al. suggest a novel blind signature
scheme (CDBS) for securing consumer electronic IoT (CIoT)
applications against quantum attacks. The motivation was
to overcome the challenges of traditional blink signature
schemes. The proposed CDBS is based on NIST-standardized
CRYSTALS-Dilithium and incorporates blinding as well as
unblinding steps—supporting enhanced privacy for applications related to anonymous payments and privacy-focused
e-ticketing.
In [A9], Mahmood et al. proposed APPLETA, an efficient trust management framework for resource-constrained
IoT devices. It calculates trust values based on application
transactions and authentication behaviors without additional
overhead. Moreover, APPLETA effectively detects and isolates

malicious nodes, exhibiting strong resistance to good and
bad-mouthing threats in simulations.
In [A10], Ullah et al. introduced Q-P2FL, a quantumbased privacy-preserving federated learning technique for the
detection of adversarial attacks on consumer edge devices. The
scheme combines quantum intelligence, additive homomorphic
encryption, and vision transformer (ViT)-based feature extraction to ensure data privacy and model security. This approach
largely suggests a convincing solution for safeguarding consumer edge devices from adversarial threats and improving
their privacy-preserving capabilities.
In [A11], Cao et al. design a physical layer security fog
computing IoT (PSFC-IoT) system, which ensures physical
layer security (PLS) against multiple eavesdroppers in a fog
computing IoT system. A joint resource allocation method
based on the post-quantum beetle optimization algorithm
(QBOA) is employed for optimal resource allocation. Simulations confirm the enhanced secrecy rates under varying
conditions while meeting optimal latency requirements for
consumer electronics such as wearables, linked devices, and
smart home devices.
To overcome the Kyber protocol’s requirement of prior
authentication, in [A12], Shahidinejad et al. present a
NIST-compliant quantum-resistant password-authenticated key
exchange (PAKE) for mobile devices. In this way, the scheme
manages to counter quantum threats in the conventional key
exchange framework. Leveraging CRYSTALS-Kyber encryption, it supports anonymity, mutual authentication, and perfect
forward secrecy. The hardware-based implementation and formal analysis validate the scheme’s security and efficiency.
In comparison with Kyber’s protocol, it manages to cut
communication and computation overheads.
We extend our sincere appreciations to the authors for their
valued contributions, the reviewers for their intuitive feedback,
and Prof. K. F. Tsang, Editor-in-Chief of IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS , for his continuous
support throughout the editing process.
A ZEEM I RSHAD , Lead Guest Editor
Punjab Higher Education Department
Faculty of Computer Science
GGC Asghar Mall Rawalpindi
Rawalpindi 46000, Pakistan
e-mail: azeemirshad@gpgcam.edu.pk
M UHAMMAD U SMAN , Guest Editor
Department of Computer Science
Edge Hill University
L39 4QP Ormskirk, U.K.
e-mail: usmanm@edgehill.ac.uk
A LAVALAPATI G OUTHAM R EDDY, Guest Editor
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Springfield
Springfield, IL 62703 USA
e-mail: galav@uis.edu

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

S HEHZAD A SHRAF C HAUDHRY, Guest Editor
Department of Computer Science and
Information Technology
College of Engineering
Abu Dhabi University
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Department of Software Engineering, Faculty
of Engineering and Architecture
Nisantasi University
34398 Istanbul, Türkiye
e-mail: shehzad.ashraf@adu.ac.ae
K HALID M AHMOOD , Guest Editor
Graduate School of Intelligent Data Science
National Yunlin University of Science and
Technology
Douliu 64002, Taiwan
e-mail: khalid@yuntech.edu.tw

A PPENDIX : R ELATED A RTICLES
[A1] A. Sharma and S. Rani, “Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) for
IoT-consumer electronics devices integrated with deep learning,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4925–4933,
May 2025.
[A2] H. M. S. Badar, S. Ahmed, N. I. Kajla, G. Fan, and C. Zhang,
“Q-BLAISE: Quantum-resilient blockchain and AI-enhanced security
protocol for smart grid IoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71,
no. 2, pp. 4959–4971, May 2025.
[A3] R. Huang and A. Sharma, “Post-quantum verifiable decryption
scheme for Internet of Thing-based consumer electronic edge device,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4903–4913,
May 2025.

1833

[A4] S. Ahmed and M. H. Anisi, “A post-quantum secure federated learning framework for cross-domain V2G authentication,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 16, 2025, doi:
10.1109/TCE.2025.3580338.
[A5] P. Bagchi, A. Bisht, A. K. Das, N. Saxena, and M. S. Hossain, “Designing quantum-safe lattice-based multi-authority CP-ABE scheme
for blockchain-enabled IoT-based consumer healthcare electronics,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4983–4994,
May 2025.
[A6] K. B. A. Kumar, L. S. Mohith, K. Jain, P. Krishnan, N. Venkatachalam, and R. Buyya, “Post-quantum cryptography-based multimedia
encryption communication scheme in IoT consumer electronics,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4995–5006,
May 2025.
[A7] A. Farouk, B. K. Behera, and E. A. Ahmed, “Design and
implement a quantum blockchain framework to secure 6G communication for consumer applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., early access, Jun. 17, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2025.
3580583.
[A8] M. E. Seno et al., “Post quantum-resistant blind signature
scheme for consumer Internet of Things security,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4949–4958,
May 2025.
[A9] S. Mahmood, M. Gohar, S.-J. Koh, M. U. Tariq, and A. Ghani,
“Application level trust authority (APPLETA) for resource-constrained
edge devices in IoT and 6G,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71,
no. 2, pp. 4934–4948, May 2025.
[A10] F. Ullah, N. Mohammad, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, and Y. Zhao,
“Q-P2FL: Quantum-enhanced federated edge intelligence for privacypreserving adversarial attack detection on consumer edge devices,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4914–4924,
May 2025.
[A11] Z. Cao, B. Geng, and D. Yu, “Consumer technology in focus:
Post-quantum security for fog computing IoT systems against
eavesdropping,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2,
pp. 4972–4982, May 2025.
[A12] A. Shahidinejad, J. Abawajy, and S. Huda, “Quantum-proof anonymous key exchange with perfect forward secrecy for mobile devices,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 24, 2025, doi:
10.1109/TCE.2025.3582742.

Azeem Irshad received the master’s degree from Arid Agriculture University, Rawalpindi,
Pakistan, and the Ph.D. degree from International Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
He has co-edited a book IoT and Smart Devices for Sustainable Environment (Springer). He has
authored more than 130 international journal and conference publications, including 80 SCI-E
journal publications. His research work has been cited over 2766 times with an H-index of
30 and an i10-index of 66. He is recognized by Stanford University as one of the top 2% mostcited scientists worldwide in 2025. His research interests include strengthening authenticated
key agreements in cloud-IoT, smart grids, pervasive edge computing, CPS, 5G networks, smart
logistics, WSN, post-quantum cryptography, and ZKPs in blockchain. He received the Top
Peer-Reviewer Award from Publons in 2018 with 126 verified reviews. He is in the technical
editorial committee (Computer Communications Elsevier). He has served as a reviewer for
more than 55 reputed journals, including IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, IEEE Communications
Magazine, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE Consumer Electronics
Magazine, IEEE S ENSORS J OURNAL, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, IEEE IAS, Computer Networks,
Information Sciences, CAEE, Cluster Computing, AIHC, JNCA, and FGCS. He served as a Guest Editor for IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS , SLAS Technology (Elsevier), IET ITS, and De Gruyter and CMC (Techscience)-based
special issues. He is serving as an Academic editor for Wiley SCN.

1834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Muhammad Usman received the M.S. (Hons.) and Ph.D. degrees in cyber security from
the School of ICT, Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. He was a Research Fellow (PostDoctoral) in cyber security and machine learning with the University of Surrey, Guildford,
U.K. He possesses over two decades of experience, during which he has held several academic
and industrial positions in different parts of the globe, including Australia, Asia, and Europe.
He provides advisory and consultancy in multiple areas, such as higher education, curriculum
design and development, cyber security, digital forensics, risk assessment and management,
security management, research and development, and career professional development training.
He has a proven track record of providing leadership to IT staff and teaching teams. He is
currently leading a Research Group of Human-Centered Intelligent and Secure Systems.
He has many research publications, including in prestigious journals, such as several IEEE
T RANSACTIONS and a book focused on mobile agent-based anomaly detection and verification
systems for smart home sensor networks. He is a regular invited speaker. He has been a recipient
of several research and travel grants. His current research interests include interdisciplinary areas around cyber security, digital
forensics, trust and privacy, AI-driven complex systems, human-centered systems, digital twins, agritech, healthtech, community
tech, consumer electronics, drones, electrical and autonomous vehicles, and formal and statistical modelling. He has been a
member of the COVID-19 Outbreak Expert Database of the U.K. Parliament. He is also a Juniper Certified Networking and
Security Specialist. He has served in different leading capacities, such as a focal person, the publication chair, an organizing
committee member, and/or a TPC member of several IEEE conferences. He has led and acted as a guest editor for special
issues in several IEEE T RANSACTIONS and other journals.

Alavalapati Goutham Reddy received the Ph.D. degree from the Information Security
Laboratory, Kyungpook National University, South Korea, in 2017. He is an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Springfield, USA. Before that,
he was an Assistant Professor with Fontbonne University, USA, and the National Institute of
Technology, India. Prior to that, he was a Researcher with Sejong University, South Korea,
and the KINDI Center for Computing Research, Qatar University, in collaboration with Purdue
University. He holds several publications on cryptographic authentication protocols. His primary
research interests revolve around cryptography and information security. He is a Professional
Member of ACM.

Shehzad Ashraf Chaudhry (Member, IEEE) received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees (Hons.)
from International Islamic University Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2009 and 2016,
respectively. He is a Professor of cybersecurity engineering with the College of Engineering,
Abu Dhabi University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; and an Associate Professor of
software engineering with Nisantasi University, Istanbul, Türkiye. He has authored more than
180 scientific publications in different international journals and proceedings. With an H-index
of 53, an i10-index of 133, and an accumulated impact factor of more than 530, his work has
been cited around 7741 times. His research interests include lightweight cryptography, elliptic
curve cryptography, multimedia security, E-payment systems, MANETs, SIP authentication,
smart grid security, the IoT and cloud infrastructure security, and next-generation networks.
He was a recipient of the Gold Medal for achieving a 4.0/4.0 CGPA in the master’s degree.
He delivered several keynote speeches and received several awards for best research papers.
Considering his research, the Pakistan Council for Science and Technology granted him the
Prestigious Research Productivity Award while affirming him among the Top Productive Computer Scientists in Pakistan. For
the consecutive five years (2020–2025), he has been listed among the top 2% of computer scientists across the world in Stanford
University’s report.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

1835

Khalid Mahmood (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from International Islamic
University, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2018. He is a distinguished scholar in the field of computer
science. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Future Technology Research Center,
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Yunlin, Taiwan. His expertise and
contributions to the field have earned him recognition as one of the top 2% scientists globally,
as acknowledged by Stanford University. Throughout his illustrious academic career, he has
authored over 80 SCI/E-indexed articles, garnering more than 1900 citations and demonstrating
the impact of his research. He is an approved Supervisor by the Higher Education Commission
of Pakistan and has successfully guided over 15 graduate students in their research pursuits. With
a focus on lightweight authenticated and key agreement solutions, his research spans various
infrastructures, including smart grids, the Internet of Drones (IoD), the Internet of Things (IoT),
vehicular ad hoc networks (VANET), mobile edge computing, and blockchain technologies.
He is an ACM Professional Member. In recognition of his outstanding contributions, he has
been honored with the Prestigious Young Productive Scientist Award by the Pakistan Council for Science and Technology in
2017. He has also received accolades, such as the Productive Researcher Award and the Newcomer Productive Researcher
Award at the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Yunlin, Taiwan. He continues to advance the field of
computer science, establishing himself as a leading figure in academia with his dedication to excellence in research and
scholarship.