936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

HADES: Detecting and Investigating Active
Directory Attacks via Whole Network
Provenance Analytics
Qi Liu , Kaibin Bao , Wajih Ul Hassan, and Veit Hagenmeyer , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Due to its crucial role in identity and access management in modern enterprise networks, Active Directory (AD) is a top
target of Advanced Persistence Threat (APT) actors. Conventional
intrusion detection systems (IDS) excel at identifying malicious
behaviors caused by malware, but often fail to detect stealthy
attacks launched by APT actors. Recent advance in provenancebased IDS (PIDS) shows promises by exposing malicious system
activities in causal attack graphs. However, existing approaches
are restricted to intra-machine tracing, and unable to reveal the
scope of attackers’ traversal inside a network. We propose HADES,
the first PIDS capable of performing accurate causality-based
cross-machine tracing by leveraging a novel concept called logon
session based execution partitioning to overcome several challenges
in cross-machine tracing. We design HADES as an efficient ondemand tracing system, which performs whole-network tracing
only when it first identifies an authentication anomaly signifying
an ongoing AD attack, for which we introduce a novel lightweight
authentication anomaly detection model rooted in our extensive
analysis of AD attacks. To triage attack alerts, we present a new
algorithm integrating two key insights we identified in AD attacks.
Our evaluations show that HADES outperforms both popular opensource detection systems and a prominent commercial AD attack
detector.
Index Terms—Advanced persistence threat detection, active
directory security, enterprise security, data provenance analysis,
auditing, logging.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT CrowdStrike studies [1], [2], [3], [4] show that
80% of modern cyberattacks are identity-driven, i.e., leveraging compromised credentials. After the initial access, attackers increasingly target Microsoft Active Directory for obtaining
critical domain credentials, and hence gaining the ability to
move laterally in the victim network and escalate privilege. For
instance, Kerberoasting attacks [5] increased almost 600% from
2022 to 2023, and Pass-the-Hash attacks [6] increased 200% [2].

R

Received 15 July 2024; revised 14 September 2025; accepted 16 September
2025. Date of publication 22 September 2025; date of current version 14 January
2026. This work was supported by funding of the Helmholtz Association (HGF)
through the Energy System Design (ESD) Program . (Corresponding author:
Qi Liu.)
Qi Liu, Kaibin Bao, and Veit Hagenmeyer are with the Institute for
Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
(KIT), 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany (e-mail: qi.liu@kit.edu;
kaibin.bao@kit.edu; veit.hagenmeyer@kit.edu).
Wajih Ul Hassan is with the School of Engineering & Applied Science,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4740 USA (e-mail: hassan@
virginia.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3611866

Active Directory (Domain Service) plays a crucial role for
identity and access management in modern enterprises’ IT infrastructures, with 90% of Fortune 1000 companies relying on
it [4], [7]. To advance the attack after the initial access, attackers routinely leverage Active Directory (AD) functionalities in
several stages of the cyber-kill-chain, in particular, internal reconnaissance, credential access, lateral movement and privilege
escalation. Comparing to network scanning using third-party
tools like nmap [8], SPN (Service Principle Name) scanning,
a form of AD internal reconnaissance, via native Windows
programs like setspn [9] is much less noisy while achieving
the same goal, i.e., identifying potentially vulnerable servers in
the network. Hence, advanced attackers like APT (Advanced
Persistent Threat) actors primarily rely on Living-Off-the-Land
Binaries (LOLBins) [10], [11], which are system pre-installed
programs that are often used by system administrators and
genuine users. This complicates intrusion detection and poses
significant risks to enterprises.
Conventional intrusion detection systems (IDS) often focus
on isolated system events, and excel at identifying malware causing a burst of malicious behaviors. Facing APT actors frequently
employing LOLBins and the so-called low and slow strategy,
these IDS tend to miss those attacks and suffer from a high false
negative rate. To overcome this, security vendors resort to the
MITRE ATT&CK Matrix [12] as a reference for further creating
detection rules. The MITRE ATT&CK Matrix, maintained with
contributions from leading industrial security vendors, provides
a high-level summary of attack tactics and techniques, including
usage of LOLBins. Our evaluation in Section VI shows that the
isolated analysis of these IDS create many false alerts due to
the fact that LOLBins are programs executed frequently also by
genuine users.
Provenance-based intrusion detection systems (PIDS) [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]
emerged as a new solution, stitching causally related system
activities by parsing system events like process creation, file
access and network socket access into provenance graphs. Given
a suspicious event as a starting point, a backward tracing and
forward tracing in the provenance graph can expose more related
malicious system activities caused by attackers, i.e., the root
cause and attack ramifications, respectively. PIDS have proved
to be effective in particular in reducing false alarm rates and
presenting real attack activities in attack graphs. Attack graphs

© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

provide much richer context for security analysts to further
investigate the scope of an attack, invaluable for an effective
and efficient security operation center (SOC).
However, current PIDS are constrained to intra-machine
provenance tracing, and lack the ability to track across machines
in an enterprise environment, and accurately reveal the scale of
attackers’ traversal inside the network, crucial for attack remediation. Cross-machine provenance tracing faces significant challenges due to the notorious dependency explosion problem [25],
[26]. While intra-machine dependency explosion occurs for
long-running processes, in which each input is conservatively
considered causally responsible for all subsequent outputs, and
vice versa, cross-machine dependency explosion arises if crossmachine edges are created simply on a network connection
basis. Naively connecting two intra-machine provenance graphs,
whenever there is a logon event from one machine to another, or
even whenever there is a network connection between them [27],
would inevitably result in numerous false dependencies, as discussed further in Section IV-B in detail. Recognizing the critical
importance of logon session ID, we propose a novel concept
named logon session based execution partitioning and tracing.
By leveraging both authentication & logon logs and system logs,
our system HADES is capable of 1) fine-grained cross-machine
provenance tracing, 2) alleviating dependency explosion also
for intra-machine provenance tracing, 3) drastically reducing
log size, 4) automatically pinpointing privilege escalation.
HADES employs a two-stage approach for efficient AD attack
detection. Its first stage consists of a light-weight authentication
anomaly detection model responsible for identifying potential
AD attacks and forwarding its results to HADES’s stage two
component, which performs logon session-based tracing and
attack graph triage. Both our authentication anomaly detection
model and attack graph triage algorithm are rooted in our thorough analysis of AD attacks. Through HADES’s development,
we faced several difficulties in realizing accurate cross-machine
tracing. First, depending on remote access type, each authentication & logon process causes varying number of logon events
with distinct logon session ID, complicating the identification
of the correct session ID. Second, under certain circumstances,
system activities in a new logon session are assigned with an
existing session ID, causing false dependencies. Third, it is often
not possible to disclose the remote access type by examining
the current logon event alone. We overcome these challenges
by introducing a remote access type inference module, a logon
session ID reassignment module, and a logon session linking
module in HADES, based on our extensive profiling and analysis
of Windows logging frameworks. Our implementation of logon
session-based tracing avoids time-consuming instrumentation,
error-prone training, and applies to the whole system rather than
a single program.
Unlike previous techniques, HADES produces alarms satisfying all five properties of reliability, explainability, analytical
depth, contextuality, and transferability as introduced in [28]. In
its first stage, HADES’s anomaly detection model avoids easily
changeable indicators such as hard-coded IP addresses and file
hashes, which are typical in popular Security Information and
Event Management (SIEM) detection rules [29], [30], ensuring

937

reliable detection. The attack graphs produced in the second
stage of HADES are both explainable and contextual, providing
an analytical overview of the attack. Finally, the system’s customizable weighting factors for indicators introduced in its threat
score calculation make HADES highly transferable and adaptable
for practical use in various scenarios.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
r We give a succinct and contextualized AD attack overview
based on a thorough analysis, critical for understanding
and detecting AD attacks.
r We present a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model for AD attacks.
r We propose a novel concept called logon session-based
execution partitioning and tracing.
r We demonstrate the first accurate and efficient causalitybased cross-machine provenance tracing system HADES.
r We introduce a new alert triage algorithm for accurate AD
attack detection.
II. BACKGROUND
AD attacks are a set of cyberattacks targeting Microsoft Active
Directory service employed in most corporate environments.
Half of organizations worldwide have experienced an AD attack
in recent years, while 40% of those attacks were successful [4],
[31]. AD uses a database to store critical information about
organizations’ network resources, and provides administrators
the ability to manage the access to those resources. That is,
AD holds the blueprint of an organization’s environment, and
the keys to all available resources. Consequently, various kinds
of attacks specifically exploiting vulnerabilities in Microsoft’s
AD design and implementation emerged over time, resulting
in a partial or even full-scale compromise of many enterprise
networks [32], [33].
Often, an attack is launched first against a targeted user via
spear-phishing, or a vulnerable domain-joined machine accessible from outside, to get an initial foothold inside the domain. The
attacker then performs internal AD discovery to gain knowledge
about the internal network and spot more machines, before
moving to them typically via some form of stolen credentials
from the first machine.
A proper understanding of the prerequisites of various AD
attacks, and logging possibilities as well as limitations is critical
for accurate AD attack detection. Fig. 1 shows the AD attack
skeleton, in which most relevant AD attack techniques are
listed. This model serves as a blueprint for reliably detecting
AD attack techniques and reconstructing high-level AD attack
graphs. These graphs can be further expanded to create whole
network attack graphs, including all malicious system activities
conducted by attackers.
III. THREAT MODEL
Like other PIDS [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20],
[21], [22], [23], [34], our system HADES assumes the integrity
of the underlying operating systems, firmware and our logging
frameworks. We only consider attacks in which threat actors
already achieved an initial foothold on a domain-joined host via

938

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Active Directory attack overview.

HADES overview.

binary exploitation or social engineering, and move laterally to
other machines leveraging stolen credentials instead of program
exploitation. That is, only identity-based remote access types are
of interest, in which valid accounts are used to access a computer.
Attacks restricted to only one machine are deemed less severe
and are hence out of HADES’s detection scope.
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
Our system HADES employs a two-stage approach for efficient
and accurate detection of AD attacks, producing an initial highlevel attack graph and a low-level whole network attack graph,
respectively. Fig. 2 provides an overview of HADES, whereas a
formal description of HADES’s detection procedure is given in
Algorithm 1. HADES’s first stage starts with its authentication
anomaly detection, and ends with producing a high-level attack
graph. HADES’s second stage starts with its logon session-based
partitioning and tracing, and ends with producing a low-level
whole network attack graph with assigned threat score. To enhance readability of Algorithm 1, we provide a short description
for symbols and functions that are not self-explanatory in Table I.
In its first stage, HADES relies on authentication & logon
logs only, and parses through each AD authentication & logon
log event. It traces backward on each logon event, and traces

backward & forward on each authentication event (Algorithm 1
Lines 24-25), as authentication is a multiple-step process. The
core component of HADES’s stage 1 is a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model, against which the authentication
& logon tracing result is matched. Once an anomaly is found,
HADES produces a high-level attack graph including involved
AD entities (Algorithm 1 Line 5), i.e., users and machines,
and labeled with a suspected AD attack type (Algorithm 1
Line 27), at the end of its stage 1. A concrete example of such
high-level attack graphs is given in Fig. 3, in which it shows
that user Alice from the Exchange Server has used user Bob’s
password hash to authenticate against the Domain Controller,
and then accessed the Data Server, mimicking the Pass-the-Hash
behavior.
The identified host names, user names and their logon session ID are passed to HADES’s stage 2, in which it performs
logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing. On the
accessed host, e.g., the Data Server in Fig. 3, by leveraging both
authentication & logon logs and system logs, HADES first infers
the remote access type (Algorithm 1 Line 7), which is critical for
deciding whether the logon session ID needs to be reassigned in
the next step (Algorithm 1 Line 8). Then it links related logon
sessions resulted from the same identity (Algorithm 1 Line 9),
and performs intra-machine backward & forward tracing inside
these logon sessions (Algorithm 1 Lines 10-11). Afterwards,
HADES checks the authentication & logon logs to spot any
logon event inside any domain-joined machine initiated from the
accessed host, i.e., cross-machine forward tracing (Algorithm 1
Line 14). Meanwhile, HADES examines the authentication &
logon logs to find out whether and from which domain-joined
machine the current logon session inside the accessing host, e.g.,
the Exchange Server in Fig. 3, is initiated, i.e., cross-machine
backward tracing. After the logon session-based tracing ends as
no further involved machine can be found, HADES passes the
low-level whole network provenance graph to its threat scoring
algorithm (Algorithm 1 Line 14), the final step of stage 2. In
this step, we leverage open-source TTP (Tactics, Techniques,

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

939

Fig. 3. An AD attack graph created by HADES on the Oilrig [35] dataset. HADES first creates an initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities like users
and hosts, after it detects an authentication & logon anomaly and suspects a Pass-the-Hash attack. Then it performs system-level forward tracing inside the specific
logon session under user Bob in the accessed host Data Server, and system-level forward & backward tracing inside the logon session of Alice in the accessing
host Exchange Server. Subsequently, it traces back to a logon session of Alice in the Workstation_1. Next, it traces forward & backward inside this logon session,
leading to another two logon sessions in the Exchange Server. This graph reveals that an attacker leveraged a C2 (Command & Control) agent disguised under
the process name SystemFailureReporter on the Workstation_1 to perform AD discovery via LOLBins like net and netstat. The attacker then pivoted to the
Exchange Server, performed further AD discovery, credential access, before moving to the Data Server for accessing critical data.1 .

Procedures) detection rules [30] for AD discovery and credential
access (Algorithm 1 Lines 35-36).
In the example of Fig. 3, the whole network forward
tracing from the accessed host, i.e., the Data Server, did not
lead to further logon session on another machine, as the attacker
found the targeted data and did not advance further in the
network. However, the whole network backward tracing from
the accessing host, i.e., the Exchange Server, reveals that the
current logon session on it is a RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol)
session that was initiated from another logon session of user
Alice inside another machine Workstation_1. Backward tracing
from the Workstation_1 did not lead to further domain-joined
machine, but rather an external IP address, which belongs to
the C2 (Command & Control) server operated by the attacker.
Forward tracing from the Workstation_1 resulted in another two
logon sessions in the Exchange Server preceding the RDP logon
session on it. In one of these logon sessions, credential access
was performed, contributing to the later lateral movement from
the RDP logon session on the Exchange Server to a logon session
on the Data Server. Note that backward tracing can only lead to
exactly one logon session, while forwarding tracing can lead to
multiple logon sessions, as one may remotely access multiple
machines from one machine and multiple logon sessions inside
one machine do not interfere with each other.
A. Authentication Anomaly Detection
The main purpose of AD is providing the service of authentication of user or machine accounts and authorization to
different network resources. AD employs Kerberos as its default
authentication protocol, and implements it in two components in
1 Note that the bounding boxes with a session ID label or host name are
manually added for better readability; this information is encoded in nodes in
the original attack graph. Besides, we replaced the user names in the original
emulation plan with shorter names. Some processes, e.g., ps and vmware, in
the attack graph are malicious processes disguised under a false name. Further,
we introduced a graph optimization technique called meta-nodes to conclude
system activities of standard known benign routines.

Fig. 4.

Standard AD authentication process.

a domain controller (DC), i.e., the Authentication Service (AS)
and the Ticket-Granting Service (TGS). Fig. 4 shows a simplified
version of standard AD authentication process: 1) the user sends
an encrypted AS request for a TGT (Ticket-Granting-Ticket), 2)
the DC replies with a TGT if it can decrypt the request and
hence verify the user’s identity, 3) the user asks for a TGS ticket
by providing the TGT, 4) the DC replies with a TGS ticket, 5)
the user asks for access to an application server by providing
the TGS ticket, 6) the server gives the user requested access
after validating the TGS ticket. Note that each communication
step is represented in a directed line in Fig. 4. The entire
process uses shared secret cryptography to deter network-level
eavesdropping, meaning that credential access is only possible
inside hosts.
The complicated network authentication process is often exploited by attackers who manage to steal some form of credentials or credentials-related data on one machine, i.e., credential
access, and ultimately use them to successfully authenticate
against a domain controller and hence access another machine,
i.e., lateral movement. Several AD attack techniques exhibit
similarities, often causing confusion. However, we believe that
a practical detection system needs to differentiate between these

940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Algorithm 1: ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACK DETECTION

attacks and hence triage the alerts due to the varying degrees
of severity of those attacks. For instance, a Golden-Ticket [36]
attack is more critical than others since it can lead to a full-scale
domain compromise.
We analyzed each attack type, and identified anomaly in the
corresponding authentication process, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
Note that, in Fig. 5, each attack type is associated with directed
lines of a specific color. Like in Fig. 4, each directed line
represents a communication step between the user machine and
the domain controller or an application server during the authentication process. Fig. 5 demonstrates that, comparing to the
standard authentication process shown in Fig. 4, each attack type
manifests itself in a specific non-standard, incomplete/abnormal
authentication process.
For instance, in AS-REP Roasting attacks (associated with
the green directed lines in Fig. 5), attackers only send a TGT

TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF SYMBOLS & FUNCTIONS

request and aim to crack the user’s password from the received TGT offline. Hence no TGS request follows. This is
demonstrated in Fig. 5, in which only two green directed lines
representing the first two communication steps are observed
during the authentication process, instead of six directed lines. In
Kerberoasting attacks (associated with the purple directed lines

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

Fig. 5.

Authentication incompleteness/abnormality.

in Fig. 5), attackers aim to crack a service account’s password
from a received TGS, meaning that no access on the application
server follows the TGS request. Therefore, only four purple
directed lines representing the first four communication steps
are observed in Fig. 5. In Pass-the-Ticket attacks (associated
with the light blue directed lines in Fig. 5), attackers send a
TGS request to the DC with a stolen TGT, meaning that no TGT
request precedes the TGS request. Thus, only four light blue
directed lines representing the last four communication steps
are observed in Fig. 5.
Therefore, we propose a light-weight authentication anomaly
detection model based on our finding. This anomaly detection
model relies on authentication & logon logs only; it parses
through each AD authentication & logon log event. It traces
backward on each logon event, and traces backward & forward
on each authentication event (Algorithm 1 Lines 24-25), as
authentication is a multi-step process. By doing so, HADES aims
to identify whether there is an authentication anomaly, and which
kind of authentication anomaly is present. Based on Fig. 5,
HADES labels the authentication anomaly with a suspected AD
attack type (Algorithm 1 Line 27). Note that AD authentication
logs and logon logs can be linked with a logon GUID (Globally
Unique Identifier), which is a critical information for HADES’s
authentication & logon tracing; a logon GUID is inserted into
each AD authentication event and the corresponding logon event
by default by Windows specifically for associating these events.
During runtime, HADES checks, for instance, each authentication event with the Windows Event ID 4769, which records each
Kerberos service ticket (TGS) request [37], i.e., the step 3) in
Fig. 4. Then it extracts the logon GUID from the authentication
event, and checks if there is a logon event with Windows Event
ID 4624 that contains the same logon GUID, which records
each successful logon [38]. If such logon event does not exist,
it indicates a Kerberoasting attack (associated with the purple
directed lines in Fig. 5). For each authentication event with
the Windows Event ID 4769, HADES also checks if there is a
corresponding authentication event with the Windows Event ID
4768, which records each Kerberos authentication ticket (TGT)
request [39], i.e., the step 1) in Fig. 4. If it does not exist,
it indicates a Pass-the-Ticket attack (associated with the light

941

blue directed lines in Fig. 5). HADES’s authentication & logon
tracing can also start with checking each authentication event
with the Windows Event ID 4768. For each such event, i.e., a
TGT request, if a corresponding event of Event ID 4769, i.e.,
a TGS request, does not exist, it indicates a AS-REP Roasting
attack (associated with the green directed lines in Fig. 5).
In our evaluation in Section VI, this model proves to be effective in catching each attack instance, but is plagued with a high
false positive rate, hindering its adaptability in practice. The reasons for false positives are manifold. For instance, false positives
for AS-REP Roasting and Kerberoasting can be resulted from
network disruption. Further, legitimate use of native Windows
programs like runas causes false Pass-the-Hash alerts.
Note that the list of AD attack types involved in the authentication & logon process (in Fig. 5) was constructed based
on our extensive analysis of AD attacks observed as of today,
and is meant to be exhaustive. Our sources include the MITRE
ATT&CK knowledge base [40], threat reports linked in it, and
threat reports posted in leading security vendors’ websites, like
CrowdStrike [1], Mandiant [41], Trellix [11]. However, we
cannot exclude the existence of an unknown anomalous authentication & logon sequence that cannot be mapped to our known
AD attack types. Such a sequence would also be detected, as it,
by definition, would deviate from the standard authentication &
logon process illustrated in Fig. 4. It makes sense to flag such
a sequence; this would likely further increase the false positive
rate. Such a check can be easily implemented in the function
CHECKATTACKTYPE (Algorithm 1 Line 27). Nevertheless, during our experiments, we did not observe any anomalous authentication & logon sequence that cannot be mapped to a known
AD attack type in Fig. 5. If an anomalous authentication & logon
sequence associated with an unseen attack type was observed by
our system HADES, it would run its stage 2 for a whole network
investigation and reveal attack tactics and techniques employed
by the attacker, as it does for known AD attack types. That is,
HADES handles each unknown authentication anomaly in the
same way as it does for those that are associated with a known
AD attack type. HADES would output an AD attack graph similar
to Fig. 3; the initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities
would be labeled as “Unknown AD Attack”.
B. Logon Session-Based Execution Partitioning and Tracing
Recent PIDS have proved to be invaluable in reducing false
alarms. To tackle the high rate of false positive, we aim to
develop the first causality-based cross-machine PIDS. A naive
approach would be to connect the intra-machine provenance
graphs of two domain-joined machines with a cross-machine
edge, whenever there is a network connection between them, as
suggested in [27]. However, this kind of cross-machine edges
do not represent a causality,2 but rather a correlation, leading to
numerous cross-machine edges between intra-machine provenance graphs. Take Fig. 3 as an example; this would result in
2 Causality is defined as the relationship between cause and effect. A causalitybased cross-machine edge connects two logon sessions, in which one session
initiated the other session via remote access, while a correlation-based edge
connects two logon sessions without this relationship.

942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

7364 edges3 between the Exchange Server’s provenance graph
and other hosts’ graphs after only one day operation, while in fact
there are only 4 causality-based cross-machine edges to/from the
Exchange Server in the true attack chain, shown as the four thick,
red directed lines in Fig. 3.
A more advanced approach would be to connect intra-machine
provenance graphs, whenever there is a logon event from one
machine to another. Yet, due to the prevalence of credential
thefts, in particular in AD attacks, it is impossible to identify
the true identity behind each logon. For instance, in Fig. 3,
Alice’s credentials were stolen by the attacker. Given that both
Alice and the attacker have accessed the Exchange Sever from
the Workstation_1 using the same credentials, this approach
would still create false-dependencies. In fact, this approach
would produce 479 correlation-based cross-machine edges,4
instead of 4 causality-based ones, to/from the Exchange Server.
Correlation-inferred edges are the root cause of the notorious
dependency explosion problem [25], [42].
In order to enable causality-based provenance tracing, we resort to a critical yet previously undiscovered information: logon
session ID, and propose a novel concept: logon session-based
execution partitioning and tracing. To the best of our knowledge,
this work presents the first PIDS leveraging logon session ID.
Windows assigns a logon session ID (unique until next reboot)
after each successful authentication & logon to label system
activities run in that session in Windows Security logs [43]. A
logon session is a computing session assigned with an access
token representing the authenticated account’s security context
and permissions [44]. Every Windows process runs within a
logon session’s context.
Fig. 6 further illustrates the difference between the three
cross-machine tracing approaches. Network connection-based
tracing, which naively connects two intra-machine provenance
graphs whenever there is a network connection between the
two machines, as shown in Fig. 6(a), would lead to a dense
graph indiscriminately connecting all system activities as depicted in Fig. 7(a). Logon-based tracing in Fig. 6(b) reduces
false dependencies by considering only logon-initiated network
connections, resulting in less dense graphs in Fig. 7(b). However,
in the prevalence of identity theft, it is infeasible to discern the
true identity behind each logon. That is, a provenance graph
produced from logon-based tracing can still contain system
activities of multiple identities. In contrast, logon session-based
tracing narrows down system activities deemed as relevant from
an entire machine to just one logon session, as shown in Fig. 6(c),
truly linking system activities belonging to the same identity,
and separating system activities unrelated to each other into
individual provenance graphs shown in Fig. 7(c).
1) Benefits: The benefits of logon session-based tracing are fourfold: 1) it enables fine-grained causality-based
3 This number is returned from a query that checks for the number of established network connections. That is, there are 7364 network connections
established between the Exchange Server and other machines during the corresponding emulation plan’s execution.
4 This number is returned from a query that checks for the number of succeeded
logons. That is, there are 479 logons performed from/to the Exchange Server
during the corresponding emulation plan’s execution.

Fig. 6. Comparison of cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas a thin black
edge denotes a network connection, a thick black edge denotes a logon by a
genuine user and a thick red edge denotes a logon by an attacker.

Fig. 7. Comparison of results from different cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas black denotes system activities originated from genuine
users, red denotes system activities caused by attackers. If a tracing approach
returns more than one graph, these graphs are numbered and considered as
independent for further investigation.

cross-machine provenance tracing, 2) it alleviates dependency
explosion also for intra-machine provenance tracing, 3) it reduces log size as most forensics-irrelevant system activities
under logon sessions with predefined logon ID5 can be safely
discarded, 4) it automatically pinpoints privilege escalation during intra-machine provenance tracing.
5 Predefined logon ID include 0x3e4, 0x3e5, and 0x3e7, belonging to Network Service account, Local Service account, System account, respectively [45].

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

When a user from one machine logs into another machine,6 the
corresponding logon session in the second machine is resulted
from exactly one logon session in the first machine. For example,
in Fig. 3, Alice’s logon session 0xb4874 on the Exchange
Server is only resulted from Alice’s logon session 0xb0db1
on the Workstation_1, while there are multiple Alice’s logon
sessions on the Workstation_1 in parallel. Our system HADES can
accurately disclose this, as it checks authentication & logon logs
among involved machines and performs logon session-based
tracing. With logon session-based tracing, we can create a
whole-network provenance graph representing activities conducted by exactly one true identity, be it the attacker or a normal
user.
The benefit is even more apparent during intra-machine provenance tracing. An enterprise-level application server typically
hosts more than a hundred logon sessions at the same time,
with some belonging to the same user, and runs cumulatively
thousands of logon sessions after just one day operation. For
instance, in the Oilrig [35] dataset, system activities run on the
Exchange Server spread over more than 5 thousands logon sessions. While some logon sessions are (interactive) long-running
ones, many others die soon after a short execution, e.g., accessing
some resources. Oblivious to logon session ID, prior provenance
tracing approaches would connect all these system activities, as
they all at the end can be traced back to the root process, system
(PID=4) on Windows. In contrast, our approach identifies the
truly involved logon sessions and tracks system activities only
inside them, greatly easing the dependency explosion problem.
The efficiency introduced by leveraging logon session ID
shows not only during provenance tracing, but also for log
storage reduction. Under the assumption of OS integrity, most
system activities run under logon sessions with predefined
logon ID belong to standard routines, and can be considered
as forensics-irrelevant and safely discarded. In the example of
the Exchange Server in the Oilrig dataset, these system activities
account for over 90% of all log events created on it. However,
some of these system activities are forensics-relevant, as they are
related to remote access and logons. HADES identifies and tracks
these system activities during its logon session linking. Further,
as logon sessions also introduce the separation of privileges,
HADES automatically identifies privilege escalation during intramachine cross-session tracing by checking the value of ”Token
Elevation Type” and ”Integrity Level” associated with a logon
session ID. By doing so, it has identified, e.g., in Fig. 3, the
privilege escalation from unprivileged user to Administrator,
i.e., from 0xb4874 to 0xb4829, and then privilege escalation from Administrator to System, i.e., from 0xb4829 to
0xb247f9c3e.
2) Challenges: We encountered several challenges while developing HADES. First, each network authentication & logon
process results in multiple logon events with distinct logon
session ID on the accessed machine. Depending on the remote
access type, e.g., via RDP or SMB (Server Message Block),
6 Note that a user accessing resources on a remote machine also triggers a
logon on the remote machine. The authentication & logon process is transparent
to users due to Single Sign-on.

943

the number of logon sessions created varies. Second, under
certain circumstances, system activities resulted from a new
logon are recorded with an existing session ID, leading to false
dependency. Third, it is often not possible to reveal the remote
access type by inspecting the logon event alone.
3) Remote Access Type Inference: Identifying remote access
type is critical for logon session ID reassignment and session
linking, both crucial for accurate cross-machine tracing. The
way how exactly Windows emits logon events and assigns logon
ID is obscure. Due to Windows’ closed-source nature, revealing
this via source code is not possible. Reference to the most
detailed sources about Windows [45], [46], [47], [48] also failed
to deliver an answer. Hence we resorted to extensive testing and
analysis of each remote access type.
We found that both authentication & logon events and system
activities events need to be processed to extract a list of attributes for accurately inferring remote access type. Hence, for
each logon event, HADES checks related authentication & logon
events and system events to analyze the context and then classify
the remote access type. HADES can identify all standard remote access types: RDP, SSH, Powershell-Remoting (WinRM),
WMI, RPC, PsExec, Network Share (SMB), internal web-server
request. Note that only identity-based remote access types are of
interest, in which valid accounts are used to access a computer.
Remote access via malware/C2 agent is not identity-based, and
will not create new logon sessions. Repetitive accesses via the
same malware/C2 agent run in the same logon session and their
system activities are recorded with the same session ID. That
is, as long as HADES can trace to the session in which the C2
agent is present, it can detect all system activities conducted by
it, without the need for inferring remote access type and session
linking etc. For example, in Fig. 3, the attacker has performed
several attack steps via the C2 agent on the Workstation_1 at
different times, and all of these steps are detected by HADES, as
they are all executed in the same session 0xb0db1 and HADES
has successfully traced back to this session.
We also found that some logon events and associated logon
sessions are purely byproducts. Some of these sessions terminate
soon after being created and others live until a logoff occurs.
These logon sessions typically do not contain any forensicsrelevant system activities. Although their creations are resulted
from a user logon, they are not influenced by the logged-on user.
For instance, when a domain user logs into a machine via SSH,
a byproduct logon session under a virtual user sshd_xxx gets
created.
4) Logon Session ID Reassignment: For several remote access types, system activities performed on a new logon session
are recorded under an existing logon session ID, necessitating
session ID reassignment for causally correct tracing. A typical
example is RDP, which is often misused by attackers [49]. Unlike
SSH, a remote logon session via RDP in the accessed machine
will not terminate, when the client program on the accessing
machine exits. The user has to explicitly log out to terminate
that session.
When the user’s credentials are stolen by an attacker who then
logs into the same remote machine with the same credentials,
all system activities conducted by the attacker are labeled with

944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

the ID of the user’s long-running session, although a new logon
session with a different ID is created. This is due to Fast User
Switching [50], which provides users the same setup after reconnecting to an existing local console session or remote desktop
session7 . The new logon session starts with the new logon by
the attacker, and ends when the attacker disconnects, marking
the exact timespan of system activities conducted only by the
attacker. Hence, if HADES identifies a logon as RDP access,
it further checks for another specific related event indicating
whether the user has entered a new remote desktop session
or an existing one. If an existing remote desktop session is
being reentered, HADES takes the ID of the new logon session
and replaces the existing logon session’s ID with it for the
corresponding system activities.
Other remote access types requiring session ID reassignment
include Powershell-Remoting and internal web-server request.
In Fig. 3, the attacker from the Workstation_1 leveraged webshell to execute commands on the Exchange Server. However system activities caused by the attacker’s web requests
are recorded with System account’s logon session ID, i.e.,
0x3e7, along with system activities resulted from other domain
users’ web requests. HADES correctly identified the remote
access type and reassigned the attacker’s system activities with
0x2476c741, separating them from unrelated system activities caused by other users.
Note that the logon session ID 0x2476c741 is a random
ID that Windows created for the corresponding internal web
request of the attacker; this ID is recorded in the corresponding
logon event. Each successful internal web request is preceded
by a corresponding authentication event recorded on the domain
controller and a logon event recorded on the web server. Although the attacker’s system activities should be recorded with
the logon session ID 0x2476c741, Windows records system
activities caused by internal web requests from all users with
System account’s logon session ID 0x3e7. It is worth noting
that our system HADES’s objective is to perform tracing of system
activities attributed to / caused by the same identity, no matter
under which user account these system activities were executed.
Therefore, it is important to reassign the logon session ID from
0x3e7 to 0x2476c741, and separate the associated system
activities from unrelated system activities caused by other users.
5) Logon Session Linking: Although most system activities
under predefined logon ID are forensics-irrelevant, some are
directly responsible for the creation of users’ logon sessions. For
instance, when a user from one machine executes remote commands on another machine via Powershell-Remoting, the remote
commands are executed by the process wsmprovhost.exe
on the second machine, which is spawned by an instance of
svchost.exe process under the System logon session, i.e.,
0x3e7, once the user successfully authenticated against a domain controller. HADES links users’ logon sessions with those
predefined logon sessions, and performs only backward-tracing
in those sessions until finding the root process responsible for
the creation of the user logon session of each access type.

Logon session linking is also needed when a privileged user
logs in a remote machine via RDP. Due to UAC [51], two logon
sessions are created inside a remote desktop session, of which
one has a privileged access token and the other does not. System
activities run under both logon sessions can only result from the
same true identity. Hence these two sessions need to be linked for
accurate tracing. Note that there can be no more than two RDPbased logon sessions under the same user account at any time,
which is a restriction enforced on Windows OS. There may be
more logon sessions under the same user account of other remote
access types at the same time. Nevertheless, it is straightforward
for HADES to differentiate between these logon sessions through
its remote access type inference module introduced above, and
hence correctly link the sessions.
It is worth noting that a logon session cannot be nested inside
another logon session. That is, a logon session on one machine
cannot originate from another logon session on the same machine, but from exactly one logon session on another machine.
Race condition is not an issue for logon session-based execution
partitioning and tracing. Take Fig. 6(c) as an example; even
when two distinct logon sessions under the same user account
from Machine A have each initiated another logon session inside
Machine B at the same time, our system HADES can still correctly
perform cross-machine system activity tracing and produce
graphs as shown in Fig. 7(c). This is because that each newly
created logon session is assigned with a logon session ID, e.g.,
logon session z inside Machine B, with which system activities
performed inside this logon session are recorded, and a logon
GUID, which is inserted into the corresponding logon event on
Machine B by default by Windows specifically for associating
this logon event with the authentication request originated from
another machine [38]. That is, there is a logon event generated
on Machine B for recording the creation of logon session z; this
event contains a logon GUID as well. The same logon GUID
is present in an authentication event recorded on the domain
controller; this authentication event holds the information that
leads to logon session x inside Machine A.
If a logon session is terminated, no more system activities will
be created and recorded under the corresponding logon session
ID; this logon session will be considered as a leaf logon session.
That is, no further logon session on another machine can originate from this logon session; the logon session-based tracing will
not advance from this logon session. If a logon attempt from a
machine to another machine fails, it will not lead to any system
activities on the second machine; no cross-machine system
activity tracing is needed for this. For instance, in Fig. 6(c),
if the attacker on Machine B tried to access Machine C, but
failed due to lack of permission, only a failed logon event [52]
will be generated on Machine C; the logon session-based tracing
will not advance further from the logon session w as shown in
Fig. 7(c). HADES’s logon session-based tracing ends, when all
relevant logon sessions are terminated or no more logon event
can be observed.
C. Threat Score Assignment

7 Note that logon sessions and local console / remote desktop sessions are two

different concepts. Only a few logon sessions “live” in local console / remote
desktop sessions, which could be seen as a container.

With our summarization of AD attacks in Fig. 1, we identified
two key insights for accurate AD attack detection. The first

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

insight is that attacks against AD follow a rigid pattern: AD
discovery, credential access, lateral movement and privilege
escalation. The second insight is that the key enabler of an AD
attack is successful credential access, and the most observable
result of an AD attack is lateral movement. For instance, in
Kerberoasting attacks, a service must be first identified, whose
credentials will be then stolen, and used for lateral movement
and privilege escalation afterwards.
Based on these two critical insights, HADES calculates a threat
score for each provenance attack graph generated after logon
session-based backward & forward tracing. This is to ensure
that the most likely true attacks are always investigated first
by security analysts. For each potential lateral movement, i.e., a
cross-machine edge in an attack graph, HADES checks how many
credential access techniques were executed in the corresponding
hosts before, and how often each technique was performed
(Algorithm 1 Line 36). For each performed credential access
technique, HADES explicitly checks whether the corresponding
process has accessed the system process lsass.exe8 , which is
the most critical process for managing credentials like password
hashes and access tokens on Windows OS, and is hence often
abused by attackers. Credential access techniques involving
accessing lsass.exe’s memory should be considered more
severe. Then, HADES examines how many AD discovery techniques were operated on related hosts and the frequency of each
discovery step conducted (Algorithm 1 Line 35). Also, HADES
inspects how many times privilege escalation is observed in the
provenance attack graph (Algorithm 1 Line 37).
We formulate the threat score calculation in the following two
equations.
T SE =

n


(F req(teqi ) × V ar(taci ))wi

(1)

i=1

where n denotes the number of tactics involved, e.g., credential access. F req(teqi ) denotes the accumulated execution frequency of techniques in a given tactic, and V ar(taci ) denotes
the number of techniques being applied for the given tactic9 .
Considering both the intensiveness F req(teqi ) and the extensiveness V ar(taci ) of a tactic being performed aligns with the
fact broadly observed in threat reports [54] that attackers often
apply multiple techniques within the same tactic to boost their
chances of success. Besides, wi is a weighting factor introduced
for each tactic. The weights for discovery, privilege escalation,
credential access, and credential access involving lsass.exe
are currently set to 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4, respectively.
The rationales for having a different weight for each tactic are
explained in the following. Credential access is considered as
8 Access to the system process lsass.exe from various processes is frequently observed on a Windows machine also during a normal operation. That
is, this action alone does not necessarily indicate a malicious activity. However,
this action can be suspicious, and is hence often logged. In fact, Sysmon [53]
employed by HADES can record access to lsass.exe.
9 MITRE defines tactics as attacker’s strategic goals when performing an
action, e.g., “credential access”, and techniques as specific actions an attacker
uses to achieve a tactic, e.g., “OS credential dumping”. A tactic includes many
techniques. For instance, to achieve “credential access”, an attacker may employ
“OS credential dumping”, “input capture” or other techniques.

945

the most relevant tactic, and should receive a higher weight than
discovery and privilege escalation, as per our second insight. As
mentioned above, credential access involving lsass.exe is
deemed more severe, and hence is assigned with an even higher
weight than credential access without involving lsass.exe.
As the consequence of privilege escalation is more severe than
the consequence of discovery, privilege escalation receives a
higher weight than discovery as well. The differences between
these weights are kept small, as having a much larger value for
one tactic than others would mean that the effect of other tactics
on threat score calculation would be negligible; note that each
constant is the exponent of a power function.
Whereas (1) calculates the threat score for each cross-machine
edge (Algorithm 1 Line 38), (2) accumulates the threat scores
returned from (1), and outputs the threat score for the attack
graph (Algorithm 1 Line 41).
T SG =

n


(T Si × (DA + 1) × Criticality)

(2)

i=1

where n denotes the number of cross-machine edges found in
a given attack graph, and T Si denotes the threat score assigned
for each cross-machine edge from (1). DA indicates whether
credentials of domain administrators are involved in the crossmachine system activities, and takes the value 0 or 1. By doing
so, we prioritize attack graphs for further investigation, in which
credentials of domain administrators are involved due to more
severe consequence of these attacks. Similarly, we assign a
Criticality to different attack types. Because, for instance, a
Golden-Ticket attack may imply a compromise of the entire
domain, whereas a Silver-Ticket attack’s scope is limited to
certain servers in the domain. If credentials of a non-privileged
domain user are involved in a Pass-the-Hash attack, the consequence is even less critical. Currently, the Golden-Ticket attack
type, the Silver-Ticket attack type, and the Keberoasting attack
type are assigned with a Criticality 10 of value 4, 3, and 2,
respectively, while all other attack types are assigned with a
Criticality of value 1. Note that Keberoasting targets service
credentials, whereas other attack types (except Golden-Ticket
and Silver-Ticket) target user credentials, which are typically
less critical than service credentials.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
We implemented a prototype of HADES in Python, and deployed it on a 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04 OS with 256 GB of RAM and
a 32-core processor. We developed HADES with considerations
of its deployability in real world in mind, and aim to avoid
possible deployment-related restrictions in practice. That is,
HADES does not require any specific, non-standard hardware
or network configuration; HADES can be easily integrated into
an existing security infrastructure.
10 The values of Criticality are subjectively assigned, not objectively, as we
do not think there is an answer (agreed by security researchers and practitioners)
to the question how much more critical a particular attack type is than others.
We believe that, in practice, these values should be decided/tuned by the security
team of an organization according to their specific preferences, settings and past
experiences etc., similar to risk assessment in practice.

946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

First, HADES leverages system logs and authentication & logon logs collected by popular industry-standard
instrumentation-free logging frameworks. In Active Directory,
authentication logs are recorded on domain controllers by default, whereas logon logs are collected in the accessed hosts
by default. We collect authentication logs from the domain
controller and logon logs from each domain-joined host. Authentication logs and logon logs can be linked with a logon
GUID. For system activities, we collect Windows Security [43]
logs and Sysmon [53] logs; both are industry-standard logs. To
ensure log integrity, recent Sysmon versions start as protected
processes, preventing tampering or disabling by attackers. Windows introduced Protected Event Logging [55] to secure logs
from unauthorized access.
Second, HADES’s whole network tracing rests on a general
concept called logon session-based execution partitioning and
tracing, which is not tied to any specific environment. Third,
HADES’s detection rules are based on the MITRE ATT&CK
Matrix [12], which is a widely recognized framework esteemed
by organizations worldwide. Leading security vendors, therefore, not only contribute to this framework but also utilize it
as a reference for the development of detection mechanisms.
Last, HADES interfaces with Elasticsearch [56] via EQL [57],
a query language designed for security purposes; Elasticsearch
is a widely utilized tool for event searching and threat analysis
within organizations.
HADES has been tested in an emulated environment with a
typical organization network as specified in the MITRE Emulation Plans [58], but not yet deployed in a production system.
There is a concern that the detailed logs required by HADES
would violate users’ privacy, especially because, by combining
recorded system activities and logon activities, HADES can reveal
which employee has carried out what activities at what time. A
proper log anonymization mechanism needs to be designed in
future work and incorporated into HADES. Deploying HADES
as a real-time detection system in a production system requires
the capability of real-time log ingestion, which can be easily
realized, as HADES interfaces with Elasticsearch and relies on
Winlogbeat [59] to ship logs to Elasticsearch. Winlogbeat is
provided by Elastic, and designed to ship logs off of endpoints as
soon as possible. Elastic also provides guidelines for data storage
management in Elasticsearch in a production environment [60],
[61], [62].
VI. EVALUATION
Public Datasets: Public datasets often do not contain AD
attacks presumably due to higher requirement on setting up emulation infrastructures. For instance, the DARPA E3 dataset [63]
does not contain any AD-based attack. Although in the DARPA
E5 dataset [64], a so-called Copykatz module is used for credential access, the credentials obtained are local credentials, as
the corresponding machines are not joined to a domain. The
DARPA OpTC dataset [65] is the only public dataset including
AD-based attacks that we can find. Unfortunately, this dataset
only includes system logs on domain-joined hosts, but no logs
from the domain controller. Authentication logs, which are

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE EVALUATION DATASETS

recorded only in domain controllers, are critical for HADES’s
functionality. Hence we cannot evaluate HADES on the OpTC
dataset either.
MITRE Attack Emulation: AD attacks are present in almost
all MITRE Emulation Plans [58]. MITRE Engenuity ATT&CK
Evaluations [66] use these plans to assess commercial detection systems from leading security vendors. MITRE’s emulation plans target enterprise networks with more sophisticated,
cross-machine attacks than most public datasets, offering greater
authenticity. However, MITRE has not published any corresponding datasets. We stringently implemented three emulation
plans, i.e, APT29 [67], Oilrig [35], and WizardSpider [68],
and then evaluated HADES on these datasets. Table II gives an
overview of our datasets. Note that these three datasets are now
combined into a published dataset called AVIATOR [69], [70].
A detailed comparison between the AVIATOR dataset and other
APT datasets is provided in [69].
A. HADES vs. SIEM Detection Rules
We extracted all detection rules for AD-based attacks from
the most popular and established SIEM rule repositories, i.e.,
Elastic [29], Sigma [30], Google Chronicle [71], and converted
them into EQL queries, which we then run parallel to HADES
on our datasets. We compare the detection results of Elastic,
Chronicle, Sigma and our system HADES in Table III. To ensure
fair comparison, in Table III, we only show the detection results
of these SIEM rules for attack techniques that HADES’s stage 1
can detect (Fig. 5), and not other AD attack techniques like AD
discovery, which would lead to a much higher number of false
positives.
Note that we implement HADES as an on-demand PIDS for
enhanced efficiency. Only when HADES’s stage 1 detects a potential lateral movement, it runs its stage 2 for a whole-network
investigation, which unfolds other tactics like AD discovery and
credential access when they are causally related to the lateral
movement. That is, HADES cannot detect an early-stage AD
attack, in which the attacker has only performed AD discovery
and credential access, but not yet moved to other machines.
In particular, for attacks like Golden-Ticket, HADES’s stage 1
cannot detect the creation of a Golden-Ticket, i.e., credential
access, but its usage for lateral movement. HADES’s stage 2
checks credential access techniques related to Golden-Ticket,
if the stage 1 detects a Golden-Ticket-based lateral movement.
HADES avoids a high rate of false alarms by neglecting potential,
yet less critical early-stage attack steps.
Table III reveals that, comparing to HADES, SIEM rules
produced more false positives and missed some true attacks.
Whereas Chronicle has a relatively low false positive rate in all

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

Fig. 8.

947

CDF of threat score for false and true alerts.

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF HADES AND PRIOR DETECTION SYSTEMS

datasets, it missed the true attack in each dataset. In contrast,
Sigma detected all true attacks, at the cost of having a much
higher false positive rate. Elastic detected the Pass-the-Hash
attack in the Oilrig dataset with less false positives, but missed
the attacks in APT29 dataset and WizardSpider dataset.
To understand why SIEM rules have a high rate of false
positives and false negatives, we resort to manually inspect
them. On the one hand, we find that a high number of false
positives often results from overly general rules matching system
activities caused by benign programs often misused by attackers,
i.e., LOLBins. Further, Sigma’s unusually high number of false
positives is also due to the fact that Sigma’s rule repository
includes many similar rules created by different contributors
for the same attack techniques. On the other hand, both Chronicle’s and Elastic’s rules tend to be overly specific, i.e., having
hard-coded strings as conditions, and also often allowlist system
activities caused by known “benign” programs. Simply favoring
high-degree of specificity and overly allowlisting lead to less
false positives, but inevitably cause more false negatives.
Unlike open-source SIEM rules, HADES employs an advanced
detection strategy that goes beyond solely looking for specific
isolated log events, contributing to an average false positive
reduction rate of 98%. Most activities involved in AD attacks are
based on (mis)using legitimate AD infrastructures and services.
For example, network shares are used intensively by normal domain users and only occasionally by attackers for lateral movement. That is, attackers can easily blend into the noise caused
by legitimate users, as indicative system and network activities
related to AD attacks are so prevalent in benign operations.
However, when putting truly causally related system activities in

a provenance graph via precise cross-machine tracing, it exposes
provenance graphs containing system activities conducted by
attackers as they typically follow a rigid AD attack pattern unlike
benign graphs.
Detailed comparison between HADES’s stages 1 and 2 is given
in Fig. 8, which presents the cumulative distribution function of
threat scores for benign and attack alerts. HADES’s stage 2 results
in Table III are based on the true attack threat score threshold.
Our threat triage algorithm in HADES’s stage 2, combined with
logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing, contributes to an average false positive reduction rate of 99% when
comparing to its stage 1.
B. HADES vs. CAD
Prior research [72] shows that, contrary to general perception,
commercial security products may have poor detection quality
despite high price tag. In order to answer the question how much
value a commercial attack detection product could bring, we
subscribed to a cloud-based dedicated AD attack detection solution from a popular security vendor and evaluated it alongside
HADES on our datasets. The security vendor is considered as
a significant security solution provider in the security market
overviews of Gartner [73] and Forrester [74]. However we did
not get the permission to name the vendor in the present paper,
and hence refer to the security product we purchased simply as
CAD (commercial attack detector).
We installed CAD on the domain controller of our emulation
infrastructure. We were also provided with a documentation
of the security product we purchased, in which a guideline

948

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

CDF of response time of HADES.
Fig. 10.

for CAD’s logging configuration and its high-level detection
logic/rules are included. To our surprise, as shown in Table III,
the commercial product did not raise a single false alarm, but is
plagued with a high false negative rate. The result of our investigation, however, aligns with the findings in prior work [72],
i.e., commercial security products may sacrifice detection rate
in exchange for analyst time.
By consulting on the documentation, in particular CAD’s
high-level detection logic, we were able to find some explanation
for the poor detection rate. First, we find that CAD, as a dedicated
AD attack detection system, does not collect enough data we
consider as necessary for accurate detection. That is, CAD only
collects a limited set of authentication & logon event types,
leading to restricted visibility. Second, some of its detection
rules do not fire alerts on events that are previously observed on
the same computers. With the prevalence of LOLBins, doing so
reduces false positives, but inevitably introduces false negatives.
Third, CAD does not check system logs inside each host at all.
We argue that credential access techniques, a critical step in AD
attacks, are detectable mostly via system logs.
To avoid false conclusion, we engaged with the vendor over
weeks by first checking if our installation and configuration of
CAD was correct, and then presenting our finding, and asking
for explanation on the high false negative rate. The answer of
the vendor confirmed our evaluation findings. In particular, the
vendor responded to the false negative for the Pass-the-Hash
attack by saying that CAD’s detection on Pass-the-Hash attacks
has known issues and they are working on a fix.
C. Response Time
We measure the response time of HADES in two separate parts.
Fig. 9 shows the cumulative distribution function of response
time of HADES in its two stages, respectively. HADES’s stage
1 response time is measured per authentication & logon alert.
Fig. 9(a) reveals that it takes less than 35 milliseconds to find an
authentication & logon anomaly for all authentication & logon
events in each dataset. We measure HADES’s stage 2 response
time as the time to perform logon session-based backward &
forward tracing on a high-level alert found in the stage 1, while
checking for system activities related to AD discovery techniques, credential access, and privilege escalation, and calculate
the threat score for the resulted attack graph. As shown in
Fig. 9 (b), it takes at most 45 seconds to return a low-level

An attack graph created by HADES on the APT29 dataset.

provenance attack graph with associated threat score for each
stage 1’s high-level alert in every dataset.
D. Case Study
1) Pass-the-Hash: Pass-the-Hash attacks leverage NTLM
authentication process, instead of the default AD authentication process Kerberos. This authentication anomaly manifests
in our authentication anomaly detection model introduced in
Section IV. However, using this model alone introduces many
false alerts, as NTLM authentication process is still widely in
use in Windows domains. For instance, when a user accesses
a remote network share via NTLM, the authentication process
against the target server and the domain controller looks the same
as in Pass-the-Hash attacks. That is, without resorting to system
logs, it is difficult to reliably detect Pass-the-Hash attacks. This is
also why CAD missed this attack in the Oilrig dataset. However,
we show that, by using whole network provenance tracing and an
alert triage algorithm, HADES can reliably detect Pass-the-Hash,
and drastically reduce false positives caused by benign user
activities. Fig. 3 automatically created by HADES presents the
entire attack chain conducted by the attacker.
2) Golden-Ticket: In a Golden-Ticket attack, the attacker
manages to steal the credentials of the krbtgt account from
a domain controller, and is then able to create a TGT impersonating any domain user. The attacker does not request a
TGT from a domain controller before requesting a TGS to an
application server, showing an anomaly in our authentication
anomaly detection model. However, during a benign operation,
when a cached TGT is used to request access to a server,
it exhibits the same network authentication anomaly, making
Golden-Ticket difficult to detect without inspecting system logs
on each involved machines. For the Golden-Ticket attack in the
APT29 dataset, as illustrated in Fig. 10, HADES first creates an
initial high-level attack graph involving AD entities like users
and hosts, after it detects an authentication & logon anomaly and
suspects a Golden-Ticket attack. Then it performs system-level
forward tracing inside the specific logon session of involved
username Bob in the accessed host Workstation_2, and systemlevel forward & backward tracing inside the logon session of
Alice in the accessing host Workstation_1, leading to a logon
session in the Domain Controller. This attack graph discloses
that the attacker first performed AD discovery and credential

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

Fig. 11.

An attack graph created by CAD on the APT29 dataset.

access on the initially compromised machine Workstation_1,
then moved to the Domain Controller for further credential
access, and finally created a Golden-Ticket for accessing the
Workstation_2.
In comparison, attack graphs produced by the commercial detector CAD are incomplete and much less informative, hindering
swift attack investigation by security analysts. For the attack
scenario in the WizardSpider dataset and the attack scenario
in the Oilrig dataset, CAD did not output an attack graph,
as it has missed the attacks. Fig. 11 shows the attack graph
produced by CAD for the attack scenario in the APT29 dataset.
Comparing to the attack graph produced by our system HADES
in Fig. 10, CAD’s attack graph is much less valuable for security
analysts in practice. First, it does not present the complete list
of machines and users that are involved in the attack. Second,
due to CAD’s limited tracing ability, its attack graph reveals no
malicious system activities conducted by the attacker. That is,
when presented with such an attack graph, security analysts need
to perform laborious, error-prone manual analysis to assess the
attacker’s traversal inside the network for attack remediation and
recovery.
E. Threats to the Validity of the Experimental Evaluation
HADES is evaluated on datasets resulted from implementation of MITRE emulation plans. We stringently followed the
emulation plans including the infrastructure setups, and are
unaware of any uncontrolled variables within our experiments
that could introduce threats to the internal validity. HADES’s
performance is measured not only by its false positive rate &
false negative rate, but also by its ability to construct concise and
complete attack graphs, which we consider as the most important
performance metrics. We developed HADES with considerations
of its deployability in real world in mind. HADES is evaluated
on a typical organization network as specified in the MITRE
emulation plans. HADES’s whole network tracing rests on a general concept called logon session-based execution partitioning
and tracing, which is not tied to any specific environment. We
believe that HADES can achieve similar detection performance in
various environments. However, there might be unknown factors
influencing HADES’s performance in real world. Due to privacy
concern, HADES is not yet extensively tested in real world, as
further discussed in Section VIII-C.
VII. DISCUSSION & RELATED WORK

949

detect AD attacks. TRACE [27] is an early attempt to detect
cross-machine attacks in enterprise networks by connecting
intra-machine provenance graphs whenever there is a network
connection between two machines, oblivious to the domain
context. This naive approach inevitably leads to cross-machine
dependency explosion, as discussed in Section IV. In contrast,
HADES is designed with realistic multi-users computing environment in domain context in mind, and can narrow the crossmachine tracing down to a specific logon session containing
system activities conducted truly by the same identity, drastically
reducing false dependencies.
However, HADES’s cross-machine tracing is limited to AD
environment and domain-joined machines. Devices brought by
employees themselves, aka BYOD, are out of HADES’s scope,
since for these devices the authentication & logon process is
done locally with local credentials instead of domain credentials.
Yet, local credentials cannot be used in identity-based attacks for
moving laterally to other machines in a network. That is, BYOD
cannot be used for identity-based attacks. Although attackers
may move laterally from BYOD to domain-joined devices via
binary exploitation, these kind of attacks are much more expensive and much less popular than identity-based attacks in reality,
as recent CrowdStrike studies [1], [2], [3], [4] show that 80%
of modern cyberattacks are identity-driven. Binary exploitation
does not cause any authentication event. Nor does it cause any
logon event. It may, however, cause some system activity events
on an accessed device. Without authentication and logon events,
HADES cannot perform accurate causality-based cross machine
tracing. The only way to also address binary exploitation-based
cross-machine attacks would be to conduct network connectionbased cross-machine tracing, which is highly inaccurate, as
discussed in Section IV-B.
B. Dependency Explosion
Intra-machine dependency explosion happens for longrunning processes, in which each input event is conservatively
considered causally responsible for all subsequent output events,
and vice versa, resulting in excessive amounts of false dependencies and formidably dense provenance graphs. Similarly, crossmachine dependency explosion occurs if edges are built simply
on a (coarse-granular) network connection basis. Program execution partitioning techniques [13], [25], [26] are the first proposed to combat intra-machine dependency explosion. MPI [75]
improves these techniques by introducing a semantics aware
program annotation and instrumentation technique. Whereas all
these techniques focus on execution of individual long-running
processes, logon session-based execution partitioning operates
at a higher level, beneficial for alleviating both intra-machine and
cross-machine dependency explosion. Nonetheless, the existing
techniques are complementary to HADES and can further reduce
false dependencies in provenance graphs.

A. Provenance-Based IDS
Prior PIDS [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22],
[23] are restricted to intra-machine tracing, and unaware of
the network context, hindering their adaptability for AD attack
detection. That is, by construction, these systems would fail to

C. Lateral Movement Detection
Although HADES is more than a lateral movement detector,
its design is centered on lateral movement detection. That is,
HADES’s stage 1 alerts on potential lateral movements, which

950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

are then further investigated in its stage 2 via whole-network
provenance tracing, and triaged with the insights from an extensive analysis of AD attacks conducted by APT actors, accurately
and comprehensively unraveling attackers’ traversal inside enterprise networks. HADES overcomes several inherent weaknesses, in terms of logging and assumptions, of state-of-the-art
lateral movement detection system Hopper [76]. First, Hopper
proposes an inference algorithm to identify complete login paths
in enterprise networks, as leveraging standard authentication
logs alone is insufficient to identify those paths. In contrast,
HADES combines authentication & logon logs and system logs
to trace these paths on a logon session basis, producing login paths guaranteed to be correct, unlike Hopper’s inference
algorithm. Second, Hopper’s detection algorithm operates on
two assumptions: 1) attackers use a different set of credentials
when moving to other machines, 2) attackers eventually access a
machine which they previously could not access. While intuitive,
these assumptions are not reliable enough, as HADES’s stage 1
shows that detection based on authentication & logon anomaly
alone leads to many false positives. A thorough investigation via
detailed system activities checking is critical for reducing these
false alarms.
D. Active Directory Attack Detection
Like the lateral movement detector Hopper [76], existing
Active Directory attack detectors [77], [78] are only comparable
to our system HADES’s stage one. That is, these systems are
anomaly detectors that can only output an (unranked) alert
simply suggesting a possible attack, but no attack graph assisting
in understanding the detection decision and hence further investigation. Anomaly detection alone often leads to many false
positives. The lack of an explanation makes it less useful for
security analysts in practice.
In comparison, HADES is not just a classification system.
Rather, HADES facilitates the investigation process in unearthing
the root causes and attack ramifications, by providing contextualized and more interpretable detection results. HADES can
perform accurate cross-machine system activity tracing in its
second stage, thanks to our novel concept called logon sessionbased execution partitioning, to automatically associate all system activities of each user or attacker. By mapping the system
activities inside each graph to AD-related attack techniques
when possible and then counting the number of attack techniques
present in each graph, HADES ranks these graphs and therefore
outputs ranked alerts, with the most likely AD attacks being
ranked the highest. This is to help security analysts perform swift
investigation, as they often find it difficult and time consuming to
investigate on, associate and understand the detection results of
currently deployed security systems [79], [80], [81]. We believe
that this functionality makes HADES much more practical than
existing systems. Note that a direct, empirical comparison with
these existing systems [27], [76], [77], [78] is difficult given the
absence of source code and differences in evaluation datasets.
VIII. LIMITATIONS
Currently, our system HADES has a few known limitations that
need to be addressed in future work.

A. Evading HADES
In practice, a PIDS’s ability to reconstruct concise and
accurate attack graphs is invaluable for security analysts, as
detection systems cannot guarantee perfect accuracy. Further
investigation by security analysts is vitally important for further
removing false positives and pinpointing true attacks. Concise and complete attack graphs automatically generated from
PIDS can substantially speed up the investigation process, and
therefore contribute to swift attack recovery & remediation.
Knowing this, advanced attackers may employ attack techniques
to specifically hinder HADES’s accurate system activity tracing
and prevent it from reconstructing correct and complete attack
graphs.
For instance, attackers may perform logon session hijacking to
disrupt HADES’s cross-machine tracing. With sufficient privilege
on one session, attackers can hijack another existing session.
However, a session hijacking attack is not directly evident in
system logs; the link between a hijacking logon session and a
hijacked logon session cannot be created by solely processing
system logs. If a session hijacking attack is not detected, the
hijacking session would not be linked to the hijacked session during logon session-based tracing. This would inevitably lead to
premature end of the cross-machine system activity tracing, and
result in incomplete or even incorrect attack graphs. Therefore,
future work needs to make HADES more robust by discovering all
possible evasion techniques and introducing countermeasures to
safeguard HADES’s cross-machine tracing.
B. Reliance on Log Integrity
A further limitation of HADES is its reliance on logs & log
integrity. Like all detection systems that rely on logs, i.e., every
system listed in Section VII, our system HADES would likely fail
at detecting the attacks, if attackers have managed to manipulate
logs without leaving any trace, or there are no logs generated or
left at all. This would be a very effective evasion technique.
However, as mentioned in Section V, there are already efforts
being put into preventing log manipulation. For instance, Windows introduced Protected Event Logging [55] to secure logs
from unauthorized access. Nevertheless, we believe that more
log protection techniques need to be designed in future work in
case attackers can bypass existing ones.
C. Deploying HADES in Real World
We developed HADES with considerations of its deployability
in real world in mind; HADES has been tested in an emulated
environment based on a typical organization network as specified in the MITRE Emulation Plans [58]. HADES leverages system logs and authentication & logon logs collected by popular
industry-standard instrumentation-free logging tools provided
by Microsoft. These logging tools are installed on each host and
have low computational overhead. Collected logs are shipped
to Elasticsearch and stored in a more efficient format. HADES
interfaces with Elasticsearch, a widely utilized tool for scalable
and near real-time event searching and threat analysis within
organizations. HADES’s response time, i.e., time to output an
AD attack graph assigned with a threat score, does not directly

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

depend on the size of an enterprise environment, but rather on the
number of cross-machine hops in each suspected attack instance,
i.e., the number of involved hosts. Note that HADES performs
fine-grained provenance tracing only on involved hosts. That
is, HADES’s performance degradation in terms of response time
in a large enterprise environment would be insignificant. Further, the size of an enterprise would have no direct impact on
HADES’s performance on generating accurate attack graphs and
its detection accuracy.
HADES has not yet been deployed in a production system. This
is due to a concern that the detailed logs required by HADES
would violate users’ privacy. By combining recorded system
activities and logon activities, HADES can reveal which employee
has carried out what activities on which machines at what
time. That is, deploying HADES without integrating a privacypreserving logging solution in an organization might lead to
increased vulnerability to abuse of power, decreased trust, or
even legal consequences. A proper privacy-preserving logging
mechanism needs to be designed in future work and incorporated
into HADES; only then is HADES readily deployable in real
world. HADES is potentially compatible with popular privacypreserving techniques like log anonymization, data masking,
noise injection. That is, personally identifiable information from
logs like user ID can be replaced with hashes or pseudonyms
that are unique but non-reversible. Besides, information like
IP addresses inside network activity logs that may reveal user
identity but is irrelevant to HADES can be masked with a fixed
value. Further, random forensics-irrelevant user activities can be
injected into the logs to make any attempt to reverse-engineer
personal information more difficult.

IX. CONCLUSION
We present a novel accurate AD attack detection and investigation system named HADES in this paper. Based on a thorough
study of AD attacks launched by APT actors, we create a succinct
and contextualized AD attack overview revealing key steps and
prerequisites of various AD attack types. We leverage critical
insights from our extensive analysis on AD attacks to design
a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model, and a
threat triage algorithm. We propose the concept logon sessionbased execution partitioning and tracing, which significantly
reduces false dependencies, contributing to accurate and swift
AD attack detection. Our evaluations, conducted on datasets
derived from rigorously implemented MITRE emulation plans,
demonstrate that HADES significantly outperforms open-source
SIEM detection rules and a commercial dedicated AD attack
detector.

REFERENCES
[1] CrowdStrike, Inc., “CrowdStrike 2023 global threat report,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/global-threat-report/
[2] CrowdStrike, Inc., “CrowdStrike 2023 threat hunting report,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/resources/reports/threathunting-report/

951

[3] V. Shastri, “Attackers set sights on active directory: Understanding your identity exposure,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/attackers-set-sights-on-activedirectory-understanding-your-identity-exposure/
[4] V. Shastri, “Endpoint and identity security: A critical combination to stop
modern attacks,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
crowdstrike.com/blog/unifying-endpoint-and-identity-security/
[5] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE T1558.003,” Accessed: Dec. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1558/003/
[6] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE T1550.002,” Accessed: Dec. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1550/002/
[7] S. Krishnamoorthi and J. Carleton, “Active directory holds the keys
to your kingdom, but is it secure?” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.frost.com/frost-perspectives/active-directory-holds-thekeys-to-your-kingdom-but-is-it-secure/
[8] “Nmap,” Accessed: May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://nmap.org/
[9] Microsoft, “Setspn,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/itpro/windows-server-2012-r2-and-2012/cc731241(v=ws.11)
[10] Falcon OverWatch Team, “8 LOLBins every threat hunter should know,”
Accessed: May 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/
blog/8-lolbins-every-threat-hunter-should-know/
[11] Trellix, “Trellix threat report 2023,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
www.trellix.com/advanced-research-center/threat-reports/feb-2023/
[12] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE matrix,” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://attack.mitre.org/matrices/enterprise/
[13] S. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “ProTracer: Towards practical provenance
tracing by alternating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2016, pp. 1–15.
[14] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
from COTS audit data,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 487–504.
[15] W. U. Hassan, L. Mark, N. Aguse, A. Bates, and T. Moyer, “Towards
scalable cluster auditing through grammatical inference over provenance
graphs,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[16] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019,
pp. 1137–1152.
[17] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2019,
pp. 1–15.
[18] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
[19] M. N. Hossain, S. Sheikhi, and R. Sekar, “Combating dependence explosion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1139–1155.
[20] Z. Cheng et al., “KAIROS: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
2024, pp. 9–28.
[21] M. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. Hassan, “FLASH: A comprehensive
approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 142–161.
[22] J. Zeng et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber threat
analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy
(S&P), 2022, pp. 489–506.
[23] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “PROGRAPHER: An
anomaly detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in
Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372.
[24] F. Dong et al., “Are we there yet? An industrial viewpoint on provenancebased endpoint detection and response tools,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 2396–2410.
[25] K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “High accuracy attack provenance via
binary-based execution partition,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
2013, pp. 1–16.
[26] S. Ma, K. H. Lee, C. H. Kim, J. Rhee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Accurate,
low cost and instrumentation-free security audit logging for windows,” in
Proc. Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2015, pp. 401–410.
[27] H. Irshad et al., “TRACE: Enterprise-wide provenance tracking for
real-time APT detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
pp. 4363–4376, 2021.
[28] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.

952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[29] Elastic, “Elastic detection rules,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/elastic/detection-rules
[30] SigmaHQ, “Sigma,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
[31] M. Crockett, “Why 86% of organizations are increasing their investment in active directory security,” Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://securityboulevard.com/2021/11/why-86-of-organizationsare-increasing-their-investment-in-active-directory-security/
[32] A. Talyanski, “nopac exploit: Latest microsoft AD flaw may lead to total
domain compromise in seconds,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/nopac-exploit-latest-microsoftad-flaw-may-lead-to-total-domain-compromise/
[33] Inc Tenable, “A gloabl threat to enterprises: The impact of
active directory attacks,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://de.tenable.com/whitepapers/a-global-threat-to-enterprisesthe-impact-of-ad-attacks?page=2
[34] X. Han, T. Pasqueir, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN:
Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2020, pp. 1–18.
[35] The MITRE Corporation, “Oilrig emulation plan,” Accessed: Oct. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-threat-informeddefense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/oilrig
[36] The MITRE Corporation, “Golden ticket,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1558/001/
[37] V. Pamnani, “4769(s, f): A kerberos service ticket was requested,”
Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threatprotection/auditing/event-4769
[38] V. Pamnani, “4624(s): An account was successfully logged on,”
Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threatprotection/auditing/event-4624
[39] V. Pamnani, “4768(s, f): A kerberos authentication ticket (TGT)
was requested,” Accessed: Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/itpro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4768
[40] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATT&CK,” Accessed: Jan. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org
[41] Mandiant, “Mandiant M-trends 2023,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mandiant.com/resources/reports
[42] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing
the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
2023, pp. 2620–2638.
[43] Microsoft, “Security auditing,” Accessed: May 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/itpro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/security-auditingoverview
[44] Microsoft, “LSA logon sessions,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/secauthn/
lsa-logon-sessions
[45] M. E. Russinovich and A. Margosis, Troubleshooting With the Windows Sysinternals Tools, 2nd ed. Redmond, WA, USA: Microsoft Press,
2016.
[46] A. Allievi, A. Ionescu, D. A. Solomon, K. Chase, and M. E. Russinovich,
Windows Internals, Part 2, 7th ed. Redmond, WA, USA: Microsoft Press,
2022.
[47] A. Miroshnikov, Windows Security Monitoring: Scenarios and Patterns.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2018.
[48] J. Forshaw, Windows Security Internals: A Deep Dive Into Windows
Authentication, Authorization, and Auditing. San Francisco, CA, USA:
No Starch Press, 2024.
[49] The MITRE Corporation, “T1021.001,” Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1021/001/
[50] Microsoft, “Fast user switching,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fast-userswitching
[51] Microsoft, “User account control,” Accessed: Feb. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/applicationsecurity/application-control/user-account-control/
[52] V. Pamnani, “4625(f): An account failed to log on,” Accessed:
Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threatprotection/auditing/event-4625
[53] M. Russinovich and T. Garnier, “System monitor,” Accessed:
Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon

[54] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATT&CK campaigns,” Accessed:
May 2024. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/campaigns/
[55] S. Wheeler and M. Lombardi, “About logging windows,” Accessed:
Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_logging_
windows?view=powershell-7.3
[56] Elastic NV, “Elasticsearch,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.elastic.co/
[57] Elastic NV, “EQL search,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/eql.html
[58] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE adversary emulation library,”
Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-forthreat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library
[59] Elastic NV, “Lightweight shipper for windows event logs,” Accessed:
Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/beats/winlogbeat/
[60] M. Davis, “How to design your elasticsearch data storage architecture for
scale,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/
beats/winlogbeat/
[61] Elastic NV, “Resize your deployment,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [Online].
Available: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-enterprise/current/eceresize-deployment.html
[62] Elastic NV, “Get ready for production,” Accessed: Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/
current/scalability.html
[63] A. D. Keromytis, “DARPA transparent computing E3,”
Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpai2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md
[64] J. Torrey, “DARPA transparent computing,” Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing
[65] M. van Opstal and W. Arbaugh, “DARPA OpTC,” Accessed: Sep. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data
[66] The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE engenuity,” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://attackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/
[67] The MITRE Corporation, “APT29 emulation plan,” Accessed: Oct. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-for-threat-informeddefense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/apt29
[68] The MITRE Corporation, “WizardSpider emulation plan,” Accessed:
Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/center-forthreat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library/tree/master/
wizard_spider
[69] Q. Liu, K. Bao, and V. Hagenmeyer, “AVIATOR: A MITRE emulation
plan-derived living dataset for advanced persistent threat detection and investigation,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2024, pp. 5592–5601.
[70] Q. Liu, K. Bao, and V. Hagenmeyer, “AVIATOR dataset,” Accessed:
Nov. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://gitlab.kit.edu/kit/iai/rsa/aviator
[71] Google Security Operations, “Chronicle detection rules,” Accessed:
Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/chronicle/detectionrules
[72] X. Bouwman, H. Griffioen, J. Egbers, C. Doerr, B. Klievink, and M. van
Eeten, “A different cup of TI? The added value of commercial threat
intelligence,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 433–450.
[73] E. Mirolyubov, M. Taggett, F. Hinner, and N. Patel, “Magic quadrant for
endpoint protection platforms,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=1-2FFCXFOM&ct=231025&st=sb
[74] A. Mellen, “The forrester new wave: Extended detection and
response (XDR) providers, Q4 2021,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.forrester.com/report/the-forrester-new-wave-tm-extendeddetection-and-response-xdr-providers-q4-2021/RES176400
[75] S. Ma, J. Zhai, F. Wang, K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “MPI:
Multiple perspective attack investigation with semantic aware execution
partitioning,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1111–1128.
[76] G. Ho et al., “Hopper: Modeling and detecting lateral movement,” in Proc.
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3093–3110.
[77] L. Kotlaba, S. Buchovecká, and R. Lórencz, “Active directory kerberoasting attack: Detection using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2021, pp. 376–383.
[78] W. Matsuda, M. Fujimoto, and T. Mitsunaga, “Detecting APT attacks
against active directory using machine leaning,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Conf.
Appl. Inf. Netw. Secur., 2018, pp. 60–65.
[79] E. Segal, “Alert fatigue,” Accessed: Aug. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/edwardsegal/2021/11/08/alert-fatiguecan-lead-to-missed-cyber-threats-and-staff-retentionrecruitment-issuesstudy/?sh=4c96871035c9
[80] C. Robinson, “In cybersecurity every alert matters,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
11/US48277521_TLWP.pdf

LIU et al.: HADES: DETECTING AND INVESTIGATING ACTIVE DIRECTORY ATTACKS VIA WHOLE NETWORK PROVENANCE ANALYTICS

[81] CRITICALSTART, “The impact of security alert overload,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.criticalstart.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
02/CS_Report-The-Impact-of-Security-Alert-Overload.pdf

Qi Liu received the PhD degree from the Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2025.
His research interests include system security, auditing & logging, data provenance analysis, and advanced persistence threat detection and investigation.

Kaibin Bao received the PhD degree from the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, in
2021. He is currently the head with Working Group
Resilient Secure Automation, Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology. His research topics include cybersecurity for critical infrastructures and automation systems using machine learning methods.

953

Wajih Ul Hassan received the PhD degree in computer science from the University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in 2021. He is
currently an assistant professor with the Department
of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. He has collaborated with NEC
Labs and Symantec Research Labs to integrate his
defensive techniques into commercial security products. His research interests include securing complex
networked systems by leveraging data provenance
approaches and scalable system design. He was the
recipoient of the NSF CAREER Award, Symantec Research Labs Graduate
Fellowship, recognition as a Young Researcher at the Heidelberg Laureate
Forum, RSA Security Scholarship, Mavis Future Faculty Fellowship, Sohaib and
Sara Abbasi Fellowship, and an ACM SIGSOFT Distinguished Paper Award.

Veit Hagenmeyer (Member, IEEE), received the PhD
degree from Université Paris XI, Paris, France in
2002. He is currently a professor of energy informatics with the Faculty of Computer Science, and
the director with the Institute for Automation and
Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. His research interests include modeling, optimization and control of energy
systems, machine learning-based forecasting in energy systems, and integrated cybersecurity of such
systems.