IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

5381

Hermes: Boosting the Performance of
Machine-Learning-Based Intrusion
Detection System Through
Geometric Feature Learning
Chaoyu Zhang , Student Member, IEEE, Shanghao Shi , Member, IEEE, Ning Wang ,
Xiangxiang Xu, Member, IEEE, Shaoyu Li, Student Member, IEEE, Lizhong Zheng , Fellow, IEEE,
Randy Marchany , Member, IEEE, Mark Gardner, Member, IEEE, Y. Thomas Hou , Fellow, IEEE,
and Wenjing Lou , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
have been extensively studied for their ability to detect zero-day
attacks by establishing a baseline of normal behavior from benign
traffic and flagging deviations as potential threats. However,
they often suffer from higher false positive rates compared to
signature-based IDSs. Unlike image data, raw network traffic
lacks directly useful features and requires additional processing to capture meaningful patterns. Simple traffic statistics
(e.g., connection duration, packet inter-arrival time) often fail
to represent the complex relationships necessary for accurate
detection, making feature engineering essential. We propose a
geometric feature learning method to optimize feature extraction.
Specifically, we employ contrastive feature learning to build a representation space where benign traffic forms a compact cluster,
and then apply H-Score feature learning to further enhance intraclass compactness and inter-class separability, thereby improving
anomaly detection performance. Beyond the NSL-KDD and
N-BaIoT datasets, we further validate our approach on more
Received 15 January 2025; revised 11 August 2025 and 5 February 2026;
accepted 4 May 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING
Editor E. Bertino. Date of publication 26 May 2026; date of current version
1 June 2026. This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research
under Grant N00014-24-1-2730 and Grant N00014-19-1-2621; in part by
U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant 1916902, Grant 2154929,
Grant 2247560, Grant 2235232, and Grant 2312447; and in part by Virginia
Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (CCI). The preliminary version of this paper
was published in ACM MobiHoc 2024 [DOI: 10.1145/3641512.3686380].
(Corresponding author: Chaoyu Zhang.)
Chaoyu Zhang, Shaoyu Li, and Wenjing Lou are with the Department
of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA 22203 USA (e-mail:
chaoyu@vt.edu; shaoyuli@vt.edu; wjlou@vt.edu).
Shanghao Shi is with the Department of Computer Science, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63144 USA (e-mail: shanghao@wustl.edu).
Ning Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: ningw@usf.edu).
Xiangxiang Xu is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627 USA (e-mail: xiangxiangxu@rochester.edu).
Lizhong Zheng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 02139 USA (e-mail: lizhong@mit.edu).
Randy Marchany is with the IT Security Office, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg,
VA 24061 USA (e-mail: marchany@vt.edu).
Mark Gardner is with the Advanced Research Computing, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail: mkg@vt.edu).
Y. Thomas Hou is with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA (e-mail:
thou@vt.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3697115

advanced and realistic benchmarks, including CIC-IDS-2017,
TON-IoT, and UNSW-NB15, demonstrating strong generalizability. To address privacy concerns and enable collaborative learning
across distributed environments, we extend our centralized design
to a federated learning (FL) setting, preserving user privacy while
leveraging the collective knowledge of diverse IoT devices. Finally,
we deploy the proposed IDS on a Raspberry Pi 4 to showcase its
efficiency and suitability for resource-constrained IoT scenarios.
Index Terms—Machine learning-based intrusion detection system, geometric feature learning, contrastive learning, federated
learning, anomaly detection, IoT security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE development of cloud computing, the expansion of
5G networks, and the exponential growth of IoT devices
have led to an unprecedented increase in network traffic and
complexity. This expansion not only facilitates innovative
applications but also causes significant vulnerabilities [2].
Cyber threats have evolved to be more sophisticated, and
attackers are exploiting these vulnerabilities to compromise the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical information
on the network. The 2016 Mirai botnet [3] is a notable example
of powerful distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks. In
these attacks, numerous Internet-connected devices, infected
with Mirai malware, flooded targeted servers with excessive
Internet traffic. This attack rendered major websites, including
Twitter, Netflix, Reddit, and CNN, temporarily inaccessible
to millions of users. Given these circumstances, the implementation of an intrusion detection system (IDS) has become
imperative. IDS plays a crucial role in the continuous monitoring and analysis of network traffic, capable of identifying
potential attacks.
In general, there are two types of IDSs to safeguard network infrastructures: signature-based and anomaly-based IDS.
Signature-based IDS functions by comparing observed traffic
against a database of known attack patterns or signatures [4],
[5], [6], [7]. This method is highly effective in recognizing
and thwarting established threats, making it an essential tool
for defending against known attacks. However, its efficacy
is limited to known threats, leaving a gap that anomalybased IDS aims to fill. Anomaly-based IDS works on the

T

2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5382

principle of behavioral analysis [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13].
It establishes a baseline of normal network behavior and
continuously monitors for deviations, flagging any unusual
activity that could signify a potential intrusion. This approach
enables it to detect novel (a.k.a., zero-day) attacks, which do
not match any known signatures. While more adaptable to
emerging threats, anomaly-based IDS can be prone to higher
false-positive rates [14], [15].
Research Motivation: An effective anomaly-based IDS
should not only detect intrusions but also identify their types,
including both known attacks and generalized zero-day threats.
This capability is essential for Intrusion Response Systems
(IRS) [16], [17], which rely on attack type identification
to trigger targeted responses. For example, a DDoS attack
may require rate limiting [18], while malware infiltration may
demand system isolation [19], [20]. Detecting zero-day attacks
is also critical [21], [22], as it enables the discovery of new
signatures to enhance signature-based IDSs and provides novel
samples to improve anomaly-based models through retraining.
However, building such an all-in-one solution is particularly challenging for resource-constrained devices, which have
limited compute, memory, and energy. Signature-based IDSs
require substantial resources to maintain and update attack
signature databases, an especially difficult task in large-scale
IoT environments with limited bandwidth and massive device
populations.
Research Objective: Therefore, the goal of our research is
to 1) improve the overall performance of the anomaly-based
IDS by minimizing the false positive rate and reducing the
incidence of detection omissions, and 2) extend the capabilities
of anomaly-based IDS by enabling them not only to detect an
intrusion but also to precisely identify the specific type of the
intrusion for resource-limited devices.
In the conventional approach to machine learning-based
IDS, feature engineering holds substantial importance within
the pipeline as it directly impacts the ultimate detection
performance. Unlike image data, where the observed features
provide immediate utility, raw network traffic necessitates
additional processing for effective detection [23], [24]. Learning useful patterns directly from raw data traffic or simple
traffic statistics (e.g., connection duration, packet inter-arrival
time) is challenging as the complex relationships are difficult
to distinguish. Therefore, it becomes imperative to extract
features that can directly enhance the performance of detection
models rather than relying solely on raw data traffic or simple
traffic statistics.
Existing contrastive learning-based IDS methods, such as
FeCo [14] and CIDS [25], employ contrastive loss to learn
representations of complex network traffic and improve IDS
performance. AOC-IDS [26] introduces a contrastive loss
tailored for autoencoders to obtain better baseline representations, thereby enhancing anomaly detection.
Our Contribution: Going beyond contrastive learning,
which relies on similarity-based objectives to structure representations in latent space, we interpret the neural network’s
latent space through a geometric lens. We propose Hermes
[1], a novel IDS that projects complex network traffic into
a geometrically optimized space for enhanced representation,
enabling clearer decision boundaries and more accurate intrusion detection. We adopt geometric feature learning [27],

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

which enables principled, distance-based feature extraction
with a clear geometric interpretation. For clarity, we define
features as the feature representations extracted by the neural
network. The space mapped by this neural network is referred
to as the feature space, and the space encompassing all benign
feature representations is termed the baseline.
The high-level design of Hermes includes a two-step
training phase. The first step involves Contrastive Feature
Learning. To achieve clear separation between benign and
malicious traffic representations in the latent space, we employ
it to guide the representation structure. Our approach forms a
positive pair using two normal traffic records, and a negative
pair using one normal and one abnormal traffic record. This
learning process pulls positive pairs closer and pushes negative
pairs farther apart, thereby generating a new baseline. In this
space, benign instances are tightly clustered, while attack
instances are repelled from the benign cluster, enhancing
the effectiveness of subsequent anomaly detection. The second step involves H-Score Feature Learning, which further
refines the learned features by maximizing the compactness
of the cluster representing normal behavior. It also increases
the separation between different types of traffic, enabling the
IDS to more clearly distinguish between attack classes. The
theoretical foundation of the geometrically optimal distance
optimization underpinning H-Score feature learning is formally established in [27] and [28].
For IDS inference, Hermes employs a dual inference mechanism: it uses a similarity-based rule to measure deviations of
traffic features from the baseline for anomaly-based detection,
and a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) rule for attack type
identification. This inference mechanism also evaluates if an
instance is a zero-day attack using entropy-based uncertainty
from the posterior distribution and inconsistency between the
two predictions.
In this work, we further extend the Hermes centralized
design to a decentralized setting through federated learning
(FL). In centralized IDSs, while collecting data from multiple
sources can provide better intrusion detection performance,
they are hindered by privacy concerns and legal restrictions,
such as those imposed by HIPAA,1 which prevent the collection of sensitive user data on central servers. On the other hand,
naı̈ve distributed IDSs, trained only with local private datasets,
often suffer from low performance due to both the quantity and
quality of local data. FL offers a promising solution to these
challenges by enabling local gateways to collaboratively train a
global model without sharing raw data, thus preserving privacy
while leveraging the collective knowledge of diverse IoT
devices [29], [30], [31], thereby enabling the creation of more
powerful IDS models for various IoT devices. Therefore, we
build FL-Hermes by incorporating geometric feature learning
into the FL system to achieve better detection performance
while simultaneously preserving user data privacy. In this FLbased design, each gateway trains an individual IDS model
locally via geometric feature learning, and all gateways cooperatively upload local updates to a central parameter server for
model aggregation. After the FL-Hermes training phase, the
well-trained model is deployed to these gateways for traffic
1 https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

5383

TABLE I
A R EVIEW OF M ACHINE -L EARNING -BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION S YSTEMS : M ECHANISMS , C APABILITIES , AND TARGETED T HREATS

inference. We further extend our evaluation to demonstrate
the effectiveness of Hermes in the FL setting.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1) Hermes employs contrastive feature learning to establish a well-formed baseline to distinguish benign and
intrusion features, thus enabling anomaly detection.
2) Building on this, Hermes employs H-Score feature learning to capture the dependencies between traffic and their
types, enabling the inference phase to identify the attack
types. This method focuses on reducing geometrical
distance in the baseline, narrowing distances among features of the same type, and increasing distances between
features of different classes, further enhancing anomaly
detection ability and enabling attack identification.
3) The dual inference of Hermes applies a similarity-based
rule to the learned features to determine if the traffic
is malicious and utilizes MAP estimation to assess the
preliminary type of intrusion. Furthermore, it classifies
the types of known attacks and flags zero-day attacks.
4) We extend the Hermes centralized design to an FLbased distributed setting to address privacy concerns in
centralized IDS learning processes and overcome the
performance limitations of naı̈ve distributed IDSs trained
on low-quality and low-quantity data.
5) Extensive evaluations of Hermes across five datasets
and diverse hardware platforms, in both centralized and
federated learning settings, have consistently demonstrated its effectiveness. Hermes outperforms various
state-of-the-art IDS baselines.

II. R ELATED W ORK
A critical factor in anomaly-based IDS performance is the
construction of a representative baseline space. Prior work
has explored various strategies: Yan et al. [47] employed
non-parametric density estimation to learn legitimate access
patterns, while KNN-based approaches [11] assess similarity
to benign instances. Deep learning models have also been
applied, including LSTMs for log modeling [48], autoencoder
ensembles for traffic features [33], and VAEs for feature
compression [10], [35]. Sequence-based modeling using GRUs
[49] and Isolation Forests [41], [43] further contribute diverse
anomaly detection strategies. Recent methods such as FeCo
[14], CIDS [25], and AOC-IDS [26] leverage contrastive learning to improve feature representations and baseline quality.
To enhance intrusion classification, signature-based IDSs [4],
[5], [6], [7] match traffic patterns against known attack signatures. For example, graphical models [9], SVMs for botnet
detection [8], two-tier classifiers [37], and hybrid clusteringclassification approaches [34] demonstrate the strengths of this
paradigm in identifying specific attack types. We summarize
existing ML-based IDS by analyzing their underlying ML
mechanisms, capabilities, and the security threats they target
in Tab. I.

5384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 1. The system workflow of Hermes. (a) Centralized system model where
the IDS model is trained on a single server. (b) Distributed system model
leveraging FL to collaboratively train the IDS model across multiple local
gateways.

III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND T HREAT M ODEL
Centralized System Model: We consider a general IDS
architecture following prior work [50], [51], as illustrated
in Fig. 1 (a). We assume that a network gateway G interconnects multiple local devices and manages both incoming
and outgoing traffic, making it a natural vantage point for
traffic monitoring and analysis. The IDS operates in two
modes: training and inference. In the training mode, raw
network packets observed at the gateway are first summarized
into flow-level records by a Flow Record Generator. This
module represents a general abstraction that aggregates packets
belonging to the same communication session and extracts
flow-level features. Such functionality can be implemented
using various schemes or tools, including NetFlow [52],
CICFlowMeter [53], or customized aggregation mechanisms.
NetFlow is referenced here only as a representative example,
rather than a required component. The generated flow records,
which encapsulate key characteristics of network communications, are forwarded to a training server S and used as input
for IDS model training. In the inference mode, the trained
IDS model is deployed at the gateway G to perform real-time
intrusion detection based on locally generated flow records.
For clarity, we refer to recorded traffic as flow-level records
that summarize sequences of packets and capture essential
communication characteristics between network endpoints.
Distributed System Model: In FL-Hermes (Fig. 1 (b)),
we extend the centralized design to a federated learning
(FL) setting. The system consists of a set of local gateways

G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GN } and a parameter server S that coordinates
model aggregation. Each gateway locally monitors traffic,
generates flow records using the Flow Record Generator, and
trains a local IDS model. At each FL round t, the parameter
server S initializes or maintains a global model M(t) with the
same architecture as the centralized IDS. A trusted subset of
gateways G0 ⊆ G is selected to participate, and the current
global model is broadcast to these clients to initialize their
local models. Each selected gateway Gi ∈ G0 performs local
training using its own flow records and computes a model
update δ(t)
i . After local training, participating gateways upload
their updates {δ(t)
i }Gi ∈G0 to the server S. The server aggregates
these updates using a standard FL aggregation rule, such as
FedAvg or FedSGD [29], to obtain an updated global model
M(t+1) . This process is repeated for multiple rounds until
convergence, resulting in a global IDS model that generalizes
across heterogeneous local traffic distributions without sharing
raw traffic data.
Threat Model: In our threat model, we assume attackers
manipulate network traffic to launch various network-based
attacks, including probing, data injection, denial of service, malware, infiltration, exfiltration, and man-in-the-middle
attacks. These may include zero-day attacks with no known
signatures. We assume such manipulations result in detectable
deviations from benign traffic patterns. The IDS and the
gateways on which it resides are assumed to be trusted and
secure. To ensure trustworthiness, we assume only verified
clients participate in the FL system, contributing diverse and
distributed data for collaborative training. While Byzantine
threats like poisoning attacks are a known concern, we assume
an honest and cooperative setting. As extensive work exists on
poisoning resilience [54], we consider such threats mitigable
and beyond the scope of this study.
We acknowledge that adversarial evasion attacks, including
black-box attacks such as transfer-based and query-based
attacks, remain an important and challenging research problem. Defending against such attacks typically requires dedicated threat modeling and specialized defense mechanisms,
and thus represents a complementary line of work beyond
the scope of this paper [13], [55]. In this work, Hermes is
evaluated under standard IDS deployment assumptions, where
the detection model is accessed as a black box, and attackers
do not have access to internal parameters or gradients. Rather
than claiming explicit adversarial robustness, Hermes focuses
on improving detection accuracy and generalization under
realistic traffic conditions. As a possible extension, adversarial
training [55] could be incorporated into our framework without
modifying its core design, which we leave as future work.
The privacy aspects of Hermes, including leakage risks
and resilience strategies inspired by [56] and [57], form an
orthogonal research direction deserving further exploration.
IV. D ESIGN OF H ERMES
A. Overview
The key steps of the Hermes learning process are depicted
in Fig. 1 (a), offering an overview of our system. The pretraining phase begins with the traffic monitor gathering packet
data from network gateways (¬). This data is processed and
then relayed to the flow record generator (­), which creates
structured flow records (®). The training phase (¯) involves

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

5385

Fig. 2. Hermes Design: Our approach begins with contrastive feature learning to train a model f (x; θ0 ), establishing a baseline space (Training Step One).
Subsequently, we refine this model to f (x; θ1 ) and develop the identification model g(y; θ2 ) using H-Score feature learning (Training Step Two). During the
Inference phase, the established IDS model employs a similarity-based rule for anomaly detection and a MAP rule for attack identification. We further analyze
each instance to ascertain whether it could be a zero-day attack, based on the results from dual inference.

two critical steps: first, we construct an initial anomaly
detection model f (x; θ0 ) using contrastive feature learning to
define a baseline. We then refine this model from f (x; θ0 ) to
f (x; θ1 ), and develop the identification model g(y; θ2 ) through
H-Score feature learning (as shown in Fig. 2). Once the fully
trained IDS model is deployed at the gateway G (°), Hermes
performs dual inference: it utilizes a similarity-based rule for
anomaly detection and a MAP rule for attack identification,
and analyzes whether the intrusion is a zero-day attack. The
system’s pivotal elements, contrastive feature learning, HScore feature learning, and dual inference, are expounded in
the following sections.

TABLE II
D EFINITIONS AND N OTATIONS

B. Training Step One: Contrastive Feature Learning
To establish a representative baseline for anomaly detection,
we employ geometrical feature extraction through contrastive
feature learning. This method leverages the inherent differences and similarities in network traffic to enhance the
performance of anomaly-based IDS. Specifically, each training
data record in our system consists of two components: the flow
record x ∈ Rd , where d represents the dimensionality of the
flow record, and its corresponding output label y ∈ {0, 1}. Here,
0 denotes benign traffic flow, while 1 indicates an intrusion.
The primary aim of our contrastive learning algorithm is to
extract a representative benign feature cluster as a baseline.
To achieve this, we train a neural network f (x; θ0 ) with
weights θ0 , which takes the input record x ∈ Rd and produces
a feature f (x) ∈ Rk . Let xi and x j represent benign inputs,
and xm represent an intrusive input. Given a training dataset
containing benign and intrusion instances, we compute feature
representations f (xi ) and f (x j ) for pairs of benign samples.
Here, x j is another benign sample within the same minibatch as xi to form a positive pair. Positive and negative pairs
are constructed dynamically within each mini-batch to reduce
computational overhead, following the strategy in [58].
In contrastive feature learning, training is performed in a
mini-batch manner. Within each mini-batch of size B, we
denote benign samples as xi and x j , where xi is an anchor
benign sample and x j is another benign sample in the same
mini-batch forming a positive pair, and malicious samples as

xm , which serve as negative samples. Let N and M denote the
numbers of benign and malicious samples in the mini-batch,

5386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

respectively. The values of N and M are not manually specified
hyperparameters; instead, they are determined by the natural
class distribution of the (non-IID) training dataset within
each mini-batch and may vary across batches. Intuitively, a
sufficient number of benign samples (N) helps learn a compact
and stable representation of normal traffic, while the presence of malicious samples (M) promotes separability between
benign and intrusive behaviors. The mini-batch size B controls
the trade-off between representation stability and computational cost, and is selected accordingly in our evaluation.
Notably, malicious samples are typically not used as anchors
because anomaly detection fundamentally relies on modeling
consistent benign behavior and detecting deviations from it.
Incorporating variable and sparse malicious data as anchors
may obscure the learned boundary by introducing unstable
or non-generalizable representations. We follow the original
dataset’s class distribution and a widely used partitioning
strategy to preserve the benign-to-malicious ratio. A complete
list of definitions and notations is provided in Table II.
Based on the above mini-batch construction and sample
roles, the contrastive learning objective aims to maximize
the similarity between f (xi ) and f (x j ), while simultaneously
distinguishing between benign f (xi ) and all malicious f (xm )
instances, where f (xm )|m∈{M} . In this context, ui = f (xi ) and
u j = f (x j ) are the features of benign inputs xi and x j ,
respectively, and vm = f (xm ) is the feature of an intrusive
input xm .
!
exp(uTi u j /τ)
li j = − log
. (1)
PM
exp(uTi u j /τ) + m=1
exp(uTi vm /τ)
The term 0 < τ < 1 represents the temperature coefficient.
The overall loss function L aggregates all pairwise losses,
encompassing both li j and l ji terms:
N

L=

N

X X
1
(li j + l ji ).
N(N − 1)

(2)

i=1 j=i+1

Phase one of the training, as depicted in Fig. 2, offers an
intuitive visualization of the learning process. In this phase,
by minimizing the loss function, we enhance the similarity
among benign data representations, effectively drawing them
closer together. Concurrently, this process distances benign
representations from those indicative of intrusions. Once the
model converges, it results in a well-defined baseline for normal traffic, which is essential for effective anomaly detection.
C. Training Step Two: H-Score Feature Learning
While our current model is adept at anomaly detection,
it cannot identify specific types of attack and the baseline
is not optimal yet. To address this limitation, we employ
H-Score feature learning [28], [59], which explores the
geometric feature space beyond the established baseline.
In essence, H-Score learning geometrically maps the feature to construct unique clusters for each attack type. This
enables the identification of specific attack types during the
inference phase. Additionally, it increases the separability
between features of different classes. This approach further
refines the baseline feature space, distancing it from intrusion
clusters, which in turn enhances the performance of the
anomaly-based IDS.

To begin, we define a variable X indicating flow records, and
a variable Y as corresponding labels. In this context, each label
yi is an integer where yi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}; here, 0 represents
a benign label, while any non-zero number corresponds to
a specific type of attack. These variables, X and Y, follow
the joint distribution PX,Y . Given the complexity of traffic
encountered by IDS, this joint distribution PX,Y is typically
unknown, making the direct computation or estimation of the
statistical dependence, as indicated by the CDK (canonical
dependence kernel) function iX;Y (referenced in [27, Eq. 4]),
infeasible.
PX,Y (x, y) − PX (x)PY (y)
iX;Y =
.
(3)
PX (x)PY (y)
Consequently, we focus on learning iX;Y from data samples
using H-Score feature learning, specifically by considering its
rank-k approximation ζ≤k (iX;Y ), given k ≥ 1. The approximation of iX;YP by the rank-k joint function is expressed
k
k
k
as f ⊗ g =
i=1 fi ⊗ gi , where f ∈ FX and g ∈ FY
represent k-dimensional features. This formulation translates
the computation of ζ≤k (iX;Y ) into an optimization problem,
aiming to minimize the approximation error kiX;Y − f ⊗ gkF ,
where k · kF is as defined in Table II. The optimization
variables in this context are the k-dimensional features f and
g. However, the error kiX;Y − f ⊗ gkF for a specific f and g
cannot be directly computed due to the unknown nature of iX;Y .
To overcome this challenge, we utilize the H-Score H ( f , g),
defined for k ≥ 1 and f ∈ FXk , g ∈ FYk , as

1
2
2
iX;Y F − iX;Y − f ⊗ g F
H ( f , g) ,
2
 T


T 
 1

= E f (X)g(Y) − E f (X) E g(Y) − · tr Λ f Λg ,
2
(4)



 
T
where Λ f = E f (X) f T (X) − E f (X) E f (X) and Λg =






T
E g(Y)gT (Y) − E g(Y) E g(Y) are the covariance matrices
of f (X) and g(Y) respectively, with tr(·) denoting the trace
function. The H-Score serves as a measure of the quality of the
approximation, where a higher H-Score value indicates a lower
approximation error. Accordingly, the optimal weights refined
through the H-Score are designed to maximize the correlation
between the traffic flow record and its specific types. This
approach not only maximizes the average distance between
different classes but also minimizes the distance within the
same class, thereby enhancing class separability. This detailed
discussion can be found in [28, Proposition 4], with its proof
provided in Appendix F therein.
In the subsequent discussion, we delve into how features
are integrated to discern the specific type of traffic. Assuming
we have obtained f ∈ FXk and g ∈ FYk by maximizing the
H-Score H ( f , g), we determine the traffic flow where k ≥
rank(iX;Y ), having established that f ⊗ g = iX;Y . With the above
assumption, we can obtain the following result, as discussed in
[27, Section 3.2].
Suppose f ⊗ g = iX;Y . Then, we will have
kiX;Y k2F = tr(Λ f · Λg ),

(5)

PY|X (y|x) = PY (y)(1 + f (x)g(y)).
T

(6)

Using the features f and g, we are able to compute the
strength of the dependence between X and Y, represented

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

as iX;Y . The posterior distribution, as outlined in Eq. 6, is
instrumental in identifying the specific type of traffic. In
Hermes, where X represents the input records and Y denotes
the types, the system obtains the results of the posterior
distribution PY|X of the label Y by Eq. 6. The traffic type
is determined through a corresponding maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimation, defined as follows:
ŷMAP (x) = arg max PY|X (y|x)
y∈Y

= arg max PY (y)(1 + f T (x)g(y)),
y∈Y

(7)
(8)

where PY can be sourced from the monitored daily traffic. This
method is proposed and explained in [27, Eq. 25].
A visual representation of H-Score feature learning is
illustrated in Fig. 2. In Training Step Two, the primary loss
function used is −H ( f , g). This function is used for calculating the optimal parameters θ1 and θ2 during the second step of
the training phase. It is specifically designed for the joint training of the parameters θ1 and θ2 in a two-network architecture.
In this architecture, the neural network f (x; θ1 ) is responsible
for generating k-dimensional features f in the feature space
FXk . The identification model g(y; θ2 ) is a fully connected
network, given the underlying distribution of Y. This network
takes the one-hot encoded vector [1{y = 1}, . . ., 1{y = |n|}]
of y as input, and produces the k-dimensional features g
from labels in the feature space FYk as output. Thus, the HScore estimator evaluates the H-Score between f and g to
capture the dependence between traffic and the corresponding
type. The main goal during the second step of the training
phase is to maximize this H-Score for geometrically optimal
representation of features, as depicted in the training step two
of Fig. 2.
D. Dual Inference Phase
The inference phase, as shown in Fig. 2, is designed to
detect the intrusion, identify the type, and explore zero-day
attacks. In this phase, two rules are employed, both utilizing
the same features extracted from the model f (x; θ1 ). The first
rule, a similarity-based detection rule, measures the deviation
of traffic features from the learned baseline, thereby enabling
anomaly detection. The second rule, a Maximum A Posteriori
rule, identifies the type of attack. It compares the posterior
distribution for all types of traffic and outputs the type with
the maximum value as the classification result. The dual
inference mechanism also evaluates if an instance is a zero-day
attack using entropy-based uncertainty from the posterior
distribution and inconsistency between the two predictions.
1) Rule 1: Similarity-Based Detection: The anomaly-based
detection in our system utilizes a threshold-based mechanism
based on similarity measures. This process starts with the
aggregation of features from the baseline space. We then
compute the mean of these normalized features to establish
an anchor baseline template, denoted as z̄:

X
1
f (xi )
z̄ = P
1(yi = 0)
,
(9)
k f (xi )k2
i 1(yi = 0) i
where 1(·) denotes the indicator function, with yi = 0 signifying benign traffic, and k·k2 represents the L2 -norm.

5387

To assess the similarity S (xi ) between a new traffic flow xi
and the anchor baseline template z̄, we employ the similarity
estimator:
z̄T f (xi )
S (xi ) =
.
(10)
kz̄k × k f (xi )k
This similarity score ranges between 0 and 1. In order to
classify a new traffic flow xi as normal or anomalous, we set a
threshold score ρ within the range of [0, 1]. This threshold is
derived from the distribution of similarity scores of the benign
training data. We start by sorting these scores in ascending
order, resulting in a sequence S = [S 1 , S 2 , . . . , S N ]. The
threshold ρ is then determined by selecting the p-th percentile
of this sequence:
k
j p
·N ,
(11)
r=
100
where b·c denotes the floor function, and p represents a
percentage. As a result, the threshold ρ is set to S r , which
corresponds to the r-th value in the sorted sequence S. To
minimize the False Positive Rate, a low percentile p is
recommended. An observation x is predicted as an intrusion
if its similarity score falls below this threshold ρ:
ŷS im (x) = 1(S (x) < ρ).

(12)

2) Rule 2: Maximum A Posteriori Rule for Attack Identification: The second rule, a MAP rule, can help to identify
the type of attack. It does this by comparing the correlation
between the features extracted from the traffic and the geometric features corresponding to specific attack types. The
neural network f (x; θ1 ) processes these records to extract the
corresponding features, represented as f (x). The identification
model g(y; θ2 ) generates the feature for each class, denoted as
g(y). For a new record x, we predict the corresponding attack
type using the MAP rule as:
˚
ŷMAP (x) = arg max PY (y)[1 + f T (x)g(y)] ,
(13)
y∈Y

where PY (y) is the true traffic type distribution that can be
monitored from the daily network flow traffic.
E. Zero-Day Attack Analysis
The dual inference of Hermes is adept at discerning whether
an attack could be a zero-day attack.
Suppose an instance is a zero-day attack; it will exhibit
new characteristics and previously unseen signatures, leading
to increased uncertainty in the model’s predictions. This
uncertainty is evaluated based on the entropy of the posterior
distribution (see Equation 6): PY|X (y|x) = PY (y)·(1+ f T (x)g(y)).
The features of a zero-day attack may manifest in a feature
space distinct from any known attack’s space, resulting in no
dominant probability for any known attack in the posterior
distribution and consequently, a higher entropy. This metric
can help to determine if it is a zero-day attack. We define this
uncertainty as follows:
X
Z (PY|X (y|x)) = −
PY|X (yi |x) log PY|X (yi |x).
(14)
i

Consistent results from similarity-based and MAP rules are
typically observed in detection scenarios. However, inconsistencies may arise, such as when the similarity rule indicates
an instance is benign, while the MAP rule identifies it as an

5388

attack, or vice versa. These inconsistencies are more likely to
occur when the features of a zero-day attack are geometrically
situated in the mid-area between the feature spaces of different
types of traffic. Therefore, if an instance is a zero-day attack, it
is more likely to provoke inconsistent predictions between the
similarity and MAP rules, necessitating further investigation
to confirm if it is a zero-day attack. We have validated these
findings through observations and experimental results.
Algorithm 1 Training Phase
1: Training Step One: Contrastive Feature Learning
N
2: Input: Flow Records with benign inputs {xi }i=1
and maliM
cious inputs {xm }m=1
3: Output: Optimized parameters θ0 for f (x; θ0 )
4: for each epoch in num epochs do
5:
for each benign input pair (xi , x j ) do
/* Compute the features */
6:
ui ← f (xi ), u j ← f (x j )
7:
vm ← f (xm )
/* Compute the pairwise loss li j */

exp(uT u /τ)
8:
li j = − log exp(uT u /τ)+Pi M j exp(uT v /τ)
m=1
i j
i m
9:
end for
/* Compute the
loss function L */
Pcumulative
N PN
1
10:
L = N(N−1)
i=1
j=i+1 (li j + l ji )
/* Update the parameters */
11:
θ0 = θ0 − α∇L,
12: end for
13: Training Step Two: H-Score Feature Learning
N
14: Input: Flow Records with labels {(xi , yi )}i=1
15: Output: Optimized parameters θ1 for f (x; θ1 ), and θ2 for
g(y; θ2 )
16: for each epoch in num epochs do
N
17:
for each (xi , yi ) in Training data {(xi , yi )}i=1
do
/* Convert labels (y to one-hot encoding yone-hot */
1 if i = y
18:
yone-hot [i] =
0 otherwise
/* Get f and g values using x and yone-hot */
N
N
19:
f = { f (xi )}i=1
, g = {g(yone-hot, i )}i=1
/* Compute the negative H-Score as loss, L */
20:
L = −H ( f , g)
/* Update the models’ parameters */
21:
θ1 = θ1 − α∇L, θ2 = θ2 − α∇L
22:
end for
23: end for
We summarize the whole training phase and dual inference
procedures in Algorithms 1 and 2, and compose the notations
in Tab. II. The whole illustration for H-Score feature learning
can be found in [27].
F. FL-Hermes Design
In FL-Hermes (Fig. 1 (b)), the learning process, instead of
operating on a central server, distributes the training process
across a set of local gateways G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GN } and utilizes
a parameter server S to coordinate the training. This FL
training paradigm allows participants to jointly train a shared
IDS model without sharing raw data. The learning process can
be outlined as follows:

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Algorithm 2 Dual Inference
N
1: Input: Flow Records {(xi )}i=1
N
2: Output: Anomaly detection results: {ŷS im (xi )}i=1
, and the
N
traffic types {ŷ MAP (xi )}i=1 .
/* Compute normalized features for benign traffic */
3: z sum ← 0
4: for all benign records xi do
5:
z sum ← z sum + k ff(x(xii)k) 2
6: end for
z sum
7: z̄ ← number of benign
records
/* Compute the threshold ρ from the benign similarity
distribution */
8: S ← sorted similarity
scores of benign records
˘
p
9: r ← 100 · N
10: ρ ← S r
N
do
11: for each xi in Flow Records {(xi )}i=1
/*Compute the similarity S for new traffic flow xi */
z̄T f (xi )
12:
S (xi ) ← kz̄k×k
f (xi )k
/* Predict new observation based on similarity score and
threshold */
13:
ŷS im (xi ) = 1(S (xi ) < ρ)
/* Predict the traffic by MAP rule ŷ(x) */
14:
Estimate the prior distribution PY (y)
15:
ŷ MAP (xi ) = arg maxy∈Y PY (y) · (1 + f T (xi )g(y))
/* Zero-Day Attack
P Analysis */
16:
Z (PY|X ) = − j PY|X (y j |xi ) log PY|X (y j |xi )
17:
if Z (PY|X ) is an outlier then
18:
return zero-day attack
19:
else if ŷ MAP (x) is consistent with ŷS im (x) then
20:
return not zero-day attack
21:
else if ŷ MAP (x) is inconsistent with ŷS im (x) then
22:
return zero-day attack
23:
end if
24: end for

In step ¬, at the beginning of FL iteration t, the parameter
server S initializes a global IDS model M(t) . The model
architecture is the same as the centralized setting ( f (x; θ0 )
and g(y; θ2 )), consistent across all participating local gateways.
During each FL iteration t, S selects a subset of gateways
G0 = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gn } ⊆ G to participate. The global model
M(t) is broadcast to the selected gateways G0 .
In the local training phase, each selected gateway Gi , where
Gi ∈ G0 , initializes its local model using the received global
model M(t) . The gateway trains the local IDS model using
flow records collected from its network, as in step ­. Similarly
to the centralized setting, step ® involves two critical substeps: first, the client constructs a local anomaly detection
model f (x; Θ0 ) using contrastive feature learning to define
a baseline; it then optimizes the traffic representation of this
model from f (x; Θ0 ) to f (x; Θ1 ) and develops the identification
model g(y; Θ2 ) using H-Score feature learning, allowing the
identification of intrusion types and the analysis of zero-day
attacks. After training for several local epochs, the gateway
(t)
computes the model update δ(t)
= {Θ1 , Θ2 }. In step
i as δi
¯, Model Update Aggregation, the local gateways upload
their model updates δ(t)
i to the parameter server S. The server
aggregates these updates using an aggregation rule, such as

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

5389

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES ON NSL-KDD DATASET

Fig. 3. Evaluating Hermes on Raspberry Pi 4, an IoT device in a resourceconstrained environment.

FedAvg, to produce a new global
M(t+1) for the next
P model
(t)
1
(t+1)
FL iteration: M
← |G0 | i∈G0 δi , The updated global
model M(t+1) is broadcast back to the selected gateways in
the subsequent iteration. This process repeats across multiple
FL iterations until the global model converges to an optimal
solution M∗ , which generalizes well across all gateways. Once
the fully trained IDS model M∗ is deployed at the gateway
G, it operates, similar to the previous design, as described
in step °. The model uses a similarity-based rule to detect
anomalies and a MAP rule to identify the type of attack.
Additionally, it analyzes whether the detected intrusion is a
zero-day attack. This FL-Hermes design ensures data privacy
by keeping sensitive flow records locally while leveraging
collaborative learning to enhance IDS performance across
diverse network environments.
V. E XPERIMENT
We evaluate Hermes under both centralized and federated
settings, focusing on three aspects: anomaly detection accuracy, attack identification capability, and performance under
zero-day attack scenarios. We further benchmark Hermes
against representative baseline methods and state-of-the-art
anomaly-based IDSs.
A. Datasets and Experiment Settings
We prototype Hermes using the PyTorch framework and
evaluate on two prominent network traffic datasets: NSLKDD [32] and N-BaIoT [46]. The NSL-KDD dataset, a
well-established benchmark in IDS performance evaluation
[34], [37], [50], includes benign traffic along with four categories of intrusions, as listed in Tab. IV. We highlight the
16 intrusion sub-classes that are only present in the test
dataset. This presents a significant challenge to Hermes in
detecting emerging zero-day threats. Each record in the dataset
features 41 attributes extracted from network traffic. These

evaluations are conducted on a server equipped with an Intel
Core i9-11900K CPU (8 cores / 16 threads, 3.50 GHz base),
an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPU, and running Ubuntu
20.04.5 LTS.
The N-BaIoT dataset focuses on IoT traffic, encompassing data from nine commercial IoT devices, including those
compromised by malicious software, such as Mirai and BASHLITE. This dataset records benign traffic and five types
of attacks for both Mirai (‘scan’, ‘ack’, ‘syn’, ‘udp’, and
‘udpplain’) and BASHLITE (‘scan’, ‘junk’, ‘udp’, ‘tcp’, and
‘combo’) [46]. A principal goal to use this dataset is to
verify the applicability of Hermes in resource-constrained IoT
environments. Accordingly, our experiments with the N-BaIoT
dataset are conducted on a Raspberry Pi 4 as depicted in Fig. 3,
equipped with a 1.5 GHz quad-core A72 64-bit ARMv8 CPU,
4GB RAM, 32GB SD card storage, and running the Raspbian
OS, to evaluate Hermes’s efficiency in such settings.
The default configurations of Hermes are outlined as follows. For the NSL-KDD dataset, the network f (x; θ0 )/ f (x; θ1 )
is composed of an input layer with d = 112 dimensions
and an output layer with k = 256 dimensions. Additionally,
it includes two hidden layers with sizes of 128 and 256.
The g(y; θ2 ) network, designed for attack identification, utilizes a three-layer structure with 256, 128, and 5 neurons.
For the N-BaIoT dataset, the architecture largely mirrors
that of the NSL-KDD. The key difference is in the input
and output layers of the f (x; θ0 )/ f (x; θ1 ) network, which are
configured to accommodate 115 feature inputs and 11 class
outputs. The ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function
is implemented after each hidden layer in both models to
introduce non-linearity. Hermes employs the Adam optimizer
with parameters that include a learning rate of α = 10−4 and
a mini-batch size of B = 128. The training regimen varies
between datasets: for the first phase, e = 20 epochs are used for
NSL-KDD and e = 15 for the N-BaIoT dataset. In the second
training phase, an additional 20 epochs are applied to both
datasets. For comprehensive analysis, Hermes’s performance
is benchmarked against machine learning models from the
renowned scikit-learn library [60].
B. Evaluation Metric and Baselines
We evaluate intrusion detection performance using standard metrics, including Accuracy, Recall, Precision, F1-score,
and False Positive Rate (FPR), following commonly adopted
definitions in prior IDS studies [11], [34], [37]. In addition,

5390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE IV
I NTRUSION C LASSES (S UB -C LASSES ) OF THE NSL-KDD DATASET

Fig. 4. Visualization of FXk and MLP Output on a Randomly Selected 5% Subset of the NSL-KDD Test Dataset for: (a) Hermes Anomaly-Detection,
(b) MLP Anomaly-Detection, (c) Hermes Attack Identification, and (d) MLP Attack Identification.

we report ROC curves by plotting Recall against FPR under
varying decision thresholds, and use the Area Under the Curve
(AUC) to summarize overall detection performance.
Our experimental configuration is as follows: Hermes Sim
employs f (x; θ1 ) with the similarity rule for anomaly detection.
Hermes MAP uses f (x; θ1 ) and g(y; θ2 ) with the MAP rule
for attack identification. CL (Contrastive Learning) utilizes
the architecture of f (x; θ1 ) and adheres to the similarity
rule. The multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model integrates the
architectures of f (x; θ1 ) and a classification head, optimized
using cross-entropy loss. Comparative performance evaluations include models such as support vector machine (SVM),
variational autoencoder (VAE), isolation forest (IsoForest),
logistic regression (LGR), Bernoulli naive Bayes (BNB), Knearest neighbors (KNN), and decision tree classifier (DTC),
along with IDS methods TDTC [37], Two-Tier [11], ESFCM
[34], and contrastive-learning-based variants AOC-IDS [26],
FeCo [14], and CIDS [25].
C. Hermes Results on NSL-KDD Dataset
1) Feature Space Insights: We utilize t-SNE—a dimensionality reduction technique—to project the feature space,
FXk , into a two-dimensional figure as shown in Fig. 4. In the
presented visualizations of FXk with a randomly selected 5%
subset of the NSL-KDD test dataset, distinct patterns emerge
when comparing Hermes and the MLP method across both
binary anomaly detection and multi-class attack identification.
For anomaly detection, the Hermes approach in (a) exhibits
a more discernible separation between the “malicious” and
“benign” clusters, whereas the MLP model in (b) shows a
considerable overlap between the two categories. (c) Hermes
and (d) MLP demonstrate multi-cluster separations. Hermes in
(c) maintains better-delineated boundaries between the classes,
especially when differentiating subtle distinctions like between
“DoS”, “Probe”, “U2R”, and “R2L”. In contrast, the MLP’s
features in (d) show more intermingling among classes.
2) Centralized Hermes Evaluation: In Tab. III, Hermes Sim achieves high accuracy, recall, precision, and F1

Fig. 5. (a) The ROC curve of Hermes Sim. (b) Uncertainty analysis for
traffic subclasses in exploring zero-day attacks.

score among all tested methods while maintaining an FPR as
low as 3.74%.
The ablation study demonstrates that adding contrastive
feature learning to the basic MLP method results in improvements across all metrics, including a 3.97% increase in recall,
while keeping a similar FPR. Introducing H-Score feature
learning further enhances performance, with overall improvements of 7.63% in recall, while reducing the FPR by 1.36%
compared to the baseline MLP. Detection Speed: The average
inference time (over 100 records) is 3.58 ms for MLP, 3.20 ms
for CL, and 4.25 ms for Hermes Sim. Other methods like
KNN, although having a low FPR, do not perform as well in
Recall, accuracy, and F1 score. TDTC (4.86%) and Two-Tier
(5.43%) systems show competitive FPRs but are less effective
in other metrics and in identifying specific attack types.
The ROC curves of Hermes and three other baselines are
plotted in Fig. 5 (a), with our method exhibiting a higher AUC
score compared to the baselines. For intrusion identification,
Tab. III shows that Hermes MAP attains an 87.77% accuracy
in identifying four classes of intrusions amid normal traffic.
The table’s lower section details the identification performance
for each traffic class, alongside their ratio in the training data.
With adequate samples, Hermes consistently maintains high
accuracy. Remarkably, it effectively identifies the R2L attack,
which represents a mere 0.13% of the training dataset, with a
low FPR of 4.85%.

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

5391

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES IN FL, NA ÏVE D ISTRIBUTED L EARNING , AND C ENTRALIZED L EARNING

TABLE VI
D EVICES S PECIFICATION IN N-BA I OT DATASET

TABLE VII
I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF FL C LIENTS ON D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE

To illustrate Hermes’s ability to identify zero-day attacks,
we display in Fig. 5 (b) the uncertainty for each intrusion
subclass and normal traffic, calculated using Eq. 14. The x-axis
in the figure represents the intrusion subclasses enumerated in
Tab. IV, with indices 0 to 23 denoting benign and known
attacks, and 24 to 39 indicating zero-day attacks. The y-axis
is the uncertainty associated with the corresponding traffic.
Notably, known traffic types exhibit lower mean and variance
in uncertainty, whereas zero-day samples display significantly
higher variance and mean. This pattern suggests that highuncertainty outliers could be potential zero-day attack samples
warranting further investigation. Furthermore, by analyzing the
discrepancies between outputs from ŷS im (x) and ŷ MAP (x), we
find that 77.24% of the intrusions are zero-day attacks. This
insight offers an additional method for identifying potential
zero-day attack samples.
FL System Setting: We simulate an FL system with 50
clients to evaluate Hermes in distributed settings. This choice
follows common practice in prior FL studies (e.g., FeCo [14],
PyramidFL [61], AUCTION [62]). We additionally evaluate
different client scales by varying the number of clients from
25 to 100 under the same training configuration. As shown
in Table VII, FL-Hermes exhibits stable performance across
these settings; therefore, we adopt 50 clients in the rest of the
evaluation for fair comparison and engineering practicality.
We consider both IID and non-IID data partitioning strategies, where the same training dataset used in the centralized
setting is partitioned and distributed among clients. For the

IID data distribution, the training dataset is randomly and
evenly divided among all clients, ensuring that each client
receives a balanced subset. In the non-IID-1 setting, each
client is assigned data from n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, representing one
to four of the total intrusion attack categories. In the nonIID-2 setting, each client is restricted to data from only one
(n = 1) intrusion attack category. Notably, the non-IID-2
setting represents a more extreme case of non-IID-1, where
FL training becomes significantly more challenging. This is
due to the highly uneven data distribution, with each client
holding data from only a single intrusion category. The lack
of diversity in local datasets amplifies the non-IID nature,
resulting in more biased local models and making it more
challenging to achieve well-trained global models.
To ensure a fair comparison, the testing dataset across all
settings remains the same as in the centralized setting. We
evaluate Hermes under three different learning frameworks:
FL, naı̈ve distributed learning, and centralized learning. In the
naı̈ve distributed learning framework, training is performed
entirely on local devices using only local data, and evaluation
metrics are averaged across all clients. Centralized learning, as
discussed in Sec. V-C2, involves training on a single merged
dataset.
For local training, we configure E = 3 epochs for both
the contrastive feature learning and H-Score feature learning
phases. The FL process is set to run for I = 20 iterations to
train the local models. Across all settings, we use the Adam
optimizer with a consistent learning rate to ensure uniformity
in the experiments.
Experimental Results: We evaluate the performance of
FL-Hermes, naı̈ve distributed learning with Hermes, and centralized Hermes under various local client data distributions,
as shown in Tab. V.
FL-Hermes consistently outperforms naı̈ve distributed learning across most evaluation metrics, regardless of the data
distribution. Moreover, FL-Hermes demonstrates consistent
detection performance across the three data distributions (IID,
non-IID-1, and non-IID-2), highlighting the ability of the FL
design to enable distributed clients, each holding different
types of data, to collaboratively train a robust model. This
aligns well with real-world privacy-sensitive application scenarios, where different clients hold their own private data,
resulting in inherently highly non-IID distributions. In contrast,
naı̈ve distributed learning, although preserving privacy, heavily
relies on the quality of local data. For example, under the
non-IID-2 distribution, naı̈ve distributed learning achieves an
average accuracy as low as 67.11% and an average recall
as low as 48.68%, highlighting its vulnerability to imbalanced data distribution and limited local data diversity. While

5392

the detection accuracy of FL-Hermes is lower than that of
centralized learning, the latter is challenging to deploy in
privacy-sensitive scenarios, making FL-Hermes a more practical alternative.
We also compare the performance of Hermes across different data distributions within the same learning framework.
In the FL setting, Hermes achieves an accuracy of 87.28%
under the non-IID-1 distribution, which is higher than the
83.19% accuracy achieved under the non-IID-2 distribution.
A similar trend is observed for recall, where Hermes achieves
81.60% under the non-IID-1 distribution, compared to 73.75%
under the non-IID-2 distribution. Similar trends are also
observed in naı̈ve distributed learning across non-IID-1 and
non-IID-2 distributions. This decreased diversity makes it
more challenging to learn stable representations of benign
instances, as geometric feature learning iteratively optimizes
the feature representations away from diverse types of attack
representations.
In summary, FL-Hermes achieves robust performance across
diverse data distributions and significantly outperforms naı̈ve
distributed learning. Although centralized Hermes achieves
higher accuracy, its practical limitations in privacy-sensitive
applications underscore the importance of FL-Hermes as a
viable and effective alternative.
D. Hermes Results on N-BaIoT Dataset
1) IoT Device Evaluation: To demonstrate the feasibility
of utilizing IoT devices for intrusion detection, we conduct
evaluations of Hermes on real IoT botnet traffic datasets
derived from nine commercially available IoT devices infected
by the Mirai and BASHLITE botnets. The specifications
of these devices are detailed in Tab. VI, which provides
a comprehensive breakdown of their characteristics. For a
detailed analysis, we create a specific model for each IoT
device and evaluate its performance individually. To simulate
a typical resource-constrained IoT environment, we implement
our system on a Raspberry Pi 4, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
The Hermes Sim model consistently demonstrates a lower
FPR compared to the CL approach, confirming its effectiveness in reducing erroneous anomaly detections. Meanwhile,
the Hermes MAP variant excels in attack identification tasks,
achieving consistently high classification accuracy while maintaining competitive FPR values across all devices. These
experimental results highlight the robustness of Hermes in
detecting anomalies, identifying attack types, and addressing
zero-day attacks. Importantly, the results validate the practicality of deploying Hermes in resource-constrained environments,
showcasing its ability to operate effectively across a variety of
IoT devices and multi-application scenarios.
To further evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we
compare the performance of Hermes Sim with several baseline methods across multiple performance metrics, as shown in
Fig. 6. Both Hermes Sim and CL demonstrate high levels of
performance across all metrics, including accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 scores, while maintaining consistently low FPR
values. These comparisons underscore the superior capability
of Hermes Sim in balancing robust detection performance
with minimal false alarms.
2) FL-Hermes Evaluation: We extend the evaluation by
leveraging FL to collaboratively train a global model across

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 6. The performance (%) of Hermes compared with baselines on the NBaIoT dataset is presented across various metrics: (a) Accuracy, (b) Recall,
(c) Precision, (d) F1 Score, and (e) FPR.

IoT devices, instead of training models independently on
local data from each device. In this setup, local models are
trained by each client and then uploaded to a parameter server
for aggregation into a global model. After the FL training
phase, the well-trained global model is deployed back to
each IoT device, where it is evaluated using the same testing
data collected from the respective devices. The results are
summarized in Tab. IX.
The experimental results demonstrate the robust performance of FL-Hermes across various evaluation metrics. Specifically, under the similarity-based rule (FLHermes Sim), the system achieves high detection accuracy,
recall, precision, and F1 score, all exceeding 99.30%. Additionally, the FPR remains exceptionally low, never exceeding
0.35%. This highlights the system’s ability to detect intrusions effectively while minimizing false alarms in a federated
environment. Similarly, FL-Hermes MAP Rule achieves consistently strong detection performance across individual IoT
devices, even with distributed and heterogeneous local clients.
The ability of FL-Hermes to collaboratively train a global
model that is then deployed to individual IoT devices ensures
effective detection of intrusion types in distributed and privacysensitive environments. The results validate FL-Hermes as a
practical and robust solution for real-world intrusion detection scenarios in IoT environments, where data privacy and
distributed deployments are critical.
E. Extended Experimental Evaluation
Table X reports a comprehensive comparison of Hermes
against advanced deep learning baselines on three benchmark
IDS datasets. Hermes achieves competitive accuracy across all
datasets, reaching 99.12% on CIC-IDS-2017, 100% on TONIoT, and 89.17% on the challenging UNSW-NB15 dataset.
While LSTM slightly outperforms Hermes on CIC-IDS-2017
in accuracy, Hermes consistently delivers substantially faster
inference. On TON-IoT, both Hermes and LSTM achieve
perfect classification with zero false positives. The most
notable gains are observed on UNSW-NB15, where Hermes
outperforms all baselines by 1.48–4.31% in accuracy while

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

5393

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES ON THE N-BA I OT DATASET

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF FL-H ERMES ON THE N-BA I OT DATASET

TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE (%) OF H ERMES AND D EEP L EARNING BASELINES (CNN, LSTM, AND TF = T RANSFORMER ) ON R ECENT IDS DATASETS . VALUES A RE
M EAN [95% CI] F ROM 1000 B OOTSTRAP S AMPLES . T IME I NDICATES AVERAGE I NFERENCE T IME IN M ILLISECONDS

TABLE XI
S IGNIFICANCE T ESTS : H ERMES VS . BASELINES
( T-T EST / W ILCOXON P -VALUES )

competing methods, highlighting its suitability for real-time
intrusion detection. Statistical significance tests (Table XI)
confirm that the observed performance differences are significant (p < 0.001). We further evaluate the training overhead
of the proposed contrastive learning framework by comparing
it with an MLP trained using cross-entropy loss under the
same architecture and batch size. Leveraging in-mini-batch
pairing and cached latent representations, Hermes incurs only
a modest training time increase of 2.45×, 2.28×, and 2.59×
on CIC-IDS-2017, TON-IoT, and UNSW-NB15, respectively.
Combined with its lightweight geometry-guided feature learning, Hermes achieves a favorable balance between accuracy,
inference efficiency, and training cost, making it practical for
deployment across diverse IDS scenarios.
VI. C ONCLUSION

maintaining high precision (98.41%). Across all datasets,
Hermes achieves approximately 5–11× faster inference than

In this paper, we proposed Hermes, a machine-learningbased anomaly IDS that leverages geometric feature learning

5394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

to improve detection accuracy and reduce false positives. By
learning compact and discriminative feature representations,
Hermes unifies the strengths of anomaly-based and signaturebased IDSs: it models normal traffic to detect deviations while
incorporating known attack data to improve separability and
enable attack classification. Extensive evaluations demonstrate
that Hermes achieves strong detection performance and efficiency, and is suitable for deployment on resource-constrained
IoT devices. To address privacy and scalability concerns,
we further extended Hermes to a federated learning setting.
FL-Hermes enables distributed gateways to collaboratively
train IDS models without sharing raw traffic data, preserving privacy while benefiting from diverse local observations.
Experimental results show that FL-Hermes maintains stable
detection performance across different client scales and data
distributions. While Hermes improves robustness and generalization, it does not aim to provide definitive classification for
zero-day attacks, which remain a long-standing challenge in
intrusion detection. Enhancing interpretability and robustness
against adaptive adversaries is an important direction for future
work.
R EFERENCES
[1]

C. Zhang et al., “Hermes: Boosting the performance of machinelearning-based intrusion detection system through geometric feature
learning,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Theory, Algorithmic Found., Protocol
Design Mobile Netw. Mobile Comput., Oct. 2024, pp. 251–260.
[2] S. Li, S. Shi, Y. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. T. Hou, and W. Lou, “Bijack:
Breaking Bitcoin network with TCP vulnerabilities,” in Proc. Eur. Symp.
Res. Comput. Secur. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023, pp. 306–326.
[3] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the Mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1093–1110.
[4] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS:
An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge
devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug.
2020.
[5] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28,
Feb. 2009.
[6] V. Jyothsna, V. V. R. Prasad, and K. M. Prasad, “A review of anomaly
based intrusion detection systems,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 7,
pp. 26–35, 2011.
[7] O. Kopuklu, J. Zheng, H. Xu, and G. Rigoll, “Driver anomaly detection:
A dataset and contrastive learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf.
Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 91–100.
[8] Q. Yan, Y. Zheng, T. Jiang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “PeerClean: Unveiling peer-to-peer botnets through dynamic group behavior analysis,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2015,
pp. 316–324.
[9] B. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “DDoS attack protection in
the era of cloud computing and software-defined networking,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 81, pp. 308–319, Apr. 2015.
[10] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
“Conditional variational autoencoder for prediction and feature recovery
applied to intrusion detection in IoT,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 9, p. 1967,
Aug. 2017.
[11] H. H. Pajouh, G. Dastghaibyfard, and S. Hashemi, “Two-tier network
anomaly detection model: A machine learning approach,” J. Intell. Inf.
Syst., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 61–74, Feb. 2017.
[12] S. Rezvy, Y. Luo, M. Petridis, A. Lasebae, and T. Zebin, “An efficient
deep learning model for intrusion classification and prediction in 5G and
IoT networks,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Mar.
2019, pp. 1–6.
[13] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MANDA: On
adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[14] N. Wang, S. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting intrusion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4215–4230, Jul.
2025.

[15] C. Zhang, N. Wang, S. Shi, C. Du, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “MINDFL:
Mitigating the impact of imbalanced and noisy-labeled data in federated
learning with quality and fairness-aware client selection,” in Proc. MILCOM - IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), Oct. 2023, pp. 331–338.
[16] S. Anwar et al., “From intrusion detection to an intrusion response
system: Fundamentals, requirements, and future directions,” Algorithms,
vol. 10, no. 2, p. 39, Mar. 2017.
[17] M. Bashendy, A. Tantawy, and A. Erradi, “Intrusion response systems
for cyber-physical systems: A comprehensive survey,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 124, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 102984.
[18] G. Dayanandam, T. Rao, D. B. Babu, and S. N. Durga, “DDoS attacksanalysis and prevention,” in Proc. 5th Innov. Comput. Sci. Eng. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 1–10.
[19] M. Yao, J. Fuller, R. P. Kasturi, S. Agarwal, A. K. Sikder, and
B. Saltaformaggio, “Hiding in plain sight: An empirical study of Web
application abuse in malware,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
2023, pp. 6115–6132.
[20] R. Canzanese, “Cloud as a malware infiltration channel,” Comput. Fraud
Secur., vol. 2023, no. 4, Apr. 2023.
[21] H. Hindy, R. Atkinson, C. Tachtatzis, J.-N. Colin, E. Bayne, and
X. Bellekens, “Utilising deep learning techniques for effective zero-day
attack detection,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 10, p. 1684, Oct. 2020.
[22] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
[23] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[24] G. D’Angelo and F. Palmieri, “Network traffic classification
using deep convolutional recurrent autoencoder neural networks for
spatial–temporal features extraction,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 173,
Jan. 2021, Art. no. 102890.
[25] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning
enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022.
[26] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with contrastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., May 2024, pp. 581–590.
[27] X. Xu and L. Zheng, “Neural feature learning in function space,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 25, no. 142, pp. 1–76, 2024.
[28] X. Xu and S.-L. Huang, “Maximal correlation regression,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 26591–26601, 2020.
[29] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, Fort
Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[30] P. Kairouz and H. B. McMahan, “Advances and open problems in
federated learning,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 14, nos. 1–2,
pp. 1–210, Jun. 2021.
[31] N. H. Tran, W. Bao, A. Zomaya, M. N. H. Nguyen, and C. S. Hong,
“Federated learning over wireless networks: Optimization model design
and analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019,
pp. 1387–1395.
[32] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[33] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
[34] S. Rathore and J. H. Park, “Semi-supervised learning based distributed
attack detection framework for IoT,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 72,
pp. 79–89, Nov. 2018.
[35] Y. Yang, K. Zheng, C. Wu, and Y. Yang, “Improving the classification
effectiveness of intrusion detection by using improved conditional variational AutoEncoder and deep neural network,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 11,
p. 2528, Jun. 2019.
[36] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
set),” in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015,
pp. 1–6.
[37] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K.R. Choo, “A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classification
model for anomaly-based intrusion detection in IoT backbone networks,”
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 314–323, Apr.
2019.

ZHANG et al.: BOOSTING THE PERFORMANCE OF MACHINE-LEARNING-BASED IDS

[38] N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K.-R. Choo, “An ensemble intrusion
detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features for
protecting network traffic of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4815–4830, Jun. 2019.
[39] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, Apr. 2011.
[40] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and S. Gritzalis, “Intrusion
detection in 802.11 networks: Empirical evaluation of threats and a public dataset,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 184–208,
1st Quart., 2016.
[41] Y. Zhang et al., “Efficient and intelligent attack detection in software
defined IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Softw. Syst.
(ICESS), Jul. 2020, pp. 1–9.
[42] R. Fontes, S. Afzal, S. Brito, M. Santos, and C. Esteve Rothenberg,
“Mininet-WiFi: Emulating software-defined wireless networks,” in Proc.
11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service Manag., Nov. 2015, pp. 1–16.
[43] Y. Fan, Y. Li, M. Zhan, H. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “IoTDefender: A federated
transfer learning intrusion detection framework for 5G IoT,” in Proc.
IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng. (BigDataSE), Guangzhou,
China, Dec. 2020, pp. 88–95.
[44] I. Sharafaldin, A. Habibi Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[45] N. Ravi and S. M. Shalinie, “Semisupervised-learning-based security to
detect and mitigate intrusions in IoT network,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 11041–11052, Nov. 2020.
[46] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018.
[47] Q. Yan et al., “SpecMonitor: Toward efficient passive traffic monitoring
for cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13,
no. 10, pp. 5893–5905, Oct. 2014.
[48] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[49] T. D. Nguyen et al., “Dı̈oT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst.
(ICDCS), Aug. 2019, pp. 756–767.
[50] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and
P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on
learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2671–2701, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[51] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. K. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali, and
M. Guizani, “A survey of machine and deep learning methods for
Internet of Things (IoT) security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 1646–1685, 3rd Quart., 2020.
[52] B. Claise, “Cisco systems netflow services export version 9,”
RFC, vol. 3954, pp. 1–33, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6125326
[53] (2026). CICFlowmeter: A Network Traffic Flow Generator and
Analyzer.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.unb.ca/cic/research/
applications.html#CICFlowMeter
[54] N. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
“FLARE: Defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks
via latent space representations,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2607–2623, May 2025.
[55] I. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014.
[56] R. Fotohi, F. Shams Aliee, and B. Farahani, “Decentralized and
robust privacy-preserving model using blockchain-enabled federated
deep learning in intelligent enterprises,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 161,
Aug. 2024, Art. no. 111764.
[57] R. Fotohi, F. Shams Aliee, and B. Farahani, “A lightweight and
secure deep learning model for privacy-preserving federated learning
in intelligent enterprises,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19,
pp. 31988–31998, Oct. 2024.
[58] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, pp. 1597–1607.
[59] X. Xu and L. Zheng, “Multivariate feature extraction,” in Proc. 58th
Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2022,
pp. 1–8.
[60] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Nov. 2011.

5395

[61] C. Li, X. Zeng, M. Zhang, and Z. Cao, “PyramidFL: A fine-grained
client selection framework for efficient federated learning,” in Proc. 28th
Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., Oct. 2022, pp. 158–171.
[62] Y. Deng et al., “AUCTION: Automated and quality-aware client selection framework for efficient federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1996–2009, Aug. 2022.

Chaoyu Zhang (Student Member, IEEE) received
the Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering from Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2018, and
the Master of Science degree in computer science
from Arkansas State University, Arkansas, USA, in
2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
computer science with Virginia Tech, USA, under
the supervision of Prof. Wenjing Lou. His research
focuses on machine learning security, network security, blockchain technology, and high-performance
computing. He was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at IEEE CNS 2024.

Shanghao Shi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in telecommunication engineering from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
in 2019 and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Virginia Tech in 2025. He is currently
a Post-Doctoral Research Associate of computer
science with Washington University in St. Louis.
His research focuses on network security and information privacy, with particular interests in machine
learning security and privacy, wireless security, and
CPS/IoT security.

Ning Wang received the B.E. degree in communication engineering and the M.S. degree in electronics
and communication engineering from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
China, in 2015 and 2018, respectively, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from Virginia
Tech in 2023. She is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of South Florida. Her
current research interests include federated learning,
anomaly detection, adversarial machine learning,
differential privacy, and LLM applications in cybersecurity.

5396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Xiangxiang Xu (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2014
and 2020, respectively. He is currently an Assistant
Professor of computer science with the University
of Rochester. Prior to joining the University of
Rochester, he was a Post-Doctoral Associate with the
Department of EECS, MIT. His research focuses on
information theory, statistical learning, representation learning, and their applications in understanding
and developing artificial intelligence and machine
learning algorithms. He was a recipient of the IEEE PES Student Prize
Paper Award in Honor of T. Burke Hayes and the Information Theory and
Applications (ITA) Workshop Sand Award.

Shaoyu Li (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree from the College of Cyber Science,
Nankai University, and the M.S. degree from the
College of Science and Engineering, University of
Glasgow. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the Department of Computer Science, Virginia
Tech, under the supervision of Prof. Wenjing Lou.
His research interests include network security and
blockchain.

Lizhong Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees from the Department of Electronic
Engineering, Tsinghua University, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, UC Berkeley. Since
2002, he has been with MIT, where he is currently a
Professor of electrical engineering and computer science. His current research interests include statistics,
information theory, and their applications in data
science. He received the NSF CAREER Award, the
AFOSR Young Investigator Award, and the IEEE
Information Theory Society Paper Award. He is an Area Editor of IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION T HEORY.

Randy Marchany (Member, IEEE) has been
involved in the computer industry since 1972. He is
currently the Virginia Tech Information Technology
Security Officer and the Director of Virginia Tech
IT Security Laboratory. He is the co-holder of three
cybersecurity patents on moving target IPV6 defense
and IDS via power monitoring. His research interests are in network security and forensics. He is a
member of the Center for Internet Security (CIS)
working group that created version 8 of the CIS
Security Controls. He is a Former Member of the
Research, Education, Networking, Information Sharing, and Analysis Center
(REN-ISAC) Board. He is an Executive Committee Member of Virginia Cyber
Range. He is one of the founders of Virginia Alliance for Secure Computing
and Networking, a consortium of security practitioners and researchers from
the major universities in Virginia. He received the 2021 SANS Difference
Maker Award. He was a recipient of the 2016 Shirley C. Payne IT Security
Advancement Award, the 2000 SANS Institute’s Security Technology Leadership Award, the 2003 VA Governor’s Technology Silver Award, a member
of the team that won the EDUCAUSE Excellence in Information Technology
Solutions Award in 2005, and a member of the Virginia Cyber Range Team
that won the 2017 Virginia Governor’s Technology Award for innovative use
of technology in education.

Mark Gardner (Member, IEEE) is currently the
Network Research Manager of advanced research
computing with the Division of Information Technology, Virginia Tech. His research interests include
network monitoring and measurement, cybersecurity, virtualization, high-performance networking,
high-performance storage and file systems, research
computing, operating systems, and programming
languages, including interpreters and compilers.

Y. Thomas Hou (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the NYU Tandon School of
Engineering in 1998. He is currently the Bradley
Distinguished Professor of electrical and computer
engineering with Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA,
USA, where he joined in 2002. He has published over 400 papers in IEEE/ACM journals
and conferences. He holds six U.S. patents. He
has authored/co-authored two graduate textbooks,
such as Applied Optimization Methods for Wireless
Networks (Cambridge University Press, 2014) and
Cognitive Radio Communications and Networks: Principles and Practices
(Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009). His current research focuses on developing
real-time optimal solutions to complex science and engineering problems
arising from wireless and mobile networks. He is also interested in wireless
security. He was named an IEEE Fellow for contributions to the modeling
and optimization of wireless networks. His papers were recognized by 12
best paper awards from IEEE and ACM, including the IEEE INFOCOM Test
of Time Paper Award in 2023. He was the Steering Committee Chair of the
IEEE INFOCOM Conference and a member of the IEEE Communications
Society Board of Governors. He served on the editorial boards of several
IEEE and ACM transactions and journals. He was a Distinguished Lecturer
of the IEEE Communications Society.

Wenjing Lou (Fellow, IEEE) is the W. C. English
Endowed Professor of computer science with Virginia Tech. Her research interests cover many topics
in the cybersecurity field, with her current research
interests focusing on wireless network security, trustworthy AI, blockchain, and security and privacy
problems in the Internet of Things (IoT) systems.
She is a Steering Committee Member of IEEE
INFOCOM and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE
C OMPUTING. She served as the Program Director
for U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) from
2014 to 2017. She is a Highly Cited Researcher by the Web of Science Group.
She received the Virginia Tech Alumni Award for Research Excellence in
2018 and the INFOCOM Test-of-Time Paper Award in 2020. She was the
TPC Chair of IEEE INFOCOM 2019 and ACM WiSec 2020. She was the
Steering Committee Chair of the IEEE CNS Conference from 2013 to 2020.