1994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Hierarchical GNN Message Passing for Node-Level
Anomaly Detection in Industrial Control Systems
Shuaiyi Lyu , Kai Wang , Member, IEEE, Yang Liu, and Bailing Wang

Abstract—Advances in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
prompted remarkable progress in anomaly detection for securing
the Industrial Control Systems (ICSs). As the core functioning
block of a GNN network, message passing in most of the current frameworks is conducted via local aggregation, in which a
node’s vector representation is updated with messages from its
directly connected neighbours. However, despite its efficiency over
numerous application scenarios, such neighbouring aggregation
mechanism tends to be highly biased towards a node’s locality,
and hence may not accurately profile the hierarchical semantics in
layered ICS architectures, such as the supervisory relations among
controllers and field devices. The resulting node embeddings, in this
case, may not be knowledgeable enough to instruct downstream
tasks such as fine-grained device-wise ICS anomaly detection. To
address this issue, we introduce the Hierarchical Message Analyzer
(the HMA), a new message passing scheme that explores a network’s supervisory structural features and regulates a message’s
transmission paths to create balanced embeddings for node-level
ICS anomaly detection. This model comprises in its architecture
a Preprocessor that condenses the original data flow into initial
node vectors, an Adjacency Parser that regulates how messages
are transmitted in the aggregation process, an Encoder performing
message passing in compliance with the adjacency info obtained
from the Adjacency Parser, and a Decoder for label inference. We
assess the HMA’s performance over multiple evaluation metrics
and compare it against various state-of-the-art baselines. Results
on multiple datasets certify the HMA’s validity and superiority in
device-wise ICS anomaly detection.
Index Terms—Hierarchical message passing, meta-graph data
collection, graph neural networks, anomaly detection, industrial
control systems.

Received 27 November 2023; revised 12 October 2025; accepted 15 October
2025. Date of publication 20 October 2025; date of current version 12 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the Taishan Scholar Project of
Shandong Province, China under Grant tsqn202408112, in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62272129, and in part
by the Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence and Content Security, Ministry
of Education, China under Grant RZZN202414. (Corresponding authors: Kai
Wang; Bailing Wang.)
Shuaiyi Lyu is with the Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin 264209, China (e-mail: lvshuaiyi2568068@163.com).
Kai Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Weihai 264209, China, and also with the Shandong
Key Laboratory of Industrial Network Security, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail:
dr.wangkai@hit.edu.cn).
Yang Liu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail: liuyang322@hit.edu.cn).
Bailing Wang is with the Harbin Institute of Technology (Weihai) Qingdao
Research Institute, Qingdao 266109, China, and also with the Shandong Key
Laboratory of Industrial Network Security, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail:
wbl@hit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3623299

I. INTRODUCTION
HE Industrial Control Systems (ICSs) are complex systems
of heterogeneous devices dedicated for industrial process
monitoring and control. They have been frequently targeted and
attacked in recent years due to their increasing connectivity to
public networks. In order to inflict massive physical damage or
cause considerable economic loss, the majority of recent attacks
aim at directly sabotaging the industrial processes supervised
by the ICSs. As the operational status of industrial processes
can be reflected in the numeric data streams of measurement
values or operational states (See Fig. 1) with respect to each
process-related ICS device (sensors, actuators, controllers, etc.),
it is imminent to derive reliable schemes to detect anomalies in
these streams in order to secure the industrial processes and
avoid any potential hazards.
To discover malicious patterns in these streams, early methods
such as the Deterministic Finite Automata [1], [2] series and the
Statechart-based Detectors [3], [4] are proposed to intuitively
detect anomalous snippets that deviate from the periodic characteristics of industrial processes. Lightweight and simple as they
are, these methods usually suffer from an undesirably high false
positive detection rate, in that the patterns extracted are usually
simple and superficial while an actual measurement value tends
to fluctuate frequently even in normal operating scenarios. This
makes state machine generation difficult and therefore greatly
weakens the methods’ applicability to anomaly detection in
dynamic ICS streams. In addition, lack of consideration of associativity among numeric streams with respect to different ICS
devices further undermines the methods’ detection accuracy.
To better exploit the complex variational semantics together
with the correlational features of devices’ numeric streams,
neural network (NN) based solutions are introduced in numerous
literature (e.g., [5] [6] [7]). By introducing layers of parameters,
these methods conduct in-depth semantic learning over the
input streams, produce in-depth features for anomaly detection
and have, therefore, made decent improvements in detection
accuracy. However, most of these methods perform graph-level
state inference rather than conducting fine-grained device-wise
adversary detection. This tremendously undermines the models’
ability in finding which devices in the system an anomaly occurs
in and severely impairs their practicality in ICS protection, as
promptly locating and responding to anomalies is critical in
securing the running industrial processes and preventing catastrophic outcomes such as physical damage and casualty [8], [9].
Furthermore, one cannot shut down the entire system as it may

T

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

Fig. 1. Numeric data streams reflecting the operational status of industrial
processes (Red-dashed blocks: Anomalous; Green-dashed blocks: Benign).
Each stream corresponds to a measurement or operation index for a particular
ICS device in a specified process (e.g. a sensor’s measurement of liquid level
inside some tank in a water treatment process, the operational mode of a pump
(on/off) on a pipe, etc.).

cause considerable economic loss [10]. It will be very useful if
operators can take actions over only the most relevant devices
when an anomaly appears.
To timely discover the specific devices an anomaly impacts,
Graph Neural Network (GNN) based approaches have been
investigated. The GNNs are a powerful architecture for profiling
graphs of arbitrary structures [11] and dealing with tasks on
both coarse-grained graph level and fine-grained device level.
The fundamental principle is to produce high-quality node
embeddings via message aggregation for subsequent feature
differentiation. However, how to design the message aggregation
scheme so that the quality of information within the embeddings
is good enough for device-wise ICS anomaly detection is a
challenging technical issue that requires in-depth exploration.
Much of the current literature is based on direct neighbourhood aggregation, in which a node obtains information from
its immediate neighbours, causing embedding learning to bias
towards a node’s local surroundings. Simple as they are, when
it comes to application in layered ICS architectures built upon
heterogeneous devices, nevertheless, such aggregation schemes
do not explicitly consider the supervisory relations among the
devices. As a consequence, the embeddings produced by these
methods are not an accurate or comprehensive reflection of
how a node belongs to a hierarchical ICS topology. Therefore,
these embeddings may not be knowledgeable enough to instruct
downstream device-wise ICS anomaly detection tasks.
To address the aforementioned issue, we introduce the Hierarchical Message Analyzer (HMA). Distinguished from previous
coarse-grained anomaly detection approaches producing graphlevel results, our proposed HMA yields fine-grained labels on the
node level that can be immediately utilized in tracking down the
specific devices with which detected anomalies are associated.
In addition, the HMA is a new message passing scheme that
accurately profiles the hierarchical semantics in layered ICS
structures via transmission path regulation. It generates balanced
embeddings that reflect more precisely how specific nodes exist
in the hierarchical context of an ICS architecture and, as a result,
boosts the model’s anomaly detection performance. The framework sequentially amalgamates the following components:
(a) A Preprocessor that condenses the original numeric data
streams captured from the ICS devices into downsized vector

1995

representations featuring compressed temporal flow properties.
These vectors are fed into the model as the initial feature vectors
for the encoding process. (b) An Adjacency Parser that constructs the hierarchical architecture from the ICSs of interest and
stipulates how messages flow during the aggregation process.
(c) An Encoder that performs message passing based upon the
new adjacency info produced by the Adjacency Parser and (d) A
Decoder that maps the Encoder’s output to the respective labels,
which represent states of ICS devices for any applicable moment.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
1) Differentiated from the majority of current literature that
conducts coarse-grained system-wise anomaly detection,
we present a fine-grained anomaly detection framework
producing device-wise labels that help locate the specific
devices or components with which detected anomalies are
associated with. As a result, our proposed framework is
much more practical than current graph-level detection
solutions in terms of anomaly retracing.
2) In order to accurately profile the core hierarchical semantics in typical layered ICS architectures that current
neighbouring passing schemes fail to effectively capture,
we develop the HMA, a hierarchical aggregation model
regulating the message passing directions during the embedding generation process, to obtain a more precise
perception of how specific nodes exist in the hierarchical
context of an ICS architecture, than existing neighbouring
aggregation paradigms in which embedding learning is
biased towards a node’s local surroundings. The resulting
perception serves as a more balanced and reliable basis
for fine-grained (node-level) state inference.
3) We implement the HMA over multiple datasets and evaluate its performance against numerous state-of-the-art
baselines. Its effectiveness in ICS anomaly detection is
demonstrated with various popular metrics.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
provides an overview of related work on ICS anomaly detection
and basic GNN techniques. Section III defines the problem and
illustrates the general principles of the proposed framework.
Section IV provides a detailed description of the model architecture. Section V summarizes the experiment procedures, results
and analysis and Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we summarize the literature in ICS anomaly
detection and the Graph Neural Networks.
1) Anomaly Detection: As security issues in the ICSs have
drawn substantial attention over the past decade, there has been
numerous reviews discussing typical structures of ICS networks [12], as well as the security challenges they are confronted
with [13], [14]. In light of the commonality of these reviews
that there exists prominent consistency and periodic features in
ICSs’ communication patterns and process-oriented semantics,
early traditional methods [15], [16], [17] are introduced to
detect anomalies via periodicity mining, using methods ranging
from classic statistical analytics [17] to state automata generation [1], [2]. Such solutions are favourable in situations where the

1996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

inspected communication is relatively simple so that the quantity
of states remains manageable. Nevertheless, they suffer from a
rather large false detection rate when handling flows exhibiting
complex semantics, not to mention their inapplicability over
relational characteristics.
To tackle this challenge, machine learning approaches are
investigated and developed [18], [19]. Early contributions such
as the k-NN methods [20], although simple, are still proved
efficient in classification tasks and scalable to large datasets.
Then, in order to discover high quality non-linear characteristics
more accurately, the Robust Deep Autoencoder (RDA) [21] and
the DAGAN [22] are introduced. More recently, intrusion detection systems are created [6], [7], [23], [24] via Convolutional
Neural Networks, Long-Short Term Memory Networks or their
combinations.
Apart from the aforementioned schemes, applications of unsupervised methods in anomaly detection are also prevailing.
Relevant solutions include outlier detectors such as One-Class
SVM [25] [26] and Isolation Forest [27], [28], [29], clustering
methods including k-Means [30] and their variations, as well as
neural network based models [31], [32], [33], [34]. For example,
an efficient NN-based structure coupled with a PCA block [34]
is developed for detecting anomalies by leveraging the data
streams’ time and frequency characteristics.
Last but not least, there are numerous other NN-based methods developed via transfer learning [35] and federated learning [36].
While these methods claim superior results, most of these approaches, to the best of our knowledge, are specifically designed
for system-wise (graph-level) state inference rather than a more
fine-grained device-wise (node-level) scenario.
2) Graph Neural Networks: To derive schemes capable of
manipulating irregular data, Graph Neural Networks have been
developed and applied to a great many domains of research and
applications, including anomaly detection in Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT) [11]. Relevant work features multiple categories
including but not limited to graph topology learning, message
passing or aggregation, decoding mechanism and so forth, with
respect to different functioning components of a GNN model.
The main goal of graph topology learning is to create or
improve the quality of graphs used for subsequent representation
learning. To achieve this, unsupervised learning methods via
adaptive graph learning (BAGE) and variational adaptive graph
learning (VBAGE) [37] are proposed, with which adjacency
matrices are updated dynamically via training instead of being
configured as a static input. The Graph Deviation Network
(GDN) [38] and the Transformer-based framework (GTA) [39]
adopt similar ideas in determining the correlational topology
used in model training to address adversary detection issues on
the graph level. In addition, the Fused Sparse Autoencoder and
Graph Net (FuSAGNet) [40] are designed to explicitly model
the relational patterns within the multivariate time series in order
to achieve system-wise anomaly detection. More recently, the
GSLCN [41] and TPGraph [42] are developed to respectively
investigate the effect of long(short)-term dependency and feature
correlation mining on a graph’s contextual expression ability.

In terms of message passing or aggregation, available solutions in the current literature mostly fall in the neighbouring
aggregation paradigm, in which a node obtains knowledge from
its direct neighbouring nodes. Extensive methods have been
proposed in this category including the GCN [43], TAGCN [20],
GAT [44], GraphSAGE [45], etc. Apart from these methods that
aggregate information from units of nodes, alternative message
updating techniques based on meta-graph aggregation [46] have
been demonstrated effective in dealing with semi-supervised
learning problems on attributed heterogeneous information networks. Furthermore, in order to improve the model’s ability in
graph-level classification, hierarchical graph learning [47] and
pooling approaches [48], [49] are developed. There are also
trials in considering edge profiles in deriving comprehensive
embeddings [50] for subsequent tasks.
There is abundant work in the literature that highlights other
respects of a GNN process as well. For example, a decoding
technique employing global-local integration (GLIN) [51] is
designed to incorporate both a node’s local identity and its
global awareness in ICS anomaly detection. The FT-GCN [52] is
suggested as a multi-view trial in traffic adversary detection. The
feasibility of decoupling node representation learning and state
classification [53] in training is investigated. Preliminary studies
show that decoupled training indeed tends to outperform joint
training, but its performance may deteriorate provided that the
behavioural patterns and label semantics are highly inconsistent.
A brief summary of current literature is displayed in Table I.
As suggested in Section I, device-wise anomaly detection
is important for ICS process protection, as operators cannot
terminate the whole industrial process at the risk of huge financial loss. It would be extremely helpful if anomalies can
be located so that operators may take appropriate actions over
specific nodes without interrupting the rest of the system. Thus,
GNN-based schemes are adopted for anomaly detector design
in this paper, as they naturally deal with fine-grained tasks and
yield node-level outputs. Particularly, to create node embeddings
that better reflect the supervisory semantics in specified ICS
scenarios, we introduce a meta-graph-based hierarchical message passing fashion (HMA) that breaches the convention of
neighbourhood message aggregation. Our proposed method is
designed to operate on ICS architectures in which the associativity among homogeneous devices (such as all sensors) can
be completely unknown. Its conceptual distinctiveness as well
as advantages over existing meta-graph based or hierarchical
learning approaches can be stated as follows:
Differentiated from current hierarchical learning methods, the
HMA can be viewed as a path regulator defining how node
information flows in message aggregation without altering the
original graph, while existing pooling approaches such as DiffPool [49] and HGP-SL [48] are graph feature condensers that
integrate node features via graph streamlining. These pooling
approaches are not applicable in device-wise anomaly detection, as they are designed to produce graph-level embeddings
and do not generate representations for individual nodes in the
graph. Compared to current meta-graph-based mechanisms, the
HMA is a hierarchical feature extractor that operates on layers

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

1997

TABLE I
GNN-BASED WORK SUMMARY

Fig. 2.

ICS Architecture.

constructed from specified meta-graphs, while existing methods
such as meta-graph aggregation [46] are local information integrators that aggregate neighbouring features from randomly
produced sub-graphs. Current meta-graph aggregation method
may not be an optimal option for ICS anomaly detection, as they
fail to highlight the supervisory structural properties a typical
ICS network renders, for which the produced embeddings are
not an accurate reflection of how a node exists in the context of
a layered ICS architecture.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND MODEL DESIGN
In this section, we formulate the problem to be addressed and
comprehensively introduce the concept and logic of the proposed
model.
A. Problem Statement
Typical ICS networks are generally stacks of explicitlydifferentiated functional layers, each of which has its own designated role to play. The architecture of a regular ICS network
is illustrated in Fig. 2. It comprises a field layer with numerous
(typically hundreds or thousands of) sensors and actuators that
directly interact with the core industrial processes, a process
control layer incorporating the controlling devices supervising
the sensors and actuators in the field layer, a supervisory control
layer and an upper enterprise layer for process management,

control, data storage, etc. Its top layer are usually accessible via
public network for remote management.
One of the aspects differentiating the ICSs from regular
networks lies in the vulnerability of the underlying physical
processes. Anomalies in ICSs are not only triggered by the
wide range of cyber attacks on the network level, but may also
result from the sneaky attempts in breaching the regular system
operating convention, which potentially leads to chaotic states in
the physical processes. Specifically, based on [54], our assumed
threat model (resources, goals and capabilities) for ICSs can be
described as follows:
1) Resources: An attacker may have access to specialized
tools to penetrate an ICS’s enterprise layer or supervisory layer
systems from external environment such as the Internet. He may
also be an employee or ex-employee (e.g. a system operator)
or be in connection with internal staff who have opportunities
to damage the target ICS systems. In addition, it is likely the
attacker is knowledgeable in relevant industrial fields and is
aware of an ICS’s potential vulnerability that can be exploited
for hazardous purposes.
2) Goals: The main goal of an attack to an ICS is to impair its
availability, which may lead to a) interruption or termination of
physical processes that causes huge economic loss and/or nationwise instability, b) damage to critical infrastructure that are hard
or impossible to recover so as to impede industrial development,
c) severe casualty that gives rise to chaos in societies.
3) Capabilities: Attacks against an ICS physical process may
exhibit the following capabilities: a) sensor data theft and/or
distortion, b) actuator command listening and/or modification, c)
direct physical penetration and/or control corruption that causes
abnormal changes in sensor readings or actuator mode sequences
(e.g. sensor measurement of liquid acidity or pump operational
mode in water treatment process). Means of execution include
but are not limited to remote network infiltration, USB importation, on-site human operation, etc.
Apart from data theft and command listening, all other capabilities of an attack targeting ICS processes presumably lead to
abnormal deviations in device readings. Therefore, discovering
such deviations is crucial in protecting the ICS processes and
circumventing potential infrastructure damage and economic
loss.
In this work, the term anomaly corresponds to an abnormal
deviation in some device reading feature for a specified physical
process, and the general Anomaly Detection problem is defined
as below:

1998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 4.
Fig. 3.

Meta-Graph Definition.

Message Passing Scenarios.

Definition 1:
Given an industrial field network
G(V, E, X(t), Y (t)), where V , E, X(t) and Y (t) correspond
to sets of the network’s devices, connections, device reading
features and ground-truth states at time t, respectively, find
model M (V, E, X(t)) = Ŷ (t) such that for ∀t, Ŷ (t) = Y (t).
Note that the term “state” can be an n-ary label representing
the condition of a particular device, such as 0 for Normal and
1 for Anomaly given n = 2, or 0 for Normal and k ≥ 1 for
anomalies of different categories when n ≥ 2. Simply put, our
goal is to create a model that maps all normal and anomalous
device reading patterns to the correct categories.
B. Model Design Principles
This work proposes a hierarchical GNN approach to address
the aforementioned problem by applying a new message passing
mechanism to node embedding learning. Unlike the classic GNN
implementations that prescribe complete adjacency interaction
over the graph regardless of the nodes’ diverse contextual semantics, we concentrate on establishing an order that stipulates
message redirection based on the specific role assigned to each
node. We exemplify this concept with the following data collection scenarios.
Data collection occurs frequently in populated communities.
One member (or collector) initiates the process, receives and
analyzes the information obtained over the whole community
before generating a feedback broadcast. The approach employed
for data collection tends to dramatically influence the process’s
legitimacy and efficiency. Two scenarios are presented as follows
for demonstration (See Fig. 3).
a) Neighbouring Message Passing: Members are arbitrarily
mingled and exchange knowledge with their closest neighbours
up till the point when info from each member has been successfully delivered to the collector. In this case, all individuals
operate in the same manner despite their role difference.
b) Hierarchical Message Passing: Rather than being equally
treated, members are arranged into groups and sub-groups in
which a supervisor is designated for collecting and transferring
group info as well as receiving feedback from their supervisors
in larger groups. This creates a well-organized hierarchical
structure enabling multiple collecting processes to occur simultaneously, allowing for a potential boost in terms of data completeness as well as operation efficiency for large communities.
The ICSs are heterogeneous networks with a multi-layered
topology, which can be abstracted into graphs that current
convolutional models such as the GCN and GAT can easily
handle. Nevertheless, given the supervisory characteristics of

the industrial control processes, these state-of-the-art models
may not effectively capture the superior-subordinate semantics
over the context of the graph, due to the fact that the neighbouring message passing fashion, as shown in scenario a) above,
does not distinguish the roles each node plays. Therefore, we
strive to discover alternative embedding learning methods that
promote organized message aggregation in hierarchical graphs,
as illustrated in scenario b).
We investigate a recursive hierarchical message passing
scheme that leverages the properties of a layered structure and
construct message aggregation blocks within the GNN layers
via meta-graph data collection.
Definition 2: A meta-graph Gm of graph G(V, E, X(t),
Y (t)) comprises a set Vm ⊆ V of semantically linked nodes
and a set Em ⊆ E of edges on condition that (i) for ∀v ∈ Vm ,
∃ṽ ∈ Vm \{v}, (v, ṽ) ∈ Em and (ii) for ∀(v, ṽ) ∈ Em , v ∈ Vm
and ṽ ∈ Vm .
In a typical industrial network, field devices are distributed
into distinct controlling cycles over separate regions. We define a
series of meta-graphs based on these functional and geographical
relations, as illustrated in Fig. 4. These meta-graphs are arranged
by their structural complexity in an ascending order. They’re
interpreted as components of the network on different scales.
The single-node meta-graphs in the black dashed blocks are the
simplest patterns in the graph architecture. Hence they serve as
a basis for construction of succeeding meta-graphs in the series.
They represent single devices in the network such as a sensor or
an actuator, etc. The triple-node meta-graphs in the blue-shaded
patches correspond to double-layered relationships such as an
individual controlling cycle. They consist of a controller, a sensor and an actuator measuring and regulating a specific physical
state. These cycles contribute to the more complex topology
(the entire Fig. 4), which can represent a department at a certain
location operating over multiple controllers.
As illustrated in Fig. 4, each complex meta-graph consists of
a supervisory node (the top node) and a number of meta-graphs
whose order is precisely one less. The term order i denotes the
(i)
position of each meta-graph Gm in the list of all meta-graphs
[Gm ] sorted by structural complexity. Our proposed message
passing scheme is defined as an ordered sequence of 3 events:
message aggregation, message exchange and message feedback.
In message aggregation, all meta-graphs except the largest one,
propagates their messages to the supervisory node of the metagraph with the next higher order. For example, in an ICS network
where controllers are appointed the 2nd ordered supervisory
nodes (the orange nodes), sensor and actuator nodes (the blue
and green nodes) swap messages directly with the controllers.

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

Then the controllers aggregate all the received messages, create
condensed meta-graph representations and report them to the
supervisory node (the yellow node at the top) of the 3rd ordered
meta-graph, which might be a gateway, a supervisory machine,
or simply a dummy node without any role, etc. Upon reaching the
point where there are no higher order meta-graphs applicable, the
message aggregation process is complete and the highest order
supervisory nodes at the current state conduct message exchange
and echo the resulting condensed messages back to the lower
level meta-graphs along exactly the same paths used for message
aggregation. The latter process, denoted as message feedback, is
identical to the message aggregation procedure, except it works
in the opposite direction.
In order to implement the aforementioned procedures, a layered structure is constructed in which the supervisory nodes of
all the highest order meta-graphs are aligned in the top layer,
and that all other nodes are assigned to their respective positions
in the structure based on their distances to these highest order
supervisory nodes. Details of the layer alignment process are
explained in Section IV-B. When the structure is ready, messages
produced at the bottom structural layer are elevated to the top,
updated at the top and reverberated to the bottom. By the time all
nodes on the bottom structural layer have received an echo from
the top, one round of message passing process comes to an end
and the resulting vectors are fed into the GNN’s U P DAT E(.)
operator. To further explain it using matrix representations,
suppose A is the original graph adjacency matrix and H (l)
the updated node embeddings after the l-th round of message
passing. In conventional GNN frameworks, message passing is
conducted as follows,
H (l+1) ← ÃH (l) W.

n−1

i=1

H

(l+1)

← U P DAT E

n−1



(i)(i+1)

Ã

(n)

Ã

H

(temp)

A. Preprocessor
.

(3)
where
Ã(n−i)(n+1−i) ← Ã(n−1)(n) Ã(n−2)(n−1) . . . Ã(2)(3) Ã(1)(2) .

i=1

(4)
n−1


Ã(i)(i+1) ← Ã(1)(2) Ã(2)(3) . . . Ã(n−1)(n) .

IV. MODEL STRUCTURE



i=1

n−1


before message feedback. Details of these matrices are discussed
in Section IV-B.

(2)

(1)

Ã(n−i)(n+1−i) H (l) .

HMA Architecture.

The HMA encapsulates 4 primary building blocks, namely
the Preprocessor, the Adjacency Parser, the Encoder and the
Decoder. Its general architecture is illustrated in Fig. 5. Designed to deal with heterogeneous data sequences and complex
relationships, the Preprocessor converts the sequential data input
(series of sensor readings, actuator states, etc.) into vectors
(initial messages) containing temporal characteristics of the
original data at specific time ticks, and the Adjacency Parser
parses the hierarchical relationships among all nodes of interest,
producing the layered architecture on which subsequent tasks are
performed. Their outputs are then passed to the Encoder, the core
functioning component of the HMA which conducts meta-graph
message aggregation, exchange and feedback as introduced in
Section III-B. Finally, the updated messages are mapped to their
states of inference in the Decoder. The main idea behind this
design is to alter the amount of knowledge each node learns
through message passing. By applying the hierarchical message
aggregation scheme proposed in the Encoder on the layered
architecture produced by the Adjacency Parser, compositions
of learnt node embeddings are much less biased to the nodes’
locality and are hence more balanced and reliable as a representation of the sophisticated relational semantics between a node
and its surroundings.

where Ã is the normalized adjacency matrix of A. In our
approach, however, this is achieved via (2) and (3), with (2)
corresponding to message aggregation, and (3) the message
exchange and feedback steps.
H (temp) ←

Fig. 5.

1999

(5)

i=1

In the equations above, n denotes the top structural layer, and
the Ã(i)(i+1) ’s are normalized adjacency matrices channeling
the i-th and the (i + 1)-th structural layers. Ã(n) symbolizes
the message exchange process that occurs within the top layer

The input of the HMA is a stream Φ of M device readings
obtained within a time interval of length T , represented as a
matrix of dimension T × M . For each individual stream ϕ(Φ’s
column) in Φ with respect to a particular device, the Preprocessor
transforms ϕ into a series of initial messages (vectors) of dimension γ via temporal encoding, a process that extracts temporal
features within a time interval (window) of a preconfigured
size placed at a specific time tick. With n the length of the
window applied, each ϕ is converted into (T − n + 1) messages
of length γ, and thus the final output of the Preprocessor (denoted
X) is of dimension (T − n + 1) × γ × M .
In order to extract the numeric features of a reading sequence
at a given time tick t, temporal encoding is achieved via the
Grouped Exponential Weighted Average (GEWA) algorithm
(see Algorithm 1 and Fig. 6). This algorithm compresses all
values within a window of length n into a new vector x(t) of

2000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 7. Architecture Construction (Different Meta-graphs may correspond to
distinct stages of an industrial process, and may vary among different industrial
scenarios.).

Fig. 6.

procedure (See (8)).

The GEWA workflow (m set to n/2 as an example).

Algorithm 1: Grouped Exponential Weighted Average
(GEWA).
Input: Reading streams of M devices Φ[T ×M ]
Output: Preprocessed vectors X[(T −n+1)×γ×M ]
Ensure:
1: X ← emptylist
2: Initialize window size n and downsizing parameter m.
3: Compute exponential weights w (See (8))
4: for each device reading ϕ in Φ:
5:
Vector list for current device Ξ ← emptylist
6:
for t ∈ [n, T ]:
7:
Fetch window at t:
8:
Compute ξ(t) (See (6) & (7))
9:
Normalize ξ(t): ξnorm (t) ← arctan(ξ(t))
10:
Ξ ← Ξ + ξnorm (t)
11:
end for
12:
X ← X + Ξ (Ξ is of size [(T − n + 1) × m])
13: end for
14: Perform P CA over all m-dimensional vectors in X
15: return X
a downsized dimension γ, where n ≤ t ≤ T is the time tick at
which the window is captured. This x(t) contains the reading’s
temporal properties at time t and can hence act as a node’s
initial feature vector representation used for succeeding tasks
of message passing and state inference (at time t).
In Algorithm 1, the window of size n is evenly divided into m
segments within each of which weighted averaging is conducted.
This operation shrinks the n-dimensional window into a vector
ξ(t) of length m (See (6) and (7)).
ξ(t) = [ξ(t, 0), ξ(t, 1), . . . , ξ(t, m − 1)]T .

(6)



jn
w(i, j) · ϕ t − i −
m
i=0

(7)

n

ξ(t, j) =

m


Note that in (7), t ≥ n, 0 ≤ j < m and w(i, j) regulates the
contribution of the original entry recorded at time (t − i − jn
m ) to
ξ(t, j). Assuming that the importance of certain context decays
with time, the weighing factors w(i, j)’s in our implementation
is hence set to decrease as time backtracks. In particular, we employ a set of exponential weights in this step of our preprocessing

jn
a
e− n (i+ m )
.
w(i, j) = 
n
a
m−1  m −1 − n
(i+ jn
m)
i=0 e
j=0

(8)

where a is the coefficient that balances the distribution of all
weights in a specific window.
Owing to the scaling distinctiveness of the original readings,
additional normalization is applied to ξ(t) after the averaging
process is complete, to circumvent potential training bias toward
the nodes with dominant magnitude. In our implementation, a
simple arctangent normalization scheme is employed for the
convenience that no additional statistics is required during the
normalization process (See (9)).
ξnorm (t, j) = arctan(ξ(t, j)), 0 ≤ j < m.

(9)

Finally, the normalized vectors ξnorm (t)’s are condensed to
x(t)’s of dimension γ via Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
for its meliorating effect on the model’s performance (See (10)).
x(t) ← P CA(ξnorm (t)).

(10)

Given that the x(t) generated in (10) is associated with a
particular device at a specific time tick t, the final output of
the Preprocessor X is defined as an aggregation of the x(t)’s
obtained at all t ∈ [n, T ] and for all ϕ’s in Φ.
In summary, by performing temporal compression, we transform the original reading sequences Φ into their respective
graph node features at different time ticks, generating initial
representations X for subsequent training.
B. Adjacency Parser
In general, the Adjacency Parser determines the hierarchical
architecture for subsequent message passing via meta-graph
alignment and layer assignment. As defined in Section III-B,
each meta-graph has a supervisory node that collects data from
other member nodes in the graph before transmitting it to its
own supervisor in a higher-order meta-graph (See Fig. 7). For
(2)
example, in a 2nd-ordered meta-graph Gm composed of a single
controller C and its subordinate sensors S’s and actuators A’s,
the controller is the supervisory node dedicated to collecting
and aggregating information from its immediate subsidiaries
(S’s and A’s) and reporting to its own supervisory node in a
3rd-ordered meta-graph, which can be a security gateway, or a
switch, etc. Fig. 8 exemplifies a 6th-ordered meta-graph for a
secure water treatment process (SWaT) constructed with layers

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

Fig. 8.

6-Layer Structure for SWaT Process.

Fig. 9.

Example of Structural Layer Dissolution.

of multiple field devices, controllers and upper supervisory
nodes (denoted as dummy).
It is trivial to realize that every node in a graph can be
treated as a supervisory node in a meta-graph of some order.
Nonetheless, not all nodes are committed to both the tasks of
data aggregation and reporting. In a typical ICS layout, field
devices such as sensors and actuators usually do not have any
subordinate devices connected to them, and hence their only task
is to report to their supervisors, namely the controllers. Some
other nodes, on the other hand, may not have any supervisors
by configuration. For instance, in scenarios where no devices
are taken into consideration other than the controllers and field
devices, the controllers have no supervisors to report to. Thus,
such nodes only receive messages during the data aggregation
process, and they are aligned in the top layer of the hierarchical
architecture. Once the top layer is generated, determining the rest
of the structure is recursive and straightforward. Specifically, the
nodes directly reporting to the top layer are assigned to the layer
right below it (See Fig. 7).
In order to develop the intended hierarchical message passing
function, we store the connectivity information among nodes
corresponding to all pairs of adjacent structural layers in an array
of adjacency matrices [A(i)(i+1) ] as defined in Section III-B.
Each A(i)(i+1) only inherits the associativity between layer i and
i + 1 and does not convey any internal links within one exclusive
end, as the HMA only prompts internal message exchange on the
top layer. Consider the adjacency matrix A of a 3-layered structure in Fig. 9, in which nodes that pertain to the same layer are
grouped together so that the adjacency information between any
pair of structural layers is conveniently decoupled into blocks
(sub-matrices). One can clearly observe that the three yellow
patches preserve the internal links within the same layers, while
the blue and green patches store all the connections between
neighbouring layers. In the left matrix in Fig. 9, specifically,

2001

Algorithm 2: Adjacency Parser.
Input: Set V of M nodes of interest (controllers, field
devices, etc.)
Output: List of adjacency matrices A
Ensure:
1: A ← emptylist, layers  ← emptylist
2: Construct list Gm of meta-graphs using all nodes in V
(See Fig. 7)
3: s ←{Supervisory nodes of all meta-graphs in Gm }
4:  ←  + s
5: V ← V - {Nodes in s}
6: while V = ∅:
7:
r ←{Nodes in V directly linked to nodes in s}
8:
s←r
9:
←+s
10:
V ← V - {Nodes in s}
11: end while
12: Derive layer adjacency matrix A using layers in 
13: for each neighbouring pair of layers (αi , αi+1 ) in :
14:
Construct A(i)(i+1) from A w.r.t.(αi , αi+1 ) via
block masking.
15:
A ← A + A(i)(i+1)
16: end for
17: return A

the green blocks in the red dashed box denotes all existing links
between layer 1 and 2. Hence, A(1)(2) can be derived by applying
a mask to A that preserves only the green patches and sets the
rest to zero. Similarly, the green patches in the right matrix in
Fig. 9 renders the connection patterns between layer 2 and 3,
and thus, we are able to obtain A(2)(3) using the same masking
principle.
To sum up, the workflow of the Adjacency Parser is presented
in Algorithm 2. This module stipulates the layered structure
and parses all the adjacency information between neighbouring
structural layers in an array of matrices [A(i)(i+1) ], which serves
as the 2nd part of input to the GNN-based Encoder.
Note that one of the core properties of an ICS process is
long-term periodicity. It means that such a process is typically
required to run for days, weeks or even months. To meet this
need, an ICS system is usually a fixed structure whose set of
devices and connections remain stationary for a long period
of time. Thus in principle, the hierarchical architecture built
above should exhibit little dynamic characteristics. However, in
case of exceptions such as node addition or removal, changes
occur in the constructed hierarchical architecture. In this case,
Algorithm 2 should be timely executed again to update the
elements in the array A of adjacency matrices, and subsequent
training should be performed for the HMA model to adapt to
this new architecture. Furthermore, if relations among devices
are unavailable or irregular, one way to deal with this situation
is to equally treat all devices by randomly arranging them into
groups and assigning an additional dummy node in each group
as its supervisory node. This creates hierarchical structures
shown in Fig. 8, in which relations among the controllers are

2002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Algorithm 3: Message Passing.
Input: Initial messages X[(T −n+1)×γ×M ] , List of
adjacency matrices A
Output: Updated message H[(T −n+1)×ψ×M ]
Ensure:
1: H ← emptylist
2: for A(i)(i+1) ∈ A:
3:
Add self −loop to A(i)(i+1)
4:
A(i)(i+1) ← LaplacianN ormalized(A(i)(i+1) )
5: end for
6: for t ∈ [n, T ]:
7:
Ĥ(t) ← Matrix containing all M γ-dimensional
vectors in X w.r.t time t
8:
for A(i)(i+1) ∈ reversed(A):
9:
Message aggregation Ĥ(t) ← A(i)(i+1) × Ĥ(t)
10:
end for
11:
Perform top layer message exchange.
12:
for A(i)(i+1) ∈ A:
13:
Message feedback Ĥ(t) ← A(i)(i+1) × Ĥ(t)
14:
end for
15:
H(t) ← Ĥ(t) × W
16:
H(t) ← ReLU (H(t))
17:
H ← H + H(t)
18: end for
19: return H
Fig. 10. Encoding Process (Each round of message passing is completed by
sequentially following steps 1 through 8).

unknown and all controllers are connected via upper layer yellow
dummy nodes. The dummy nodes here act as virtual message
aggregators rather than real entities, and they enable construction
of hierarchical architectures with no a priori information on
devices’ supervisory relationships.
C. Encoder
As the core function of the HMA, the Encoder enables hierarchical message passing via a cascade of message aggregation,
exchange and feedback, followed by an U P DAT E(.) operation
for dimension shifting. The input to this module consists of the
initial messages X of size (T − n + 1) × γ × M produced by
the Preprocessor, as well as the array of adjacency matrices
[A(i)(i+1) ] manifesting the structure of the layered topology
defined in the Adjacency Parser. The output of the Encoder is
the updated messages H of dimension (T − n + 1) × ψ × M ,
where ψ equals the length of every updated message vector.
Details of this encoding process is presented in Algorithm 3 and
Fig. 10.
In Algorithm 3, initial messages (X) recursively ascend to
the top via message aggregation, mingle at the peak level and
descend back down to the bottom of the layered architecture as
Ĥ. Each ascent or descent is achieved via a left multiplication of
a normalized adjacency matrix Ã(i)(i+1) , which acts as a bridge
for the neighbouring layers i and i + 1 to transfer messages to
each other. The Ĥ is subsequently updated to H by applying
a linear weight matrix W and a ReLU (.) activation, and the
generated H has a new dimension of (T − n + 1) × ψ × M .

Note that in our implementation, Laplacian normalization is
employed in each step of message passing due to its outstanding
runtime efficiency compared against other mechanisms such as
attention and sampling.
D. Decoder
To determine the states of all nodes in every time tick of interest, the updated messages H are fed into a decoding block with
a Logarithm-Softmax layer and a category mapping function.
The Logarithm-Softmax function converts each vector h in H,
which is of length ψ, down to an N -dimensional vector of logits
ŷ where N denotes the number of classes. Then it computes the
logarithmic probability lp = [lp(1), lp(2), . . ., lp(N )] of all the
N classes that a particular ŷ is associated with in the following
manner (See (11)).


eŷi
, 1 ≤ i ≤ N.
(11)
lp(i) ← log N
ŷj
j=1 e
where ŷi refers to the i-th entry in ŷ. Finally, all lp vectors are transformed into one-hot representations showing the
categories these vectors are mapped to. The eventual output
Y of the Decoder and the entire HMA is therefore of size
(T − n + 1) × N × M , inferring the states of all M devices
for all (T − n + 1) time ticks.
As a binary output is generated for each node, operators
may interpret the result based on the specific type of device
being examined. In case of sensor, a positive output indicates
a deviation in its measurement values from normal variational
patterns, while for an actuator, this means that the device’s

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

2003

TABLE II
DATASET CHARACTERISTICS

operating states are not properly switching as configured. For a
controller, however, interpretation of an anomalous flag relies
on the variable under check, which could be an adversarial
command or an invalid operand, etc.
V. EVALUATION
In this section, we discuss our evaluation process including
the used datasets, baseline configurations, relevant results and
analysis. All baseline methods are measured on a server running
CentOS Linux system (version 7) and equipped with 32 processors of 800.000 MHz together with a Memory of 125.388 G.
All necessary coding is implemented using PyTorch version
1.7.1+cu110. Popular metrics (F1 Score, AUROC and AUPRC)
are adopted in the performance assessment process. As described
in Section IV, the HMA’s input and output sizes are T × M
and (T − n + 1) × N × M , respectively. With T , N and M the
number of time ticks, classes and devices, the output contains
the anomalous states of every individual device for all time ticks
of interest. As we do not distinguish anomalies of disparate
categories in this study, all final output states are binary (i.e.,
N = 2, output state equals 0 for normal and 1 otherwise).
A. Datasets & Graphs
We measure the HMA’s functionality over 5 popular datasets
in security research: the Secure Water Treatment dataset
(SWaT) [55], the Critical Infrastructure Security Showdown
dataset (CISS), the Water Distribution dataset (WADI: A water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber
physical systems), the Battle of Attack Detection Algorithms
dataset (BATADAL) [56] and the Car Hacking Dataset (CHD).
All datasets are ICS-based except the CHD, which is a car
hacking dataset recording a vehicle’s CAN traffic in 4 attack
scenarios. This dataset is used to evaluate the HMA’s generality
in domains other than ICS security. The key characteristics of
all 5 datasets are summarized in Table II. Note that with the
system-level operating states provided in the last column of
each data set, device-wise labels are generated from these states
in order to perform fine-grained node-level anomaly detection.
Specifically, a snippet extracted from a device’s data stream is labelled as anomalous if any state within the snippet is anomalous
in the original dataset.
The ICS network topologies on which model evaluation is
conducted are exemplified in Fig. 11. In both architectures, all
field devices (sensors and actuators) are directly linked to their
respective controllers, while all controllers are inter-connected
in a 2-layered architecture but associated with a dummy supervisory node denoted as “Central Reference Point”(or “CRP”) in
a 3-layered instance. To examine the effect of structural depth on

Fig. 11.

Layered Structures.
TABLE III
CORE HMA PARAMETERS

the HMA’s performance, we implement the architectures with 4,
5 and 6 structural layers as well. Relevant test results are shown in
the following sections. Note that in the datasets above, there are
devices whose readings remain constant all along. These devices
are omitted in the graph assuming that they are not affected by the
physical processes (e.g. a shutdown pump whose state remains
zero).
B. Baselines
The HMA’s implementation complies with the configurations
in Table III. Note that the M values are quantitative additions of
controllers and field device readings (M = 6 + 35 stands for 6
controllers plus 35 readings from the field devices). They do not
include any dummy nodes involved in architectures with deep
structural layers.
Our set of baselines consists of several GNN-based benchmark approaches including classic GNN variations (GAT,
TAGCN) and more advanced methods recently proposed for
adversary detection (GLIN, AHGA, etc.), as well as several
popular methods for outlier detection (GAAL, LOF, AE, etc.).
All benchmark methods and their implementation details are
listed as follows:
1) GAT [44]: A GNN framework with an attention mechanism. Input layer size equals the length γ of preprocessed
vectors, and the output layer is of size 2. Between the
input and output layers, 1 hidden layer with 128 neurons
is configured.
2) TAGCN [20]: Compound GNN with a kernel that consists of multiple classic Graph Neural Network channels.
The number of neurons in the input layer matches the

2004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE IV
BASELINE TEST RESULTS

dimension γ of the preprocessed vectors. Quantity of
neurons in the output layer equals 2. Maximum of 3
hidden layers of size 128 are implemented.
3) GLIN [51]: A global pooling and integration approach
applied to the decoding block of a GNN framework. It
has an input layer with γ neurons, 2 hidden layers with
128 neurons, and an output layer of size 2. Maximum
pooling and concatenation are applied.
4) AHGA [57]: Features graph-learning using processrelated properties. Implemented with an input layer of
size γ, 3 hidden layers of size 128 and a binary output
layer.
5) TPGraph [42]: Graph learning scheme using feature
correlation mining. Specifically developed with 2 graph
producing blocks (one for Âr and one for Âc ) and 1
graph fusion module. Anomaly detector is constructed
as a GCN structure with 2 hidden layers of 64 neurons.
6) GSLCN [41]: Graph learning approach based on longterm or short-term dependency encoding. Coordinates
replaced by an ICS device’s position attributes and features computed as a vector with 64 entries, mapped from
original numeric data streams.
7) GAAL [58]: Features application of informative sample
generation and boundary learning in anomaly detection.
MO-GAAL is developed with 2 generators, each of
which composed of 3 layers, as well as 1 discriminator
equipped with 1 input layer of size γ, 1 hidden layer of
size 128 and 1 output layer of size 2.
8) LOF [59]: Density-based outlier detection scheme on
assumption that regular nodes are clustered more closely
than outliers. Its contamination rate equals the rate of
anomalies in each preprocessed dataset.
9) AE [60]: Anomaly detection method based upon embedding reconstruction. Implemented as a 3-layered architecture with 1 input layer of size γ, 1 encoding layer of
size 2k where k equals the largest integer that satisfies
2k ≤ γ, and 1 decoding layer of the same size as the
input.
10) OCSVM [61]: An unsupervised outlier detector based
upon hyperplane training. Similar to the Isolation Forest,
the nu rate is set to the rate of anomalous samples in the
preprocessed data corresponding to each dataset.
11) Isolation Forest [62]: An unsupervised outlier detector
using feature point splitting. Its contamination rate

matches the anomalous rate in the set of preprocessed
samples with respect to each dataset.
Note that the output vectors generated by the Preprocessor in
Section IV-A serve as the input of all the baseline methods.
C. Baseline Test Results
Comparative test set results are summarized in Table IV. For
the proposed HMA method, metric values of the models trained
on hierarchical graphs with 2 and 3 structural layers are recorded
for comparison. Note that while the depth of the hierarchical
architecture can be greater than 3, these scenarios are analyzed
separately in Section V-D3.
As shown in Table IV, it is clear that the HMA’s detection performance surpasses the benchmark methods in almost all metrics
for all the 5 datasets. Compared with its GNN counterparts,
it achieves average AUROC gains of 9.92%, 18.92%, 15.09%,
15.47% and 4.45% with respect to SWaT, WADI, BATADAL,
CISS and CHD datasets. As all the baseline approaches follow
the conventional neighbouring aggregation paradigm during the
message passing process, it can be inferred that hierarchical
message aggregation may have a more extensive meliorating
effect on the quality of generated node embeddings, with which
anomaly detection is conducted. With contribution of each node
to a particular vector representation reshaped, the message composition pattern of every node embedding is a better reflection
of how a node is hierarchically associated with the rest of
the topology, such as whether specific nodes are positioned in
the same layer of an ICS architecture, etc. The resulting node
embeddings are, therefore, semantically closer to the specified
ICS structure and serve as a more informative and reliable source
for subsequent node-level anomaly detection.
One may also claim from Table IV that the HMA outperforms
non-GNN-based methods including the GAAL, LOF, AE, etc.
In terms of node-level detection, the feature vectors used by
these methods do not contain information from other devices,
and therefore cannot utilize the correlations among nodes to
enhance adversarial numeric patterns for anomaly detection. In
SWaT scenario, for example, the vector representing FIT-101
(measuring flows) incorporates features of sensor FIT-101 only,
but does not gather characteristics of its neighbours, say, sensor
LIT-101 (measuring liquid levels in tanks). As the containers
(tanks or pipes) are connected in which LIT-101 and FIT-101
are deployed, variation in one’s numeric streams presumably has

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

Fig. 12.

Test results with and without PCA.

a direct influence on the other (Level changes in tanks lead to
flow changes in pipes). With LIT-101’s information encoded, the
FIT-101’s feature vector should gain a better perception of how
its own measuring value changes, and become more sensitive
to an anomaly at its occurrence. However, such neighbouring
interactions do not exist in these methods, and as a consequence,
the methods’ reliability in anomaly detection is undesirably
limited.
D. Ablation Study
Apart from the baseline test results provided above, a comprehensive ablation study is conducted in order to explore how each
component of the HMA framework shapes the model’s performance. Effects of core functions in all components are measured,
except for the Decoder whose structural configurations remain
consistent across all HMA variants. In particular, the following
items are examined: the PCA function in the Preprocessor, the
hierarchical dissolution function and structural layer configuration in the Adjacency Parser, as well as the 3 primary hierarchical
message passing steps (message aggregation, top layer message
exchange, message feedback) in the Encoder.
1) PCA Function: Comparative test results of the HMAs
implemented with and without the PCA function in the Preprocessor are presented in Fig. 12. The noticeable numeric
discrepancies between the 2 scenarios suggest that the HMA’s
performance can be rather susceptible to the quality of initial input features. Core essences extracted from the original
data streams, redundant information that negatively impact the
HMA’s learning process is mostly removed via PCA, leading
to a boost in the quality of the model’s input features. The
performance of the HMA trained with these refined attributes
tends to be greatly enhanced as a result.
2) Hierarchical Dissolution: The hierarchical dissolution
function dissects the ICS topology into layers, based on which
data transmission paths are built. In order to examine its effect on the HMA’s detection ability, the original HMA is
constructed, together with the classic GCN trained with the
same layered graph input but regular neighbouring aggregation scheme. Results yielded by these two implementations,
as exhibited in Fig. 13, are an immediate demonstration of
the superiority of the hierarchical message passing paradigm
over the classic neighbouring aggregation convention. With
data transmission paths re-regulated across distinct levels, core
layer-wise network semantics are better absorbed in the nodes’
vector representations, improving the model’s adaptation to the
respective ICS systems and enhancing its anomaly detection
ability.

Fig. 13.

Test results with and without hierarchical dissolution.

Fig. 14.

Test results for different structural layer configurations.

2005

3) Structural Layer Configuration: As is demonstrated in
Section V-C, results produced by the HMA implemented with a
2 or 3 layered hierarchical architecture appear rather decent.
This gives rise to the conjecture, though, as to whether the
HMA’s performance can be further optimized via introducing
extra structural layers. To explore this, additional layers are
stacked above the controllers to deepen the structure. These
layers contain dummy nodes which do not have any specific
physical roles. In a 6-layer structure constructed for the SWaT
dataset (See Fig. 8), for instance, a layer of 4 nodes is placed
above the controllers, among which 2 are each linked to 2
controllers, while the other 2 are uniquely connected to the
remaining 2 controllers. Then another layer of 3 nodes is built
upon the 4-node layer, and the mapping between these 2 layers
are established in a similar way.
Assessment results on the HMA trained on graphs with 2
to 6 structural layers are illustrated in Fig. 14. For all datasets
evaluated, performance is peaked on topologies with either 2 or
3 layers. In addition, as observed from the SWaT, WADI and
BATADAL histograms, the HMA’s functionality generally falls
as more layers are involved. This possibly attributes to the oversmoothing effect caused by excessive message passing steps on
deep structural layers.
4) Hierarchical Message Passing: Finally, experiments are
conducted to explore how each step of the proposed hierarchical message passing scheme impacts the model’s detection
functionality. With the original scheme sequentially composed
of message aggregation, exchange and feedback, scenarios are
investigated in which parts of the steps are disabled. The examined scenarios and the corresponding test results are displayed
in Table V. It can be easily discerned from the results that the
metric values drop faster with more steps removed. The AUPRC
for the SWaT dataset, for instance, suffers from a 2.33%, 13.53%
and 24.24% decline when message feedback, exchange and
aggregation are orderly blocked. On one hand, it is inferred that
as the initial step of the whole message passing scheme, message
aggregation plays a significant role in reshaping a node’s awareness of its contextual correlations with the rest of the graph.

2006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE V
FUNCTIONAL IMPACT OF SPECIFIC HIERARCHICAL MESSAGE PASSING STEPS

Fig. 15.

Test results with noise.

On the other hand, even though not as prominent, the message
exchange step also has a rather large positive influence on the
HMA, as it is the main step in which information from nodes
in disparate industrial stages gets mingled and integrated. With
this operation, further enhancement in the nodes’ perception of
their surroundings is achieved, leading to a rather promising
performance gain in the HMA’s detection functionality.
E. Robustness Study
In this section, the HMA’s resiliency is examined against
multiple external interfering factors, including varying ratio
of anomalies, as well as graph input errors such as structural
perturbation and environmental noise. Implementation details
and the respective test set results and discussions are given as
follows.
1) Influence of Noise Addition: To examine the effect of
noise in input graphs on the HMA’s detection performance, a
uniformly distributed noise is applied to every non-zero element in the equivalent adjacency matrix Aeq used for forward
propagation. In particular, this equivalent adjacency matrix can
(i)(i+1)
(n−i)(n+1−i)
)Ã(n) ( n−1
)
be expressed as ( n−1
i=1 Ã
i=1 Ã
n−1 (n−i)(n+1−i)
n−1 (i)(i+1)
where i=1 Ã
and i=1 Ã
are respectively defined in (4) and (5). With Amin
eq the minima of Aeq ,
each noise value is randomly generated within the range of
β min
[− β2 Amin
eq , 2 Aeq ], where β is a non-negative coefficient representing the maximum magnitude ratio between the noise and
Amin
eq . To investigate how noise of different magnitudes impacts
the HMA’s detection performance, multiple β values are selected
for noise generation and the respective AUROC values of the
HMA models are shown in Fig. 15.
Intuitively, as the maximum magnitude ratio increases, noise
becomes stronger and tends to disturb the HMA more. However,
as shown in Fig. 15, no apparent discrepancies are spotted
among the AUROC values yielded in different β configurations for the majority of the datasets evaluated. This potentially
attributes to the HMA’s ability to smooth out the effects of
noise via message aggregation. Therefore, the model’s robustness is strengthened and its detection performance is hardly
affected.

Fig. 16.

Test results with structural errors.

2) Influence of Structural Errors: Apart from the environmental noise discussed above, structural errors are another factor
that leads to distortion in input graphs and hence may negatively
influence the HMA’s detection accuracy. To explore this correlation, directed edges in the original graph are randomly dropped
before construction of the hierarchical architecture for message
passing. Specifically, in a 2-layered scenario shown in Fig. 11,
edges are grouped into 2 sub-pools, i.e., sub-pool 1 containing
all internal edges in the top layer and sub-pool 2 incorporating
all edges between the 2 layers. A specified number (e.g., 5%
of the total edge quantity) of edges are randomly selected and
removed from designated pools for ten times and the respective
AUROC values of the HMA models are displayed in the box
plots in Fig. 16 (Note that the full pool in Fig. 16 denotes the
entire edge set).
In general, the HMA’s AUROC values fall within a rather narrow interval that approximately peaks at the AUROC obtained
with the complete graph structure. This is the case for all 3
scenarios in which links are respectively deleted from sub-pool
1, sub-pool 2 and the entire edge set. It shows that disconnecting
a limited number of node pairs does not lead to noticeable
information loss for the rest of the graph. This information loss is
actually compensated via alternative connections in the original
graph. Hence, the HMA’s robustness in terms of structural loss
is justified.
3) Influence of Anomaly Ratios: As a key property of the
input data, anomaly ratio also has a prospective influence on
the HMA’s functional reliability. To explore this connection,
portions of anomalies are removed and the AUROC values of
the HMA frameworks evaluated on the resulting datasets are
presented in Fig. 17. Note that the horizontal indexes in Fig. 17
denote the ratio of removed anomalies to all anomalous samples
in the original dataset.
One may tell from Fig. 17 that the HMA’s detection performance remains stable around a particular level as the quantity

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

2007

TABLE VI
TEST SET AUROC RESULTS FOR MODELS EVALUATED OVER ALL DATASETS
(LEFTMOST COLUMN: TRAINING SETS, TOP ROW: TEST SETS)

Fig. 17.

Test results with different anomaly ratios.

of anomalous samples declines. It shows that the framework is
able to capture sufficient variational semantics from the input
streams that help distinguish anomalous patterns from the normal ones regardless of specific anomaly ratios. This contributes
to the overall robustness of the proposed approach in anomaly
detection.
F. Generalization Study
In this section, the HMA’s generalization ability across nonICS domains and its transferability to different scenarios are
analyzed.
1) Domain Generalization: With the model’s detection accuracy evaluated on not only popular ICS datasets, but also a
car hacking dataset (CHD), it’s convincing that the HMA is
able to generalize in domains other than ICS security. Theoretically, whether the HMA can be applied to non-ICS scenarios
depends on the feasibility of generating hierarchical structures
from current graph topologies. Unlike an ICS system whose
architecture is naturally layered and hierarchical, a non-ICS
graph structure can be arbitrary and irregular. However, it is
viable that these non-ICS graph structures get transformed into
layered topologies using either of the following two strategies.
For heterogeneous graphs representing communities in which
roles of all nodes are explicitly designated, hierarchical relations
among nodes can be inferred from the specified roles. In a data
collection scenario described in Section III-B, for instance, with
the blue and green nodes referred to as regular members of the
community, and the orange ones supervisors collecting data from
groups of regular members, hierarchical relations (see Fig. 3(b))
can be established among the orange nodes and the union of blue
and green ones. Similarly, links between the orange nodes and
the yellow nodes can be created in the same fashion.
For all other cases in which either roles are unavailable or supervisory relations among roles are unclear, nodes are intuitively
indistinguishable. However, as most of a node’s interactions with
the rest of the graph can still be considered bounded within
a local distance, regions can be assumed and groups can be
defined as sets of all nodes within the same region. In this case,
communication among different regions requires construction of
inter-region highways (or channels). Such channels incorporate
information from nodes in the same region and can be considered as supervisors of particular regions. Hierarchical links
are hence produced among these channels and the respective
regions.
With supervisory relations inferred and layered architecture
created, the HMA can be generalized beyond ICS contexts and is

applicable to non-ICS scenarios in which hierarchical properties
are unclear.
2) Cross-Dataset Transferability: Despite its good generalizability across non-ICS domains, whether the proposed framework trained in one system can be directly transferred to another
is a completely different story. In this section, the models trained
in one dataset are evaluated with the test samples in all other 4
datasets. All AUROC values are summarized in Table VI.
The results in Table VI shows that the HMA framework
trained over one dataset does not fit the test samples in other
datasets very well. For instance, the AUROC of the model trained
over the SWaT dataset and tested on the CHD dataset is 0.2832
inferior than the one specifically trained for the CHD dataset. It
is likely that this discrepancy attributes to the distinctiveness
of both features and graphs in different domains. Therefore,
in order to bridge the gap, the following strategies can be
investigated in the future.
Feature Adaptation: The training and test datasets belong to
different domains (e.g., trained on SWaT and tested on WADI),
and their input vector spaces may differ a lot from each other,
leading to incompatibility of a framework trained over one
domain with a different one. Therefore, feature adaptation can
be investigated in the future to map the vector space of test
domain to the respective training domain (e.g., vector shifting
or matrix transformation can be adopted to transform the WADI
input patterns to the SWaT ones at the start of the testing
process). In this fashion, the model’s adaptivity to different
domains is enhanced and its transferability can potentially be
improved.
Graph Adaptation: Graph distinctiveness is another factor
that adds to the model’s inapplicability to different application scenarios, as it leads to a difference in terms of how
information is aggregated. One potential solution that might
mitigate this undesirable effect is creating auxiliary topologies
that structurally bridge the test set graph to the training one
(e.g., sub-graphs from test set graph that resemble part of
the training graph). Using these auxiliary topologies, test set
message passing is performed in a graph context similar to the
one producing the trained detector. This presumably leads to
a boost in the model’s transferability among distinctive graph
settings.
G. Runtime and Memory Consumption Analysis
To investigate the feasibility of the HMA’s application in
real-time anomaly detection, runtime comparison is conducted
with the classic GCN method as well as all baseline approaches
in Section V-B. In addition, in order to measure the amount of

2008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE VII
TRAINING TIME (PER EPOCH) AND TEST TIME (PER TIMESTAMP) FOR THE
HMA AND GCN

TABLE VIII
BASELINE MEMORY CONSUMPTION OF GNN-BASED METHODS

TABLE IX
BASELINE MEMORY CONSUMPTION OF NON-GNN-BASED METHODS

Fig. 18.

Baseline Runtime Comparison.

spatial resource required for the operation of the HMA framework, its memory consumption is analyzed together with all the
baselines.
1) Runtime Comparison With Classic GCN: Adopted structures and parameter configurations identical for both models,
the training and test time of the HMA and GCN are presented
in Table VII. Note that the training time is measured for each
epoch and the test time is recorded on the basis of timestamp,
indicating how long detection results are produced for all devices
at a single sampling time.
One can discern that the HMA scheme suffers from an
undesirable training and testing latency in contrast with the
classic GCN method. This drawback arises from the increase
of complexity in the adjacency matrices applied. Considering
the SWaT topology with 3 structural layers, only 7,936 (0.11%)
out of 7,225,344 entries are positive values in a GCN batch
adjacency matrix incorporating 64 time ticks, while there are
totally 112,896 non-zero entries (1.56%) in the respective HMA
batch matrix. Similar findings are claimed in the 2-layered
structures as well, with the number of existing edges 9,024
(0.13%) and 107,584 (1.56%) with respect to GCN and HMA.
In terms of operating time complexity, as the main message
aggregation steps in both methods are developed via sparse
matrix manipulation, the methods’ runtime consumptions are
closely associated with the time complexity of the respective
sparse matrix multiplication operations. Given 2 sparse matrices
of shape m × n and n × p, the time complexity of a regular
matrix multiplication equals O(mnp), but may drop down to as
low as O(mp) when sparse matrix operations are involved, in
which case the specific time complexity varies proportionately
with the ratio of non-zero elements in the adjacency matrices.
As the HMA creates more non-zero values (existing edges) in
its adjacency matrices, the level of matrix sparsity is lower and
hence, the operating time complexity is relatively higher.
To alleviate this negative impact, the idea of reducing the
number of nodes by clustering devices with similar reading
patterns can be studied in the future. However, one should further
investigate efficient ways to differentiate nodes in the same
cluster to conduct node-level state inference.
2) Runtime Comparison With Baselines: Fig. 18 presents the
test time results for the HMA and all the baseline methods. It
shows that the HMA’s test time consumption is generally on a

low level in contrast with some of the baseline approaches. With
0.0210 s, 0.0623 s, 0.0187 s, 0.0335 s and 0.0053 s the processing
time of all device-wise inputs for a particular sampling time
with respect to SWaT, WADI, BATADAL, CISS and CHD
datasets, the method is suitable for real-time anomaly detection
in these systems in which sampling interval is no less than 1 s.
Furthermore, as these processing time values are approximately
proportionate to the scale of the input architecture (i.e. number
of nodes in the input graph), one may estimate that the HMA is
capable of handling ICS systems (DCS, SCADA, etc.) with as
many as over one thousand devices. Nevertheless, compared to
over half of the GNN-based frameworks, this method’s runtime
efficiency still has room for improvement owing to the extra
complexity in its adjacency matrices.
3) Memory Consumption: The memory costs of all GNNbased models are determined by the amount of space allocated
for storage of both tuples of sparse adjacency matrices and
parameters in weight matrices. Suppose coordinates are encoded
as unsigned integers and all values (in tuples) and parameters
are defined as float numbers, each element takes up 4 bytes
of memory. Therefore, the total amount
memory 
consumed
nof
adj
w
i
Ntup
+ nj=1
Nj,
by each model can be estimated as 3 i=1
where nadj and nw are quantities of adjacency matrices and
i
and Nj are numbers of tuples in the
weight matrices, and Ntup
i-th adjacency matrix and values in the j-th weight matrix. The
space costs of the HMA and all the GNN baseline implementations are shown in Table VIII.
For non-GNN-based benchmark approaches, how space costs
are computed varies a lot from one method to another. For neural
network based frameworks (GAAL and AE), memory usage
depends on the size of parameter matrices between layers, and
for outlier based methods (IForest, OCSVM and LOF), it is
directly shaped by the quantity and dimension of samples used
for construction of detectors. The estimated space costs of nonGNN baseline implementations are shown in Table IX.
Compared to most baseline methods, the HMA requires more
memory for operation. However, in order to segregate the detection operation from industrial processes, the platform on which
the framework runs is typically deployed in a separate branch
from an aggregation node (e.g., a gateway). In this fashion,
the HMA simply processes the data copied from this node on
its local platform without consuming space resources of ICS
devices. Typical configuration of such platforms differs a lot
among systems and is customizable. Processors are usually of
1.8 to 3.5 GHz and available memory can be 16 G, 32 G or higher.

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

2009

Fig. 19. Embedding Composition (Each bar represents a device embedding
whose portions of different colours manifest the level of contribution of other
devices.

For complex data processing tasks, superior configurations are
also necessary.
H. Embedding Composition and Interpretability
The HMA establishes a new message passing scheme which
enables the model to capture the vertical (hierarchical) relational
semantics in typical ICS networks during the embedding learning process. Compared with the regular GCN, which indiscriminately treats every node regardless of their role in the system,
the HMA intensifies a node’s specificity via reformulating its
embedding composition in a way that enhances its awareness
of the roles played by other nodes’ in the graph, as well as
reducing any local discrimination through top-layer message
exchange. It is apparent that different embedding compositions,
which is determined by the disparate contribution patterns to
a particular node from the rest of the graph, produce different inference results. Hence, taking the SWaT dataset as an
example, we present the composition patterns for parts of the
node embeddings produced by the HMA and GCN, as shown in
Fig. 19.
One can observe from Fig. 19 that in both models, there are
dominant contributions for each node embedding. Nevertheless, the distribution patterns in the HMA is dramatically more
balanced than the GCN. Taking device #0 as an example (the
leftmost column in each graph), its immediate neighbourhood
(device #2, #3 and #4, the bottom 3 segments in the column)
contributes approximately 50% to its representation produced
by an HMA model, while over 75% in the case of GCN. This
indicates that an overall balanced message layout may have
a positive effect on the model’s classification ability, on the
premises that this layout is still far from being uniform, which
leads to over-smoothing. The underlying distribution principle
still requires further research, though.
To further interpret how the ultimate embedding composition for a specific node is generated, device #0 (FIT-101) is
selected as an example whose composition patterns after 1,2
and 4 rounds of GCN message passing are shown in Fig. 20.
Each bar in the figure profiles the scale of contribution of each
node to FIT-101’s embedding. It can be inferred that after the
1st round of message passing, FIT-101’s vector representation
incorporates information from device #4 (the controller FIT-101
is directly linked to) other than itself, as it is the only node
directly linked to FIT-101 in the graph. With the 2nd round
completed, node FIT-101 is semantically enriched with all other

Fig. 20.

Embedding composition for device #0.

nodes in the same industrial stage including device #2 (LIT-101),
device #3 (MV-101), etc. As the number of rounds increases,
device #0 starts incorporating information from nodes in other
stages. From the composition patterns obtained after 4 rounds of
message passing, it can be inferred that device #0 has gathered
information from all other nodes in the graph, with nodes in the
same industrial stage its dominant information sources. Embedding composition patterns for the HMA scenario are computed
in the same manner.
Note that in both compositions presented in Fig. 19, the
dummy node’s contribution, denoted as the top green segment
in every column, seems fairly prominent as well, even though
this node does not have any direct role to play in the physical
processes. This results from the principle of the inherent message
passing mechanisms employed in the two models. For GCN,
the further a node is, the less it contributes to the construction
of embedding vectors. Similarly, in HMA, the significance of
some node is diminished along the message aggregation and
feedback paths. Since the dummy node information is encoded at
the end of the message aggregation step, its contribution is fairly
significant at this current point and only starts to shrink in the
message feedback step. Therefore, at the end of message passing,
this node still has noticeable influence on the embeddings.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we investigate a hierarchical message passing scheme to generate effective embeddings for downstream
anomaly detection tasks in the ICSs. We design and develop
the HMA, a new message passing approach that re-regulates
the message transmission directions via meta-graph data aggregation. The HMA is composed of 4 functional blocks known
as the Preprocessor, the Adjacency Parser, the Encoder and the
Decoder. It improves the anomaly detection accuracy by creating
more balanced and reliable node representations encapsulating
the sophisticated supervisory semantics in the ICSs for state
inference. The framework’s performance is assessed and compared against various state-of-the-art machine and deep learning
baselines over several popular evaluation metrics. Evaluation on
multiple datasets certify the HMA’s validity and superiority in
ICS anomaly detection, with average AUROC gains of 9.92%,
18.92%, 15.09%, 15.47% and 4.45% with respect to SWaT,

2010

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

WADI, BATADAL, CISS and CHD datasets. Our future work
includes further investigation on enhancing the HMA’s runtime
efficiency, as well as upgrading the current hierarchical message
passing mechanism to generate embeddings incorporating more
comprehensive contextual semantics of an ICS network in order
to further improve the model’s anomaly detection performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Datasets are provided by iTrust, Centre for Research in Cyber
Security, Singapore University of Technology and Design.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Goldenberg and A. Wool, “Accurate modeling of Modbus/TCP for
intrusion detection in SCADA systems,” Int. J. Crit. Infrastructure Protection, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 63–75, 2013.
[2] C. Markman, A. Wool, and A. A. Cardenas, “A new burst-DFA model for
SCADA anomaly detection,” in Proc. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Secur.
PrivaCy, 2017, pp. 1–12.
[3] A. Kleinmann and A. Wool, “Automatic construction of statechart-based
anomaly detection models for multi-threaded SCADA via spectral analysis,” in Proc. 2nd ACM Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 1–12.
[4] A. Kleinmann and A. Wool, “Automatic construction of statechart-based
anomaly detection models for multi-threaded industrial control systems,”
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2017.
[5] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly
detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[6] M. Abdallah, N. An Le Khac, H. Jahromi, and A. D. Jurcut, “A hybrid
CNN-LSTM based approach for anomaly detection systems in SDNS,” in
Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur., 2021, pp. 1–7.
[7] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
Recognit., 2020, pp. 223–231.
[8] C. Hwang and T. Lee, “E-SFD: Explainable sensor fault detection in the
ICS anomaly detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 140470–140486,
2021.
[9] G. Cao, Y. Wu, D. Yu, and Z. Wang, “Attack detection and location using
state forecasting in multivariate time series of ICS,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2989–3001, Jul.–Aug. 2025.
[10] P. S S, G. S. R. E. Selvan, and M. P. Ramkumar, “Anomaly-based intrusion
detection system for ICS,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.
Technol., 2023, pp. 1–4.
[11] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and H. Tang, “Graph neural networks for anomaly
detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
no. 12, pp. 9214–9231, Jun. 2022.
[12] R. R. R. Barbosa, R. Sadre, and A. Pras, “A first look into SCADA
network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2012,
pp. 518–521.
[13] M. R. Asghar, Q. Hu, and S. Zeadally, “Cybersecurity in industrial control
systems: Issues, technologies, and challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 165,
2019, Art. no. 106946.
[14] M. AlMedires and M. AlMaiah, “Cybersecurity in industrial control
system (ICS),” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Technol., 2021, pp. 640–647.
[15] J. Zhang, S. Gan, X. Liu, and P. Zhu, “Intrusion detection in SCADA
systems by traffic periodicity and telemetry analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 318–325.
[16] M. Caselli, E. Zambon, and F. Kargl, “Sequence-aware intrusion detection
in industrial control systems,” in Proc. 1st ACM Workshop Cyber-Phys.
Syst. Secur., 2015, pp. 13–24.
[17] J. Yang, C. Zhou, Y.-C. Tian, and S.-H. Yang, “A software-defined security
approach for securing field zones in industrial control systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 87002–87016, 2019.
[18] M. A. Umer, K. N. Junejo, M. T. Jilani, and A. P. Mathur, “Machine
learning for intrusion detection in industrial control systems: Applications,
challenges, and recommendations,” Int. J. Crit. Infrastructure Protection,
vol. 38, 2022, Art. no. 100516.
[19] A. M. Koay, R. K. L. Ko, H. Hettema, and K. Radke, “Machine learning in
industrial control system (ICS) security: Current landscape, opportunities
and challenges,” J. Intell. Inf. Syst., vol. 60, pp. 1–29, 2022.

[20] Z. Deng, X. Zhu, D. Cheng, M. Zong, and S. Zhang, “Efficient KNN classification algorithm for Big Data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 195, pp. 143–148,
2016.
[21] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674.
[22] L. Chen, Y. Li, X. Deng, Z. Liu, M. Lv, and H. Zhang, “Dual auto-encoder
GAN-based anomaly detection for industrial control system,” Appl. Sci.,
vol. 12, no. 10, 2022, Art. no. 4986.
[23] A. Dey, “Deep IDS: A deep learning approach for intrusion detection
based on IDS 2018,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Sustain. Technol. Ind. 4.0,
2020, pp. 1–5.
[24] D. Nedeljkovic and Z. Jakovljevic, “CNN based method for the development of cyber-attacks detection algorithms in industrial control systems,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 114, 2022, Art. no. 102585.
[25] S. Amraee, A. Vafaei, K. Jamshidi, and P. Adibi, “Abnormal event detection
in crowded scenes using one-class SVM,” Signal, Image Video Process.,
vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1115–1123, 2018.
[26] L. Abedalla, M. Badarna, W. Khalifa, and M. Yousef, “K–means based
one-class SVM classifier,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Database Expert Syst. Appl.,
2019, pp. 45–53.
[27] X. Tao, Y. Peng, F. Zhao, P. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “A parallel algorithm for
network traffic anomaly detection based on isolation forest,” Int. J. Distrib.
Sensor Netw., vol. 14, no. 11, 2018, Art. no. 1550147718814471.
[28] M. U. Togbe et al., “Anomaly detection for data streams based on isolation
forest using scikit-multiflow,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Appl., 2020,
pp. 15–30.
[29] P. Karczmarek, A. Kiersztyn, and W. Pedrycz, “N-ary isolation forest: An
experimental comparative analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Soft
Comput., 2020, pp. 188–198.
[30] C. Yuan and H. Yang, “Research on K-value selection method
of K-means clustering algorithm,” J, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 226–235,
2019.
[31] G. Fortino, C. Greco, A. Guzzo, and M. Ianni, “Neural network
based temporal point processes for attack detection in industrial control systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience, 2022,
pp. 221–226.
[32] D. Fährmann, N. Damer, F. Kirchbuchner, and A. Kuijper, “Lightweight
long short-term memory variational auto-encoder for multivariate time
series anomaly detection in industrial control systems,” Sensors, vol. 22,
no. 8, 2022, Art. no. 2886.
[33] E. Aboah Boateng and J. Bruce, “Unsupervised machine learning techniques for detecting PLC process control anomalies,” J. Cybersecurity
Privacy, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 220–244, 2022.
[34] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
Jul./Aug. 2022.
[35] W. Wang et al., “Abnormal detection technology of industrial control
system based on transfer learning,” Appl. Math. Computation, vol. 412,
2022, Art. no. 126539.
[36] H. T. Truong et al., “Light-weight federated learning-based anomaly
detection for time-series data in industrial control systems,” Comput. Ind.,
vol. 140, 2022, Art. no. 103692.
[37] R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Lu, and X. Li, “Unsupervised graph embedding via
adaptive graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
no. 4, pp. 5329–5336, Apr. 2023.
[38] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 4027–4035, 2021.
[39] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[40] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
[41] J. Liang, Z. Du, J. Liang, K. Yao, and F. Cao, “Long and short-range
dependency graph structure learning framework on point cloud,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 14975–14989,
Dec. 2023.
[42] J. Ouyang, M. Yu, W. Yu, Z. Qin, A. C. Regan, and D. Wu, “TPGraph:
A spatial-temporal graph learning framework for accurate traffic prediction on arterial roads,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 3911–3926, May 2024.

LYU et al.: HIERARCHICAL GNN MESSAGE PASSING FOR NODE-LEVEL ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS

[43] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017,
pp. 1–14.
[44] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 1–12.
[45] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning
on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30,
pp. 1025–1035.
[46] A. Sankar, X. Zhang, and K. C.-C. Chang, “Meta-GNN: Metagraph
neural network for semi-supervised learning in attributed heterogeneous
information networks,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Adv. Social Netw.
Anal. Mining, 2019, pp. 137–144.
[47] J. Li, Y. Huang, H. Chang, and Y. Rong, “Semi-supervised hierarchical
graph classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
no. 5, pp. 6265–6276, May 2023.
[48] Z. Zhang et al., “Hierarchical graph pooling with structure learning,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 545–559, Jan. 2023.
[49] Z. Ying, J. You, C. Morris, X. Ren, W. L. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec,
“Hierarchical graph representation learning with differentiable pooling,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 31: Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst.2018, pp. 4805–4815. [Online]. Available: https://publications.rwthaachen.de/record/999809
[50] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann,
“E-graphsage: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system for
iot,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–9.
[51] L. Shuaiyi, K. Wang, L. Zhang, and B. Wang, “Global-local integration
for GNN-based anomalous device state detection in industrial control
systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 209, 2022, Art. no. 118345.
[52] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in
label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
[53] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling representation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detection,”
in Proc. 44th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2021,
pp. 1239–1248.
[54] Q. Do, B. Martini, and K.-K. R. Choo, “The role of the adversary model
in applied security research,” Comput. Secur., vol. 81, pp. 156–181,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0167404818306369
[55] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., 2016, pp. 88–99.
[56] R. Taormina et al., “The battle of the attack detection algorithms: Disclosing cyber attacks on water distribution networks,” J. Water Resour. Plan.
Manage., vol. 144, no. 8, Aug. 2018, Art. no. 04018048.
[57] S. L(y)u, K. Wang, L. Zhang, and B. Wang, “Process-oriented heterogeneous graph learning in GNN-based ICS anomalous pattern recognition,”
Pattern Recognit., vol. 141, no. 109661, pp. 1–14, Sep. 2023.
[58] Y. Liu et al., “Generative adversarial active learning for unsupervised
outlier detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 8,
pp. 1517–1528, Aug. 2020.
[59] O. Alghushairy, R. Alsini, T. Soule, and X. Ma, “A review of local outlier
factor algorithms for outlier detection in Big Data streams,” Big Data
Cogn. Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 1.
[60] M. Tschannen, O. Bachem, and M. Lucic, “Recent advances in
autoencoder-based representation learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS 3rd workshop Bayesian Deep Learn., 2018, pp. 1–26.
[61] Y. Wang, J. Wong, and A. Miner, “Anomaly intrusion detection using one
class SVM,” in Proc. 5th Annu. IEEE SMC Inf. Assurance Workshop, 2004,
pp. 358–364.
[62] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.

2011

Shuaiyi Lyu received the MSE degree in electrical
and electronic engineering from the University of
Pennsylvania, USA, and the PhD degree in cybersecurity from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
China. He has authored or coauthored papers in numerous prestigious international journals including
ACM TIST, IEEE Transactions on Network Science
and Engineering, and IEEE Internet of Things Journal. His research interests include anomaly detection
model design and optimization in industrial control
systems.

Kai Wang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in communication and information systems from Beijing Jiaotong University, China, in 2014. From 2017
to 2019, he was a postdoc researcher of computer
science and technology with Tsinghua University,
China. He is currently a full professor with the School
of Computer Science and Technology Faculty of
Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, China.
He has authored or coauthored more than 40 papers
in prestigious international journals, including IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, ACM TOIT, and ACM TIST. His
research interests include trustworthy AI and network intrusion detection. He is
a member of the ACM, and a senior member of the China Computer Federation.

Yang Liu is currently an associate professor. He has
authored or coauthored more than 20 academic papers
in journals and conferences both in China and abroad.
His research interests include network information
security technology and Internet of Things security
technology. He has participated in many projects
of Ministry of National Information and Science
Industry.

Bailing Wang received the PhD degree from the
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, in 2006. He is currently a
professor with the Faculty of Computing, Harbin
Institute of Technology, China. He has authored or
coauthored more than 80 papers in prestigious international journals and conferences. His main research
interests include information content security, industrial control network security, and V2X Security. He
has been selected for the China national talent plan.