3240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

HINHJ: Hierarchical Attention-Based
Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network for
DNS Hijacking Detection
Haoran Jiao , Cong Dong , Chenglong Li , Jiahai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, Leyao Nie, Yuling Liu ,
Jing Wang, Changzhi Zhao , and Xia Yin

Abstract—The Domain Name System (DNS) is a critical internet infrastructure that translates human-readable domain names
into machine-routable IP addresses. However, DNS is inherently
vulnerable to manipulation, with hijacking attacks growing in
both frequency and sophistication. Existing detection methods
primarily rely on traffic analysis at specific network points.
However, they suffer from limited coverage and low accuracy
in complex environments, such as when CDN is employed.
While recent approaches employ graph-based techniques, they
still suffer from detection inaccuracy issues due to their failure
to account for the complex interdependencies among multiple
types of nodes. To address these limitations, we propose a
novel heterogeneous graph-based detection framework. Based
on the collected DNS records from distributed scanners, our
method extracts activity and security features and constructs
a heterogeneous graph to capture resolution patterns and crossentity relationships. We further design a time-decay graph neural
network TNHAN that enhances traditional Heterogeneous Graph
Attention Networks (HAN) by dynamically weighting recent
records. This network improves adaptability to legitimate DNS
changes. For evaluation, we conduct experiments on real-world
resolvers and domain datasets. Experiment results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method. Our method can achieve an
F1-score of 0.96, outperforming the best baseline by 0.057 on
average, and up to 0.113 under low label proportion. Moreover, we conduct several case studies on detected incidents,
including cases related to geopolitical conflicts, censorship-related
hijacking, and manipulation by malicious resolvers. These cases
demonstrate the method’s effectiveness in identifying diverse
hijacking behaviors in practice.
Received 4 June 2025; revised 8 December 2025; accepted 11 March 2026.
Date of publication 19 March 2026; date of current version 27 March 2026.
This work was supported by Zhongguancun Laboratory. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Libing Wu. (Corresponding authors: Cong Dong; Chenglong Li.)
Haoran Jiao, Cong Dong, and Leyao Nie are with Zhongguancun
Laboratory, Beijing 100194, China (e-mail: jiaohr@mail.zgclab.edu.cn;
dongcong@mail.zgclab.edu.cn; niely@mail.zgclab.edu.cn).
Chenglong Li and Jiahai Yang are with the Institute for Network
Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,
and also with Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100194, China (e-mail:
lichenglong@tsinghua.edu.cn; yang@cernet.edu.cn).
Yuling Liu and Changzhi Zhao are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with
the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 101408, China (e-mail: liuyuling@iie.ac.cn; zhaochangzhi@iie.ac.cn).
Jing Wang is with the College of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing 100875, China (e-mail: wangjing@bnu.edu.cn).
Xia Yin is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with Zhongguancun
Laboratory, Beijing 100194, China (e-mail: yxia@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3675876

Index Terms—DNS hijacking, graph neural network, heterogeneous graph, hierarchical attention mechanism.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE Domain Name System (DNS) serves as the cornerstone of the entire internet, functioning as the
critical bridge between human-readable domains and machineroutable IP addresses. However, DNS inherently possesses
numerous security vulnerabilities that render it susceptible to
manipulation and tampering [1]. DNS hijacking has grown in
both frequency and complexity in recent years. It now includes
not only malicious activities but also state-level censorship
and commercial exploitation. This form of DNS compromise
not only leads to data breaches but also poses significant
risks to the stability of critical infrastructure systems. Hence,
it is significant to develop effective detection mechanisms
specifically targeting DNS hijacking.
Notably, the DNS hijacking studied in this paper refers to
the destruction of DNS integrity. DNS integrity is defined as
users consistently receiving unaltered responses from authoritative servers [1]. It can be violated through two attack
vectors: (1) Institutional manipulation via query interception or response forgery by network operators [2], [3], [4];
(2) Technical exploits like cache poisoning by malicious actors
[5], [6], [7]. Recursive resolvers are particularly vulnerable
to these integrity violations due to their intermediary role in
DNS resolution. As the critical link between end users and
authoritative servers, they face threats from both institutional
interference and technical exploits.
Detecting DNS hijacking attacks presents a complex challenge due to multiple inherent difficulties. A primary obstacle
lies in DNS’s extensive attack surface. Its distributed architecture and complex recursive query process involve extensive
network communication, creating multiple potential points for
hijacking. Another critical difficulty stems from the continuous
emergence of vulnerabilities. At the DNS protocol level, persistent cache poisoning vulnerabilities allow malicious records
to overwrite legitimate cached entries [6], [7], [8]. Simultaneously, system-level vulnerabilities enable attackers to directly
compromise authoritative servers or modify records at domain
registrar systems [9].
To address these challenges, current research has proposed
various detection approaches. The predominant methodology

1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

involves deploying traffic capture devices at specific network locations during the resolution process and applying
detection methods on the captured traffic. However, these
methods exhibit several critical limitations. First, these methods demonstrate limited coverage against attacks targeting
different network locations. By relying exclusively on traffic
analysis from specific monitoring points, they fail to detect
hijacking activities occurring in non-cooperative domains, particularly those downstream relative to the observation points
[10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Second, accuracy issues arise as
they rely on single-point features such as NS/AS changes.
Consequently, they are only effective for domains with simple
deployment structures and fail to identify DNS hijacking in
complex scenarios like CDN environments accurately [15],
[16], [17]. To enhance accuracy, recent studies employ graphbased methods [18]. However, they only focus on simple
node connections rather than detecting abnormal interaction
patterns between resolvers, IPs, and domains. This limitation
also results in missed detections for sophisticated hijacking
attacks.
In this paper, we propose a novel heterogeneous graph-based
approach for DNS hijacking detection. Targeting specific
public resolvers and domain lists, our method employs geographically distributed scanners to probe and collect DNS
records. Based on these records, the approach generates two
distinct feature categories, activity features and security features. To comprehensively capture cross-entity relationships
in DNS resolution, we construct a heterogeneous graph that
visually represents both the resolution process and the complex
associative structures of resolution records. Based on this
graph, we design a novel graph neural network architecture to
model the complex neighbor relationships accurately. Building
upon conventional heterogeneous graph neural networks, our
model introduces a time-decay neighbor selection mechanism TNHAN that enhances traditional Heterogeneous Graph
Attention Networks (HAN). This mechanism dynamically
adjusts the weights of resolution records from different dates.
In particular, it assigns higher weights to more recent records,
thus adapting to scenarios involving legitimate modifications
of DNS records.
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
we constructed a representative list of resolvers and critical domains. We evaluated our approach using DNS
records collected from these targets and conducted comparative experiments with state-of-the-art methods in this
field. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves superior accuracy, attaining an F1-score of 0.96.
Furthermore, based on the detection results, we performed a
manual in-depth analysis of several hijacking incidents, which
yielded case studies characterizing typical DNS hijacking
behaviors.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• This paper proposes a heterogeneous graph framework that models domain-resolver-answer ip correlations through four predefined relationship types and
multi-dimensional node features. This approach dynamically captures evolving DNS resolution patterns, enabling
systematic analysis of hijacking behaviors.

3241

• This paper presents a novel Heterogeneous Graph DualLayer Attention Neural Network (TNHAN) with a timedecay neighbor selection mechanism for DNS hijacking
detection. The proposed network architecture incorporates
a time-decay neighbor selection mechanism that enhances
conventional HAN, resulting in significant improvements
in detection performance.
• We deploy our method in a real-world network environment and successfully obtain multiple cases of different
types of DNS hijacking events, with purposes including
censorship factors, political factors, and malicious hijacking.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II summarizes the preliminary and previous works
related to DNS hijacking. Section III elaborates on the details
of our proposed HINHJ method. Section IV describes the
experiment settings. Secition V shows the detailed analysis
results of experiment and provides several hijacking case
studies in reality. Section VI provides the conclusion.
II. R ELATED W ORK
As a core internet infrastructure, the domain name system
faces security threats from both malicious attacks and manipulation. In 2024, a large-scale DNS hijacking in China exploited
router vulnerabilities to redirect millions of users to fake CDN
nodes. This incident disrupts services like Alibaba Cloud and
Tencent Cloud [19]. State-level interventions routinely replace
authentic IP addresses with government-approved servers [14].
For example, Iran’s DNS tampering for political censorship.
Commercial operators also prefer to hijack user queries to
their own DNS services (e.g., 8.8.8.8) [20]. For example,
Chinese companies redirect 30% of Google DNS traffic to
local servers for cost reduction or ad injection [14]. These
practices compromise data security and destabilize critical
internet infrastructure.
To mitigate the aforementioned challenges, recent studies
on DNS hijacking detection proposed several approaches.
They can be categorized into three: response record based
methods, traditional machine learning based methods, and
graph learning methods.
1) Response Record Based Methods:
DNS hijacking can be detected based on analyzing response
inconsistencies to specialized queries. Randall et al. [10]
detect router-level interception by sending diagnostic requests
to public DNS services, whereas Luo et al. [11] identify
hijacked resolvers through subdomain probes monitored at
authoritative servers. While these methods require minimal
resources, their effectiveness depends on target configurations and cannot detect hijacking at public resolver level.
Through experiments with controlled domains, Liu et al. [14]
reveal widespread DNS interception by comparing expected
and actual query resolution paths. Akiwate et al. [12]
combine internet scans with DNS/certificate logs to detect
historical anomalies in domain-IP-certificate patterns. Their
shortage remains in that manual verification limits scalability.
Nosyk et al. [13] passively detect middlebox injections using

3242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 1. Core concepts. Differences between normal and hijacking records can be categorized into three aspects: stability vs volatility, consistency vs isolation,
and security vs risk.

root server response patterns, but miss DNS cache poisoning
attacks.

the overall architecture of the HINHJ. After that, we elaborate
on each process of HINHJ in detail.

2) Traditional Machine Learning Based Methods:

A. Core Concepts

Machine learning approaches for DNS hijacking detection
typically combine statistical features with algorithmic analysis.
Houser et al. [15] utilize DNSDB data to identify server
response anomalies (e.g., IP/NS record changes) through SVM
and RF models trained on daily passive DNS features. While
effective in detecting new NS/AS ownership patterns, this
method shows elevated false positives due to overlooking
resolver-domain-IP correlations. Jin et al. [17] develop a
multi-dimensional detection framework incorporating protocol
features, temporal features, and geographic features to distinguish legitimate DNS updates from malicious alterations.
Fejrskov et al. [16] use traffic data to extract multiple types
of resolver features, including resolver prefixes, number of
associated records, etc., and use machine learning methods to
implement DNS hijacking detection. Their method assumes
that if a resolver is well-known, it is benign. However, wellknown resolvers can also cause DNS hijacking.

In this section, we examine several representative DNS
hijacking examples and abstract three core concepts that guide
our detection design. As shown in Figure 1, DNS hijacking exhibits abnormal connection patterns among domains,
resolvers, and records. These patterns can be directly shown
through changes in node relationships on graphs. Specifically,
differences between normal and hijacking records can be categorized into three aspects: stability, consistency, and security.
Stability vs volatility. Benign DNS resolution demonstrates
structural stability, consistently resolving to static record IP
addresses or CDN nodes. In contrast, DNS hijacking induces
abrupt topological shifts through recursive resolver cache poisoning. This triggers sudden resolution pattern mutations. As a
result, these behavioral contrasts manifest in graph structures
as spatial stability versus spatial volatility.
Consistency vs isolation. Benign resolvers demonstrate
global consistency. While load balancing and geo-routing
strategies [22], [23] may create variations, resolution patterns
remain coherent within geographic or network boundaries.
In contrast, hijacked resolvers exhibit behavioral isolation
when persistently manipulating specific domains for purposes
like advertisement injection and censorship. Leveraging graph
analysis can capture the distinction that benign resolution
patterns form cohesive subgraphs over time, while hijacked
resolution patterns appear as topological outliers beyond dominant communities.
Security vs risk. Benign DNS resolutions exhibit highconfidence security attributes, commonly appearing in threat
intelligence whitelists. Conversely, hijacking resolutions show
strong associations with blocklisted entities and high-risk
domains. Leveraging graph analysis can capture the distinction
through node attributes that hijacking nodes exhibit lowcredibility features and connect to high-risk domains.

3) Graph Learning Methods:
In recent years, graph learning based methods have emerged
in multiple anomaly monitoring domains. Its effectiveness
in capturing sharp relationships among different nodes for
detection makes it a focus in complex detection problems. In
this paper, we also follow this routine to design our method.
In previous studies related to DNS hijacking, graph-based
detection methods address this problem through relational
analysis of interconnected network entities. Jia et al. [18]
demonstrate this approach by constructing resolver-web server
interaction graphs and using Louvain community detection
and node2vec [21] embeddings to identify malicious resolvers.
However, this method relies only on a bipartite graph between
the resolver and the web server. As a result, the relationships
it captures are not comprehensive.

B. Overview
III. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce our proposed method for DNS
hijacking detection. We first introduce the core concepts that
motivated us to design the approach. Then we briefly introduce

As shown in Figure 2, HINHJ comprises four processes:
records collection, graph construction, feature design and
TNHAN-based detection. HINHJ first collects response messages from recursive resolvers through active probing. Then

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

3243

Fig. 2. The overall architecture of HINHJ.

HINHJ constructs a heterogeneous graph and corresponding
meta-path set by combining various auxiliary information.
The graph and path represent the association relationships
among resolvers, domains, and answer ips (the IP address
returned as the DNS answer) in DNS scenarios. Subsequently,
HINHJ produces behavior patterns of each entity as features of
nodes. Finally, to effectively identify abnormal patterns from
heterogeneous graph with properties of meta-path set and node
features, the TNHAN model is employed for DNS hijacking
detection. The following sections elaborate details of each
component.
C. Records Collection
The first process of HINHJ is collecting DNS records from
resolvers. In general, collecting these records can be divided
into active probing and passive monitoring. Both of these
methods can achieve the collection of resolver, domain and
records. However, considering the flexibility and the specificity
of monitoring targets, we prefer to choose the active probing.
Specifically, we maintain two specific lists for monitoring,
a critical domain list and a public resolver list. In probing,
we initially request the domains on the list to each public
resolver and parse corresponding response to collect records.
This procedure is repeated periodically to observe the change
of each record.
Notably, when PDNS sources from strategic locations are
available, the collection process can also be conducted by passive monitoring. These strategic locations include the ingress
or egress points of resolvers and critical routing nodes that
cover the target resolver’s network interactions. Such positions
ensure that passive monitoring can obtain rich redundant
records, including interested targets. Therefore, HINHJ can
also leverage such monitored PDNS data in its subsequent
processing.
D. Graph Construction
The DNS resolution process involves data flows across multiple entities. To model the relationships among these entities,
we prefer to use a graph structure for representation. Since
the types of entities in the resolution process are different,
it causes information loss when using a homogeneous graph.
This is due to ignoring the relationship among different types

of entities. Hence, we employ the Heterogeneous Information
Network (HIN) [24] to capture more semantics and support
more comprehensive representations.
As shown in Fig. 2, an HIN is built consisting of resolvers,
domains, answer ips (the IP address returned as the DNS
answer). Formally, the heterogeneous graph is defined as
G =< V, E >, with V = {Vd , Vr , Va } denoting domains,
resolvers, and answer ips respectively, and E
=
{E1 , E2 , E3 , E4 } represents four types of relationships.
The details of these relations are as follows, and Table I lists
their adjacency matrices.
• Resolver queries to Domain. We use matrix Q to denote
that resolver queries to domain.
• Domain is resolved to answer ip. We use matrix R to
denote that domain is resolved to answer ip.
• rDNS (reverse DNS record) of answer ip contains
domain. We use matrix F to denote that the reverse DNS
record for answer ip i contains domain j.
• Resolver in the same AS of another resolver. We use
Matrix A to denote that two resolvers belong to the same
AS.
ASN information and rDNS information of resolvers and
records are acquired through open source [25] and host
command queries. Among these relations, Q, R, and F represent directional interactions. We model them as directed
edges. Specifically, DNS queries originate from resolvers and
domains, while resolution mappings and reverse DNS relationships also have clear source and target semantics. Modeling
them as directed edges preserves the directionality of information flow in the DNS resolution process. In contrast, A captures
the symmetric AS-level co-location between resolvers, so we
model it as an undirected relation.
We formulate DNS hijacking detection as an answer ip
node classification task. On the built graph, we define several
metapaths to focus on crucial relationships [26]. We specifically consider metapaths where both endpoints are IP nodes,
yielding four fundamental metapath types P = {P1, P2, P3, P4}
as detailed in Table II, where a, d, and r represent the
answer ip, domain, and resolver, respectively.
These meta-paths are designed to capture different semantic
relationships between answer ips. These include co-resolving
to the same domain, sharing reverse DNS entries, and being
returned by the same or AS-affiliated resolvers. Each meta-

3244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE I
A DJACENCY M ATRIX

TABLE II
M ETA -PATH D EFINITIONS

TABLE III
F EATURE D ESCRIPTION

path represents a type of semantic connection, and HINHJ
applies semantic-level attention to learn the relative importance
of each meta-path.
Each meta-path is formally encoded as a commuting matrix.
We use these matrices to build a subgraph, connecting
answer ips that meet the meta-path condition. In the nodelevel attention stage, the model learns to aggregate features
across these subgraphs.
The selection of meta-paths is guided by domain knowledge
of DNS hijacking. The selected meta-paths reflect different
dimensions of relationships between answer ips, including
domain-level association (co-resolving to the same domain),
network-level similarity (sharing reverse DNS entries), and
resolver-level behavior (being returned by the same or ASaffiliated resolvers). These patterns correspond to key stages
in the DNS resolution process and contribute discriminative
information for distinguishing between benign and hijacked
answer ips.
E. Node Feature Design
In the heterogeneous graph, each answer ip node can be
correlated with abundant information. As an enhancement, we
further produce node features. As shown in Table III, these
features are categorized into activity features and security
features.
1) Activity Features: Activity features are designed to
capture the dynamic behavior of answer ips within a time

window. This type of feature reflects their stable and change
pattern over a period. These features include three subtypes:
query frequency, request diversity, and network topology.
a) Query frequency features: Dynamic Activity Index
(DAI) is calculated as follows,
DAI =

T
X

w(t) · I(answer ip active at day t),

t=1
−λ(T −t)

w(t) = e

(1)

where λ is the attenuation coefficient(we set λ = 0.7), and T
is the total number of days in the time window. A higher DAI
value indicates recent concentrated activity, whereas a lower
value indicates earlier or more evenly distributed activity.
longest active streak represents the answer ip’s maximum
consecutive active days within the time window. Higher value
indicates sustained activity or persistent DNS hijacking, while
lower values suggest potential cache pollution or configuration
anomalies. std degree nd measures daily fluctuations in
domain associations, where abnormal volatility may signal
malicious hijacking.
b) Request diversity features: Domain count and
domain count ndays represent the number of associated
domains in a single query round and across time windows
respectively. Significant daily variations in these metrics may
suggest potential hijacking activity. resolver count quantifies
the unique resolvers within two hops of the answer ip,

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

while the Domain Diversity Entropy (DDE) measures domain
diversity through the following equation,
DDE = −

K
X

pk log2 pk ,

k=1

pk =

nk
N

(2)

where K represents the total common TLD types
(e.g.,.com,.net,.gov), nk denotes the request count for
T LDk and N is the total request volume.
c) Network topology features: The binary feature is cdn
identifies whether the answer ip’s autonomous system (AS)
belongs to CDN providers, as attackers typically are less
likely to point the hijacking to CDN. ip resolver as sim
checks whether the answer ip and its resolver (within two
hops) share the same AS. A higher value suggests the
resolver is resolving domains to its own AS, potentially
indicating hijacking. Similarly, ip resolver geo sim detects
answer ip-resolver country matches.
2) Security Features: Security features are used to describe
the security risks of answer ip itself. The blocklist feature identifies whether the answer ip appears in historical
malicious lists, though this feature alone cannot definitively assess risk due to potential answer ip dynamism. The
sensitive ratio feature measures the proportion of sensitive
domains associated with the answer ip, where a higher
ratio indicates greater security risk due to potential malicious activity. Similarly, gov ratio quantifies the fraction of
government-related domains linked to the answer ip. Additionally, ttl long identifies DNS records with TTL values
exceeding a predefined threshold, as DNS hijacking attacks
frequently employ abnormally high TTL values to prolong
their effectiveness.
Finally, we construct a feature matrix x. This matrix is used
with the heterogeneous graph as input to the later TNHAN
model.
F. Attention Network Classifier
To effectively classify answer ip nodes in heterogeneous
graphs, we propose TNHAN, a dual-layer attention neural
network based on heterogeneous graphs. It enables HINHJ
to not only learn from node features in time series but also to
dynamically weigh the importance of different neighborhood
structures and semantic meta-paths. This enhances the model
to discern critical relational patterns indicative of hijacking,
rather than treating all connections as equally significant.
For specific, TNHAN takes the heterogeneous graphs G =
(V, E), meta-path set P = {p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 } and feature matrix
x as input. Briefly, TNHAN includes node-level attention,
semantic-level attention, and classification. We elaborate each
layer in detail.
1) Node-Level Attention: HINHJ constructs a subgraph Gk
for each meta-path pk , and then calculates the attention weight
of answer ip node i to neighbor node j under meta-path pk .

exp ReLU a>k [Wk xi kWk x j ]
k

(3)
αi j = P
exp ReLU a>k [Wk xi kWk x j0 ]
j0 ∈Nk (i)

This is a node-level attention neural network that calculates the
importance between neighbor nodes i and j in the subgraph.

3245

Wk ∈ Rd×dh is the projection matrix of the meta-path pk , and
ak ∈ R2dh is the attention parameter vector of the meta-path
pk .
It is worth noting that when searching for the neighbors of
node i, we do not directly select in the heterogeneous graph,
but adopt a time-decayed neighbor selection strategy. By prioritizing more recent interactions and changes in neighborhood
patterns, HINHJ is more sensitive to the abrupt behavioral
shifts that often characterize the onset of hijacking events, an
aspect that static graph analyses might overlook.
ˇ

ˇ
(t)
(t)
Nk (i) = Nk (i) ∪ j ∈ V \ Nk (i) ˇˇ
t−1
X

I( j ∈ Nk(τ) (i)) · λt−τ ≥ θ


(4)

τ=t−∆

Nk (i) denote the neighbor set of node i in the daily subgraph Gk , where V represents the complete node set of Gk .
The time window ∆ filters recent active neighbors, and the
threshold θ selects the most active neighbors. The decay factor
λ ∈ [0, 1) controls the influence of past interactions, where a
smaller λ assigns lower weights to older neighbor occurrences.
This exponential decay ensures that more recent interactions
contribute more to the final neighbor selection, effectively
capturing temporal locality in graph dynamics. The time-aware
neighbor set Nk(t) (i) captures node interactions within ∆.
After that, the neighbor features are aggregated through
Path-Specific Aggregation:
0
1
X
hi,k = σ @
αkij Wk x j A + Wres xi
(5)
j∈Nk(t) (i)

In 5, Wres ∈ Rd×dh , σ is the ReLU activation function. This
step uses node-level attention calculation to identify which
neighbor answer ip under each meta-path is more important
to the target node, and finally generates the node embedding
matrix Hk under the meta-path pk .
2) Semantic-Level Attention: After aggregating information
within each meta-path, it remains to combine the resulting
embeddings to form a unified node representation. Since different meta-paths capture different semantics, their contributions
to the final classification may vary. Semantic-level attention
is used to adaptively weigh the importance of each metapath based on its relevance to the task. Following node-level
attention, HINHJ produces node embeddings Hk for each
meta-path pk . The model then dynamically integrates these
semantic representations. First, our method learns the global
context vector and its importance weight for each meta-path:
ck = MEAN(Hk ) ∈ Rdh
γk = v> tanh(Uck + b)

(6)
(7)

ck represents the average behavior pattern of all nodes under
the meta-path pk , and γk represents the global contribution of
the meta-path pk to the classification task.
Then, our method employs linear projection coupled
with multi-head attention computation to capture complex

3246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

interaction patterns across diverse meta-path combinations.
WQ , WK , WV are learnable parameters and we set M = 4.
Hweighted =

4
X

γk Hk

(8)

k=1

Q = Hweighted WQ ,

K = Hweighted WK ,
V = Hweighted WV


Qm K >
Attentionm = softmax √ m Vm
dh /M

(9)
(10)

The attention outputs are then aggregated to produce the final
semantic-level embedding:
Z = LayerNorm ([Attention1 k · · · kAttention M ] WO
+ Hweighted )

(11)

3) Classification: The model is trained by learning the final
embeddings of labeled sample nodes using a cross-entropy loss
function:
X
L=−
Yi ln(Θ · Z i )
(12)
i∈YL

where Θ denotes the model parameters, Z i represents the
embedding of labeled nodes and Yi indicates the labels of
marked nodes. Through minimizing this cross-entropy loss,
the model learns to predict labels for unmarked nodes in the
graph.
IV. E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS
In this section, we provide preparation for the experiment.
First, we specify the targets for monitoring and details in active
probing. Besides, we also provide the method for acquiring
groundtruth. Second, we describe the metrics used in the later
experiment.
We use PyTorch [27] to run experiments on a server
equipped with an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU with 16GB
memory, an Intel Xeon Gold 6226R CPU (16 cores), and 128
GB RAM. For data collection, we deploy a scanner running on
an Ubuntu 22.04 system with an Intel Xeon Platinum 8255C
CPU (2 cores) and 2GB memory.
A. Active Probing
To acquire records of domain name from resolvers, we
employ active probing for collection. Notably, we treat DNS
servers serving dual roles (both resolver and authoritative)
solely as public resolvers for our analysis.
The public resolver list is obtained from multiple sources
[28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. In order to maximize the coverage,
our principle is to choose the resolver ISP public resolvers
and famous national DNS services [33]. Nevertheless, there
also exist invalid resolvers. Hence, we adopt a two-stage
validation process to filter out unreliable services following
the two processes: (1) Port verification using geographically
distributed scanners to confirm open port 53 accessibility,
and (2) DNS query validation requiring correct NOERROR
responses to controlled test queries. These criteria effectively
filter out private resolvers and authoritative-only servers. Additionally, we utilize active domains from Tranco [34], including

government, critical infrastructure, and sensitive domains. This
diverse dataset enables comprehensive DNS hijacking analysis.
We deploy five globally distributed scanners to conduct
continuous DNS measurements over 10 months (September
2024 to April 2025), with detection rounds performed every
2–3 days. Each round targeted 2,001 public resolvers and
36,192 domains. For this study, we analyze data from the latest
seven rounds, with each round generating approximately 20M
packets. In probing, we use ZDNS [35] as the tool to send
queries. Notably, to avoid potential ethical risk and disruptions
to DNS service, we strictly limit the query rate and randomize
the query order.
To support evaluation, groundtruth of hijacking events
is manually confirmed from multiple sources. Specifically,
hijacking samples are identified using threat intelligence
platforms, including VirusTotal and ThreatBook [36], [37].
Additionally, we develop a crawler that uses custom host
headers to access web pages from answer ips. By comparing
the content with trusted References, we can identify potential
DNS hijacking. For benign samples, we configure a controlled
local recursive resolver and use its responses as trusted data.
We exclude ambiguous cases (responses that could not be
definitively classified as hijacking or benign) from both training and testing datasets. Our method incorporates auxiliary
IP-ASN and IP-geolocation data obtained from the MaxMind
database [25].
B. Ethical Considerations
To minimize potential impact on DNS infrastructure, we
strictly limit the query rate and randomize the resolver selection. These measures ensure that no individual resolver or
authoritative server experiences significant load. Furthermore,
our experiments do not involve any user-side data collection.
We do not access or analyze personal DNS traffic, and the
entire dataset is generated from controlled queries.
C. Metrics
For a comprehensive evaluation, we use several standard
metrics derived from the confusion matrix, including Accuracy (ACC), Precision, Recall, F1 score, Balanced Accuracy
(B-Acc), Cohen’s kappa, Matthews correlation coefficient
(MCC), and Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC). Since the
dataset is imbalanced, we pay particular attention to B-Acc
and kappa. The formulas for these two metrics are as follows:


1
TP
TN
B-Acc =
+
(13)
2 TP + FN TN + FP
po − pe
TP + TN
, po =
,
Kappa =
1 − pe
N
(TP + FP)(TP + FN) (TN + FN)(TN + FP)
pe =
+
N2
N2
(14)
TN indicates the number of benign answer ips correctly
classified; FP indicates the number of benign answer ips
classified as hijacked; FN indicates the number of hijacked
answer ips classified as benign; TP indicates the number of
hijacked answer ips correctly classified.

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

3247

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE OF HINHJ

V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present comprehensive experiments to
evaluate HINHJ. In total, we conduct three experiments for
evaluation. First, we show the overall performance of HINHJ
as an initial evaluation. Second, we compare HINHJ with
baseline detection methods from the perspective of precision.
Third, we provide visualization analysis demonstrating our
dual-layer attention mechanism’s effectiveness in identifying
important nodes and meta-paths. Fourth, we describe several
hijacking cases detected by HINHJ.

Fig. 3. Training loss and F1-score across epochs. The model quickly
converges within 100 epochs, with loss decreasing and F1-score stabilizing
above 0.95.

A. Preliminary Experiment of HINHJ
To evaluate the model’s robustness and performance under
varying levels of supervision, we simulate scenarios with
different amounts of labeled data. Specifically, we select k%
of graph nodes as training samples, where k is set to 10, 30,
50, 70, or 90. By varying k, we are able to assess the model’s
behavior across a spectrum of labeled data availability. HINHJ
still needs a validation set to train the parameters of the model,
so we then select m% (where m is equal to 10) of the dataset
as the validation set, using the remaining nodes for testing
model performance.
Table IV and Table V show the overall experiment results
when using different ratios of label proportion. It can be seen
that HINHJ achieves strong performance when trained on 90%
of graph nodes, reaching 99% F1-score. This indicates our
method performs exceptionally well with sufficient training
data. As the number of training samples decreases, there is
a small decrease in each evaluation metric value of HINHJ.
When HINHJ is trained with only a small number of training
label samples (about 10% of training samples in the graph), it
also has good performance with balanced accuracy above 95%.
These results demonstrate that our graph structure features
and two-layer attention network effectively extend detection
coverage to identify related hijacked nodes.
It can be seen from Table IV that our method maintains
stable accuracy as label proportions decrease. However, recall
declines slightly due to behavioral variations across different
hijacking categories and organizations. HINHJ misses some
hijacking cases where attackers use reputable cloud servers.
These servers exhibit normal behavior in other periods, leading
to false negatives. Additionally, some false positives occur
with geographically optimized domain resolutions that show
mutation in timing characteristics.
Moreover, considering the cost of labeling data and detection efficiency in practical applications, we evaluate the
method’s F-score and loss at 50% label proportion as shown
in Fig. 3. The performance improves with increasing epochs
and stabilizes at epoch 100, which we consequently adopt for
all subsequent experiments. The corresponding training time

Fig. 4. Training time per epoch across epochs. The bars illustrate the training
time for each epoch, while the line represents the cumulative average training
time.

per epoch is illustrated in Fig. 4, showing that each epoch takes
less than 0.5 seconds on average, indicating high efficiency.
Further, we find that some false alerts in HINHJ are
caused by legitimate answer ip connected to hijacked ones
via meta-paths. This typically happens when attackers use
shared infrastructure such as CDN nodes or cloud services for
malicious activities. However, such cases are relatively rare
and do not significantly affect the overall performance of our
method.
B. Comparison Experiments
To evaluate HINHJ, we compare it with both traditional
machine learning models and recent state-of-the-art methods. For traditional machine learning methods, we use RF,
XGBoost, and AdaBoost, and apply the node features designed
by HINHJ to these models. In addition, we introduce several
state-of-the-art approaches: (1) MC-RF and MC-GBDT [15],
machine learning methods detecting hijacking through multiday DNS record analysis; (2) G-Belief [18], a semi-supervised
method based on graph modeling answer ip-domain relationships with SybilScar belief propagation [38] for reputation
scoring; (3) SeHGNN [39], a simple and efficient heterogeneous GNN framework that aggregates neighborhood
information using a parameter-free design tailored for heterogeneity; (4) LMSPS [40], a graph learning method that

3248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ACROSS D IFFERENT L ABEL P ROPORTIONS . NF I NDICATES THE U SE OF O UR E XTRACTED N ODE F EATURES ; HG D ENOTES
THE U SE OF O UR C ONSTRUCTED H ETEROGENEOUS G RAPH ; MP I NDICATES THE U SE OF O UR M ANUALLY D EFINED M ETA -PATHS

enhances long-range dependency modeling on large-scale
heterogeneous graphs by searching informative meta-paths
across multiple hops. (5) TESA [41], a temporal heterogeneous GNN that captures temporal behavioral patterns via
trajectory-based evolution and models relation-specific semantics through semantic-aware aggregation.
Regarding input requirements, MC-RF, MC-GBDT, and GBelief operate directly on DNS records or answer ip-domain
graphs and do not require manually constructed heterogeneous
graphs or meta-paths. SeHGNN requires a heterogeneous
graph together with manually specified meta-paths, both supplied by our constructed graph. In contrast, LMSPS performs
automatic meta-path discovery and does not rely on our manually defined meta-paths. For TESA, it directly captures the
historical behavior of answer ip nodes using a timestamped
heterogeneous graph without the need for meta-paths.
Considering the significant imbalance of benign and hijacking instances (1% hijacking messages in ground truth), we
primarily assess performance using F1 and B-Acc as shown
in Table V. These results demonstrate that general-purpose
models achieve good performance when combined with our
extracted node features (NF), constructed heterogeneous graph
(HG), and manually defined meta-paths (MP). This confirms
the effectiveness of our feature extraction, graph construction,
and meta-path design.
First, when compare with traditional machine learning based
methods, HINHJ consistently outperforms machine learning
baselines across all label proportions. Notably, XGBoost and
AdaBoost achieve more than 85% F1 at 50% label proportion, demonstrating that our features effectively capture DNS
hijacking behavior and approximate node graph structures.
However, their graph representation capability remains inferior
to graph models, explaining HINHJ’s superior performance.
Moreover, XGBoost and AdaBoost outperform other machine
learning methods. This stems from our high-dimensional feature space containing numerous sparse, nonlinearly separable
features, which particularly disadvantages linear classifiers.
Second, when compare with state-of-the-arts, it can be
seen that the F1 and B-Acc of our method are significantly
higher than all other methods. In addition, the performance of
MC-RF and MC-GBDT methods is lower than the other four
machine learning methods using our extracted features, and the

performance of G-Belief method is lower than XGBoost and
AdaBoost. These results prove that the features we designed
can well mine DNS hijacking behavior patterns.
Both SeHGNN and LMSPS operate on the heterogeneous
graph constructed by our method. However, neither method
incorporates time-aware neighbor information, which limits
their ability to characterize temporal resolution behaviors.
For SeHGNN, manually specified meta-paths are required.
We therefore provide the same meta-paths used in HINHJ.
LMSPS, in contrast, selects meta-paths automatically, but
the selected ones do not match DNS hijacking well. As a
result, SeHGNN achieves better performance than LMSPS.
In comparison, HINHJ integrates temporal modeling with
our designed meta-paths and node-level attention, leading
to consistently superior performance. TESA operates on a
temporal heterogeneous graph and captures the time-evolving
behavior of individual answer ip nodes. However, it overlooks semantic correlations across nodes, which are crucial in
DNS hijacking detection for identifying coordinated behaviors.
HINHJ addresses this by leveraging meta-paths to aggregate
cross-node semantics, leading to more expressive and discriminative representations. As a result, TESA shows weaker
performance compared to HINHJ.
When we deep into the falsely predicted instances, we
found that MC-RF/MC-GBDT generate false positives from
legitimate DNS variations, like dynamic IP, and miss longterm hijacking (e.g., censorship) by only examining temporal
resolver behavior. G-Belief’s graph propagation fails when
hijacking affects few domains as it lacks supplementary statistical features. This explains why our feature design, which
combines graph structures with statistical features, achieves
superior performance when applied to machine learning methods compared to these baseline approaches. SeHGNN and
LMSPS effectively capture answer ip associations in the daily
graph, but due to the lack of historical context modeling,
they miss some long-term hijacking cases. Due to the lack
of modeling correlations between answer ip nodes, TESA
misses some hijacking cases where suspicious answer ips
resolve the same domain or resolvers.
Our proposed TNHAN is designed based on HAN [42],
[43], [44] by introducing a temporal neighbor mechanism and
a multi-head attention mechanism at the semantic layer. To

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

3249

Fig. 7. Meta-path attention for different label proportion.
Fig. 5. Performance evaluation on HINHJ and TNHAN. TNHAN introduces a
temporal neighbor selection mechanism based on the HAN model to improve
the ability to capture temporal neighbor nodes.

Fig. 8. The change in attention of different meta-paths as the training epoch
increases.
Fig. 6. Neighbors and attention values of node P18563. Red represents DNS
hijacking nodes, and blue represents normal nodes.

verify the effect of our improvement on the model, we compare
the proposed model with the original HAN model [42], and
the results are shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that our method
can capture the temporal neighbor node information of the
node, so it can achieve higher performance than HAN.

domains on the same resolver. These hijackings point to IPs
that share the same resolver.
In addition, we further record the weight evolution of metapaths throughout training, as shown in Fig. 8. Initially uniform,
the weights diverge as training progresses: P1 and P2 decline,
while P3 and P4 rise. This shows our method’s ability to
dynamically discern meta-path importance for DNS hijacking
detection.

C. Analysis of Hierarchical Attention
Our approach hierarchically integrates neighboring node
relationships and multi-relational meta-paths. To facilitate a
deeper understanding of its decision process, we visualize both
node-level attention and semantic-level attention.
As aforementioned, HINHJ effectively assigns attention
weights among neighboring nodes within meta-paths, where
critical neighbors for detection receive higher attention values. Fig. 6 demonstrates this mechanism through P18563’s
neighborhood analysis. In sub-Figure 6a, P18563 connects
to six nodes - three hijacked (P20082, P27724, P18563)
and three normal (P18563, P18563, P27724). Edge widths
represent attention weights, revealing significantly stronger
attention (thicker edges) to the hijacked nodes than to normal
ones. This selective attention mechanism enables our model
to automatically prioritize relevant nodes while suppressing
irrelevant connections.
As shown in Fig. 7, our analysis of meta-path attention
across varying label proportions reveals P3 and P4 are more
important compared to P1 and P2.as shown in Fig. 7. This
is mainly because the DNS hijacking we detect occurs on
the public resolver, and the hijacker tends to hijack different

D. Analysis of Time Decay Mechanism
Our method uses a time decay mechanism to model the
historical connections between nodes, where more recent
neighbor relations are assigned higher weights through a decay
factor λ. A larger λ means historical neighbors have more
influence. For each candidate neighbor, we compute a cumulative weight by summing its past occurrences, each discounted
by a factor of λ based on its recency. Only neighbors whose
total weight exceeds the threshold are kept. This helps the
model focus on recent patterns while reducing the effect of
outdated or rare connections.
To evaluate the effect of the time decay factor λ, we
vary its value from 0 to 0.9 and evaluate the F1-scores, as
shown in Fig. 9. Notably, λ = 0 corresponds to the no-decay
setting, where the model only uses neighbors from the daily
subgraph, resulting in an F1-score of 0.939. As λ increases, the
model includes more historical neighbors, leading to improved
performance. The F1-score peaks at λ = 0.7, suggesting that
leveraging historical information benefits detection. However,
setting λ too high brings in outdated neighbors, which introduces noise and degrades performance.

3250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

Fig. 11. Certificate comparison for hijacking answer ip (AS16223) and normal answer ip. Red markings indicate the hijacking answer ip (AS16223)
with all certificates having the .ua TLD, blue markings denote normal
answer ips with certificates including .com, .ru, .ag, and other TLDs but
excluding .ua.
Fig. 9. F1-score under different time decay factors λ. The performance peaks
at time decay factor λ = 0.7.

Fig. 10. The proportion of domains hijacked by AS16223, AS8764 and
AS2588, with Russian domains accounting for the majority.

Fig. 12. Hijacking cases of some Russian domains (e.g., rutube.ru,
yandex.ru). Public resolvers in Latvia, Lithuania, and Ukraine are shown to
resolve Russian domains to block IPs in their respective countries.

E. Real-World Dns Hijacking Incidents
To illustrate this approach concretely, we first describe how
we use HINHJ to identify a set of DNS hijacking incidents
in reality. Then we discuss the characteristics of the full set
of hijacking events and the validation. In general, we apply
HINHJ to real-world networks and discover multiple types
of hijacking incidents, including geopolitical conflicts, DNS
censorship, malicious hijacking, and configuration errors.
1) Geopolitical Conflicts: As a concrete example of
our method, we discovered a DNS hijacking activity on
Ukrainian resolver AS16223. Compromised IPs associated
with this resolver exhibit strong meta-path correlations with
known malicious infrastructure through meta-paths P3 and
P4 while exhibiting significant deviations from benign IPs
in activity features and security features. While most of
its domain resolutions appear legitimate, our method identifies targeted hijacking of 70 specific domains—29 .ru
TLDs (e.g., yandex.ru) and 41 Russian-oriented non-.ru sites
(e.g., kinogo.best)—redirecting traffic to Ukrainian IPs within
AS16223. As shown in Fig. 10, the website types include
search engine websites, streaming media websites, news websites, social networking websites, etc.
Through manual verification with extra information, we
confirm DNS hijacking for Russian domains on AS16223.
The Ukrainian-operated host columbus.te.ua presents parking

certificates parking.columbus.te.ua for these domains, contrasting sharply with normal regional resolution certificates
shown in Fig. 11. This discrepancy rules out legitimate
CDN optimization. Furthermore, normal resolvers maintain
proper.ru-authoritative NS records (e.g., ns1.yandex.ru for
yandex.ru) while AS16223 resolver does not. This provides
conclusive evidence of DNS hijacking rather than infrastructure anomalies.
Our findings demonstrate that the Ukrainian AS16223
public resolver has been hijacking Russian domains. This
pattern extends to other regional public resolvers - Lithuania’s
AS8764 and Latvia’s AS2588 similarly target.ru domains and
Russian news sites as shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 10, aligning
with their governments’ political positions. Notably, while
most countries’ public resolvers hijack both illegal content and
politically sensitive domains, Lithuania’s AS8764 exclusively
targets Russian domains and excludes illegal domains such
as gambling, reflecting a focused political agenda rather than
standard security filtering.
In contrast, we found that a number of public resolvers also
hijack .ua domains, including Russia, Belarus and Iran, mainly
including Ukrainian news websites nv.ua, unian.ua, f ocus.ua,
etc. The relevant manual judgment process is similar to the
previous one.

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

Fig. 13. Changes in the answer ip organization of TikTok-related domains
resolved by the Albanian resolver. In March 2025, Albania decided to
block TikTok, and the proportion of abissnet (affiliated with the Albanian
government) in answer ip organizations gradually increased. In February
2025, there was a resolution to Italia-Tele, speculated to be a pre-blocking
test.

Fig. 14. Changes in the AS50057 resolver’s resolution results for the domain
wesleyancollege.edu. The domain was hijacked for less than a day.

2) Censorship of ByteDance-Related Domains: In April
2025, our method detected DNS hijacking of ByteDance
domains (including tiktok.com, bytedance.com, etc.) by
Albania’s public resolver AS35037. Verification through certificates and landing pages confirms this as hijacking rather
than CDN usage. As shown in Fig. 13, historical analysis since September 2024 reveals stable resolution patterns
through China Telecom, Akamai, and Amazon cloud servers
until February 2025, when tiktok.com first redirected to Italia
Telecom. The resolution pattern shifted dramatically in March
2025, with Albania-local servers (matching the resolver’s AS)
gradually replacing previous destinations, showing a systematic takeover rather than temporary anomalies.
News reports confirm that the Albanian government officially banned TikTok in March 2025 for alleged legal
violations [45], coinciding with our detection of ByteDance
domains being redirected to Abissnet servers. This indicates
Albania’s censorship strategy includes DNS hijacking through
public resolvers. The earlier redirection to an Italian server
on February 15, 2025 suggests testing of DNS blocking
mechanisms, demonstrating that ByteDance restrictions were
already being implemented at that time.
3) Malicious Hijacking: Our method also detected shortlived hijacking events, such as a less-than-one-day hijack
of wesleyancollege.edu by Iran’s AS50057 resolver in April
2025, redirecting to AS210083. As shown in Fig. 14, analysis

3251

Fig. 15. Answer ip distribution of wesleyancollege.edu resolution results on
all resolvers. Dark shades indicate the presence of records on the corresponding date, while light shades indicate no records.

Fig. 16. ASN distribution of wesleyancollege.edu resolution results on all
resolvers. Dark shades indicate the presence of AS on the corresponding date,
while light shades indicate no records.

Fig. 17. Abnormal response message about name-mismatch.

of the domain’s resolution history shows stable patterns except
for this brief anomaly on April 8. Comparative resolution
distributions across all resolvers confirm temporal consistency
in most answer ip assignments, with AS210083 appearing
only during the attack window as shown in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16.
Certificate verification and threat intelligence checks identify
the answer ip as malicious, collectively proving this was
a deliberate DNS cache poisoning attack rather than CDNrelated anomalies. It is worth noting that wesleyancollege.edu
is a women’s university and this hijacking may be relevant to
the situation of women in Iran.
4) Configuration Error: In addition to the hijacking incidents mentioned above, our approach also discovers some
records with abnormal resolver configurations. We find that
there was a mismatch between the name in the response A
record and the requested domain, which has not been studied
before.
Our method identifies a novel resolver misconfiguration termed “name-mismatch”, where queries return correct
answer ip but incorrect domain names (e.g., ahcme.edu.cn

3252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

resolving to elster.de’s IP, as shown in Fig. 17). Analysis
of 2M messages from April 8, 2025 reveals 95 such cases
across 8 resolvers and 94 domains. Daily detection shows
100-200 name mismatch occurrences with varying resolver
lists, while a few resolvers exhibit this behavior persistently with different domains each day. This pattern suggests
underlying software/hardware defects rather than manual configuration errors.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an effective method HINHJ
for detecting DNS hijacking. HINHJ first constructs a heterogeneous graph to represent the cross-entity association
relationship between domains, answer ips, and resolvers,
and then extracts features based on the behavior patterns of
each answer ip. In order to better combine graph structure
features and statistical features, HINHJ uses an improved HAN
model TNHAN to learn the embedding representation of each
answer ip through node-level and semantic-level attention
networks. We evaluate HINHJ on the test set and in the
real network environment. The experimental results show that
our method can achieve accurate detection performance when
compared with other state-of-the-arts. Besides, we also provide
several DNS hijacking cases in real-world.
R EFERENCES
[1]

R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, and S. Rose, “DNS
security introduction and requirements,” RFC Editor, Fremont, CA,
USA, Tech. Rep. RFC 4033, 2005.
[2] P. Pearce et al., “Global measurement of DNS manipulation,” in Proc.
26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2017, pp. 307–323.
[3] A. Bhaskar and P. Pearce, “Understanding routing-induced censorship
changes globally,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
Secur., Dec. 2024, pp. 437–451.
[4] L. Jin, S. Hao, H. Wang, and C. Cotton, “Understanding the impact of
encrypted DNS on internet censorship,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021,
pp. 484–495.
[5] J. Park, M. Mohaisen, and A. Mohaisen, “Investigating DNS manipulation by open DNS resolvers,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw.
EXperiments Technol., Dec. 2019, pp. 45–46.
[6] K. Man, X. Zhou, and Z. Qian, “DNS cache poisoning attack: Resurrections with side channels,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3400–3414.
[7] K. Man, Z. Qian, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Huang, and H. Duan,
“DNS cache poisoning attack reloaded: Revolutions with side channels,”
in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2020,
pp. 1337–1350.
[8] X. Li et al., “The maginot line: Attacking the boundary of DNS caching
protection,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023,
pp. 3153–3170.
[9] Y. Afek, A. Bremler-Barr, and L. Shafir, “NXNSAttack: Recursive DNS
inefficiencies and vulnerabilities,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2020, pp. 631–648.
[10] A. Randall et al., “Home is where the hijacking is: Understanding DNS
interception by residential routers,” in Proc. 21st ACM Internet Meas.
Conf., Nov. 2021, pp. 390–397.
[11] M. Luo, L. Xin, Y. Yao, Z. Jiang, Q. Wang, and W. Shi, “Who are
querying for me? Egress measurement for open DNS resolvers,” in Proc.
26th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD),
May 2023, pp. 1544–1550.
[12] G. Akiwate et al., “Retroactive identification of targeted DNS infrastructure hijacking,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022,
pp. 14–32.
[13] Y. Nosyk et al., “Intercept and inject: Dns response manipulation in the
wild,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Passive Act. Netw. Meas. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2023, pp. 461–478.

[14] B. Liu et al., “Who is answering my queries: Understanding and
characterizing interception of the DNS resolution path,” in Proc. 27th
USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2018, pp. 1113–1128.
[15] R. Houser, S. Hao, Z. Li, D. Liu, C. Cotton, and H. Wang, “A
comprehensive measurement-based investigation of DNS hijacking,”
in Proc. 40th Int. Symp. Reliable Distrib. Syst. (SRDS), Sep. 2021,
pp. 210–221.
[16] M. Fejrskov, J. M. Pedersen, and E. Vasilomanolakis, “Detecting DNS
hijacking by using NetFlow data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw.
Secur. (CNS), Jul. 2022, pp. 273–280.
[17] Y. Jin, M. Tomoishi, and S. Matsuura, “A detection method against
DNS cache poisoning attacks using machine learning techniques: Work
in progress,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA),
Sep. 2019, pp. 1–3.
[18] J. Jia, Z. Dong, J. Li, and J. W. Stokes, “Detection of malicious DNS
and web servers using graph-based approaches,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust. (ICASSP), Aug. 2021, pp. 2625–2629.
[19] WebRAY & Panabit. (2024). Analysis of a Large Number of Abnormal Network Access and Traffic Hijacking Incidents of Domestic
Home Routers. [Online]. Available: https://blog.csdn.net/c20220511/
article/details/141019242
[20] Google Public DNS. Accessed: Apr. 23, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://dns.google.com/
[21] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, 2016, pp. 855–864.
[22] K. Govindan, K. Arunachalam, and K. Subramaniam, “Optimal server
selection policy for improved network efficiency in smart phones,” in
Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[23] K. Schomp, O. Bhardwaj, E. Kurdoglu, M. Muhaimen, and R. K. Sitaraman, “Akamai DNS: Providing authoritative answers to the world’s
queries,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Spec. Interest Group Data Commun.
(SIGCOMM), 2020, pp. 465–478.
[24] Y. Sun, Y. Yu, and J. Han, “Ranking-based clustering of heterogeneous
information networks with star network schema,” in Proc. 15th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2009, pp. 797–806.
[25] MaxMind Inc. (2025). GeoIP2/GeoLite2 Database. [Online]. Available:
https://www.maxmind.com
[26] C. Shi, Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Sun, and P. S. Yu, “A survey of heterogeneous
information network analysis,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 17–37, Jan. 2017.
[27] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 8026–8037.
[28] Trickest. (2024). Resolvers: The Most Exhaustive List of Reliable DNS
Resolvers. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/trickest/resolvers
[29] Cujanovic. (2023). Public-DNS-Resolvers: List of Periodically Validated
Public DNS Resolvers. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/cujanovic/
public-dns-resolvers
[30] (2023). Public DNS Server List. [Online]. Available: https://publicdns.info/
[31] Mutin-Sa. (2021). Top Public Recursive Name Servers.
[Online].
Available:
https://gist.github.com/mutin-sa/
5dcbd35ee436eb629db7872581093bc5
[32] M. Fejrskov, E. Vasilomanolakis, and J. M. Pedersen, “A study on the
use of 3rd party DNS resolvers for malware filtering or censorship
circumvention,” in Proc. IFIP Int. Conf. ICT Syst. Secur. Privacy
Protection, 2022, pp. 109–125.
[33] A. Randall et al., “Trufflehunter: Cache snooping rare domains at large
public DNS resolvers,” in Proc. ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Oct. 2020,
pp. 50–64.
[34] V. Le Pochat, T. Van Goethem, S. Tajalizadehkhoob, M. Korczyński,
and W. Joosen, “Tranco: A research-oriented top sites ranking hardened
against manipulation,” 2018, arXiv:1806.01156.
[35] L. Izhikevich et al., “ZDNS: A fast DNS toolkit for internet
measurement,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022,
pp. 33–43.
[36] (2025). Virustotal: R Client for the Virustotal API. [Online]. Available:
https://www.virustotal.com
[37] (2025). Threatbook. [Online]. Available: https://x.threatbook.com
[38] B. Wang, L. Zhang, and N. Z. Gong, “SybilSCAR: Sybil detection in
online social networks via local rule based propagation,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun. (IEEE INFOCOM), May 2017, pp. 1–9.
[39] X. Yang, M. Yan, S. Pan, X. Ye, and D. Fan, “Simple and efficient
heterogeneous graph neural network,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2023, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 10816–10824.

JIAO et al.: HINHJ: HIERARCHICAL ATTENTION-BASED HETEROGENEOUS GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK

[40] Z. Guo, K. He, Q. He, and C. Li, “Long-range meta-path search on
large-scale heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 37, 2024, pp. 44240–44268.
[41] X. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Yan, and Q. Huang, “Tesa: A trajectory and
semantic-aware dynamic heterogeneous graph neural network,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., 2025, pp. 1305–1315.
[42] X. Wang et al., “Heterogeneous graph attention network,” in Proc. World
Wide Web Conf., 2019, pp. 2022–2032.
[43] M. Liu et al., “Enhanced detection of obfuscated HTTPS tunnel traffic
using heterogeneous information network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 257,
Feb. 2025, Art. no. 110975.
[44] Q. Wang et al., “HANDOM: Heterogeneous attention network model
for malicious domain detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 125, Jun. 2022,
Art. no. 103059.
[45] CNN.(2025). Albania Shuts Down Tiktok for a Year Amid Concerns Over
Violence Among Children. [Online]. Available: https://edition.cnn.com/
2025/03/06/europe/albania-shuts-down-tiktok-intl-latam/index.html

Haoran Jiao received the M.S. degree from the
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2023. He is
currently an Engineer with Zhongguancun Laboratory. His research interests include network security
and network measurement.

Cong Dong received the Ph.D. degree from the
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2022. He is
currently an Assistant Professor with Zhongguancun
Laboratory. His research interests include network
security awareness, network measurement, anomaly
detection, and traffic analysis.

Chenglong Li received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science and technology from Tsinghua
University, China, in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Research Professor with
the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace,
Tsinghua University. His research interests include
network measurement, situational awareness, and the
IoT security.

Jiahai Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. degree in computer science from Beijing Technology and Business University and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Tsinghua
University, China. He is currently a Professor with
the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace
and Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China. He is a Researcher Fellow with
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing. His research
interests include network management, network
measurement, network security, Internet routing, and cloud computing.

3253

Leyao Nie received the M.S. degree from the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2024. She is currently
an Assistant Engineer with Zhongguancun Laboratory. Her current research interests include DNS
measurement and situational awareness.

Yuling Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
He is currently a Professorate Senior Engineer with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
network security situational awareness, network
security, big data analysis, and security measurement
and certification.

Jing Wang received the Ph.D. degree from Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, China,
in 2012. She is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal
University, China. Her current research interests
include networking, communications, and security.

Changzhi Zhao received the Ph.D. degree in cyber
security from the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2026. His research interests include network security awareness and anomaly detection.

Xia Yin received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science from Tsinghua University in
1995, 1997, and 2000, respectively. She is currently
a Full Professor with the Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. Her
research interests include future Internet architecture, formal method, protocol testing, and large-scale
Internet routing.