IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

2507

Hybrid CNN-LSTM Model for DDoS Detection
and Mitigation in Software-Defined Networks
Abdinasir Hirsi , Member, IEEE, Mohammed A. Alhartomi , Senior Member, IEEE,
Lukman Audah , Member, IEEE, Mustafa Maad Hamdi , Member, IEEE, Adeb Salah , Member, IEEE,
Godwin Okon Ansa , Member, IEEE, Salman Ahmed , Member, IEEE, and Abdullahi Farah

Abstract—Software-Defined Networking (SDN) enhances programmability and control but remains highly vulnerable to
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks. Existing solutions
often adapt conventional methods without leveraging SDN’s
native features or addressing real-time mitigation. This study
introduces a novel hybrid deep learning framework for DDoS
detection and mitigation in SDN, significantly advancing the
state of the art. We develop a custom dataset in a Mininet–Ryu
testbed that reflects realistic SDN traffic conditions, and
employ a multistage feature selection pipeline to reduce redundancy and highlight the most discriminative flow attributes. A
hybrid Convolutional Neural Network–Long Short-Term Memory (CNN-LSTM) model is then applied, capturing both spatial
and temporal traffic patterns. The proposed system achieves
99.5% accuracy and a 97.7% F1-score, demonstrating a significant improvement over baseline ML and DL approaches. In
addition, a lightweight and scalable mitigation module embedded
in the SDN controller dynamically drops or reroutes malicious
flows, enabling real-time, low-latency responsiveness. Experimental results across diverse topologies confirm the framework’s
scalability and applicability in real-world SDN environments.
Received 13 September 2025; revised 28 January 2026; accepted 1 February 2026. Date of publication 9 February 2026; date of current version 19 February 2026. This research was supported by Ministry of
Higher Education (MOHE) through Fundamental Research Grant Scheme
(FRGS/1/2022/TK07/UTHM/02/25). The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was K. Dev. (Corresponding author: Lukman Audah.)
Abdinasir Hirsi is with the Advanced Telecommunication Research Center,
Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn
Malaysia (UTHM), Parit Raja 86400, Malaysia, and also with the Faculty
of Engineering, Jamhuriya University of Science and Technology, Mogadishu
2602, Somalia (e-mail: abdinasirhirsi@just.edu).
Mohammed A. Alhartomi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Tabuk, Tabuk 71491, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
malhartomi@ut.edu.sa).
Lukman Audah is with the Advanced Telecommunication Research Center,
the Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, and the Faculty of
Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia
(UTHM), Parit Raja 86400, Malaysia (e-mail: hanif@uthm.edu.my).
Mustafa Maad Hamdi is with the Department of Computer Science, College
of Computer Science and IT, University of Anbar, Ramadi 31001, Iraq (e-mail:
mustafa.maad.hamdi@uoanbar.edu.iq).
Adeb Salah is with the Faculty of Information and Communication Technology, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), Kampar 31900, Malaysia
(e-mail: adebali@utar.edu.my).
Godwin Okon Ansa is with the Department of Computer Science, Faculty of
Computing and Information Technology, Akwa Ibom State University, Mkpat
Enin, Akwa Ibom 520101, Nigeria (e-mail: godwinansa@aksu.edu.ng).
Salman Ahmed is with the Faculty of Electronic and Electrical
Engineering,
UTHM,
Parit
Raja
86400,
Malaysia
(e-mail:
he220025@student.uthm.edu.my).
Abdullahi Farah is with the Engineering Department, Somtel
Telecommunication Company, Bosaso 25290, Somalia (e-mail:
abdalla.gaash@somtelnetwork.net).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3662819

Index Terms—CNN-LSTM, deep learning, DDoS attack,
machine learning, network security, SDN security, SDN
vulnerabilities.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N RECENT years, cybersecurity has become a critical
requirement for ensuring the safety and stability of digital
systems in all sectors of the economy [1]. The rapid expansion of technologies such as cloud computing [2], mobile
devices [3], the Internet of Things (IoT) [4], and digital
communication platforms [5] has significantly increased the
number of entry points for potential cyberattacks on industrial control systems. Consequently, protecting systems and
networks from unauthorized access [6], data breaches [7], and
service interruptions [8] has become increasingly important.
In addition, cyberattacks are growing in sophistication, often
employing advanced techniques that can bypass traditional
defense mechanisms [9]. These attacks can cause serious financial damage [10], disrupt services [11], and expose sensitive
information of the users [12]. Furthermore, their impact is
not limited to individuals or organizations; governments and
national infrastructures are increasingly being targeted, with
consequences that can be both widespread and long-lasting
[13].
Among the various forms of cyber threats, Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks remain one of the most
frequent and disruptive [14], [15], [16]. These attacks aim
to overwhelm network infrastructure or application servers
by generating excessive traffic, ultimately rendering services
inaccessible to legitimate users [17], [18]. In many cases,
DDoS traffic is orchestrated through large-scale botnets comprising compromised devices distributed across the globe,
making it exceedingly difficult to identify or block the true
source of the attack [19]. The consequences can be severe,
ranging from financial loss and reputational damage to prolonged service outages and loss of life [10]. In addition, no
organization is immune; both small businesses and large enterprises are increasingly targeted because of the availability of
attack-as-a-service tools and low execution costs [20].
Although various detection techniques have been proposed in
recent years, traditional static and signature-based approaches
have proven inadequate for addressing the dynamic and
evolving nature of modern DDoS attacks [21]. Consequently,
there is an urgent need for intelligent and adaptive mitigation strategies that can operate effectively in instantaneous,

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. Typical SDN architecture with DDoS vulnerabilities, showing normal and malicious traffic flows and attack points such as controller saturation, flow
table overflow, buffer saturation, and link congestion.

high-throughput network environments [22]. Deep learning
techniques are particularly well-suited for this challenge, as
they can capture both fine-grained traffic features and evolving
sequential patterns that are often missed by static or signaturebased systems.
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) has emerged as a
transformative paradigm for improving the flexibility [14],
scalability [21], and security [22] of modern network infrastructures. By decoupling the control and data planes, SDN
enables centralized and programmable network management,
allowing administrators to monitor and configure traffic flows
dynamically in response to emerging threats [23]. This centralized architecture enhances overall efficiency and supports
real-time adaptation, making SDN particularly well-suited for
complex and rapidly evolving threat landscapes [24]. However, despite these advantages, SDN introduces new security
challenges, with DDoS attacks posing a significant threat to
all three layers of the architecture: application, control plane,
and data plane [25]. As illustrated in Figure 1, common
vulnerabilities include buffer saturation, flow table overflow,
link congestion and controller saturation. For a more comprehensive exploration of these issues, our previous work
[26] presents an in-depth analysis of SDN vulnerabilities and
introduces a novel taxonomy that categorizes DDoS attacks
into seven distinct classes based on their targets across the
SDN stack. These unique vulnerabilities highlight the need
for advanced detection methods that not only analyze static
flow characteristics but also adapt to evolving attack dynamics.
Hybrid models such as CNN-LSTM provide this advantage

by combining spatial traffic feature extraction with sequential
temporal learning, making them especially relevant for SDN
environments where attacks often unfold as dynamic flow
sequences.
Branches of artificial intelligence, such as machine learning
(ML) and deep learning (DL), have demonstrated strong potential for detecting DDoS attacks by learning network traffic
patterns [27], [28], [29]. These methods are particularly effective in capturing subtle deviations in flow activities, which are
often difficult to identify using conventional approaches [30],
[31]. The effectiveness of DL techniques is closely tied to the
quality of feature representation and the availability of large
and diverse datasets for training purposes [32], [33]. Building
on this synergy, we propose a hybrid deep learning model that
integrates Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for spatial
feature extraction with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
networks for temporal sequence learning. This architecture
is designed to capture both static flow characteristics and
dynamic behavioral patterns, thereby enabling more accurate
and robust detection of DDoS attacks.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first
to present a comprehensive DDoS detection and mitigation
framework for SDN environments. It integrates a custombuilt dataset, advanced feature selection techniques, hybrid
deep learning models, and a real-time script-based mitigation
strategy. A novel dataset was developed using Mininet and
the Ryu controller to capture SYN and DoS traffic in a
realistic SDN environment. It contains 74,595 labeled data
points. Unlike prior studies that rely on synthetic or limited

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

datasets, this dataset closely mirrors real-world conditions and
is specifically structured for ML applications. In addition,
a multistage feature selection process, including correlation
analysis, univariate testing, and chi-squared filtering, was
employed to identify 16 highly discriminative features. Several
classification algorithms were evaluated; notably, the proposed
CNN-LSTM hybrid model achieved state-of-the-art results,
with 99.5% accuracy and 97.7% F1-score, surpassing existing
approaches in terms of precision and robustness. Furthermore, a lightweight, script-based mitigation mechanism was
implemented directly in the SDN controller. This enables
real-time classification and dynamic handling of malicious
traffic, allowing the system to drop or redirect harmful packets.
This approach not only enhances the response speed but also
reduces the reliance on external mitigation systems. Moreover,
the framework was extensively validated across diverse network topologies, confirming its effectiveness, scalability, and
adaptability to modern SDN infrastructures.
Roadmap: The remainder of this paper is structured
as follows. Section II provides a review of existing
ML/DL-based techniques for DDoS detection in SDN environments. Section III details the proposed methodology, including
dataset generation and model architecture. Section IV presents
the experimental setup, results, and analysis. Finally, Section V
concludes the paper and outlines directions for future research.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Traditional network security systems often fall short in managing the increasing scale and complexity of DDoS attacks,
mainly because of their limited flexibility and scalability [33],
[34]. Consequently, SDN, particularly with OpenFlow support,
has gained attention for its ability to provide dynamic and
centralized control over network traffic [35]. This architecture
enables the deployment of customized, responsive security
measures tailored to specific network requirements [36], [37].
However, SDN’s centralized nature of SDNs also introduces
new security risks, as the controller becomes a critical point of
failure and an attractive target for attackers [38]. To enhance
security in SDN environments, researchers have increasingly
applied ML and DL techniques. For example, Singh et al. [39]
proposed a hybrid ML-based approach for detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN environments. The framework
integrates Snort IDS and a hybrid Support Vector Machine
Random Forest (SVM-RF) classifier for detection and applies
two mitigation strategies: dropping and redirecting malicious
traffic. The SVM-RF model achieved a detection accuracy of
99.1%, outperforming other standalone classifiers. Features
were selected and reduced using PCA and t-SNE before
training the ML models. Despite strong results, this approach
remains focused on traditional ML models without exploring
DL or hybrid DL architectures. The generated dataset is
not publicly available (empty link provided), which makes it
difficult for other researchers to verify. Moreover, although
redirection is innovative, it lacks integration with adaptive
feedback or intelligent path optimization.
Alashhab et al. [40] presented a dynamic framework
for detecting zero-day DDoS attacks in SDN using an
ensemble online machine learning (EOML) method. The

2509

proposed approach, which integrates four OML algorithms,
“BernoulliNB,” “Passive-Aggressive,” “SGD,” and “MLP,”
achieved a detection accuracy of 99.26% with high precision
(99.10%) and recall (99.62%). The system was validated using
a self-generated SDN dataset (not publicly available), which
demonstrated consistently high performance. Additionally, the
OML-based Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) reduced the
CPU usage and network latency while maintaining a low
false alarm rate (FAR) of 0.025. Although this study presents
a novel ensemble detection system, it does not explore
DL architecture techniques (e.g., CNN-LSTM), which may
better capture spatiotemporal traffic dynamics.Eldhai et. al
[41] investigated stream-based traffic classification in SDN
using optimized feature selection and adaptive learning systems. The study introduces Boruta, a robust feature selection
method, and integrates it with three stream-learning classifiers:
“Hoeffding Adaptive Tree (HAT)”, “Adaptive Random Forest
(ARF)”, and “KNN-ADWIN”. The Boruta-based feature selection achieved 95% accuracy, outperforming traditional genetic
algorithms. When combined with stream-learning models,
the system maintained up to 88% F1-score (ARF), showing
superior performance in dynamic environments. However,
the authors focused solely on traffic classification (detection)
and did not implement or propose mitigation mechanisms.
Alqahtani et al. [42] proposed a modified scanning tool, “APTSDNmap”, that mimics the “slow and low” behavior of APTs,
aimed at reconstructing flow rules in OpenFlow switches.
Among the five supervised ML models tested, XGBoost,
RF, KNN, DT, and SVM were used. XGBoost consistently
achieved the best performance, attaining 97.82% accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score using just the top five features.
Although this study makes a significant contribution by focusing on stealthy reconnaissance detection, it does not address
traffic mitigation, leaving a critical gap in the protection
process of the vehicle. The proposed method does not explore
multi-class attack detection or hybrid techniques.Manisankar
et al. [43] introduced a hybrid ML framework for both detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN environments. The
approach combines RF for the initial detection of abnormal
traffic with “Gradient Boosting (GB)” to classify the detected
attacks into TCP, UDP, or ICMP. The method achieved an
overall detection accuracy of 97%, with a precision of 96.96%,
recall of 98%, and F1-score of 97.48%. The system supports automated traffic classification and response, making it
viable for integration into SDN deployments. Although the
technique incorporates both detection and mitigation, it relies
on traditional ML frameworks and does not explore deep or
hybrid deep learning architectures (e.g., CNN-LSTM), which
may yield better performance.Tonkal et al. [44] combined
traditional supervised ML algorithms with Neighbourhood
Component Analysis (NCA) for feature selection. The aim
was to build an efficient and scalable classification pipeline
that reduces the computational overhead while maintaining
high accuracy. The use of NCA enabled the selection of
14 most influential features from the original 23 in the
public SDN DDoS dataset. The classifiers tested included
k-NN, DT, Artificial Neural Network (ANN), and SVM. The
DT approach achieved 100% accuracy, whereas ANN, kNN,

2510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

and SVM achieved 99.78%, 99.15%, and 98.59% accuracy,
respectively. Although the study achieved high classification
accuracy with traditional ML models, it did not discuss
advanced DL techniques. In addition, they did not implement
mitigation mechanisms, which are important for sophisticated
attacks in the SDN environment.Liu et al. [45] discussed
a “feature-engineering-based intrusion detection system for
SDN” that utilizes an improved “binary grey wolf optimization (BGWO)” algorithm for feature selection. The selected
feature subset was then trained using five supervised learning
classifiers (RF, SVM, k-NN, DT, and XGBoost), and the
best-performing model was deployed in the SDN controller
for DDoS detection and mitigation. The RF technique, when
trained on 26 features selected from the original 79 using
the improved BGWO, achieved 99.13%, 98.43%, 99.92%,
and an F1-score of 99.13%. The article used an outdated
synthetic public dataset, CSE-CIC-IDS2018. Although the
our approach achieves high accuracy using traditional ML
methods, it lacks exploration of more expressive learning
paradigms, such as deep or hybrid deep learning architectures,
which are increasingly vital for modeling complex network
behaviors.Sangodoyin et al. [46] utilized classic ML algorithms to detect and classify DDoS flooding attacks in SDN
environments. The authors emphasize a cost-effective approach
using a small but balanced dataset derived from SDN scenarios. The models tested included CART, k-NN, QDA, and GNB.
CART delivered the best results, with a 98.7% prediction
accuracy, and outperformed the other models in terms of training speed and prediction stability. The dataset was carefully
crafted from a controlled SDN environment using tools such
as LOIC and iperf, yielding 3,600 data points across four
traffic categories. Four features were selected manually and
mathematically engineered, not via automated feature selection
algorithms such as Chi2 or PCA. Overall, this study presents
a solid offline detection system with high accuracy; however,
it lacks integration with SDN controllers, and no mitigation
mechanism is implemented.Gadallah et al. [47] presented DLbased framework for detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks
in SDN control and data planes. The proposed model employs
a “hybrid autoencoder Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit
(BGRU)” architecture to analyze traffic flow patterns and
detect anomalies in real time. The AE-BGRU method achieved
99.89% and 99.91% accuracies for the control and data plane
detections, respectively, with a false positive rate (FPR) as
low as 0.09% and an F1-score of 99.89%. However, the
authors used a generated dataset that was not available online.
Although effective, the trust mechanism is rule-based and nonadaptive, lacking reinforcement or dynamic learning to evolve
with network activities.Zaidoun and Lachiri [48] explored deep
learning-based multi-classification of DDoS attacks in SDN
using both simple and hybrid DL models. The objective is
to improve detection granularity beyond the common binary
classification approach by accurately identifying five specific
DDoS attack types and normal traffic. This study evaluated
multiple DL models under a unified experimental setup using
an optimized version of the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset. Among
all the algorithms, the DNN-GRU hybrid achieved the highest
accuracy of 97.37%, whereas LSTM led among the simple

models at 97.15%. The F1-scores across the hybrid models ranged from 90.5% to 94.7%. Although the framework
achieves excellent accuracy in multi-class DDoS detection, it
lacks a mitigation component, limiting its defensive capability
in SDN.Said et al. [49] combined a “CNN-BiLSTM” architecture with a hybrid feature selection process. It addresses
the limitations of redundancy, feature noise, and imbalanced
datasets by integrating optimized feature engineering with
spatiotemporal DL modeling. The proposed CNN-BiLSTM
model achieved 97.77% accuracy in binary classification and
97.12% in multi-class classification using the InSDN dataset.
Remarkably, it achieved 100% recall and F1-score for key
attack classes, including DDoS, DoS, U2R, and Botnet. The
mitigation logic is controller-based and reactive but lacks the
dynamic flow rule adaptation seen in production-grade mitigation systems.Haider et al. [50] proposed a CNN ensemble
framework for the efficient detection of DDoS attacks in SDN
environments. The system was designed to operate at the SDN
control plane using flow-based input features extracted from
a benchmark dataset. The ensemble CNN model achieved
a detection accuracy of 99.45%, outperforming other deep
learning architectures, such as RNN, LSTM, CNN-LSTM, and
hybrid RL. It also demonstrated high precision, recall, and
F1-score, with significantly lower false-positive rates. The
study used four key flow features selected via a Random Forest
Regressor from a total of 80 features in the CICIDS2017
dataset. Despite achieving excellent classification metrics, the
framework is strictly detection-oriented and does not extend to
proactive threat response or mitigation logic in the SDN environment.Najar and Naik [51] developed a robust CNN-based
detection and mitigation framework for SDN environments
by combining “Balanced Random Sampling (BRS)” with deep
feature selection using Information Gain. The CNN achieved
99.99% accuracy in binary classification and 98.64% in multiclass classification, with an AUC of 0.9998, indicating a
near-perfect performance. The algorithm was rigorously tested
under three operational scenarios: attack-free, attack without
mitigation, and attack with mitigation, and demonstrated a
marked drop in CPU and packet overhead when the mitigation
module was active. Although efficient, the CNN method
could benefit from hybrid deep learning or transformer-based
modules to better handle evolving attack signature areas
directly targeted in the proposed hybrid framework.Zhang and
Wang [52] presented a hybrid DDoS detection and mitigation framework for SDN, called “HESS,” which combines
a lightweight entropy-based anomaly flagging system with a
deep learning classifier (SSAE-SVM) to enable efficient twostage detection. The standalone SSAE-SVM achieved an accuracy of 98.63% and a false alarm rate (FAR) of 2.13%, whereas
the combined system (entropy + SSAE-SVM) achieved an
accuracy of 98.76% and further reduced the FAR to 1.8%
with significantly lower CPU utilization. HESS remains rulebased in its mitigation logic, lacking adaptiveness or dynamic
prioritization of flows based on evolving traffic patterns.
Nguyen et al. [53] proposed a hybrid detection architecture that
combines a BI-LSTM deep learning model with a “Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM)” for open-set recognition and uses
incremental learning to adapt the model as new threats are

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

identified. The initial BI-LSTM model trained on DoS traffic
achieved an accuracy of 97.23% and a recall of 0.9979 for
known attacks. However, it performed poorly on unseen attack
types, such as those in the CICDDoS2019 dataset. Although
the framework effectively detects both known and unknown
DDoS attacks, no mitigation mechanism is incorporated into
it. In addition, the detection logic is decoupled from the
SDN operation, and the performance of the GMM in highspeed, SDN settings has not been benchmarked.Elsayed et al.
[54] presented “DDoSNet,” a deep learning-based intrusion
detection system specifically designed for SDN environments.
The presented system combines an RNN-based autoencoder
(AE) with a softmax classifier to perform binary classification of network traffic as either benign or malicious.
DDoSNet achieved 99% accuracy, precision, recall, and F1score, demonstrating strong detection capabilities. The area
under ROC curve (AUC) reached 98.8, indicating high separability between benign and malicious traffic. There is no
flow rule-level integration with the SDN controller to enforce
traffic control.Vajrobol et al. [55] proposed method combines the temporal learning capabilities of LSTM with the
gradient-boosting precision of XGBoost, further strengthened
by adversarial training to resist manipulation and evade detection attempts. The model was trained and tested on real-world
Mirai variants using the CICIoT2023 dataset. The hybrid
model of LSTM + XGBoost achieved an overall accuracy
of 97.7% with strong precision, recall, and F1-scores across
four Mirai attack types (GREETH, GREIP, UDP-Plain, and
benign). However, the framework remains detection-centric
and does not integrate any autonomous mitigation mechanisms. The system effectively identifies malicious patterns but
does not extend to active response actions, such as traffic
shaping, flow rule enforcement, or packet redirection, within
an SDN controller.Mhamdi and Isa [56] introduced deep
autoencoder-based feature learning with a Random Forest
classifier. It is deployed inside the SDN controller as part
of a three-layer adaptive architecture that integrates entropybased anomaly detection and passive service monitoring for
layered decision-making. The DAERF model achieved 98%
accuracy using only eight selected OpenFlow-native features.
When integrated into the full DAERF IDS three-layer framework, the system achieved an accuracy of 98.16% accuracy,
98.92% F1-score, and a false-positive rate of 1.85%. However,
mitigation is layered and adaptive, and the response logic
is threshold-based rather than predictive or reinforcementdriven.Pradeesh et al. [57] integrated modular detection
strategies, including signature-based, anomaly based, and
behavior-based models, combined with “adaptive ensemble
learning (AEL)” and dynamic weighting using “One-vs-Rest
(OvR)” classifiers. The proposed “Adaptive Ensemble of Modular Classifiers (AEMC)” framework achieved a classification
accuracy of 96.7%, with precision, recall, and F1-score all at
0.967. Additional metrics further confirmed its robustness: an
AUC-ROC of 0.97, FPR of 0.04, and FNR of 0.03. However,
the technique mitigation logic is limited to threshold-based
decision-making without demonstrating the actual enforcement of flow rules or traffic rerouting via the SDN
controller.

2511

Recent works have also investigated CNN-LSTM hybrids
for DDoS detection in SDN and related domains. For instance,
Ullah et al. [58] proposed an explainable CNN-LSTM model
for IoT-enabled Healthcare 5.0, achieving very high accuracy
on CICDDoS2019 but relying primarily on public datasets
without addressing controller-level deployment challenges.
Jimoh et al. [59] explored CNN-LSTM for SDN DDoS
mitigation, reporting strong results on ISCXIDS2012, though
their work was limited to an older dataset and lacked validation under realistic SDN emulation or custom traffic.
Afroj et al. [60] developed ensemble and hybrid CNN–LSTM
models, showing that stacking ensembles outperformed standalone hybrids, but their study remained offline and did not
integrate mitigation within the controller. Similarly, a twolevel CNN-LSTM detection framework was introduced in
[61], demonstrating promising accuracy, but focusing primarily on architectural layering without considering feature
redundancy or in-controller resource constraints. While these
studies confirm the utility of CNN–LSTM models, they predominantly emphasize accuracy on benchmark datasets and
give limited attention to (i) dataset realism/diversity tailored
to SDN, (ii) principled feature reduction to avoid redundancy
and reduce overhead, and (iii) integrated, controller-level
mitigation with measured resource impact. In contrast, our
framework couples a custom SDN-specific dataset with a multistage feature selection pipeline and in-controller mitigation,
expressly targeting both detection quality and deployment
feasibility.
Recent studies have advanced DDoS detection in network
environments.Yang et al. [62] detected MAWD attacks in highspeed networks with over 99% recall, while authors in [63]
proposed a ML model for detecting DDoS attacks with system
variables, achieving 58%-95% accuracy. A tensor decomposition framework for DDoS detection in big data environments
achieved 99.19% accuracy [64], and P4-Secure introduced an
in-band DDoS detection system in the data plane, minimizing
false positives to 0.5% [65]. Our study differs by using a hybrid
CNN-LSTM model for DDoS detection in SDN environments
with integrated real-time mitigation in the SDN controller,
offering enhanced scalability and responsiveness.
Recent contributions have also explored DDoS detection
in SDN-enabled and IoT-driven environments. For instance,
[66] proposed a dynamic multiphase framework for SDNbased fog-enabled IoT networks that combines entropy-based
anomaly detection, statistical thresholding, and machine learning classifiers such as Random Forest. Their approach achieved
high accuracy (98.71%) on the BoT-IoT dataset and demonstrated reduced response time through fog-layer deployment.
Similarly, [67] utilized statistical filtering combined with ML
classifiers on the CICDDoS2019 dataset to predict variants
of DDoS attacks, achieving effective traffic reduction and
attack-type identification. While both works confirm the utility
of statistical and ML-based methods, they remain reliant
on entropy thresholds or shallow classifiers and focus primarily on offline datasets. In contrast, our study introduces
a hybrid CNN-LSTM model with a custom SDN-specific
dataset, employs a multi-stage feature selection process, and
integrates real-time mitigation directly inside the controller,

2512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE I
S UMMARY AND C OMPARATIVE V IEW OF R ELATED W ORKS (M: M ITIGATION , D: D ETECTION ). T HE TABLE E MPHASIZES D IFFERENCES IN T ECHNIQUE ,
DATASET C HOICE , P ERFORMANCE R EPORTING , AND W HETHER M ITIGATION AND D EPLOYMENT C ONSIDERATIONS W ERE A DDRESSED

thereby addressing both detection accuracy and deployment
feasibility in operational SDN environments.
A. Research Gap
After conducting a comprehensive literature review using
a systematic search strategy, we examined research articles
published between 2021 and 2025. The search was primarily
focused on high-impact journals indexed in the Web of Science
(WoS), including IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect, Springer, and
MDPI. From an initial pool of 35 articles closely aligned
with our research objectives, we applied rigorous screening
criteria and selected 25 key studies that were directly related to
our research domain. These studies provide valuable insights
into the current state of DDoS detection and mitigation in
SDN. However, a critical evaluation revealed several research
gaps that remain largely unaddressed. These gaps not only
limit the practical deployment of existing solutions but also
highlight the need for a more robust and scalable framework
capable of providing instantaneous detection and responses.
Motivated by these gaps, our research aims to develop a
comprehensive, reliable, and effective detection and mitigation
solution tailored for SDN environments. We have listed the
identified research gaps in the existing studies as follows:
• Most existing studies (see Table I) rely on synthetic or
outdated datasets that do not accurately reflect modern
SDN traffic or real-world DDoS attack scenarios. In many

cases, the datasets used are not publicly accessible, making reproducibility and benchmarking extremely difficult
for other researchers [39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [46], [47],
[49], [52] and [56].
• Many studies use full feature sets without applying
rigorous feature selection methods, which can result in
overfitting, increased computational cost, and reduced
model interpretability [41], [46] and [53].
• Although DL has been applied to SDN security, there
is a noticeable lack of hybrid architectures, such as
CNN-LSTM, that can effectively capture both spatial and
temporal features in network traffic patterns [39], [40],
[42], [43], [44] and [45].
• Most studies focus solely on detection, with few addressing integrated and lightweight mitigation strategies that
can operate within an SDN controller in real time [41],
[42], [44], [46], [48], [50], [53], [54] and [55].
• A large proportion of research validates models on simplified or static network topologies, limiting confidence in
their adaptability to diverse and large-scale SDN infrastructures [40], [42], [43] and [46].
• Many frameworks depend on third-party tools to block
or redirect malicious traffic, which introduces latency and
additional dependencies, undermining the responsiveness
of the system [39] and [40].
• Current research tends to address either detection or mitigation in isolation, with minimal effort toward building

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

2513

TABLE II
F EATURES OF THE DATASET

holistic frameworks that integrate both capabilities for
real-time SDN defence [41], [42], [44], [46], [48], [50],
[53], [54] and [55].
In response, our work (i) constructs and releases a custom SDN dataset, (ii) employs principled, multistage feature
selection to reduce redundancy and controller overhead, and
(iii) integrates detection with in-controller mitigation while
reporting resource and latency observations. These choices
directly target the deployment-oriented gaps surfaced by the
comparative analysis.
Comparative Synthesis: Across the surveyed literature, three
trends emerge. First, many studies achieve high accuracy
on public datasets (e.g., CIC* family) but seldom assess
controller-level deployability or resource overheads, limiting
low-latency applicability in SDN. Second, mitigation is either
absent or rule-based in most works, with few integrating
detection and response inside the controller to minimize reaction latency. Third, several approaches rely on full feature
sets or ad-hoc selection, which can inflate computation and
obscure interpretability compared to principled, multistage
filtering. Table I consolidates these differences, highlighting
gaps in dataset realism/diversity, in-controller mitigation, and
resource-awareness that motivate our design choices. Additionally, our custom dataset, developed specifically for SDN
environments, stands as a critical differentiator. Unlike many
existing studies that rely on outdated or synthetic datasets, our
dataset accurately mirrors real-world SDN traffic and is freely
available for future research, ensuring reproducibility and
enabling broader benchmarking of DDoS detection techniques.

Fig. 2. Design framework of the proposed model.

III. M ETHODOLOGY AND DATASET D EVELOPMENT
Figure 2 illustrates the workflow designed for DDoS-attack
detection within an SDN. The process began with the creation
and structuring of a custom CSV-formatted dataset. This is
followed by a data inspection and exploration (DIE) phase that
identifies the underlying patterns, statistical properties, and any
label imbalance using correlation metrics and visual analytics.
Based on these insights, feature selection was conducted using
techniques such as correlation filtering, univariate testing, and

chi-squared analysis to isolate the most predictive attributes.
These features were used to train several algorithms, including
LR, NB, LSTM, and hybrid CNN-LSTM. The trained frameworks were then evaluated using standard metrics, such as
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. The results guide a
refinement loop, wherein algorithm selection, hyperparameter
tuning, and feature configurations are iteratively adjusted to
enhance the detection performance.

2514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 3. Experimental topology used for DDoS attack simulation in the SDN testbed.

A. Dataset Generation
A controlled experimental environment was established
to develop a robust dataset for DDoS detection in SDNs.
Specifically, Mininet served as the emulation platform, and
the RYU controller handled the SDN logic. The network
topology illustrated in Figure 3 comprises multiple OpenFlowenabled switches connecting various end hosts, including
both benign and malicious nodes. This setup was designed
to reflect real-world distributed systems with a central controller that manages all flow decisions. To simulate attack
scenarios, malicious hosts launch different types of DDoS
attacks, such as SYN floods, ICMP floods, and UDP-based
volumetric attacks, targeting one or more designated victim
servers. These attacks were generated using tools such as
hping3, Scapy, and custom traffic scripts. Legitimate hosts
maintain regular communication patterns. This ensured that the
dataset represented a realistic blend of normal and malicious
traffic. Traffic flow was captured at the switch level using
OpenFlow counters supplemented by additional monitoring
scripts. The collected data were exported in a structured
format .xlsx files, with separate entries for attack and benign
traffic. Each record includes key attributes, such as the packet
count, byte rate, flow duration, inter-arrival time, and perIP activity metric. Forty initial features were extracted from
raw data. A correlation-based feature selection technique was
applied to enhance model efficiency and reduce redundancy.
Consequently, 35 relevant features were retained, representing
flow characteristics, volume trends, and timing scenarios. A
binary label (0 for normal and 1 for an attack) was added to
each entry to support supervised learning. The final dataset
included 74,595 samples that were evenly balanced across

the attack traffic classes. These features include span flow
identifiers, protocol types, traffic volumes, timing intervals,
activity durations, and host behaviors. The complete list of
retained features is grouped and summarized in Table II. This
comprehensive and well-structured dataset was subsequently
used to train and evaluate a range of ML and DL techniques
for effective DDoS detection in an SDN environment.
It is important to note that while our dataset incorporates
multiple network- and transport-layer attack types (e.g., SYN
floods, UDP floods, ICMP floods, scanning, and passwordguessing), the present study focused on volumetric DDoS
attacks. Application-layer and low-rate stealthy attacks, such
as HTTP GET/POST floods or slowloris, were not yet included
in this version of the dataset. These attack categories pose
unique detection challenges and will be addressed in future
dataset extensions and evaluation studies.
B. Preprocessing
Data preprocessing is crucial in AI because it directly
affects model performance [68]. This step transforms raw
data into a structured format suitable for training, ensuring
that the framework learns from clean and relevant information. Inadequate preprocessing, such as ignoring noise,
inconsistencies, or irrelevant data, can lead to inaccurate and
overfitted systems. Effective preprocessing enhances both the
predictive accuracy and the algorithm’s ability to generalize. One significant challenge in preprocessing is addressing
missing or zero values, which may arise from incomplete
data or measurement errors [1]. These values can bias the
method; therefore, they must be handled with care. In this
study, columns with missing or zero values that did not
provide meaningful information were removed to retain only

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

2515

TABLE III
S ELECTED F EATURES

Fig. 4. Correlation Among Features.

the relevant features, minimize the risk of overfitting, and
improve generalization. Feature engineering involves selecting
the most informative attributes that best represent the underlying patterns in the data. By focusing on relevant features, such
as “source ipv4” or “total pkts per src ip,” we ensured
that the classifier was trained on the most valuable information,
minimizing redundancy and improving accuracy. This step is
crucial for preventing the overfitting of unseen data. To refine
feature selection, statistical methods such as correlation and
chi-squared tests were employed to assess the relevance of
each feature. Features that exhibit strong correlations (either
positive or negative) are deemed more significant because they
contribute meaningfully to the predictive power of the model.
Three feature selection techniques were applied in this
study: SelectBest, which automatically identifies the top features based on predefined criteria; Univariate Selection, which
targets features that are most strongly related to the target
variable; and Correlation-Based Selection, which evaluates the
relationships between features to eliminate redundancy. By
applying these methods, we retained the most informative
features to improve system accuracy. A heat map, as shown
in Figure 4, was used to visualize the feature correlations.
The color coding represents the strength of the relationships:
darker shades of blue indicate strong positive correlations,
whereas darker shades of green and light blue represent weak
or no correlations. Lighter blue and green shades signify
weaker negative correlations, with the most intense blue hue
representing a stronger negative correlation. This visualization
aids in identifying the key feature pairs for inclusion or
exclusion in the model. Finally, five algorithms were applied to
evaluate the 35 dataset features. This multi-algorithm approach
ensured that only the most relevant features were retained,
optimizing the dataset for model training and improving the
overall accuracy.
C. DDoS Attacks
In this study, we used a novel dataset encompassing various
attack types, including DoS, DDoS, scanning, and passwordguessing attacks, which represent a broad spectrum of threats
to network security. However, this study specifically focuses
on DDoS attacks, which continue to be among the most

widespread and disruptive forms of network intrusion [52].
Unlike traditional DoS attacks, DDoS attacks leverage multiple
systems or botnets to flood a target with excessive traffic, making detection and mitigation significantly more challenging
[56]. Although our dataset includes multiple attack vectors,
it is particularly suitable for applying ML/DL methods to
identify and classify DDoS traffic patterns. The primary aim
of our analysis was to enhance the detection and mitigation of
DDoS threats in SDN environments.

D. Feature Selection
Effective training and evaluation of ML/DL techniques
rely heavily on the availability of high-quality and wellstructured datasets to ensure reliable and valid performance
assessment [49], [69]. In this study, highly correlated features were identified and removed using a threshold-based
correlation matrix, thereby mitigating multicollinearity and
preserving only the independent variables. Subsequently, a
feature importance analysis was conducted to evaluate the
contribution of each feature to classification performance.
Based on this dual-stage refinement, a concise set of 16 features was finalized. This curated set encapsulates the essential
characteristics of network traffic across multiple dimensions, including volume metrics, timing, flow-level attributes,
and host-specific communication patterns. Importantly, features such as “flow duration sec,” “avg packet size,” and
“flow bytes per sec” were particularly influential in distinguishing between benign and malicious flows. Table III
provides an overview of the features selected based on their
relevance and contribution to detection tasks.
Although DL models are capable of automatic feature
learning, applying explicit feature selection is particularly
beneficial in SDN-based DDoS detection. First, flow-level
datasets often include highly correlated and noisy attributes
(e.g., multiple counters per IP), which can mislead the learning

2516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 5. Architecture of hybrid Model.

Fig. 6. Proposed ML/DL-based intrusion detection framework.

process; eliminating such redundancy reduces the risk of
overfitting, especially given that our dataset size (74k samples)
is modest by deep learning standards. Second, minimizing
the feature set lowers the computational cost of both training
and instantaneous inference, which is critical when models are deployed inside resource-constrained SDN controllers
that must process flows with minimal latency. Third, feature
selection improves interpretability by highlighting the specific traffic attributes (e.g., duration, packet size, flow rates)
that most strongly contribute to attack detection, offering
actionable insights for network operators. To achieve these
benefits, we adopted a complementary three-step strategy: correlation analysis removed multicollinearity, univariate filtering
assessed discriminative power, and chi-square testing verified
statistical association with the attack label. This multi-stage
pipeline ensured that the final 16 features preserved maximum
predictive value while supporting scalability, robustness, and
deployment feasibility.

For correlation filtering, a threshold of 0.8 was selected
based on prior SDN traffic studies, as values above this
level indicate strong multicollinearity that may obscure model
learning while lower thresholds risk discarding informative
features. Similarly, chi-square testing was applied to evaluate
the statistical dependence of categorical features with the class
label, ensuring that only features with meaningful discriminative power were retained. These choices balance the trade-off
between reducing redundancy and preserving predictive capability, thereby improving transparency and reproducibility of
the feature engineering process.
E. Model Design and Architecture
This study presents an advanced framework that integrates
ML/DL techniques to improve the accuracy and efficiency
of network IDSs, which play a critical role in identifying
security threats. The process began with a comprehensive

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

analysis of the dataset, including the inspection of structure,
data types, and key statistical characteristics. To enhance pattern recognition, categorical features were transformed using
OneHotEncoding. Next, the data were prepared to ensure the
proper configuration of the input features and target labels for
training. Several algorithms have been employed, including
DT, RF, CNN, LSTM networks, and a combined CNN-LSTM
model. These approaches were evaluated using confusion
matrices and classification metrics, such as precision, recall,
accuracy, and F1-score. Notably, the hybrid CNN-LSTM
architecture combines temporal and spatial feature extraction, resulting in improved predictive performance. Rule-based
methods, such as RF and DT, offer complementary strengths
that can further enhance classification accuracy. Extensive testing confirmed the robustness and effectiveness of the proposed
approach in detecting abnormal traffic patterns and potential
intrusions. As illustrated in Figure 6, the hybrid method begins
with preprocessing and feature extraction from a custom
dataset. The processed data were then used to train and evaluate multiple frameworks. The best-performing approach was
deployed in the SDN controller for traffic classification and
attack mitigation. This layered architecture includes a control
and data plane, ensuring detection and response capabilities
within the network environment. Furthermore, we chose the
following techniques:
1) Decision Trees (DT): DT emulate human decisionmaking processes, which contributes to their intuitive design
and ease of interpretation [70]. These algorithms are structured
as trees, where each internal node evaluates a specific feature
and the branches represent the possible outcomes of that
feature. A key advantage of DTs is their robustness to variations in feature scales, allowing them to perform effectively
even when the input data are not normalized. Additionally,
their framework is independent of the actual feature values,
making it particularly well-suited for handling non-normalized
datasets. The effectiveness of the DT approach is evidenced
by its accuracy of 96.8% on the given dataset, demonstrating
strong performance in this context.
2) Random Forest (RF): The RF technique employs an
ensemble learning strategy, utilizing multiple decision trees
to perform classification tasks [71]. Each tree contributes to
the final prediction, collectively enhancing the reliability of the
results. In RF, the overall accuracy is determined by averaging
the results from all individual classifiers, which helps to reduce
the influence of weaker learners. This ensemble approach
ensures that high-performing trees dominate the decisionmaking process, thereby improving predictive accuracy. RF
is particularly effective for datasets with numerous significant
features because it handles complex data structures with ease.
When tested on our custom dataset, this approach achieved a
notable accuracy rate of 97.1%, thus highlighting its strong
performance.
3) Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs): CNNs are
widely recognized for their effectiveness in image classification; however, one-dimensional convolution (Conv-1D) has
also shown notable success in areas such as anomaly detection
and recommender systems [72]. A central element of CNNs
is the convolutional layer, which uses kernels to extract

2517

meaningful patterns from the input data. This process involves
applying kernel weights across the input vector to highlight
relevant characteristics and is mathematically expressed as:
ot = tanh(yt ∗ ht + st )

(1)

where ot denotes the output, yt is the input, ht represents the
kernel weights, and st is the bias term. Subsequently, a maxpooling layer compresses the feature representation, retaining
key information while reducing dimensionality. Conv-1D is
particularly effective in identifying important features for classification tasks and often requires minimal data preprocessing.
When applied to our custom dataset, the Conv-1D architecture
achieved a remarkable accuracy of 98.2%, highlighting its
strong performance and suitability for the task.
4) Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM): LSTM networks
were introduced to overcome a key drawback of standard
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs): their difficulty in retaining long-term dependencies. Traditional RNNs suffer from
the vanishing gradient problem, where diminishing gradients
hinder effective learning in the earlier layers, making it challenging to model sequences with long-range temporal patterns.
LSTMs address this limitation through a gating mechanism
comprising input, forget, and output gates that dynamically
manage the information retained or discarded over time. This
architecture enables the network to preserve crucial sequence
data and make informed predictions over an extended time
step. An LSTM unit is typically described by the following
equation:
c(t) = ft ∗ ct−1 + it ∗ ct
(2)
where:
• c(t) is the state of a memory cell at time t,
• f t is the forget gate output
• c t − 1 is the previous cell state
• i t is the input gate,
Owing to this structure, LSTMs are highly effective for
modeling time-series data and sequences with such dependencies. However, in this evaluation, the model fell short of
expectations, achieving an accuracy of 95%. This performance
lag, compared to the other models in the study, indicates
potential difficulties in capturing dataset-specific patterns or
insufficient tuning for optimal feature extraction.
5) CNN-LSTM: The CNN-LSTM hybrid architecture incorporates a set of essential hyperparameters that significantly
influence its overall effectiveness. In the first convolutional
layer, 32 filters were employed to extract features from the
input data with a kernel size of 3 × 3, enabling the model to
detect localized patterns across various spatial scales. A second
convolutional layer followed, utilizing 64 filters with the same
kernel size. To introduce nonlinearity and enhance the learning
capacity of the model, the ReLU activation function was
applied after each convolutional operation was performed. In
addition, “same” padding was used to maintain the original
spatial dimensions throughout the convolutional process. Each
convolutional layer is followed by a 2 × 2 max-pooling
layer that reduces the spatial dimensions and aids in feature
generalization. Subsequently, a dropout layer is introduced to
reduce overfitting by randomly deactivating neurons during

2518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE IV
CNN-LSTM H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION

training. The resulting feature maps were then flattened into a
1D vector before being fed into the LSTM component. Within
the LSTM layer, 128 hidden units were configured to capture
the temporal relationships and long-term dependencies across
the sequential data. The tanh activation function was adopted
to manage state transitions and regulate the memory flow
within the LSTM cells. For training purposes, a batch size
of 64 was used, allowing the model to update its weights after
processing each group of samples. The learning rate was set
to 0.001, which determined the pace of weight adjustments
during optimization. Adam was selected as the optimizer,
offering adaptive learning rate adjustments that contribute to
more efficient convergence. The training was conducted over
50 epochs, providing ample iterations for fine-tuning and
performance improvement. Figure 5 illustrates the structural
composition of the CNN-LSTM model, including the layer
configuration, pooling operations, dropout integration, and the
final classifier. This diagram enhances the understanding of the
internal workflow of the model, from the initial spatial feature
extraction to sequential data interpretation and classification.
Notably, the hybrid model achieved an impressive accuracy
rate of 99.5%, underscoring its high effectiveness for the given
task.
6) CNN-LSTM: The CNN-LSTM hybrid combines convolutional layers for spatial feature extraction with LSTM
units for modeling sequential dependencies in flow-level traffic. Figure 5 illustrates the architecture, where convolutional
and pooling layers capture localized traffic patterns, dropout
reduces overfitting, and the LSTM models temporal relationships before final classification. The complete hyperparameter
configuration is summarized in Table IV.
F. Mitigation
To address DDoS attacks in an SDN environment, a
script-based mitigation solution was developed, as shown in
Algorithm 1. This solution incorporates a proactive mechanism
known as the “Drop Method,” which is designed to swiftly
identify and block illegitimate traffic by targeting the source
IP address. As illustrated in Figure 7, the method begins with
the traffic reception and inspection by an IDS. Upon detecting
potential DDoS indicators, the system conducts a detailed
examination of incoming data packets. If malicious activity
is confirmed, the system isolates the offending packets based
on their origin and promptly rejects them, preventing them

Fig. 7. Flowchart of the DDoS mitigation process in the SDN controller.

from overwhelming the network or reaching their intended
destinations. This method not only strengthens security but
also ensures efficient traffic management through continuous
monitoring and precise packet filtering of the data packets.
Moreover, the script-based approach significantly enhances
the operational efficiency within the SDN framework. Unlike
traditional solutions that often rely on external applications
and third-party modules, introducing latency and increasing
resource consumption, this method is fully integrated into
the network’s control logic. Such integration enables the
streamlined processing of traffic, allowing the system to filter
malicious data with minimal processing power and memory requirements. Conventional filtering techniques, which
struggle with the computational overhead of analyzing large
volumes of packet data, are far less efficient than the proposed
method. In contrast, the proposed solution effectively mitigates
this burden, enhancing both the resilience of the network to
DDoS attacks and the performance of the underlying infrastructure. By balancing robust security with efficient resource
use, this method ensures that both protection and operational
efficiency are maintained.
While packet dropping and redirection may appear simplistic compared to more advanced approaches such as traffic
shaping or adaptive QoS enforcement, these mechanisms
were deliberately chosen to demonstrate the feasibility of
integrating detection and mitigation directly within the SDN
controller. Their lightweight design ensures minimal latency
and resource overhead, which is crucial for validating operation. Furthermore, the scripts are modular and can be extended
to incorporate more sophisticated strategies in future iterations
of this framework.
To quantify the efficiency of the mitigation process,
we monitored controller resource usage and traffic load
reduction during operation. When the CNN-LSTM classifier

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

Algorithm 1 DDoS Traffic Mitigation With Reverification and
Rollback
Input: Network traffic flows with extracted features
(flow index, src ip, dst ip, ports, byte/packet rates,
duration, etc.)
Output: Classified flows (Normal or Malicious) with mitigation actions.
Initialization: Define thresholds, detection window = 2s,
verification interval = 3 windows.
1: Step 1: Receive and preprocess traffic
2: foreach flow ido
3: Extract flow features
4: Store metadata for detection
5: end for
6: Step 2: Detect suspicious behavior
7: ifflow iexceeds anomaly thresholds then
8: Flag as suspiciousand apply temporary rate-limiting
9: Log flow for secondary verification
10: end if
11: Step 3: Reverification across windows
12: ifsuspicious flow persists for ≥ 3intervals then
13: Escalate to blocking rule(drop packets from src ip)
14: else
15: Rollback and restore flow if flagged traffic behaves normally
16: end if
17: Step 4: Spoofing safeguards
18: ifsrc ip suspected of spoofing then
19: Cross-check consistency (flow duration, byte/packet
ratios, bidirectional symmetry)
20: Block only if anomalies are confirmed
21: end if
22: Step 5: Forward legitimate flows
23: ifno DDoS indicators remain then
24: Forward traffic normally
25: end if

triggered the mitigation script, the controller’s CPU utilization remained below 12% and memory usage below 9% of
available resources, confirming lightweight integration. Redirecting malicious traffic resulted in a measurable decrease in
bandwidth consumption and packet rates on the primary links,
thereby alleviating network strain while maintaining service
availability for legitimate users. The end-to-end delay from
detection to rule enforcement was negligible, demonstrating
that the mitigation can be executed in real time without
degrading controller performance.
To further minimize the risks of false positives and IP
spoofing, Algorithm 1 was enhanced with a verification and
rollback mechanism. Suspicious flows are first rate-limited
rather than blocked, and their behavior is re-evaluated across
three consecutive detection windows. Only if anomalies persist
is a permanent block rule enforced. This staged approach
prevents service interruptions due to transient anomalies. In
addition, potential spoofed IP addresses are validated using
flow-level consistency checks, such as packet-to-byte ratios
and bidirectional symmetry. If legitimate behavior is detected,

2519

the system automatically rolls back the block rule, restoring
service continuity. This layered decision logic ensures that
blocking is applied only when malicious behavior is confirmed, while legitimate users remain unaffected.
In our setup, “real-time” refers to the ability of the SDN
controller to classify and act on flows within milliseconds
of their arrival. Specifically, flows were sampled at 2-second
intervals, features were extracted in 1.2 ms per flow, and
CNN–LSTM inference required 3.8 ms per flow on CPU.
Overall end-to-end latency, including mitigation, remained
below 15 ms, while controller CPU and memory usage stayed
under 12% and 9%, respectively.
G. Experimental Setup and ML Techniques
The experiments were conducted in a controlled environment involving both host and guest operating systems, as
well as various simulation and network analysis tools. The
host system, which ran Windows 11 on an Intel Core i5
processor, provided the required computational resource. The
guest operating system, Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS, was selected
for its stability and suitability for the network simulations.
Virtualisation was managed using VirtualBox 7.1.6, which
enabled the creation and management of virtual machines
for testing purposes. The network topology and simulations
were emulated using Mininet, a tool commonly employed
to simulate an SDN. The network was controlled by a single Ryu controller, with the number of switches and hosts
determined by the topology. Traffic generation and monitoring
were performed using mgen and tcpdump, respectively, to
simulate and capture the network activity. Communication
between network devices utilized the OpenFlow protocol, with
port 6653 configured for connection. The network topologies
were configured and visualized using the MiniEdit package.
The simulations lasted for 280 s and involved six different
topologies. ML methods were developed and executed using
Python 3.13.3 within an Anaconda environment, ensuring a
well-managed and isolated setup. TensorFlow was used as the
primary deep learning framework for model implementation
and training.
It should be noted that while Mininet provides an effective and flexible environment for functional validation and
prototyping, it does not fully capture the throughput and
scalability characteristics of carrier-grade SDN deployments.
The traffic rates achievable in Mininet are inherently limited
by the host machine’s resources and cannot emulate multiGbps conditions. Therefore, the results reported in this study
should be interpreted as feasibility validation under emulated
conditions, with large-scale throughput evaluations reserved
for future work on hardware-based SDN testbeds.
H. Performance Evaluation Metrics
Evaluating the performance of AI techniques is a critical
step in establishing their effectiveness, especially in sensitive
domains such as SDN security [1], [19]. In the context of
DDoS attack detection, an accurate assessment of method
behavior ensures that the solution not only detects intrusions
reliably but also minimizes the risk of false alarms that may

2520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE V

TABLE VI

C ONFUSION M ATRIX FOR B INARY C LASSIFICATION

P ERFORMANCE OF PARAMETERS R ESULTS

disrupt legitimate traffic. Therefore, statistical performance
metrics such as “accuracy”, “precision”, “recall”, and the
“F1-score” are indispensable for quantifying framework reliability and robustness. The evaluation process is based on
the confusion matrix, which is a tabular representation of the
classification outcomes. Table V presents the confusion matrix
for binary classification, where the approach distinguishes
between benign and malicious traffic (i.e., DDoS traffic).
Each term in the confusion matrix serves a distinct evaluative role.
• TP: Number of malicious flows correctly identified as
attacks.
• TN: Number of benign flows correctly classified as nonattacks.
• FP: Benign flows are incorrectly flagged as attacks,
contributing to false alarms.
• FN: Malicious flows are misclassified as benign, indicating a failure in threat detection.
These values are subsequently used to compute the core
performance metrics, as defined below.
TP + TN
(3)
T P + T N + FP + FN
TP
(4)
Precision (PRC) =
T P + FP
TP
Recall (RCL) =
(5)
T P + FN
RCL · PRC
F1 Score = 2 ·
(6)
RCL + PRC
• The ACC provides a global measure of correctness but
may be misleading in imbalanced datasets, where attack
instances are rare.
• The PRC emphasizes the reliability of positive predictions
and is crucial for minimizing the cost of false alarms in
critical SDN environments.
• The RCL (also known as sensitivity or true positive
rate) indicates the model’s effectiveness in identifying all
instances of attacks, thus measuring detection coverage.
• The F1-score offers a harmonic mean of precision and
recall, making it a balanced metric when the dataset
exhibits class imbalance or when both false positives and
false negatives carry significant consequences.
Accuracy (ACC) =

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
This section presents an evaluation of various ML
approaches, focusing on their precision in detecting SYNbased DDoS attacks. The assessment considers several
effectiveness parameters that, although not fully detailed here,
form the basis of the analysis. The evaluation exclusively used
SYN-type DDoS attack data. The dataset was divided into

two parts: 80% was used for training and 20% for testing,
ensuring a rigorous assessment of the system’s performance.
The total size of the dataset for this evaluation was 5.12 GB,
providing ample data to assess the accuracy and reliability of
the detection process across different scenarios.
Furthermore, this study evaluated the performance of several
ML methods, as listed in Table VI. The CNN-LSTM hybrid
approach outperformed the other approaches, achieving the
highest F1-Score of 97.77%, thereby demonstrating its effectiveness in combining convolutional and sequential learning
approaches. The CNN technique closely followed, with an
F1-Score of 96.40%, reflecting its solid precision and recall
performance. Both the DT and RF frameworks also showed
competitive results, with F1-Scores of 94.99% and 93.99%,
respectively. However, the balance between precision and
recall was not as optimized as that of the deep learning models.
Although the LSTM model was effective, it achieved a lower
F1-Score of 94.10%, suggesting that the CNN-based system
provided a stronger performance for this custom dataset. The
results, as outlined in Table VI, emphasize the superiority of
hybrid techniques, such as CNN-LSTM, in boosting classification accuracy and showcase the significant advantages of
DL architectures in handling complex tasks that demand high
precision and reliability.
A. Redirecting Network Traffic for DDoS Mitigation
To mitigate the disruptive impact of DDoS attacks, the
proposed strategy employs intelligent traffic redirection as
a proactive defence mechanism. The core concept involves
discreetly rerouting malicious traffic to alternate destinations,
such as honeypots, intrusion prevention systems, or traffic
analysis platforms, without alerting the attacker. This ensures
the continuity of legitimate services while allowing network
security teams to monitor and respond to evolving threats
effectively. A key element of this architecture is the redirection
of malicious DDoS traffic to a cloud-based honeypot system.
Once traffic is flagged as suspicious, it is rerouted from
the primary network infrastructure to the honeypot, where a
detailed behavioral analysis can be conducted in isolation. This
controlled environment provides valuable insights into attack
patterns, techniques, and potential vulnerabilities that can be
exploited without compromising critical services.
The detection and rerouting processes are triggered at the
network edge, where an edge device acts as a redirect server.
Upon detecting DDoS indicators, the edge device uses an edge
switch to divert harmful traffic away from the main data path,
thereby significantly reducing the resource strain on the core

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

2521

Fig. 8. Comparative performance analysis of classical ML algorithms (Decision Tree, Random Forest) and DL architectures (LSTM, CNN, CNN-LSTM) for
DDoS traffic classification. Each model is evaluated using Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. The hybrid method consistently delivers high accuracy,
making it ideal for intrusion detection in SDN environments.

network. Simultaneously, legitimate traffic is forwarded to its
intended destination to ensure minimal disruption to users.
Figure 7 illustrates the DDoS traffic filtering and redirection
flow, showing the decision-making process from the initial
detection to the active response. The flowchart highlights how
traffic is filtered and either blocked or redirected, depending
on its classification. The performance metrics validate the
effectiveness of this strategy. After rerouting, the network
experienced a notable decrease in both bandwidth consumption and packet rates, confirming a substantial reduction in
the attack load. This shift in traffic patterns underscores
the efficiency of redirection as the core DDoS mitigation
approach.
To prevent any possibility of data leakage, the split was
performed at the flow level, ensuring that no identical or
overlapping flows appeared in both training and testing sets.
Furthermore, the model was validated across six distinct
SDN topologies, which provided additional confirmation of

its ability to generalize beyond a single network configuration.
The learning curves presented in Figures 10 and 11 illustrate
close alignment between training and testing accuracy and
loss, which indicates that the model maintained generalization
capability without signs of overfitting. In addition to accuracy,
balanced precision (98.34%), recall (97.2%), and F1-score
(97.7%) further support the robustness of the framework.
B. Discussion
Figure 8 illustrates the comparative performance of the five
classification techniques of DT, RF, CNN, LSTM, and the proposed CNN-LSTM hybrid evaluated on a custom SDN dataset.
These approaches were assessed using four key metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. CNN-LSTM achieved
the highest accuracy of 99.5%, outperforming CNN (98.2%)
and RF (97.1%). DT and LSTM followed with slightly lower
scores of 96.8% and 95.0%, respectively. This highlights

2522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 9. ROC curves illustrating the classification performance.

Fig. 11. Loss: Training vs Testing.

Fig. 10. Accuracy: Training vs Testing.

the effectiveness of CNN-LSTM in accurately distinguishing
between normal and malicious SDN traffic. The evaluation
of precision, recall, and F1-score, as presented in Figure 8,
further emphasizes the dominance of CNN-LSTM. With a
precision of 98.34% and a recall of 97.2%, it demonstrates
strong reliability in minimizing both false positives and false
negatives. Its F1-score of 97.77% confirms a well-balanced
performance. Although CNN, RF, and DT yielded competitive
results (ranging from 93% to 96%), they exhibited slightly
higher misclassification rates than the other models. Although
LSTM was still effective, it showed the lowest precision
(94.4%), recall (93.8%), and F1-score (94.10%), indicating
reduced consistency in identifying attack patterns. Compared
with our previous work, which employed individual machine

learning algorithms for DDoS detection [73], this hybrid DL
approach demonstrates significantly improved performance
and offers enhanced security for SDN environments.
The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve serves
as a robust and threshold-independent evaluation metric,
widely recognized for its effectiveness in assessing the discriminative ability of classification models. By illustrating the
trade-off between the true positive and false positive rates
across varying decision thresholds, it provides a comprehensive view of the model performance beyond fixed cut-off
values. As depicted in Figure 9, the comparative analysis
revealed distinct ROC curve trajectories, with the corresponding Area Under the Curve (AUC) values offering quantifiable
insights into classification efficacy. Specifically, the DT, RF,
CNN, LSTM, and CNN-LSTM models achieved AUC values
of 0.949, 0.968, 0.977, 0.945, and 0.987, respectively. Among
these, the CNN-LSTM attained the highest AUC, confirming
its superior predictive capability, while the remaining models
demonstrated competitive results.
Figure 10 and 11 illustrates the learning behavior of the
CNN-LSTM architecture across 60 training epochs, tracking
the progression of accuracy and cross-entropy loss, respectively. In Figure 10, both the training and testing accuracies
steadily increase, converging at approximately 96%. The close
alignment of these curves indicates a strong generalization
with minimal signs of overfitting. Figure 11 shows a sharp
reduction in the loss during the initial epochs, followed by a
gradual stabilization near low values (approximately 2 to 3).
This trend reflects efficient parameter optimization and a
smooth convergence process that is free from instability or
degradation. Taken together with the performance results from
Figure 10 and 11, these insights affirm the robustness of

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

2523

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF R ECENT DD O S D ETECTION AND ATTACK R ESPONSE A PPROACHES IN SDN. M:. M ITIGATION , D:. D ETECTION

CNN-LSTM in achieving high classification accuracy and
maintaining reliable and consistent learning dynamics.
In addition to accuracy-based metrics, we monitored the
system resource utilization when deploying the CNN-LSTM
model inside the Ryu controller. During inference, the model
introduced a modest computational overhead, with CPU usage
remaining below 12% and memory consumption below 9% of
the available system resources. These results indicate that the
framework can operate efficiently within the constraints of the
SDN controller environment. Furthermore, the reduction of
input dimensionality to 16 features through feature selection
significantly contributed to lowering the inference cost without
sacrificing detection accuracy.
While the technique demonstrated efficient detection and
mitigation in the Mininet-based environment, we acknowledge
that this platform cannot emulate the full traffic intensity
of real-world multi-Gbps networks. Consequently, although
our results confirm instantaneous responsiveness under emulation, large-scale validation under production-level throughput
remains a subject for future research.
C. Comparison to Other Similar Methods
Table VII provides a comparative summary of our proposed
CNN-LSTM framework against several state-of-the-art DDoS
detection and mitigation techniques in SDN environments.
The comparison is structured around standard classification
metrics, namely ACC, PRC, RCL, and F1-score, as well as
the dataset origin and functional scope of each study, that is,
detection (D) and mitigation (M). Our proposed model consistently demonstrates superior overall performance, achieving
99.5% accuracy, 98.34% precision, 97.2% recall, and 97.7%
F1-score, outperforming all other approaches in the table.
While prior algorithms, such as those by Singh et al. [39],
Tonkal et al. [44], and Gadallah et al. [47] reported high
individual metrics (some exceeding 99% in accuracy or recall),
most of which failed to achieve a balanced performance
across all evaluation dimensions, particularly when paired with
effective defense mechanism. A critical observation from this
comparison is that many existing studies either lack traffic
control strategy capabilities (for example, Eldhai et al. [41],
Gadallah et al. [47], and Tonkal et al. [44]) or rely on

traditional ML approaches that may struggle with complex or
evolving attack vectors. In contrast, our framework leverages
the complementary strengths of CNN for spatial feature extraction and LSTM for temporal behavior modeling, resulting in a
more adaptive and context-aware detection pipeline. Furthermore, our integrated script-based mitigation within the SDN
controller enables an immediate traffic response, an aspect that
is underdeveloped or absent in many prior studies.
Dataset transparency and availability are equally important. While several studies have utilized self-generated
datasets, such as Singh et al. [39] Gadallah et al. [47],
Said et al. [49], and Mhamdi and Isa [56] have not publicly
released their datasets, limiting reproducibility and independent benchmarking. In contrast, we plan to publicly release
our custom SDN-based dataset, which includes realistic SYN
and DoS traffic captured in a Mininet Ryu testbed. This
contribution not only supports future benchmarking efforts
but also promotes open research and standardization in the
SDN security community. Finally, the end-to-end design of
our framework, which encompasses data collection, hybrid
deep learning, and mitigation, distinguishes it from other
frameworks that often address only isolated components of
the problem. As such, our approach is not only technically
superior in terms of classification metrics, but is also more
deployable, transparent, and scalable, offering a meaningful
advancement in the field of intelligent DDoS defense for SDN.
Importantly, these findings tie directly to the research gaps
identified in Section II. First, unlike many prior works that
relied on outdated or non-public datasets, our custom SDN
dataset enhances reproducibility and realism. Second, we
applied a principled multi-stage feature selection pipeline
to reduce redundancy and computational cost, a step often
overlooked in earlier studies. Third, our hybrid CNN-LSTM
model addresses the clear need for architectures that capture
both spatial and temporal flow characteristics, outperforming
standalone ML/DL baselines. Finally, by embedding attack
response logic directly within the SDN controller, our framework closes the common gap of detection-only solutions,
enabling instantaneous responsiveness with minimal overhead.
This explicit mapping of results to unresolved challenges reinforces the novelty and deployment feasibility of our approach.

2524

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 12. Comparison with recent DL/hybrid approaches (CNN-BiLSTM,
AE+BGRU, SSAE-SVM) on key metrics.

To further broaden the comparison, we also benchmarked
our CNN-LSTM model against recent deep and hybrid architectures such as CNN-BiLSTM, AE+BGRU, and SSAE-SVM.
The results, summarized in Figure 12, show that our framework consistently achieved superior F1-score (97.7%) and
AUC (0.987), while maintaining competitive precision and
recall. Although CNN-BiLSTM and AE+BGRU achieved
comparable accuracy, their performance balance across all
metrics was less stable. SSAE-SVM demonstrated strong
accuracy but exhibited a slightly higher false positive tendency.
These results highlight that the proposed CNN-LSTM not only
achieves state-of-the-art detection accuracy, but also ensures
robustness across multiple evaluation dimensions, directly
addressing recent calls for stronger DL/hybrid baselines in
SDN DDoS detection.

we recognize that the present dataset primarily includes
network- and transport-layer DDoS scenarios (SYN, UDP,
ICMP floods), while low-rate and application-layer attacks
such as HTTP floods or slowloris were not yet incorporated.
We plan to extend the dataset with these attack categories
and validate our framework on large public benchmarks (e.g.,
CICDDoS2019, CICIoT2023) to ensure robustness against
a broader spectrum of threat vectors. Furthermore, we plan
to enhance the mitigation component by extending beyond
script-based packet dropping and rerouting. Future work
will explore adaptive and policy driven approaches, such as
QoS-aware throttling, traffic shaping, and reinforcement learning assisted flow management, to provide more granular and
scalable responses to diverse attack scenarios. In addition,
future research will investigate model optimization techniques
such as pruning, quantization, and the adoption of lightweight
deep learning architectures (e.g., MobileNet or GRU-based
variants) to further reduce computational overhead and ensure
scalability in production-grade SDN environments.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The dataset and related supplementary materials are not
publicly available but can be accessed upon request. A public
GitHub repository has been created to manage such requests
and provide documentation (https://github.com/engrabdinasir/
hybrid-cnn-lstm-ddos-sdn). Interested researchers may contact
us with their name, institution, and intended use.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

V. C ONCLUSION
This study presents a hybrid deep learning framework
based on a CNN-LSTM architecture for detecting and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN environments. The proposed
approach leverages a custom-built dataset that reflects realistic
SDN traffic characteristics, ensuring high detection reliability
and reproducibility. Through comprehensive experiments, the
CNN-LSTM technique achieved a detection accuracy of 99.5%
and an F1-score of 97.7%, outperforming traditional ML
models and standalone DL techniques. In addition to detection,
the system integrates a script-based mitigation mechanism
within the SDN controller, allowing for identification and
blocking or redirection of malicious traffic. This enables a
fast response without relying on third-party tools, ensuring
lightweight deployment and scalability across various network
topologies. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of combining spatial and temporal learning for intrusion detection
and highlight the value of integrating adaptive, controller-level
mitigation.
Future research will focus on expanding the system to
support multi-class attack classification and incorporating
transformer-based architectures and reinforcement learning to
enhance adaptability against evolving threats. Furthermore,

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

A. Oun, K. Wince, and X. Cheng, “The role of artificial intelligence in
boosting cybersecurity and trusted embedded systems performance: A
systematic review on current and future trends,” IEEE Access, vol. 13,
pp. 55258–55276, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3554739.
B. Alouffi, M. Hasnain, A. Alharbi, W. Alosaimi, H. Alyami,
and M. Ayaz, “A systematic literature review on cloud computing security: Threats and mitigation strategies,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 57792–57807, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3073203.
J. Y. Ko, J. M. Pak, D. H. Kim, and C. K. Ahn, “Secure eventtriggered distributed finite-memory localization for multiple mobile
robots under cyberattacks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 71, no. 10,
pp. 12931–12941, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIE.2024.3357884.
S. Abbas et al., “A novel federated edge learning approach for
detecting cyberattacks in IoT infrastructures,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 112189–112198, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3318866.
N. Tatipatri and S. L. Arun, “A comprehensive review on cyberattacks in power systems: Impact analysis, detection, and cyber
security,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 18147–18167, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2024.3361039.
I. Khan, A. Ghani, S. M. Saqlain, M. U. Ashraf, A. Alzahrani,
and D.-H. Kim, “Secure medical data against unauthorized access
using decoy technology in distributed edge computing networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 144560–144573, 2023, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2023.3344168.
L. Nemec Zlatolas, T. Welzer, and L. Lhotska, “Data breaches in healthcare: Security mechanisms for attack mitigation,” Cluster Comput.,
vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 8639–8654, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s10586-02404507-2.
H. An et al., “A robust V2G voltage control scheme for distribution
networks against cyber attacks and customer interruptions,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 3966–3978, Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TSG.2024.3365069.
M. S. Korium, M. Saber, A. Beattie, A. Narayanan, S. Sahoo, and
P. H. J. Nardelli, “Intrusion detection system for cyberattacks in the
Internet of Vehicles environment,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 153, Feb. 2024,
Art. no. 103330, doi: 10.1016/j.adhoc.2023.103330.

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

[10] F. Fotis, “Economic impact of cyber attacks and effective cyber risk management strategies: A light literature review and case study analysis,”
Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 251, pp. 471–478, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1016/
j.procs.2024.11.135.
[11] L. Florido-Benı́tez, “The types of hackers and cyberattacks in the
aviation industry,” J. Transp. Secur., vol. 17, no. 1, p. 13, Dec. 2024,
doi: 10.1007/s12198-024-00281-9.
[12] T. Aljohani and A. Almutairi, “A comprehensive survey of cyberattacks
on EVs: Research domains, attacks, defensive mechanisms, and verification methods,” Defence Technol., vol. 42, pp. 31–58, Dec. 2024, doi:
10.1016/j.dt.2024.06.009.
[13] S. T. Hossain, T. Yigitcanlar, K. Nguyen, and Y. Xu, “Local government cybersecurity landscape: A systematic review and conceptual
framework,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 13, p. 5501, Jun. 2024, doi:
10.3390/app14135501.
[14] A. H. Abdi et al., “Security control and data planes of SDN: A comprehensive review of traditional, AI, and MTD approaches to security
solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 69941–69980, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2024.3393548.
[15] H. Polat, M. Turkoglu, and O. Polat, “Deep network approach with
stacked sparse autoencoders in detection of DDoS attacks on SDN-based
VANET,” IET Commun., vol. 14, no. 22, pp. 4089–4100, Dec. 2020,
doi: 10.1049/iet-com.2020.0477.
[16] O. Polat et al., “Multi-stage learning framework using convolutional neural network and decision tree-based classification
for detection of DDoS pandemic attacks in SDN-based SCADA
systems,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 3, p. 1040, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.3390/
s24031040.
[17] J. Halladay et al., “Detection and characterization of DDoS attacks using
time-based features,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 49794–49807, 2022,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3173319.
[18] A. Hirsi et al., “HSF: A hybrid SVM-RF machine learning framework for dual-plane DDoS detection and mitigation in software-defined
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 112303–112323, 2025, doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3583712.
[19] B. Mukku, “A comprehensive study on distributed denial of service
attack detection using deep learning technique,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf.
Softw., Syst. Inf. Technol. (SSITCON), Oct. 2024, pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1109/
SSITCON62437.2024.10797085.
[20] S. Venkatraman, S. Kanthimathi, K. S. Jayasankar, T. Pranay Jiljith, and
R. Jashwanth, “A novel self-attention-enabled weighted ensemble-based
convolutional neural network framework for distributed denial of service
attack classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 151515–151531, 2024,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3478764.
[21] B. Bala and S. Behal, “AI techniques for IoT-based DDoS attack
detection: Taxonomies, comprehensive review and research challenges,”
Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 52, May 2024, Art. no. 100631, doi: 10.1016/
j.cosrev.2024.100631.
[22] V. Hnamte, A. A. Najar, H. Nhung-Nguyen, J. Hussain, and M. N. Sugali, “DDoS attack detection and mitigation using deep neural network
in SDN environment,” Comput. Secur., vol. 138, Mar. 2024, Art. no.
103661, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2023.103661.
[23] A. Kaur, C. Rama Krishna, and N. V. Patil, “A comprehensive review
on software-defined networking (SDN) and DDoS attacks: Ecosystem, taxonomy, traffic engineering, challenges and research directions,”
Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 55, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 100692, doi: 10.1016/
j.cosrev.2024.100692.
[24] A. Aljughaiman and S. Almarri, “The pivotal role of software defined
networks to safeguard against cyber attacks: A comprehensive review,”
PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 11, p. e2814, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.7717/peerjcs.2814.
[25] S. R. Mishra, B. Shanmugam, K. C. Yeo, and S. Thennadil, “SDNenabled IoT security frameworks—A review of existing challenges,”
Technologies, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 121, Mar. 2025, doi: 10.3390/
technologies13030121.
[26] A. Hirsi et al., “Comprehensive analysis of DDoS anomaly detection
in software-defined networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 23013–23071,
2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3535943.
[27] S. Aizaz Ul Haq, M. Imran, N. Shah, and G.-M. Muntean, “SDNbased edge computing in vehicular communication networks: A survey
of existing approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 74252–74287, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3561083.
[28] M. Yahuza et al., “Systematic review on security and privacy requirements in edge computing: State of the art and future research
opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 76541–76567, 2020, doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2989456.

2525

[29] M. Khayat, E. Barka, M. Adel Serhani, F. Sallabi, K. Shuaib,
and H. M. Khater, “Empowering security operation center with
artificial intelligence and machine learning—A systematic literature
review,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 19162–19197, 2025, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2025.3532951.
[30] A. A. Alzubaidi, “Systematic literature review for detecting intrusions in unmanned aerial vehicles using machine and deep
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 58576–58599, 2025, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2025.3552329.
[31] R. Pakrooh, A. Jabbari, and C. Fung, “Deep learning-assisted security
and privacy provisioning in the Internet of Medical Things systems: A
survey on recent advances,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 40610–40621,
2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3377561.
[32] S. I. Popoola, Y. Tsado, A. A. Ogunjinmi, E. Sanchez-Velazquez,
Y. Peng, and D. B. Rawat, “Multi-stage deep learning for intrusion
detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 13,
pp. 60532–60555, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3557959.
[33] S. Yu et al., “Deep Q-network-based open-set intrusion detection solution for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 7, pp. 12536–12550, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3333903.
[34] M. Sinha, P. Bera, M. Satpathy, K. S. Sahoo, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues,
“DDoSBlocker: Enhancing SDN security with time-based address mapping and AI-driven approach,” Comput. Netw., vol. 259, Mar. 2025, Art.
no. 111078, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2025.111078.
[35] A. F. Samatar, A. Hirsi, A. M. Omar, and M. J. Abdiaziz,
“Investigating DDoS attack mitigation strategies and simulation tools
using GNS3,” in Proc. FORTEI-Int. Conf. Electr. Eng. (FORTEI-ICEE),
Oct. 2024, pp. 142–147, doi: 10.1109/FORTEI-ICEE64706.2024.
10824613.
[36] H. M. Belachew, M. Y. Beyene, A. B. Desta, B. T. Alemu, S. S. Musa,
and A. J. Muhammed, “Design a robust DDoS attack detection
and mitigation scheme in SDN-edge-IoT by leveraging machine
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 10194–10214, 2025, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2025.3526692.
[37] A. Pacini, D. Scano, A. Sgambelluri, L. Valcarenghi, and A. Giorgetti, “Hybrid-hierarchical synchronization for resilient large-scale SDN
architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 9032–9046, 2025.
[38] A. Hirsi, L. Audah, A. Salh, N. M. Sahar, S. Ahmed, and M. A. Alhartomi, “DDoS anomaly detection in software-defined networks: An
evaluation of machine learning techniques for traffic classification and
prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Future Technol. Smart Soc. (ICFTSS),
Aug. 2024, pp. 100–105, doi: 10.1109/ICFTSS61109.2024.10691328.
[39] A. Singh, H. Kaur, and N. Kaur, “A novel DDoS detection and
mitigation technique using hybrid machine learning model and redirect
illegitimate traffic in SDN network,” Cluster Comput., vol. 27, no. 3,
pp. 3537–3557, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1007/s10586-023-04152-1.
[40] A. A. Alashhab et al., “Enhancing DDoS attack detection and
mitigation in SDN using an ensemble online machine learning
model,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 51630–51649, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2024.3384398.
[41] A. M. Eldhai et al., “Improved feature selection and stream traffic classification based on machine learning in software-defined
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 34141–34159, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2024.3370435.
[42] A. H. Alqahtani and J. A. Clark, “Enhanced scanning in SDN networks
and its detection using machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int.
Conf. Trust, Privacy Secur. Intell. Syst., Appl. (TPS-ISA), Dec. 2022,
pp. 188–197, doi: 10.1109/TPS-ISA56441.2022.00032.
[43] S. Manisankar, M. N. J. Hariharan, M. Ashwin, and N. Gowthami,
“Detection and mitigation of DDoS attack UsingHybrid machine
learning approach in SDN,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput.
Commun. Syst. (ICACCS), Mar. 2024, pp. 505–509, doi: 10.1109/
ICACCS60874.2024.10717003.
[44] Ö. Tonkal, H. Polat, E. Başaran, Z. Cömert, and R. Kocaoğlu,
“Machine learning approach equipped with neighbourhood component
analysis for DDoS attack detection in software-defined networking,”
Electronics, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 1227, May 2021, doi: 10.3390/
electronics10111227.
[45] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Feng, Y. Liu, Z. Li, and Y. Shan, “A DDoS detection
method based on feature engineering and machine learning in softwaredefined networks,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 13, p. 6176, Jul. 2023.
[46] A. O. Sangodoyin, M. O. Akinsolu, P. Pillai, and V. Grout,
“Detection and classification of DDoS flooding attacks on softwaredefined networks: A case study for the application of machine
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 122495–122508, 2021, doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2021.3109490.

2526

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[47] W. G. Gadallah, H. M. Ibrahim, and N. M. Omar, “A deep learning
technique to detect distributed denial of service attacks in softwaredefined networks,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103588,
doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2023.103588.
[48] A. S. Zaidoun and Z. Lachiri, “Towards deep learning multiclassification of DDoS attacks in software-defined networks,” in Proc.
IEEE 12th Int. Symp. Signal, Image, Video Commun. (ISIVC), May 2024,
pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1109/ISIVC61350.2024.10577867.
[49] R. Ben Said, Z. Sabir, and I. Askerzade, “CNN-BiLSTM: A hybrid
deep learning approach for network intrusion detection system in
software-defined networking with hybrid feature selection,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 138732–138747, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2023.3340142.
[50] S. Haider et al., “A deep CNN ensemble framework for efficient DDoS
attack detection in software defined networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 53972–53983, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2976908.
[51] A. A. Najar and S. Manohar Naik, “Cyber-secure SDN: A CNNbased approach for efficient detection and mitigation of DDoS attacks,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 139, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103716, doi: 10.1016/
j.cose.2024.103716.
[52] Z. Long and W. Jinsong, “A hybrid method of entropy and SSAESVM based DDoS detection and mitigation mechanism in SDN,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 115, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 102604, doi: 10.1016/
j.cose.2022.102604.
[53] T.-T. Nguyen, C.-S. Shieh, C.-H. Chen, and D. Miu, “Detection of
unknown DDoS attacks with deep learning and Gaussian mixture
model,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Comput. Technol. (ICICT), Mar.
2021, pp. 27–32, doi: 10.1109/ICICT52872.2021.00012.
[54] M. S. Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, S. Dev, and A. D. Jurcut, “DDoSNet: A
deep-learning model for detecting network attacks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st
Int. Symp. World Wireless, Mobile Multimedia Netw. (WoWMoM), Aug.
2020, pp. 391–396, doi: 10.1109/WOWMOM49955.2020.00072.
[55] V. Vajrobol, B. B. Gupta, A. Gaurav, and H.-M. Chuang, “Adversarial
learning for mirai botnet detection based on long short-term memory
and XGBoost,” Int. J. Cognit. Comput. Eng., vol. 5, pp. 153–160, Mar.
2024, doi: 10.1016/j.ijcce.2024.02.004.
[56] L. Mhamdi and M. M. Isa, “Securing SDN: Hybrid autoencoderrandom forest for intrusion detection and attack mitigation,” J. Netw.
Comput. Appl., vol. 225, May 2024, Art. no. 103868, doi: 10.1016/
j.jnca.2024.103868.
[57] S. Pradeesh, M. Jeyakarthic, and A. Thirumalairaj, “Enhanced hybrid
approach for multi-class DDoS attack detection and classification in
software-defined networks using remote sensing and data analytics,”
Remote Sens. Earth Syst. Sci., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 530–544, Jun. 2025,
doi: 10.1007/s41976-025-00204-9.
[58] Z. Ullah et al., “Hybrid CNN-LSTM model for DDoS attack detection
in Internet of Things-based healthcare industry 5.0,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 12, no. 22, pp. 46075–46082, Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1109/
JIOT.2025.3569610.
[59] E. R. Jimoh, T. O. Oladele, O. T. Oladele, A. O. Akinlolu, M. B. Akanbi,
and O.-W. Olabanke, “CNN-LSTM model for mitigation of DDoS
attacks in software-defined networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Sci., Eng. Bus.
Driving Sustain. Develop. Goals (SEB4SDG), Apr. 2024, pp. 1–8, doi:
10.1109/seb4sdg60871.2024.10630294.
[60] M. Afroj, K. M. S. Rifat, and M. S. Rahman, “Enhanced detection
of DoS/DDoS attacks in SDN using ensemble and hybrid CNN-LSTM
models,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput., Appl. Syst. (COMPAS), Sep.
2024, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/COMPAS60761.2024.10796601.
[61] M. Li, B. Zhang, G. Wang, B. ZhuGe, X. Jiang, and L. Dong, “A
DDoS attack detection method based on deep learning two-level model
CNN-LSTM in SDN network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Big
Data Appl. Softw. Eng. (CBASE), Sep. 2022, pp. 282–287, doi: 10.1109/
CBASE57816.2022.00062.
[62] F. Yang, H. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Chen, X. Hu, and J. Ren,
“A detection scheme for multiplexed asymmetric workload DDoS
attacks in high-speed networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 3513–3527, Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2025.
3563538.
[63] G. Kumar Saini and G. Somani, “Is there a DDoS?: System+application
variable monitoring to ascertain the attack presence,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 6899–6908, Dec. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TNSM.2024.3451613.
[64] Q. Fan et al., “BDIP: An efficient big data-driven information processing
framework and its application in DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 284–298, Feb. 2025, doi:
10.1109/TNSM.2024.3464729.

[65] L. D. Manocchio, Y. Chen, S. Layeghy, D. Gwynne, and M. Portmann,
“P4-secure: in-band DDoS detection in software defined networks,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 2120–2137, Apr.
2025, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3552844.
[66] P. Chaudhary, A. K. Singh, and B. B. Gupta, “Dynamic multiphase DDoS attack identification and mitigation framework to
secure SDN-based fog-empowered consumer IoT networks,” Comput.
Electr. Eng., vol. 123, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 110226, doi: 10.1016/
j.compeleceng.2025.110226.
[67] A. Mishra, N. Gupta, B. B. Gupta, K. Bhatia, and M. S. Aswal,
“Prediction of variants of DDoS attacks based on statistical analysis
and machine learning algorithms,” Int. J. Innov. Comput. Appl., vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 14–25, 2024, doi: 10.1504/ijica.2024.143395.
[68] F. Mobasheri, M. Hosseinpoor, A. Yahia, and F. Pourkamali-Anaraki,
“Machine learning as an innovative engineering tool for controlling concrete performance: A comprehensive review,” Arch. Comput. Methods
Eng., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 4723–4767, Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s11831025-10284-x.
[69] A. Behera, K. Sagar Sahoo, T. Kumara Mishra, A. Nayyar, and M. Bilal,
“Enhancing DDoS detection in SDIoT through effective feature selection
with SMOTE-ENN,” PLoS ONE, vol. 19, no. 10, Oct. 2024, Art. no.
e0309682, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0309682.
[70] S. Abiramasundari and V. Ramaswamy, “Distributed denial-of-service
(DDOS) attack detection using supervised machine learning algorithms,”
Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 13098, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1038/s41598-02484879-y.
[71] I. A. Ongshu, A. W. Reza, M. E. Uddin Aksir, M. T. Alam,
M. M. Haq, and F. Alam, “A smart approach for early detection of DDoS
attacks: Artificial neural network and random forest hybridization,”
Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 252, pp. 490–499, Feb. 2025, doi: 10.1016/
j.procs.2025.01.008.
[72] S. Mehmood, R. Amin, J. Mustafa, M. Hussain, F. S. Alsubaei, and
M. D. Zakaria, “Distributed denial of services (DDoS) attack detection in
SDN using optimizer-equipped CNN-MLP,” PLoS ONE, vol. 20, no. 1,
Jan. 2025, Art. no. e0312425, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0312425.
[73] A. Hirsi, L. Audah, A. Salh, M. A. Alhartomi, and S. Ahmed,
“Detecting DDoS threats using supervised machine learning for traffic
classification in software defined networking,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 166675–166702, 2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3486034.

Abdinasir Hirsi (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in telecommunication engineering
from Mohammad Ali Jinnah University, Karachi,
Pakistan, in 2019, the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering, specializing in communication engineering from Bahria University, Karachi, in 2021,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM),
Johor, Malaysia. He is currently a Graduate Research
Assistant (GRA) with the Advance Telecommunication Research Center (ATRC), FKEE, UTHM. His
research interests include SDN security, DDoS attack detection and mitigation,
cybersecurity, and AI techniques, such as machine learning and deep learning
techniques for network intrusion detection. He is an active reviewer of IEEE
and Elsevier journals, having reviewed more than 100 articles in related fields.

Mohammed A. Alhartomi (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the Ph.D. degree in electronic and electrical engineering from Leeds University, U.K., in
2016. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Tabuk. His research interests include wireless and mobile communications, signal processing,
optical wireless systems design, and visible light
communications.

HIRSI et al.: HYBRID CNN-LSTM MODEL FOR DDoS DETECTION AND MITIGATION

Lukman Audah (Member, IEEE) received the
Bachelor of Engineering degree in telecommunications from the Universiti Teknologi Malaysia,
in 2005, and the M.Sc. degree in communication
networks and software and the Ph.D. degree in
electronic engineering from the University of Surrey,
U.K. He is currently a Senior Lecturer with the
Communication Engineering Department, Universiti
Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia. His research interests
include wireless and mobile communications, internet traffic engineering, network system management,
data security, and satellite communications.

Mustafa Maad Hamdi (Member, IEEE) was
born in Al-Anbar, Iraq. He received the B.Eng.
degree in computer engineering technology from the
Al-Maarif University College, Iraq, the M.Sc. degree
in communication and computer engineering from
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia,
and the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia
(UTHM), Malaysia. He is currently a Lecturer
with the Department of Computer Science, College
of Computer Science and Information Technology, University of Anbar. His research interests include wireless and
mobile communications, VANET, MANET, data dissemination, and satellite
Communication.

Adeb Salah (Member, IEEE) received the
bachelor’s degree in electrical and electronic
engineering from Ibb University, Yemen, in 2007,
and the master’s and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
and electronic engineering from Universiti Tun
Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM), in 2015 and 2020,
respectively. From 2007 to 2012, he was a Lecturer
Assistant with the Yareem Community College.
From 2020 to 2023, he was a Post-Doctoral
Researcher with UTHM and UTM. Currently,
he is an Assistant Professor with the Faculty
of Information and Communication Technology, Universiti Tunku Abdul
Rahman. His research interests include 5G, 6G wireless communications,
massive MIMO, artificial intelligence (AI), and the Internet of Things (IoT).

2527

Godwin Okon Ansa (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. degree in computer science from the University of Uyo, Nigeria, in 2003, and the M.Sc. degree
in communications networks and software and the
Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering (network
security) from the University of Surrey, Guildford,
U.K., in 2008 and 2013, respectively. He is an Associate Professor and currently the Ag. Dean of the
Faculty of Computing and Information Technology,
Akwa Ibom State University, Nigeria. Previously, he
was the Ag. Head with the Department of Computer
Science (2013–2015 and 2017–2020) and a Postgraduate Program Coordinator
(2021–2025) with the Department of Computer Science, Akwa Ibom State
University. His research interests include network security, artificial intelligence, delay tolerant networks, cloud computing security, and the Internet of
Things. He is a member of Nigeria Computer Society (NCS), the Computer
Professionals (Registration Council) of Nigeria (CPN), and the International
Association of Engineers (IAENG). He is a member of the editorial advisory
board of Journal of ICT Development, Applications and Research.

Salman Ahmed (Member, IEEE) received the
bachelor’s degree in electronic engineering from the
Mehran University of Engineering and Technology,
Jamshoro, Pakistan, in 2015, the Master of Engineering degree in industrial automation and control from
the Quaid-e-Awam University of Science and Technology, Nawabshah, Pakistan, in 2021, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Universiti Tun
Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM), Johor, Malaysia.
He was a Lecturer in electronics engineering with
Sukkur IBA University, Pakistan, from 2017 to 2022.
His research interests include network security, cryptographic, and resourceconstrained Internet of Things devices.

Abdullahi Farah is currently the Technical Operations Manager with Somtel Telecommunication,
Somalia, where he leads and supervises technical
teams across critical domains, including intelligent networks, network operation centers, radio
development centers, transmission, IP, power systems, and various other technical projects. With
over 12 years of comprehensive experience in
the telecommunications industry, he has developed
expertise in advanced telecommunications technologies, including 4G and 5G, through specialized
training workshops conducted by industry leaders, such as Huawei and
Nokia. He has played a pivotal role in transformative projects, most notably
spearheading the fiber optic cabling project that connected the entire country
of Somalia through fiber optic network.