782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Incorporating Gradients to Rules: Toward Online,
Adaptive Provenance-Based Intrusion Detection
Zhenyuan Li , Lingzhi Wang , Zhengkai Wang , Xiangmin Shen , Haitao Xu , Yan Chen , Fellow, IEEE,
and Shouling Ji , Member, IEEE

Abstract—As cyber-attacks become increasingly sophisticated
and stealthy, accurately distinguishing between benign behavior
and malicious intrusions has become both more critical and more
challenging. Provenance-based intrusion detection systems (PIDS)
show strong potential for detecting malicious activities through
fine-grained causality analysis, which has gained significant attention from both industry and academia. Among the various PIDS
approaches, rule-based systems are particularly favored for their
low overhead, real-time detection capability, and interpretability.
However, these systems face challenges in reducing false positive
rates, primarily due to the lack of fine-tuned rules and specific
environments. In this paper, we introduce CAPTAIN+, a rule-based
PIDS that autonomously adapts to diverse environments online.
Specifically, we propose three adaptive parameters to adjust the
detection configuration for nodes, edges, and alarm generation
thresholds. Initially, we build a differentiable tag propagation
framework and utilize the gradient descent algorithm to optimize
these adaptive parameters based on the training data. In this
extended version, we integrate an online learning module into the
detection stage to dynamically optimize adaptive parameters based
on real-time feedback from the detection process. We evaluate
CAPTAIN+ based on data from DARPA TC, OpTC datasets, and
PKU ASAL datasets. The results demonstrate that CAPTAIN+ offers superior detection accuracy, lower detection latency, reduced
runtime overhead, long-term resilience against concept drift, and
more interpretable detection results compared to state-of-the-art
PIDS.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection, provenance graph analysis,
online learning, adaptive learning.

I. INTRODUCTION
DVANCED Persistent Threats (APTs) pose a significant
risk to both government and industry [1]. For example,
the 2017 Equifax data breach underscored critical privacy and
security vulnerabilities [2], [3]. Moreover, attackers continuously evolve their tactics to infiltrate systems and remain undetected for extended periods. While provenance-based intrusion

A

Received 12 February 2025; revised 28 July 2025; accepted 15 September
2025. Date of publication 18 September 2025; date of current version 14 January
2026. (Zhenyuan Li, Lingzhi Wang, and Zhengkai Wang contributed equally to
this work.) (Corresponding author: Zhenyuan Li.)
Zhenyuan Li, Zhengkai Wang, Haitao Xu, and Shouling Ji are with the
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058,
China, and also with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China (e-mail: lizhenyuan@zju.edu.cn;
wangzhengkai@zju.edu.cn; haitaoxu@zju.edu.cn; sji@zju.edu.cn).
Lingzhi Wang, Xiangmin Shen, and Yan Chen are with the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL 60208-3118 USA (e-mail: lingzhiwang2025@u.northwestern.edu;
xiangminshen2019@u.northwestern.edu; ychen@northwestern.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3611461

detection systems (PIDS) have gained attention for their causal
analysis capabilities, they still face key challenges in practical
applications, including alarm fatigue, high operational overhead,
and long detection latency [4], [5].
Alarm fatigue [6], [7] is a critical challenge in the cybersecurity industry. A recent survey [8] reports that large enterprises
could receive over 100,000 alarms daily, with security analysts
managing an overwhelming average of 5,000 alerts per day,
most of which are false positives. The excessive volume of
alarms can lead to serious consequences. For example, the
damage from the 2013 Target data breach was exacerbated
by a failure to respond to alerts on time. Alert overload and
ambiguity make it difficult for analysts to identify threats [9]
quickly. Consequently, an abundance of false alarms can be
as detrimental as a single missed one. Beyond alarm fatigue,
cybersecurity systems also face challenges related to runtime
overhead and detection latency. High computational overhead
restricts large-scale deployment of detection systems [10], while
prolonged detection delays impede timely threat response and
reduce analyst productivity.
In academia, an increasing number of PIDS are adopting embedding techniques, such as Word2Vec [11] and
Graph2Vec [12], to encode system entities and events. These
systems further utilize neural networks, including Graph Neural Network (GNN) [13], [14] and Recurrent Convolutional
Neural Network (RCNN) [15], to analyze information flow
and generate detection results, termed embedding-based PIDS.
Although they have achieved significant advancements in detection performance, they still encounter several challenges:
C1. High Computation Overhead: Processing embedded features with deep learning techniques [12], [15], leading to
substantial computational overhead. Besides, caching models
and embeddings significantly increase memory usage [10].
C2. Long Detection Latency: Many system designs rely on time
windows [16] or log batching [11], [12], introducing additional detection delays. C3. Uninterpretable Results: Many systems [11], [17] only report anomaly behavior without attack semantics. The “black box” nature of models limits understanding
of the detection, complicating alert handling.
On the other hand, a group of PIDS [18], [19], [20],
[21], [22] operates based on human-defined mechanisms to
generate representations for system entities, propagate information flow, and trigger alarms, referred to as rule-based
PIDS. Rule-based PIDS use simple operations to generate
semantically rich alerts, accurately locate suspicious events, and

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

require low computing resources. Furthermore, some rule-based
approaches support real-time data processing, which reduces
storage requirements and enables fast responses with low latency. In practice, their fine-grained detection and efficient
performance are particularly notable. Despite their strengths,
rule-based PIDS face several challenges in real-world deployment: C4. Fixed Rules: Rule-based PIDS often rely on simplistic
and universal rules (such as a node’s confidence level [18],
[19], [20] or general system parameters [18], [19], [20], [22])
to distinguish between benign and malicious graphs. However, these fixed rules can easily lead to a system that is
too lax or too strict. C5. Inflexible Detection Settings: Existing methods fail to account for variations across different detection environments, as their detection policies remain unchanged across different datasets. C6. Manual Optimization:
Even when some adjustments are possible, extensive manual
effort is required to configure these systems, relying heavily on
user expertise and manual analysis of environmental factors.
C7. Online Adaptation to Concept Drift: Shifts in a system’s
primary behaviors can degrade the performance of detection
models and algorithms [8], [23]. Thus, detection systems must
dynamically adjust their parameters in response to environmental changes. However, existing rule-based PIDS typically lack
such adaptation mechanisms.
To address these limitations, we need an automated configuration mechanism that enables rule-based PIDS to dynamically
adjust parameters based on detection feedback. Building on
CAPTAIN, introduced in our previous conference paper [24],
this extended version presents CAPTAIN+, which enhances parameter optimization mechanisms to enable online adjustments
based on false alarm feedback. This improvement further reduces false positives while enhancing adaptability to concept
drift, enabling better long-term performance and maintainability. Specifically, CAPTAIN+ is designed to retain the advantages
of traditional rule-based PIDS while autonomously acquiring
optimal configurations. To this end, we introduce three adaptive
parameters, which provide the system with greater flexibility. To
enable their optimization, we construct a learning module and
transform the rule-based system into a differentiable function
by calculating and recording the gradients for each parameter.
This allows for a two-stage optimization: 1) Offline Training:
Using a loss function, we apply the gradient descent algorithm
to optimize the adaptive parameters based on training data.
2) Online Adaptation: During the detection phase, the learning
module promptly computes loss upon receiving feedback on
false or missed alarms. It then immediately updates the parameters to enhance subsequent detection. As summarized in Table I,
CAPTAIN+ builds upon the lightweight and adaptive foundation
of CAPTAIN by introducing online learning and the ability to
learn from false negatives.
We evaluate CAPTAIN+ across a variety of benign and
APT attack scenarios, leveraging widely recognized public datasets [25] from the DARPA TC Project [26], OpTC
datasets [27], and simulated environment datasets [28] collected
in collaboration with a SOC. The evaluation results show that
CAPTAIN+ reduces false alarms by over 98% (60.18×) on average compared to traditional rule-based PIDS. Additionally, CAPTAIN+ achieves significantly higher detection accuracy while

783

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF PIDS

maintaining CPU usage below 15%, along with substantially
lower memory consumption and latency compared to state-ofthe-art embedding-based PIDS. CAPTAIN+ reduces false alarms
by over 76% (4.2-fold improvement) on average compared to
CAPTAIN and can detect more malicious events. In addition,
CAPTAIN+ effectively copes with the concept drift problem and
demonstrates higher stability in the detection process. Finally,
we analyze selected scenarios to assess the explainability of
the learned configurations. This paper makes the following
contributions:
r We developed CAPTAIN+, a PIDS that adjusts its tagpropagation rules offline based on benign data and learns
online using both benign and malicious feedback with
an online learning module. This design equips CAPTAIN+
with the high accuracy and adaptability of learning-based
systems, while ensuring long-term maintainability.
r We have parameterized our CAPTAIN+ with a differentiable tag propagation framework, enabling parameter tuning via gradient descent across various environments, which preserves the lightweight, low-latency, and
fine-grained detection capabilities inherent to rule-based
systems.
r We implemented CAPTAIN+ and evaluated it in various
scenarios, including the DARPA TC, OpTC datasets, and
PKU ASAL datasets. Results show that CAPTAIN+ adapts
well to different environments with improved detection
accuracy, reduced latency, lowered overhead, enhanced
maintainability, and more interpretable results. To facilitate future research, we open-source our work at https:
//anonymous.4open.science/r/CAPTAINplus-DA05.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Provenance-based Intrusion Detection
Recently, provenance-based intrusion detection has garnered
significant attention from both industry and academia due to
its powerful capabilities for correlation and causal analysis.
In provenance analysis, system behaviors are represented as
directed acyclic graphs, termed provenance graphs [29], [30]. In
these graphs, nodes represent system entities, such as processes,
files, sockets, pipes, and memory objects, while edges denote interactions between entities, including file access and remote host
connections. Based on how entity information, data/control flow,
and system behaviors are modeled and aggregated, we categorize
PIDS into two major approaches, namely, embedding-based and
rule-based.

784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

1) Embedding-based PIDS: Embedding-based systems utilize numerical vectors to represent, propagate, and aggregate
information about system entities, events, and data/control flows
within a graph [11], [13], [15], [16]. For instance, PROVDETECTOR [31] selects rare paths based on historical event frequency to generate embedding vectors for sequence learning
and anomaly detection, which requires processing the entire path
for detection. UNICORN[23] embeds extracted histograms from
the provenance graph and clusters the embedded graph sketches.
While these systems can achieve higher detection accuracy, they
often fail to provide contextual explanations for the alarms they
generate. For instance, FLASH [11] identifies suspicious entities
with causal links but lacks detailed attack semantics for those
interactions. As a result, more manual effort is required to review
the corresponding audit logs and initiate a response.
Furthermore, since these techniques typically require structured input, such as graphs or paths, embedding-based PIDS
often use time windows or log batches, which introduces additional detection delays, a concept we term “buffer time” in
this paper. Specifically, buffer time is the duration of the time
window during which streaming logs are accumulated to form
a graph structure for subsequent processing. Previous studies
have implemented fixed-length windows based on time [13]
or the number of events [11], while others [12] have used
variable-length windows. In the worst case, after an attack is
initiated, a PIDS must wait for the entire buffer time before
beginning the detection process.
2) Rule-based PIDS: Rule-based systems [18], [19], [20],
[22] use human-designed rules to map system entities and events
to predefined semantic units (e.g., tags [18], [19], TTPs [20]),
which are then propagated along the information flow to generate detection results. For example, POIROT [32] models APT
detection as a graph pattern matching problem, where manually
constructed query graphs are aligned with the provenance graph.
Such systems have gained popularity due to their real-time
processing capabilities and lightweight nature. However, they
often suffer from low detection accuracy due to the absence
of fine-grained rules and environment-specific configurations.
Most rule-based PIDS [18], [19], [20] implement simple, universal rules that make them inflexible and unsuitable for adaptation
to diverse environments. These systems typically rely on discrete
classifications to characterize the properties of system entities
(e.g., private or public) and apply the same rules to all nodes
and events. As a result, they lack the granularity needed to
accurately distinguish between similar graphs, often resulting in
either overly lenient or overly strict rules that cause false alarms
or missed alarms. We will further explore these challenges in
§II-E.
In this paper, we build CAPTAIN+ using a rule-based detection
method for the following reasons: 1) Rule-based detection is
computationally efficient [18], [23], [32]. 2) Rule-based methods are suitable for real-time detection, as they can process event
streams incrementally [30]. 3) Rule-based methods [18], [19],
[21] provide greater explainability in the detection process and
results compared to embedding-based methods [11], [14], [23].
4) Rule-based methods are robust against mimicry attacks [33].
CAPTAIN+ makes a significant advancement over traditional

rule-based PIDS by systematically addressing the limitations
that hinder their real-world application. Unlike systems that rely
on simple, inflexible rules, CAPTAIN+ introduces a novel, mathematically complete framework for the automatic fine-tuning
of tag initialization, propagation, and thresholds. This approach
offers greater flexibility and precision, enabling more accurate
detection and response to security threats.
B. Configuration as an Optimization Problem
Finding the optimal configuration for a rule-based PIDS
can be formalized as an optimization problem, where the goal
is to identify the best parameters θ in a parameter space to
minimize or maximize an objective function J(θ). One common approach to solving this optimization problem is gradient
descent [34]. It utilizes the gradient of the objective function
concerning the parameters, ∇θ J(θ), to update θ according to
θ = θ − l · ∇θ J(θ), where l is the learning rate. Many variants
have been proposed based on the gradient descent algorithm,
including stochastic gradient descent [35], mini-batch gradient
descent, Adagrad [36], and Adam [37]. We discuss more algorithms and their applicability to CAPTAIN+ in §V-A.
Although optimization problems and their gradient-based
solutions play a significant role in quantitative science and
engineering [38], they are rarely discussed in prior work on rulebased PIDS because of the following challenges. First, existing
research does not clearly define the adjustable parameters in
rule-based PIDS. Second, designing an objective function, along
with calculating, updating, and saving the gradients needed in
the gradient descent algorithm, are non-trivial challenges for
a rule-based PIDS. In this paper, we introduce CAPTAIN+ to
address these two identified gaps.
C. Online Learning
Traditional adaptive learning methods often rely on a predefined training dataset and use a specific algorithm to train
models offline. However, concept drift [39] brings a challenge to
their long-term effectiveness in real-world applications. Online
learning, which continuously updates its predictions based on
sequentially arriving data, iteratively refines the model’s predictive capabilities. This method has been effectively used to
adjust to diverse detection environments and rapidly changing
attack vectors [40], [41], achieving higher detection accuracy by
adapting in real-time to evolving environments [42].
However, the key challenge of online learning lies in selecting
appropriate training data for continuous learning. This challenge
arises from the variability of data across the detection and
training phases, which necessitates modifications to both the
parameter adaptation strategy and the gradient calculations used
in gradient descent optimization. In this paper, we integrate
online learning into CAPTAIN+ and customize the parameter
update mechanism to address this challenge. By leveraging
online learning, CAPTAIN+ dynamically adjusts the parameters
of nodes affected by tag propagation. This approach not only
improves detection accuracy and reduces false positives but also
enhances the system’s maintainability.

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 1.

Motivating Examples from Real-world Datasets

D. Threat Model and Assumptions
Following prior work [16], [18], [19], we assume OS kernels and auditing tools are part of the trusted computing base,
meaning attackers cannot tamper with system audit data. We
exclude hardware manipulation or other attacks that leave no
trace in audit logs. Additionally, we assume the availability of
audit logs reflecting daily activities without malicious behavior,
for training in each detection environment.
E. Motivation Examples
This section presents several motivating examples to elucidate
the challenges encountered by traditional, coarse-grained rulebased PIDS, as depicted in Fig. 1.
1) “Grey” Nodes: Recent reports indicate that attackers are
increasingly exploiting commercial FaaS services, commonly
used for legitimate purposes, to redirect traffic to Command and
Control (C2) servers, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). In such scenarios,
both benign and malicious activities may involve communication with the same external FaaS IPs, making them difficult
to differentiate. Existing rule-based PIDS often rely on overly
coarse classifications when representing these IPs. For instance,
SLEUTH [18] categorizes nodes into only three trustworthiness
levels (Benign Authentic, Benign, and Unknown), which limits
its ability to make precise distinctions. Consequently, these
coarse-grained rules either generate excessive false alarms or
fail to detect actual threats. A more fine-grained approach is
needed to capture the “grey scale” of these IPs. Assigning a
continuous trustworthiness value (e.g., a float between 0 and 1)
to each node would enable more nuanced and adaptive detection.
2) Dependency Explosion: A dependency explosion occurs
when the influence of a single event is propagated across an
excessive number of system entities, resulting in high computational overhead and false alarms. Many approaches have been
proposed to address this issue [43], [44], [45]. One category
of solutions requires extensive instrumentation of applications
or operating systems, which introduces significant overhead
and limits practical deployment, particularly on end-host systems. Another category, found in rule-based PIDS, employs
techniques such as event whitelisting [18], cost-based pruning,
and stage-wise classification of suspicious events in an APT
lifecycle [20]. For instance, MORSE [19] introduced decay and
attenuation mechanisms to gradually reduce the maliciousness
attributed to system entities over time.

785

However, these mechanisms apply uniform decay and attenuation factors to all nodes and edges, which leads to a tradeoff between excessive false alarms and missed detections, as
attackers can evade detection by forking numerous irrelevant
processes or interacting with benign entities. Ideally, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), dependency explosion should be contained
in scenarios like the left graph while preserving maliciousness in
cases like the right. To achieve finer-grained control, we propose
assigning a customized propagation rate to each event. This allows maliciousness to dissipate rapidly for common events while
persisting for anomalous ones, improving detection accuracy
and reducing false positives.
3) Customized Alarm Triggering: In rule-based PIDS,
alarms are triggered based on predefined conditions that are
uniformly applied across all events, regardless of their context,
which could result in suboptimal detection performance. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(c), both processes Firefox and sshd
frequently engage in network activities with various IP addresses. While sshd commonly executes scripts using bash,
such behavior is unusual and potentially suspicious for Firefox. Despite similarities in event types and related entities,
applying a uniform rule threshold for all “execute” events could
either generate false alarms for sshd or fail to detect genuine
threats involving Firefox. To address this challenge, a more
context-aware approach is needed. For common events, a higher
threshold should be set to minimize false alarms, whereas for
rare events, a lower threshold is necessary to prevent missing
true alarms. However, determining how to set distinct thresholds
for the “execute bash” event for different processes remains
challenging.
4) Concept Drift: The environment in which models operate is not static; changes in system behavior can lead to
concept drift, resulting in degraded model performance. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(d), when the process bash is introduced
for the first time, both its initial confidentiality and reliability scores are set to the default value of 1. Over time, as
more events are processed, tag propagation causes the tag
scores of bash to change. Specifically, when bash executes
a read operation on the file /dev/tty multiple times, its tag
score significantly decreases. Similarly, when bash writes to
the file /home/user/.bash_history-44482.tmp, an
alarm is triggered because a low-reliability process is writing to a high-reliability file, which is identified as a false
alarm.
These motivating examples highlight the challenges that current rule-based PIDS face in striking a balance between detection
coverage and false positives, largely due to their coarse-grained
rules. Furthermore, these systems often struggle with adaptability, as they cannot dynamically modify rules to suit an
evolving environment. On the other hand, embedding-based
PIDS, powered by deep learning, have the capability to generate tailored “rules” for each event and entity in the graph
by mapping them into a feature space. However, the training
and deployment of deep neural networks require substantial
computational resources and storage, resulting in significant
runtime overhead. Additionally, these systems typically lack
transparency in their detection process and outcomes, making it

786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE II
TAGS’ DEFINITION IN CAPTAIN+

Algorithm 1: Offline Learning.
Fig. 2.

CAPTAIN+’s Architecture

challenging to identify malicious behavior at the granularity of
individual events.
To address these challenges, our approach enhances rulebased PIDS by incorporating fine-grained rules that achieve a
better balance between detection accuracy and false positives.
By enabling these systems to adapt and refine rules based on
training data, we can significantly improve detection accuracy
while avoiding the high computational costs and runtime overhead often associated with deep learning methods. Furthermore,
to specifically address concept drift and enhance long-term
maintainability, we incorporate an online learning module into
CAPTAIN+’s detection phase. This allows for dynamic adjustments based on real-time feedback, which not only mitigates
false alarms by adapting to evolving system behaviors but also
reduces the system’s reliance on static training datasets.
III. CAPTAIN+ DESIGN
As illustrated in Fig. 2, CAPTAIN+ consists of two primary
components: the detection module and the learning module.
The detection module processes audit logs to produce detection
results. Concurrently, the learning module utilizes false alarms
and missed alarms to fine-tune the detection module throughout
the training and detection phases.
A. Adaptive Detection Module
As detailed in Algorithm 1 (lines 2-4) and Algorithm 2
(lines 1-4), the detection module in CAPTAIN+ operates in three
sequential stages: tag initialization, tag propagation, and alarm
generation. The process begins when new system entities are
introduced; each is assigned an initial tag containing its security
state and contextual information. Subsequently, as system events
unfold, these tags propagate throughout the provenance graph,
continuously updating the security context. In the final stage, the
alarm generation component evaluates system activities against
predefined security policies to identify and flag malicious behavior.
1) Tag Design: Inspired by previous provenance-based approaches that utilize data flow and control flow [46], CAPTAIN+
employs two types of tags: data tags and code tags as detailed
in Table II. Data tags apply to all nodes within the provenance
graph, quantifying the maliciousness of data through a numerical
vector <c, i>, where c represents the confidentiality score,
and i the integrity score of the data. Conversely, code tags,

indicated by <p>, assess the integrity of the code and are
exclusive to process nodes. All scores (c, i, and p) range from
0 to 1, where lower scores suggest potential compromise and
higher scores indicate trustworthiness.
The tag system in CAPTAIN+ is modeled after previous rulebased PIDS methodologies [18], [19], though this paper does
not delve into the tag design rationale. We establish that any new
tag type integrated into CAPTAIN+ must meet three criteria: 1)
numerical representation, 2) update via arithmetic calculations,
and 3) alarm triggering based on tag values. For instance, an
“exploitability” tag could be developed for web service nodes,
complete with specific propagation and alarm rules. The focus
here is on demonstrating the enhancements brought about by
CAPTAIN+’s learning module rather than the specifics of tag
design, leaving room for tailored tag development in particular
scenarios.
The online learning design of CAPTAIN+ is built upon three
adaptive parameters: 1) Tag Initialization Value (A) determines
the initial tags for system entities. 2) Tag Propagation Rate (G)
adjusts how system events influence tag values.
3) Alarm Generation Threshold (T ) modifies the rules for
alarm generation. We detail how CAPTAIN+ utilizes these
parameters to enhance the flexibility of rule-based detection.
2) Tag Initialization: Proper tag initialization rules are pivotal as they determine the initial security states of system entities.
For example, assigning a low integrity tag to a socket connected
to a benign IP address could generate numerous false alarms.

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

Algorithm 2: Online Detection and Learning.

This aspect, however, is often under-discussed in the literature [18], [19], where initial tags are typically assigned based
on domain knowledge without subsequent adjustments. While
MORSE acknowledges that tag initialization policies could be
informed by previous tracing data, it lacks a detailed discussion
or a practical methodology.
In CAPTAIN+, tags are initialized when nodes are first added
1 . The
to provenance graphs, as depicted in Fig. 2 at step 
detection system scans incoming system audit logs to identify
new entities, which are then added as nodes with initial data
tags. For new process nodes, we do not initialize code tags and
data tags directly. A process node’s code tag value is inherited
from the data tag of the libraries loaded by it, and its data tag
value is inherited from its parent nodes. For non-process nodes,
we employ an adaptive parameter A at the node level to enable
fine-grained tag initialization rules for any node ni ∈ N within
the provenance graph. A stores its initial data tag based on the
node’s specific features, such as file path, process name, and
command line. For instance, sockets with identical IP addresses
receive the same initial data tag based on this feature.
The adaptive parameter A allows CAPTAIN+ to learn finegrained tag initialization rules at the node level. CAPTAIN+’s
learning module refines A through a training process, detailed
in §III-B, beginning with a default value A0 . To avoid missing
threats early on, A0 is conservatively set during training on
benign data, accepting some initial false alarms. Unlike MORSE
which uses conservative settings to capture all potential threats
[19], CAPTAIN+ applies such settings only during the initial
training phase. For example, we assign all IP addresses an initial
integrity value of 0, ensuring that we do not miss any attackers
entering through network communications.
A key challenge in provenance-based detection is establishing
initial trust scores for system entities. Deriving these purely
from data can be unreliable without extensive, domain-specific
knowledge. To address this, CAPTAIN+ employs a principled,
two-stage approach for score initialization and adaptation. First,
during system deployment, an administrator performs a onetime manual configuration rule to set baseline confidentiality
scores for different categories of entities (e.g., executable files,
network sockets). This step injects essential domain knowledge

787

into the system from the outset. From that point forward, the
system is fully automatic. When new entities are created during
runtime, CAPTAIN+ instantly assigns them an initial score based
on the pre-configured rules. These scores are then dynamically
adjusted through both tag propagation and a continuous online
learning process. In this latter process, an adaptive parameter,
A, is refined based on real-time feedback to enhance future
detection accuracy.
2 , once
3) Tag Propagation: As depicted in Fig. 2 at step 
tags are initialized, specific system events trigger the propagation of these tags along the information flow, altering code
and data tags accordingly. In CAPTAIN+, tag propagation is
designed to transfer and accumulate potentially malicious intentions through tag values. For instance, the event (Firefox,
read, IP) updates the data tag of Firefox to the lower of
the two values between Firefox and IP, ensuring that any
malicious intent carried in the information flow is preserved.
Our propagation rules, detailed in Table III, are based on prior
work [18], [19]. To ensure a fair comparison, we adopted the
default hyperparameter values recommended by MORSE. These
parameters, defined in Table III, include key terms such as data
and code tags (dtag, ptag), quiescent tag values (Tqb , Tqe , decay
rates (db , de ) and attenuation factors (ab , ae ).
However, such a mechanism can lead to a dependence explosion problem [19], resulting in excessive false alarms. For
example, as discussed in §II-E, the event (bash, write,
/home/user/.bash_history) commonly appears in
many false alarm propagation chains, indicating widespread
misclassification of benign activities as malicious within the
provenance graph. To address this issue, we introduce an adaptive parameter G, which controls the propagation rate. Specifically, for any edge e ∈ E characterized by (src_node_feature,
event_type, dest_node_feature), G stores its propagation rate
parameter ge ∈ [0, 1]. During tag propagation, the destination
node’s tag tagdest is updated as shown in Equation (1), where
tagrule typically equals tagsrc , representing the tag value determined by the propagation rules listed in Table III. If ge ’s value
is close to 0, it results in minimal changes to tag values, while a
value close to 1 leads to significant changes.
new
tagdest
= ge · tagrule + (1 − ge ) · tagdest

(1)

CAPTAIN+ continuously refines G through its online training
process, with details elaborated in §III-B. Initially, we conservatively set all ge values to 1, ensuring that during the initial phase,
tag propagation occurs without attenuation. This allows for the
maximum possible dissemination of information throughout
the graph. This strategy ensures that we retain a broader set
of potentially suspicious nodes and paths during the training
stage. By preventing the premature dampening of signals, we
provide the model with richer data to learn from, enhancing
its ability to capture complex threat patterns. For subsequent
online detection, this initial setup allows the system to maintain
maximum vigilance against unknown entities, as potential risk
indicators are propagated without being weakened by an initially
conservative parameter.
3 , upon
4) Alarm Generation: As depicted in Fig. 2 at step 
the occurrence of an event, the system evaluates whether it

788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE III
TAG PROPAGATION POLICIES

TABLE IV
ALARM GENERATION POLICIES

meets the criteria for triggering an alarm according to predefined
alarm generation rules. Our alarm generation policies, detailed in
Table IV, are adopted from MORSE [19], in which incl_exec(p)
means p contains the execution permission, and socket(o) holds
when o refers to a socket. In general, these rules are based on
the event, the associated tags of the subject and object, and
a defined threshold that can be fine-tuned to manage alarm
frequency. For instance, a file corruption alarm is initiated if
a process with a data integrity value below 0.5 writes to a
normal file. Frequent false alarms from events like (sshd,
execve, bash) during training may indicate the need to
raise the threshold for such cases.
We introduce an adaptive parameter T to enable fine-grained
adjustment of the alarm threshold. Specifically, for any edge
e ∈ E in the provenance graph, T stores its alarm threshold
thre ∈ [0, 1]. For an edge e, the detection function f (e) is
defined in Equation (2) where tag is the relevant node tag on
edge e. A low threshold thre tends to suppress alarms, whereas
a high threshold tends to promote alarm generation, allowing
CAPTAIN+ to dynamically adjust response sensitivity at the edge
level. Like A and G, T is refined through a training process
discussed in §III-B. Furthermore, during the online learning
phase in detection, T is adjusted in real-time based on incoming
data and event outcomes. Initially, we set default thresholds
(T0 ) neutrally, assigning thri = 0.5 for every edge e to neither
universally suppress nor promote alarm triggering.

malicious,
f (e) = tag − thre ⇒
benign,

if f (e) < 0
otherwise

(2)

It is noteworthy that CAPTAIN+’s methodology is systematic
and independent of specific rules or tags, making it broadly

applicable to various rule-based PIDS, especially taint-analysis
systems like SLEUTH [18] and HOLMES [20].
B. Configuration Learning Module
With the three adaptive parameters defined, the problem of
adaptive configuration for the detection system is transformed
into an optimization problem: finding the optimal values for
A, G, and T that minimize a given objective function. This
section details how we define the objective function, calculate the necessary gradients, and search for optimal parameter
values. Compared to the previous CAPTAIN design, CAPTAIN+
incorporates online learning capabilities in addition to offline
training to further enhance detection accuracy and long-term
maintainability. The inclusion of an online learning mechanism
allows CAPTAIN+ to continuously analyze and adapt to not only
false positives but also false negatives, thereby significantly
improving the reliability of the model.
1) Loss Function: The first step in optimization is defining
the objective function, termed the loss function in our learning
tasks. The goal of the learning module is to adjust parameters
in a way that reduces classification errors (both false positives
and false negatives) while preserving sensitivity to genuine
malicious events. Consequently, the loss function
consists of

two components: a term for these errors ( e∈E L(e)) and a
regularization term (R) to maintain generalization capabilities.
The error term, as shown in Equation (3), is designed to
penalize false alarms — both false positives and false negatives.
Specifically, for an event e, a penalty is incurred if the sign of
its score f (e) is incorrect. For a malicious event misclassified
as benign (a false negative), its score f (e) will be positive. The
function in Equation (3) is designed to penalize the incorrect

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

score. Importantly, correctly classified events are excluded from
the loss computation to avoid unnecessary updates that may
reduce sensitivity or increase false alarms.
L(e) = (1 + |f (e)|)2 − 1

(3)

The second component of our loss function is the regularizer
term. As previously mentioned, CAPTAIN+’s offline training
stage primarily relies on benign data to learn normal behaviors within the detection environment. In the field of machine
learning, One-class classification (OCC) algorithms address scenarios where only one class of samples, typically the “normal”
class, is available during training [47]. Drawing inspiration from
seminal works in this area [48], [49], we incorporate a regularization term into our loss function to prevent the parameters
from becoming overly permissive in the absence of malicious
training samples. The core idea is to make the adaptive parameters as close as possible to the default values (A0 , G0 , T0 ). By
minimizing the l2 distance between the adaptive parameters and
the default values, we protect the detection capability during
training, as shown in Equation (4), where α, γ, and τ are the
regularizer coefficients. In the evaluation section, we discuss
the effect of the regularizer coefficients (§IV-D2) and methods
used to fine-tune them (§IV-A3).

L(e)+α||A−A0 ||2 +γ||G−G0 ||2 +τ ||T −T0 ||2
Loss =



e∈E

Offline Training

(4)
Unlike offline training, online learning does not incorporate
regularization. This omission is deliberate because the errors
identified in the detection phase need immediate and effective
updates. The regularization techniques used during training to
prevent overfitting are unsuitable for online learning, which
requires the system to respond swiftly to both false positives
and negatives without artificially constraining its adaptiveness.
2) Differentiable Detection Framework: The core challenge
in building an adaptive rule-based PIDS is computing the gradients of its parameters (∂f /∂an , ∂f /∂ge , and ∂f /∂thre ), as the
detection process typically involves a series of discrete, nondifferentiable rule-based decisions. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to formalize and compute the gradients
of parameters in a tag-based PIDS. Our approach achieves this
by computing these gradients in response to misclassifications,
as detailed in Algorithm 1 (lines 5-6) and Algorithm 2 (lines
5-7). Following the chain rule, the gradient for a parameter such
as an is given by Equation (5), with similar derivations for other
parameters like ge and thre .
∂Loss  ∂L(e) ∂f
·
=
+ α · (an − a0 )


∂an
∂f
∂an 
e∈E

(5)

Offline Training

In CAPTAIN+, we enable gradient-based optimization by modeling the detection process as a differentiable function. We
calculate the gradients of each adaptive parameter with respect to
the system’s loss, allowing us to use gradient descent to find the
optimal parameters. The following section details this gradient
calculation process, using a node’s initial tag value, A, as a
representative parameter. The core of our method is to apply

789

the chain rule recursively through the provenance graph. Since
the final detection outcome is a function of node tags, which are
themselves functions of prior tags, we can trace the gradients
backward from the loss to any initial parameter like A. The
recursion begins with the initial state of the graph. The gradient
of a tag on a node n concerning the initial value an of a node n
is defined as:

∂tagn
1, if n = n
=
(6)
0, if n = n
∂an
This simply states that a node’s tag is initially dependent only
on its own starting value.
For the recursive step, we consider the propagation policies
detailed in Table III. When an event occurs, an updated tag value,
tagrule , is determined by the tags of the source node (tagsrc )
and the destination node (tagdest ). By applying the chain rule to
these policies, we derive the recursive formula for the gradient.
We consolidate the different update rules into the following
comprehensive equation:
dest
(1 − ge ) ∂tag
∂tagn
∂an ,
=
∂tagdest
src
ge ∂tag
∂an
∂an + (1 − ge ) ∂an ,

if tagrule = c
if tagrule = tagsrc
(7)
Here, the first case applies when a tag is reset to a constant value
c, which halts the flow of the gradient from any prior nodes under
this update rule. The second case corresponds to policies where
the tag propagates from source to destination. The third case
handles policies where the destination’s tag remains effectively
unchanged (or is influenced only by its prior state).
3) Online Learning Rate: The offline training phase benefits
from a large volume of events over multiple epochs, allowing for
a small, fixed learning rate to achieve gradual and stable convergence. In contrast, the online phase must learn effectively from
sparse and critical feedback, necessitating a dynamic learning
rate. The strategy, detailed in Algorithm 2 (line 6), differentiates
between false positives and false negatives.
For false positives, the learning rate lf p is designed to increase
as more errors are observed, allowing the model to correct
systematic biases more aggressively over time. It’s computed
as:
N
(8)
lf p = lbasic ·
n
where lf p is the learning rate, lbasic is the initial learning rate,
N is the number of false positive events, η is the update interval.
The term N
n serves as a scaling factor, increasing the learning
rate as more batches of false positives are observed.
False negatives represent critical failures and require a more
forceful correction. Therefore, the learning rate for false negatives, lf n , is set to a larger, constant value to ensure that any
missed threat prompts a significant model update. Furthermore,
because detecting malicious events is the primary goal, the
occurrence of a single false negative suggests the model may
be too lenient overall. To counteract this, we also adjust the
learning rate for future false positives whenever a false negative
is found. This adjustment is governed by:
old
lfnew
p = lf p · D

(9)

790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

where D represents the multiplicative factor applied to lf p each
time a false negative is detected.
4) Training and Testing: In the previous section, we established a differentiable framework for calculating the gradients
of our system’s adaptive parameters. We now describe how we
use gradient descent to optimize these parameters in two distinct
phases: an initial offline training phase and a continuous online
learning phase during live operation.
The goal of the offline training phase is to learn an optimized
set of baseline parameters (A, G, and T ) from a static dataset.
Instead of random initialization, we begin with a conservative
default configuration. This ensures the system maintains high
sensitivity to potential threats from the start of the training
process. Training proceeds in epochs. In each epoch, the system performs a forward pass over the entire training dataset,
propagating tags and accumulating gradients. To ensure stable
convergence, we employ a batch update strategy: all gradients
are aggregated throughout the epoch, and the model parameters
are updated only once at the very end (as shown in Algorithm 1,
lines 7-12). The parameter update follows the standard gradient
descent rule:
∂Loss
(10)
pnew = pold − l ·
∂pold
where p represents any adaptive parameter (e.g., an , ge , or
thre ) and l is the learning rate. This iterative process repeats
until a maximum number of epochs is reached or the model’s
performance converges. The resulting learned parameters form
the customized configuration used for initial system deployment.
The online learning phase allows CAPTAIN+ to adapt to evolving threats in real-time, which differs from offline training in
several key ways. First, unlike the epoch-based training, online
updates are event-driven and immediate. An update is triggered
by a misclassification, either a false positive (FP) identified
by an analyst or a false negative (FN) discovered later (see
Algorithm 2, line 8). Then, the parameter updates are tailored
to the error type. FPs trigger updates that make the system
more lenient to similar future events, while FNs trigger updates
that make it more stringent, thus heightening its sensitivity.
Moreover, a misclassification indicates that the tag value of the
involved node is unreliable. Therefore, after updating the model
parameters, we also immediately update the tag value of the
misclassified node itself to prevent cascading errors and improve
the accuracy of subsequent, related detections. The effectiveness
of this mechanism is verified in §IV-F3. This dual-phase approach ensures that CAPTAIN+ starts with a robust, well-trained
model and continues to improve its detection capability through
continuous adaptation to real-time feedback.
IV. EVALUATION
The entire system, including data parsing, tag initialization,
tag propagation, alarm generation, online learning, and the training/testing framework, comprises approximately 5K lines of
Python code. We implement the differentiable tag-propagation
framework by maintaining two dictionaries per tag to store
gradients for A and G. For T , since its gradients are independent
of node tags, there is no need to store them within the nodes.

We deployed CAPTAIN+ and performed all experiments on an
Ubuntu 22.04.3 Linux Server with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum
8358 CPU @ 2.60 GHz and 1.0 TB of memory. Our evaluation
aims to answer the following research questions:
1) How accurate is CAPTAIN+?
2) How efficient is CAPTAIN+?
3) How robust is CAPTAIN+ against adversarial attacks?
4) How is the long-term performance of CAPTAIN+?
5) How do individual modules influence CAPTAIN+’s
performance?

A. Experiment Settings
1) Datasets: We evaluate CAPTAIN+ using public forensic
datasets from the DARPA Transparent Computing program and
datasets generated within simulated environments in collaboration with a professional SOC.
r DARPA TC Datasets [26]. The DARPA TC program ran
between 2016 and 2019 and conducted several red team
assessments. It sets up platforms with various background
benign activities, generating datasets that include millions
of benign and hundreds of malicious events.
r DARPA OpTC Datasets [27]. DARPA OpTC program executed a red team simulation of a three-day-long APT
attack on a group of hosts, producing data that includes
benign activities over seven days and an additional three
days with a mix of benign and malicious activities.
r PKU ASAL Datasets [28]. The PKU ASAL dataset consists of three hosts: a Linux server, a Windows server, and a
Windows 10 host, on which various normal user activities
were performed. The dataset also includes five emulated
APT attack scenarios, including APT29 and Sidewinder.
2) Baseline Detectors: We evaluate CAPTAIN+ against six
SOTA PIDS as baselines to compare with CAPTAIN+ from
different perspectives. FLASH, KAIROS, and NODLINK are the
most recent SOTA embedding-based PIDS and have already
evaluated some other embedding-based PIDS [17], [20], [23],
demonstrating state-of-the-art performance. These systems are
open-source, allowing us to test them on different datasets
with their open-sourced code. We chose MORSE since it is
an SOTA rule-based PIDS, and this allows us to evaluate the
improvements from our differentiable adaptation framework.
To ensure a fair and unbiased comparison, we use the settings
from MORSE in the evaluation. According to [11], [13] and
our communication with the authors, the detection systems of
SHADEWATCHER and PROGRAPHER are not fully open-source
due to proprietary license restrictions. Although the data preprocessing module of SHADEWATCHER is open-source, we were
unable to locate the preprocessing output files used for training and testing. Therefore, for these systems, we utilized the
available code to evaluate the efficiency and latency of data
preprocessing, and relied on the detection results reported in
their paper to assess detection accuracy. We reimplemented
MORSE according to their paper. All code used for evaluating the baselines will also be publicly available for future
research.

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

TABLE V
DATASET STATISTICS FOR TRAINING AND TESTING

zero yields the following conditions:
α=−

 ∂L(e)
e∈E

γ=−
τ =−

∂f

 ∂L(e)
e∈E

∂f

 ∂L(e)
e∈E

3) Experiment Setup: Initial State and Data Splits: Following prior work [19], we assume that attacks originate from external networks or existing files. Consistent with the conservative
strategy mentioned in §III-A, we set their initial integrity score
in A0 to 0, which signifies low integrity. To ensure a clean
training process, we partition our datasets based on the ground
truth attack timestamps. All data preceding the first attack is
used as the training set (containing only benign events), and the
remainder is used for testing. The specific details for each dataset
split are provided in Table V.
Cross-Validation: To prevent overfitting and respect the
temporal nature of audit logs, we employ time-series crossvalidation instead of standard k-fold cross-validation. Standard
k-fold shuffling would violate temporal causality, potentially
training the model to predict past events based on future ones.
Our approach involves setting a time window (approximately
2/3 the length of the training set) and creating k distinct training/validation splits by sliding this window forward in time. For
our experiments, we set k = 3. This method provides a robust
and unbiased estimate of the model’s performance on unseen
streaming data.
Hyperparameter Selection: The performance of CAPTAIN+
depends on several hyperparameters, particularly the three regularizer coefficients (α, γ, τ ). We propose a two-pronged strategy
for their selection. When a labeled validation set is available,
we use grid search to identify the optimal hyperparameter
combination. Our optimization goal is to select settings that
yield the fewest false positives while maintaining or improving
the true positive rate compared to a conservative baseline. For
example, for the E3-CADETS dataset, this process resulted in
optimal settings of α = 0.1, γ = 0.1, τ = 0.1 with a learning
rate of 0.01.
In practice, comprehensive validation sets for PIDS are often
unavailable. For these scenarios, we propose a heuristic-based
method to estimate the coefficients. Since our training begins
from a conservative state, false alarms serve to “loosen” the rules.
The regularizers counteract this, preventing the model from
becoming too lenient and missing true attacks. The magnitude of
the coefficients, therefore, should depend on the number of false
alarms (N) an administrator is willing to tolerate per entity. Based
on this principle, we provide the following heuristic to estimate
the coefficients before training: α ≈ 3N, γ ≈ 3N, τ ≈ 12N .
Moreover, we provide a mathematical justification for this
∂Loss
∂Loss
heuristic. According to Eq. 5, setting ∂Loss
∂an , ∂ge and ∂thre be

791

∂f

·

∂f
· (an − a0 )−1
∂an

·

∂f
· (ge − g0 )−1
∂ge

·

∂f
· (thre − thr0 )−1
∂thre

(11)

Since the regularization coefficients α, γ and τ are used in offline learning, the loss function L(e) = max(0, (1 − f (e))2 −
1). For a misclassified event where −1 < f (e) < 0, the derivative is therefore:
−

 ∂L(e)
e∈E

α=



∂f

=



2(1 − f (e))

2(1 − f (e)) ·

∂f
· (an − a0 )−1 ≈ 3N (n)
∂an

2(1 − f (e)) ·

∂f
· (ge − g0 )−1 ≈ 3N (e)
∂ge

2(1 − f (e)) ·

∂f
· (thre − thr0 )−1 ≈ 12N (e)
∂thre

e∈E

γ=


e∈E

τ=


e∈E

(12)

e∈E

(13)
At the optimal point where the gradients of the total
loss are zero, we also have the following relationships for
∂f
∂f
= −1, −1 < ∂a
< 0, −1 <
the partial derivatives: ∂thr
e
n
∂f
∂ge < 0. According to §III-A, the default values are typically a0 = 0 and g0 = 1. We can make the following estima∂f
∂f
≈ 0.5, an − a0 ≈ 0.5, ∂g
≈ −0.5,
tions: f (e) ≈ −0.5, ∂a
n
e
ge − g0 ≈ −0.5, thre − thr0 ≈ −0.25. Let N (n) and N (e)
be the number of allowed false alarms related to node n and
event e.
It is important to note that the values above are heuristic estimates. Since attackers may hide within training data or exploit
benign entities, the choice of regularizer coefficients depends
on the presumed purity of the “benign” dataset. Therefore, a
universally optimal method for selecting these coefficients does
not exist. Instead, we propose a dynamic adjustment strategy
that begins with the estimated values and adapts based on model
performance. If missed alarms appear when compared to the
conservative baseline, the regularization is made stricter by
multiplying the coefficients by a set factor (e.g., 10). Conversely,
after a prolonged period with no missed alarms, the regularization can be relaxed by dividing the coefficients by the same
factor, after which the model is retrained.
Online Learning Trigger: The online learning mechanism is
triggered whenever a misclassification is observed. In our experiments, we simulated this by comparing the system’s output
against a labeled ground truth dataset containing an average
of 70 malicious events each. In a real-world deployment, this
trigger would be the feedback from a security analyst who either
dismisses a false alarm or identifies a missed attack.

792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF EVENT-LEVEL ACCURACY

4) Data Labeling: We labelled entities and events in each
attack scenario’s kill chain as malicious and all others as benign,
based on the corresponding attack report. While prior studies [11], [17] offer entity-level labels in their open-source repositories, they often lack a specified labeling strategy or sufficient
contextual details. Furthermore, we observed an impractically
high number of malicious labels in their datasets. For instance,
over 12,000 system entities were marked as malicious within
30 hours in the CADETS dataset from Engagement 3, a figure
that does not reflect a realistic SOC environment. To ensure a
fair and unbiased comparison between CAPTAIN+ and baseline
systems, we created and utilized our own data labels for this
evaluation. This labeling process was non-trivial, as it required
mapping descriptions from natural language attack reports to
records in raw audit logs. To facilitate future research and
improve reproducibility, we have made our data labels publicly
available.

B. How accurate is CAPTAIN+?
1) False Alarm Events Reduction: We first compared the
number of false alarms generated by CAPTAIN+, CAPTAIN, and
MORSE across different datasets. As shown in Table VI, CAPTAIN+ reduces false alarms by over 76% on average compared
with CAPTAIN. For those remaining false alarms, especially in
S-2 and S-3, CAPTAIN+ cannot remove them for the following
reasons. The persistence of some false alarms, particularly in
datasets S-2 and S-3, can be attributed to several factors. First,
some “false” alarms relate to potentially malicious nodes (e.g.,
specific configuration files in S-2) but cannot be directly mapped
to attack steps and are therefore not labeled as malicious. Second,
some relevant nodes and edges are absent from the training set
or fail to trigger alarms.
Furthermore, since CAPTAIN+ adopts the same initial training
method as CAPTAIN, their parameter settings are identical at the
start of the detection phase, making some initial false positives
unavoidable before online learning is triggered. Finally, to ensure learning stability, we employ a gradual increase in the learning rate, meaning that some initial parameter updates do not have
an immediate, significant effect. To verify that this reduction
in false positives does not compromise detection capability, we
also analyzed the number of malicious events detected. Table VI
shows that CAPTAIN+ detects all malicious events that CAPTAIN
does, and in some datasets (e.g., T-3, OpTC), detects even more.

TABLE VII
COMPARISON OF NODE-LEVEL ACCURACY

2) False Alarm Entity Reduction: Although CAPTAIN+ is
an event-level detector, we also compare it with state-of-theart (SOTA) entity-level PIDS, such as FLASH, KAIROS, and
NODLINK. To make this comparison feasible, we transformed
the alarm events triggered by MORSE, CAPTAIN, and CAPTAIN+
into alarm entities, where an entity is considered an alarm entity
if it is involved in any alarm event. To ensure the integrity of
our comparison, we also addressed differences in dataset usage
and evaluation metrics. While previous works [11], [13], [17]
often used only a subset of each DARPA dataset, we utilized the
entire dataset to simulate a more realistic SOC scenario. To do so,
we divided the data as described in §IV-A3, retraining baseline
models using their provided code. Furthermore, we observed
that some baselines, such as FLASH and THREATRACE, employed
lenient criteria for counting false positives (FPs) [13]. To ensure a
fair yet strict evaluation, we report results that include a ‘one-hop
FP’ metric, where we exclude any FP entities within a one-hop
distance of a ground-truth attack entity. These differences in experimental settings account for potential discrepancies between
our results and those in the referenced papers.
We evaluated detection accuracy on the CADETS, TRACE,
THEIA, and OpTC datasets. As shown in Table VII, the performance of the baseline systems varied significantly. Among the
embedding-based systems, FLASH reported a fair number of true
positives (TPs). Still, it produced an excessive number of FPs,
as its GNN-based approach struggles with limited training data.
KAIROS performed well in time-window detection but exhibited
poor entity-level accuracy. Similarly, NODLINK detected most
attacks but produced many FPs and missed key entities such
as files and network sockets. The rule-based system, MORSE,

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

793

TABLE VIII
COMPARISON OF DETECTION LATENCY

achieved a lower false positive rate at the node level. This is
attributable to its semantically-rich alarms, which provide additional context for filtering. For example, during a file corruption
event, MORSE flags both the process and the corrupted file, but
the file node may be filtered from the final alert because it is considered an object of the attack rather than a malicious actor itself.
This explains why MORSE can trigger thousands of event-level
false alarms but only flags a few hundred nodes incorrectly. Such
semantic filtering is not available in embedding-based PIDS.
On all datasets, CAPTAIN+ demonstrates superior performance, identifying the majority of TPs while maintaining fewer
FPs, even when compared to CAPTAIN. Since CAPTAIN+ operates
at the event level, some entities not directly associated with
attack events may not be reported. For instance, when malware is
downloaded and executed, CAPTAIN+ triggers MalFileCreation
and FileExec alarms, providing analysts with critical information about the malware process, file, and parent process. However, to prevent alarm fatigue, we do not immediately report the
entry network node used by the attackers. This design choice
leads to some false negatives (FNs) in CAPTAIN+, with the
expectation that analysts can investigate these related nodes after
the initial response.

C. How efficient is CAPTAIN+?
In this section, we compare CAPTAIN+ with the SOTA PIDS,
including FLASH, KAIROS, NODLINK, SHADEWATCHER, MORSE
and CAPTAIN, to evaluate their efficiency.
1) Detection Latency: In our evaluation, we define detection
latency as the sum of three components: buffer time (delays from
time-windowing, as discussed in §II), preprocessing time (e.g.,
data parsing, feature extraction), and detection time (from data
input to result output). Our latency evaluation focuses on the
testing phase, as training can be conducted offline, and utilizes
the TRACE and CADETS datasets. To ensure a fair comparison,
we executed the baseline systems’ original code, excluded I/O
time to measure only computational latency, and verified that
the amount of data fed into each detection module after preprocessing was identical.
The results in Table VIII show that CAPTAIN+ outperforms
other PIDS in terms of both preprocessing and detection time.
Unlike other methods that rely on embedding graph structures
and require significant buffer time (from minutes to hours),
CAPTAIN+ processes audit logs in a streaming fashion, eliminating buffer time entirely, and uses a lightweight preprocessing
pipeline, enabling faster data handling.
Besides, compared to other rule-based systems like MORSE
and CAPTAIN, the introduction of the online learning mechanism
in CAPTAIN+ means that every false positive or false negative
triggers a parameter adjustment. As a result, CAPTAIN+ consumes more time during the detection stage. However, it is
essential to note that the detection logic in CAPTAIN+ remains
unchanged, so this additional time should be considered part of
the training time. The extra time spent is, on average, less than
one minute, which we consider a negligible cost for improved
accuracy.

Fig. 3.

Comparison of Resource Consumption

2) Runtime Overhead: Another key metric for PIDS
evaluation is runtime overhead. This section assesses
CAPTAIN+’s runtime overhead and memory usage during detection. We use the Python “resource” module to measure
the resource consumption of detectors, running them in CPU
mode. As GPUs may not be available in most real-world threat
detection scenarios. We calculate the total CPU time in user
mode to evaluate CPU resource consumption, as shown in
Fig. 3(a). Due to the use of deep learning libraries, KAIROS,
FLASH and NODLINK are multi-threaded, so their total CPU
time in Fig. 3(a) may exceed the detection time reported in
Table VIII. In contrast, MORSE, CAPTAIN, and CAPTAIN+ are
single-threaded. For fair comparison, the CPU time sum of all
cores is considered when conducting multi-core execution statistics. Since CAPTAIN+ relies on basic arithmetic operations on
real-number tags, it requires far less CPU time than embeddingbased PIDS (around 3% of FLASH and 0.3% of KAIROS), which
rely on complex matrix and vector operations for their neural
networks. Moreover, like the detection latency experiment, there
may be a slight increase in CPU usage compared to CAPTAIN and
MORSE.

794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

We used the “psutil” library in Python to monitor the memory
usage of the detectors during detection. As shown in Fig. 3(b),
CAPTAIN+ completes detection much faster than embeddingbased PIDS (as shown in Table VIII) and uses the least memory
throughout the entire detection process. As seen in Fig. 3(b),
compared to CAPTAIN and MORSE, CAPTAIN+ shows a slight
increase in both memory usage and detection time. This is partly
due to adjustments made for each false alarm, leading to multiple
calls. However, this memory is only used for online learning
and does not affect actual detection. In practice, users batch
and periodically update false alarms, further reducing memory
use. When focusing only on detection, comparing with CAPTAIN
offers a clearer view. The small difference in memory usage
between CAPTAIN+ and MORSE comes from the storage of finegrained rules. Overall, CAPTAIN+ retains the lightweight and fast
characteristics of rule-based PIDS.
To further clarify CAPTAIN+’s runtime overhead, we present
a resource consumption proportion in Fig. 3(c). As the figure
illustrates, the overhead is primarily due to the online learning
module (specifically, gradient calculation), which accounts for
approximately 30% of the additional cost. We believe this is a
reasonable trade-off for achieving real-time model adaptation
compared to the significantly higher cost of periodic full model
retraining.
D. How robust is CAPTAIN+ against adversarial attacks?
As the development of PIDS grows, adversarial attacks aimed
at evading these detection mechanisms are a growing concern.
This section examines the robustness of CAPTAIN+ against
“mimicry attacks” and “data poisoning attacks”.
1) Adversarial Mimicry Attack: Mimicry attacks on PIDS
involve altering the provenance data and incorporating more
benign features to “mimic benign behavior”, to evade detection.
We evaluated the robustness of CAPTAIN+ against mimicry attacks using the attack methodology from [11], [33], i.e., inserting
benign structures into the attack graphs. Our mimicry attack
involves two steps: First, we extracted common benign event
structures from the training data. Then, we swapped the original
entities in these benign structures with malicious ones from
an actual attack graph. This creates a malicious action that is
disguised to look like everyday system activity. For our experiment, we used the *CADETS* dataset (Engagement 3) due to its
manageable size and focused on testing the system’s response
to the specific event (XIM, chmod, /tmp/test) after it was
cloaked in a benign structure.
As Fig. 4(a) shows, both CAPTAIN+ and FLASH demonstrated
some robustness against the mimicry attack. The attack entity
(/tmp/test) was still detected by both systems even after adding
benign activities. However, we observed a notable drop in
FLASH’s anomalous score with just a few added benign events
(fewer than 10), a result also confirmed in [11]. On the other
hand, CAPTAIN+ remained unaffected by the mimicry attack,
showing better robustness than the baseline.
CAPTAIN+ achieves robustness through three key factors: 1)
Heuristic-based propagation: Unlike embedding-based PIDS
like FLASH, CAPTAIN+ uses heuristic rules that are less affected

Fig. 4.

Impact of Adversarial Attacks on CAPTAIN+

by minor benign changes. 2) Event-level detection: CAPTAIN+
works at a finer granularity (event level) compared to entitylevel detectors. Since operating at event level without buffering,
CAPTAIN+ remains unaffected by benign events added after
attacks—unlike time-window-based detectors. 3) Conservative,
rule-based detection: CAPTAIN+ is not anomaly-based; it uses
conservative rules trained on normal data to reduce false alarms.
Therefore, adding normal features does not weaken its detection
capability, as the conservative rules ensure detection reliability.
2) Data Poisoning Attack: Data poisoning refers to injecting
malicious events into benign training data, causing the detector
to learn attacker-crafted patterns and potentially miss future
attacks. To enhance CAPTAIN+’s robustness, we add a regularizer
to the loss function to reduce sensitivity to training data and
mitigate the impact of such manipulation.
Training Set Poisoning Attack: In this section, we demonstrate CAPTAIN+’s resilience against training set poisoning attack
using a real attack scenario, namely, a Pine Backdoor and
Phishing Email attack from the Engagement 3 TRACE dataset.
In this attack, a vulnerable pine application connected to the
email server 128.55.12.73, downloaded and executed a
phishing email attachment. However, since 128.55.12.73
had multiple activities, it caused some “false” alarms in the
training data. This violates our assumption (as noted in §II-D)
that the training set should be free from attack entities or events,
making it an ideal test case for dataset poisoning.
To analyze the attack, we focus on the initial integrity tag (a)
of the IP node 128.55.12.73, which shows the impact of the
regularization term. Without the regularizer, 128.55.12.73
would receive a high integrity score (close to 1.0) due to its
benign activities in the training data, which would cause us to
miss the phishing email attack originating from it. However,
when we apply the regularizer (α = 10), CAPTAIN+ becomes
more cautious during training, assigning a lower integrity score
of 0.488 to the IP, similar to the “grey node” example in §II-E.
This helps prevent false alarms and ensures that phishing email
attacks are correctly detected. More details can be found in
§IV-G. Additionally, the event propagation rate for the attack
(pine, read, 128.55.12.73) becomes more conservative,
helping to mitigate the effects of the poisoned training set.
Online Learning Poisoning Attack: To evaluate the robustness of CAPTAIN+ against online learning poisoning attacks,
we simulated an adversary attempting to influence the system
by injecting misleading benign events. The experiment was
conducted on the CADETS dataset from Engagement 3, focusing
on the malicious event (XIM, chmod, /tmp/test). The attack

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 6.

Fig. 5.

Comparative Analysis of False Positives in Long Term

was simulated by creating a malicious file, /tmp/test, that
mimicked the interaction patterns of a benign file (/dev/tty)
and by inserting preceding executions by benign processes (e.g.,
newsyslog) as noise. As shown in Fig. 4(b), while the injection of
these false events led to a gradual increase in false positives, CAPTAIN+ consistently maintained its detection of the true positive
event. This robustness is primarily attributable to the controlled
online learning rate, which prevents the model from overreacting
to misleading feedback and incorrectly reclassifying a malicious
event as benign. Overall, CAPTAIN+ proved highly robust against
this adversarial attack.
E. How is the long-term performance of CAPTAIN+?
In this section, we compare the adaptability of CAPTAIN+ and
CAPTAIN to concept drift by tracking how their false positives
change over time. We use the detected events number as a proxy
for time and evaluate both systems on the CADETS, TRACE, and
THEIA datasets from DARPA Engagement 3.
As shown in Fig. 5, CAPTAIN+ outperforms CAPTAIN in controlling false positives, both in the final results and in the rate of
increase over time. While CAPTAIN can manage false positives
well in the early stages, its rate of false positives increases rapidly
as time goes on. In contrast, CAPTAIN+ maintains a relatively low
false positive rate throughout the detection process, particularly
in the TRACE and THEIA datasets. In the CADETS dataset, the false
positive rate is already low, so the effect of online learning is less
noticeable. The key to CAPTAIN+’s performance lies in its online
learning mechanism. After each wrong detection occurs, the
system updates its parameters and node tags, enabling CAPTAIN+
to control false positives and adapt to new patterns effectively.
Online learning not only reduces false positives but also
addresses missed attacks. For example, when the event “(ztmp,
write, 162.66.239.75)” first appeared in the TRACE
dataset, both CAPTAIN+ and CAPTAIN missed it. However, when
the event occurred again, CAPTAIN+ flagged it correctly after
online learning, whereas CAPTAIN missed it again.
F. How do modules influence CAPTAIN+’s performance?
1) Ablation Study on Learning Rate: During training, the
learning rate not only determines the learning speed but also

795

Influence of Parameters on Detection Performance

controls the granularity of the search. We evaluated the impact
of the learning rate using the CADETS dataset. As shown in
Fig. 6(a), a higher learning rate leads to a sharper decline
in training loss during the initial epochs. In contrast, a lower
learning rate enables finer optimization, yielding a lower final
loss when sufficient epochs are available. This necessitates a
balance between training speed and final model quality. Based
on the figure, if training is limited to 20 epochs due to resource
constraints, a learning rate of 0.01 is preferable. For longer
training durations, however, a rate of 0.001 achieves superior
results.
2) Ablation Study on Three Parameters: We conducted an
ablation study to evaluate the contribution of each adaptive
parameter (A, G, and T ). Since the parameters can be adjusted independently, we performed seven experiments, each
optimizing a different subset of the parameters: {A}, {G}, {T },
{A, G}, {A, T }, {G, T }, and {A, T, G}. The results, presented
in Fig. 6(b), reveal several key findings. First, adjusting the alarm
threshold (T ) alone has a limited impact on performance. This is
because, without changes to the initial tags or propagation rates,
propagated tag values tend to polarize towards 0 or 1, rendering
a continuous threshold ineffective. The results also indicate that
tuning the tag initialization parameter (A) is the most effective
single-parameter strategy for reducing false alarms, playing a
more critical role than G or T .
While the combination of all three parameters (A, G, and T )
generally yields incremental improvements, we observed that
adjusting T alone sometimes resulted in fewer false alarms on
specific datasets (S-3 and C-3). This occurs because, without
the ability to modulate the propagation rate or threshold, the
optimization process compensates by assigning higher integrity
tags to a broader set of nodes. Although this can reduce false
alarms in a coarse-grained manner, it carries the risk of making
the system overly lenient. Finally, a significant advantage of
tuning all three parameters is the accelerated convergence of
the training process. As shown in Fig. 6(b), while the {A},
{A, T }, and {A, T, G} configurations achieve comparable final
detection performance on the testing set, the full {A, T, G}
model converges in considerably fewer epochs during training.
3) Ablation Study on Online Learning Module: To assess
the contribution of each component within the online learning module, we conducted an ablation study on three key
submodules: “False Negative Feedback,” “Node Tag Update,”
and “Learning Rate Adjustment,” with the results presented in
Table IX. Disabling the False Negative Feedback loop resulted
in a further reduction in false positives, but at the unacceptable

796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IX
ABLATION STUDY ON ONLINE LEARNING MODULE

cost of missing attacks due to excessive leniency. Similarly,
removing the Learning Rate Adjustment mechanism and using
a fixed learning rate resulted in an increase in false positives,
indicating that dynamic adjustment is crucial for correcting false
positives. Finally, removing the Node Tag Update submodule
also reduced false positives but significantly limited CAPTAIN+’s
responsiveness to and ability to correct for false negatives. Collectively, these experiments demonstrate that each submodule is
critical for achieving the desired balance between high detection
accuracy and a low false positive rate.
G. Case Study
Another advantage of rule-based PIDS over embedding-based
PIDS is the interpretability of the detection process. To investigate the explainability of CAPTAIN+, we delve into the training
outcomes of the E3-TRACE dataset as a case study. The case study
highlights CAPTAIN+’s key strength—fine-grained detection enabled by adaptive parameters. As mentioned in §II-E and §III,
unlike prior work [18], [19], [20] that uses discrete, manually
assigned values and global rules, CAPTAIN+ tunes customized
numerical parameters for each entity and event, improving its
ability to distinguish subtle differences between benign and
malicious behavior.
Fig. 7(a) demonstrates how CAPTAIN+ better distinguishes
similar behaviors using fine-tuned parameters. In both cases,
process pine reads from 128.55.12.73 (possibly the email
server) and creates, writes, and changes the permissions of a
new file. Traditional rule-based PIDS like MORSE [18], [19]
struggle to assign a tag for 128.55.12.73: marking the IP
as benign (tag = 1.0) misses the first stage of attacks, while
assigning the initial tag as “Untrusted” causes multiple false
“Malicious File Creation” and “Change Permissions” alarms
on the left-hand side benign graph. Instead, CAPTAIN+ assigns a moderate initial tag an , 0.488, to this IP and slightly
tunes down the threshold thr for the event (pine, create, /home/admin/pinerc174500) from 0.5 to 0.478.
As 0.478 < 0.488, the creation of the file will not be alarmed,
but in real attacks, the thr for the event (pine, create,
/tmp/tcexec) is still 0.5, meaning creating a malicious file
would still trigger alarms (0.5 > 0.488).
Unlike MORSE’s fixed decay factors, CAPTAIN+ more precisely addresses the dependency explosion caused by libresolv.so.2 through fine-grained propagation rates, learning
distinct values for different events. As shown in Fig. 7(b),
CAPTAIN+ learns to assign lower propagation rates to events

Fig. 7. Case study from Engagement 3 TRACE. We omitted some irrelevant
details to keep the graphs clean and succinct.

that frequently lead to dependency explosions (e.g., when sshd
or firefox reads the file), while even for the same process, firefox, CAPTAIN+ learns to suppress the dependency
propagation when reading this file (ge = 0.63) and remains
sensitive to maliciousness propagation when loading this file
(ge = 0.99). This adaptive balance prevents excessive leniency
while ensuring no malicious activities are missed.
With its enhanced capability of distinguishing, CAPTAIN+
can significantly reduce false alarms compared to traditional
rule-based PIDS while ensuring that all true attacks are detected. These fine-grained parameters of CAPTAIN+ outperform many embedding-based PIDS in detecting mimicry attacks. For instance, in Fig. 7(a), the attacker can modify the file name of /tmp/tcexec for a mimicry attack
with the knowledge that pine might interact with a file
like /home/admin/pinerc+numbers. Since generalization techniques like Word2Vec and Sentence2Vec are widely
used in embedding-based PIDS, they can manipulate the file
name by appending random digits to pinerc, making it similar
to pinerc174500 after embedding. However, the attacker
requires the exact file name of pinerc174500 to evade CAPTAIN+’s detection, making mimicry much more complicated,
especially with limited training data (only four related events in
7 days).
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A. More Optimization Algorithms
For parameter optimization, we utilize Batch Gradient Descent (BGD). The choice of BGD over mini-batch or stochastic

LI et al.: INCORPORATING GRADIENTS TO RULES: TOWARD ONLINE, ADAPTIVE PROVENANCE-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION

methods is deliberate. In our context, a “batch” encompasses
all events within a single analysis window. Updating the adaptive parameters before processing the entire graph, as would
occur with smaller batches, could introduce tag inconsistencies
during the propagation process. Therefore, a full-batch update
is necessary to maintain analytical integrity. Our differentiable
tag propagation framework, however, is not limited to BGD. Its
ability to provide first-order gradients makes it directly compatible with numerous other optimizers, such as Momentum,
NAG [50], ADADELTA [51], ADAM [37], and RMSPROP, which
often achieve faster and more stable convergence. We thus leave
the implementation of these alternative optimization strategies
for future investigation.
B. Conclusion
This paper introduces CAPTAIN+, a tag-based Provenance
Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) that automatically adapts
to diverse environments. Its adaptability stems from three tunable parameters: tag initialization (A), propagation rate (G),
and detection threshold (T). We propose a differentiable tag
propagation framework that enables the optimization of these
parameters via gradient descent. To our knowledge, CAPTAIN+
is the first PIDS to leverage gradient-based methods for automated parameter tuning, overcoming the rigidity of traditional
rule-based systems. During detection, CAPTAIN+ employs online
learning to refine its configuration in real-time continually. By
learning from both false positives and false negatives, it ensures
sustained accuracy — a capability absent in statically trained
offline models.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alshamrani, S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, and D. Huang, “A survey
on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges, and
research opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1851–1877, Secondquarter 2019.
[2] H. B. Review, “Missed alarms and 40 million stolen credit card numbers:
How target blew it,” (n.d.). [Online]. Available: https://hbr.org/2014/03/
could-target-have-prevented-its-security-breach
[3] N. Y. Times, “Equifax says cyberattack may have affected 143 million the
U.S.,” (n.d.). [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/07/
business/equifax-cyberattack.html
[4] G. P. Spathoulas and S. K. Katsikas, “Using a fuzzy inference system to
reduce false positives in intrusion detection,” in Proc. 2009 16th Int. Conf.
Syst., Signals Image Process., 2009, pp. 1–4.
[5] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009,
doi: 10.1145/1541880.1541882.
[6] C. Dietrich, K. Krombholz, K. Borgolte, and T. Fiebig, “Investigating
system operators’ perspective on security misconfigurations,” in Proc.
2018 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1272–1289,
doi: 10.1145/3243734.3243794.
[7] S. C. Sundaramurthy et al., “A human capital model for mitigating security analyst burnout,” in Proc. 11th Symp. Usable Privacy Secur., 2015,
pp. 347–359.
[8] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
[9] S. C. Committee, “A “kill chain” analysis of the 2013 target data breach,”
2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/
files/24d3c229-4f2f-405d-b8db-a3a67f183883
[10] F. Dong et al., “Are we there yet? An industrial viewpoint on provenancebased endpoint detection and response tools,” in Proc. 2023 ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 2396–2410.

797

[11] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 139–139.
[12] F. Yang, J. Xu, C. Xiong, Z. Li, and K. Zhang, “ProGrapher: An anomaly
detection system based on provenance graph embedding,” in Proc. 32nd
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 4355–4372.
[13] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” 2023, arXiv:2308.05034.
[14] A. Goyal, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “R-Caid: Embedding root cause analysis
within provenance-based intrusion detection,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 257–257.
[15] J. Zengy et al., “ShadeWatcher: Recommendation-guided cyber threat
analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy, 2022, pp. 489–506.
[16] S. Li et al., “NodLink: An online system for fine-grained APT attack
detection and investigation,” 2023, arXiv:2311.02331.
[17] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based threats
in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022.
[18] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction from COTS audit data,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017,
pp. 487–504.
[19] M. N. Hossain, S. Sheikhi, and R. Sekar, “Combating dependence explosion in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 1139–1155.
[20] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrishnan,
“Holmes: Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
[21] C. Xiong et al., “Conan: A practical real-time apt detection system with
high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan./Feb. 2022.
[22] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., 2019.
[23] X. Han, T. F. J. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. I. Seltzer,
“Unicorn: Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2020.
[24] W. Lingzhi et al., “Incorporating gradients to rules: Towards lightweight,
adaptive provenance-based intrusion detection,” 2025, arXiv:2404.14720.
[25] “APT Notes,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/kbandla/
APTnotes
[26] “TC,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/
Transparent-Computing
[27] “OpTC,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/
OpTC-data
[28] “ASAL,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/PKU-ASAL/
Simulated-Data
[29] M. Zipperle, F. Gottwalt, E. Chang, and T. Dillon, “Provenance-based
intrusion detection systems: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 7,
pp. 1–36, 2022.
[30] Z. Li, Q. A. Chen, R. Yang, Y. Chen, and W. Ruan, “Threat detection and
investigation with system-level provenance graphs: A survey,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 106, 2021, Art. no. 102282.
[31] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via data
provenance analysis,” 2020.
[32] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan,
“POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
threat hunting,” ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2019,
pp. 1795–1812.
[33] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t
what you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion
detection systems,” in Proc. 30th Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2023.
[34] S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,”
2016, arXiv:1609.04747.
[35] H. Robbins and S. Monro, “A stochastic approximation method,” Ann.
Math. Statist., vol. 22, pp. 400–407, 1951.
[36] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer, “Adaptive subgradient methods for
online learning and stochastic optimization,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12,
no. 7, pp. 2121–2159, 2011.
[37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[38] J. R. Martins and A. Ning, Engineering Design Optimization. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2021.

798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[39] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with contrastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., 2024, pp. 581–590.
[40] Y. Wei, C. Cheng, and G. Xie, “OFIDS : Online learning-enabled and
fingerprint-based intrusion detection system in controller area networks,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 4607–4620,
Nov./Dec. 2023.
[41] A. Aldribi, I. Traoré, B. Moa, and O. Nwamuo, “Hypervisor-based cloud
intrusion detection through online multivariate statistical change tracking,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 88, 2020, Art. no. 101646. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404819301907
[42] S. Han et al., “Log-based anomaly detection with robust feature extraction and online learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
pp. 2300–2311, 2021.
[43] S. Arzt et al., “FlowDroid: Precise context, flow, field, object-sensitive
and lifecycle-aware taint analysis for android apps,” ACM Sigplan Notices,
vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 259–269, 2014.
[44] S. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “PROTRACER: Towards practical provenance tracing by alternating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. 23rd
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016.
[45] K. H. Lee, X. Zhang, and D. Xu, “High accuracy attack provenance
via binary-based execution partition,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.
Symp., 2013, vol. 16.
[46] J. Park, D. Nguyen, and R. Sandhu, “A provenance-based access control model,” in Proc. 10th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, 2012,
pp. 137–144.
[47] S. S. Khan and M. G. Madden, “One-class classification: Taxonomy
of study and review of techniques,” Knowl. Eng. Rev., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 345–374, 2014.
[48] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Data domain description using support vectors,”
in Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 1999, vol. 99, pp. 251–256.
[49] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector domain description,” Pattern
Recognit. Lett., vol. 20, no. 11/13, pp. 1191–1199, 1999.
[50] Y. Nesterov, “A method for unconstrained convex minimization problem
with the rate of convergence O (1/k2),” in Proc. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR,
1983, vol. 269, no. 3, p. 543.
[51] M. D. Zeiler, “ADADelta: An adaptive learning rate method,” 2012,
arXiv:1212.5701.

Zhenyuan Li received the PhD degree in cyber security from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. He
is currently an assistant professor with the College
of Science and Technology, Zhejiang University. His
research interests include system security and cyberattacks, intrusion detection, and cyber threat analysis.

Lingzhi Wang received the BE degree in electronic
information science and technology from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently
working toward the PhD degree with Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL, USA. His research interests
include behavior analysis of software, AI security,
and the development of the knowledge base to enhance our understanding of cyberattack techniques to
improve system security, and protect against evolving
threats in the digital space, and focuses on system
security and cyberattacks, especially on developing
and optimizing endpoint detection and response (EDR) systems, and host intrusion detection systems (HIDS) systems to detect and defend against advanced
persistent threats (APT).

Zhengkai Wang received the BE degree in network
engineering from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan, China, in
2024. He is currently working toward the master’s
degree with Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China.
His research interests include intrusion detection and
defending against advanced persistent threats (APT).

Xiangmin Shen received the BS degree in computer
science from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
USA, in 2019. He is currently working toward the
PhD degree with Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL, USA. His research interests include intrusion detection and security measurement, and verification.

Haitao Xu is currently an assistant professor with the
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Zhejiang, China. Before joining Zhejiang
University, he was a tenure-track Assistant Professor
with Arizona State University. His research interests
include cyber deception defense, IoT security, web
security, and e-crime investigation. His work on underground cybercrime investigation was the recipient
of the Best Paper nomination in WWW 2015.

Yan Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in computer science from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2003. He is currently a
professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL, USA. His papers have been cited more
than 7000 times based on Google Scholar and his
H-Index is 34. His research interests include network
security, measurement, and diagnosis for large-scale
networks and distributed systems. He was the recipient of the Department of Energy (DoE) Early
CAREER Award in 2005, the Department of Defense (DoD) Young Investigator
Award in 2007, and the Best Paper nomination in ACM SIGCOMM 2010.

Shouling Ji (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree in electrical and computer engineering from the
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA,
and the PhD degree in computer science from Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA. He was a
research intern with the IBM T. J.Watson Research
Center. He is currently a Qiushi distinguished professor with the College of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China.
His research interests include data-driven security
and privacy, AI security, and software and system
security. He was the recipient of the 2012 Chinese Government Award for
Outstanding Self-Financed Students Abroad and 10 Best/Outstanding Paper
Awards, including ACM CCS 2021. He is also a member of ACM, and a senior
member of CCF.