Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Full Length Article

Intrusion detection algorithm based on multi-scale feature fusion
Jinxian Zhao , Haidong Hou , Liang Chang *
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Heilongjiang University of Science and Technology, Harbin, 150022, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Intrusion detection
Soft pool
Multi-scale feature fusion
ResNeXt50
Focal Loss

Network intrusion detection plays a crucial role in ensuring cybersecurity by promptly mitigating network at­
tacks. However, existing deep learning methods have limited capabilities in capture network attack features and
address class imbalances, resulting in low classification accuracy. This paper proposes a deep-learning intrusion
detection model named FLSPPMRXt, which is built upon ResNeXt50. It enhances feature capture by improving
the backbone convolution and introducing a multi-scale feature fusion module, including the Soft Pool layer.
Meanwhile, focal loss is employed as the loss function to effectively mitigate the impact of class imbalance on
classification accuracy. Furthermore, this method proposes a data visualization processing algorithm to provide
an image representation that is more consistent with the feature nearest neighbor distribution. Experimental
results show that the FLSPPMRXt model achieves 93.3 % and 95.2 % in overall classification accuracy and F1
score on UNSW_NB15 dataset, respectively. Compared with existing algorithms, such as the 2DCNN and RNN
models, the method demonstrates superior network intrusion detection performance.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of emerging technologies such as cloud
computing, fog computing, edge computing, and the Internet of Things,
the Internet has become indispensable in people’s daily lives. However,
this convenience also comes with substantial cybersecurity implications.
The popularity of the Internet has made our lives more convenient, but it
has also provided opportunities for cyber intruders. It is crucial to create
an efficient cyber intrusion detection system in order to reduce the
threat that cyber intrusions pose.
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) (Hinton et al., 2006) can be cate­
gorized into host-based and network-based systems, depending on the
origin of the detection data. Among these, the Network Intrusion
Detection System (NIDS) is an integral component of the network se­
curity protection system, which plays a pivotal role in detecting network
attacks and initiating corresponding defensive measures. Its primary
function lies in detecting and identifying illicit and malicious traffic,
thus prompting security administrators to prevent cyberattacks and
mitigate financial losses.
Intrusion detection (Anderson, 1980) technology has been proposed
for over 40 years, and various intrusion detection technologies are
emerging. However, the continuous advancements in network equip­
ment and technology, coupled with the rapid growth of network data,
pose new challenges for network intrusion detection. While traditional

machine learning methods have achieved some success in detecting
network intrusions, the majority of them are shallow learning algo­
rithms that heavily rely on feature engineering. As cyberattacks
continue to evolve and mutate and the ability of bad actors to bypass the
rule base increases, securing cyber information and communications
becomes increasingly challenging. Hence, there is an urgent need to
enhance network security protection capabilities to address the pressing
issues in network security.
As the hottest technology nowadays, deep learning has excellent
potential for network intrusion detection. The nonlinear activation layer
can effectively extract the relevant features from the original data. A
system that can self-learn and detect unknown attacks can be established
by using the training set. After model training, the system demonstrates
a significant effect in identifying unknown attacks and can be used to
detect novel, unknown, and abnormal data.
When building deep learning networks with network intrusion
detection algorithms, on the other hand, the traditional convolutional
layer will have issues like gradient disappearance or gradient explosion
when the network is too deep, which will lower the accuracy of the
classification. To solve this problem, He et al. (He et al., 2016) proposed
a residual network (ResNet) to solve the problem of performance
degradation as the network layer deepens. This is why Wu et al. (Wu
et al., 2020) suggested a deep neural network made of residual blocks.
This network had a low rate of false alarms in intrusion detection and

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: 1992800405@usth.edu.cn (J. Zhao), changliang@usth.edu.cn (L. Chang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2025.104783
Received 25 May 2023; Received in revised form 14 October 2025; Accepted 21 November 2025
Available online 22 November 2025
0167-4048/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

fixed the issue of deep networks not working well. The residual learning
model can learn deeper features, protect the integrity of information,
and effectively solve the problem of network degradation, which has
certain advantages in the field of intrusion detection. Also, ResNeXt (Xie
et al., 2017) is an improved model based on the residual model, ResNet.
It can handle more data and perform better than ResNet with the same
amount of computation, and it can lower the number of hyper­
parameters while keeping accuracy high (Zhao et al., 2023).
The quality of intrusion detection classification depends on extract­
ing data features and selecting parameters in the classifier. In traditional
methods, these two aspects are optimized separately. However, with
deep learning technology, both can be optimized simultaneously to
improve classification performance. Although deep learning has been
widely applied to intrusion detection in recent years, many existing
methods still have several challenges. Firstly, most approaches rely on
individual feature vectors as input, thereby neglecting potential corre­
lations among different features in intrusion behaviors, particularly
those between non-consecutive features. Secondly, while image-based
processing methods offer novel perspectives for intrusion detection,
their image generation processes are either simplistic or overly complex,
leading to increased computational costs.
This paper proposes an intrusion detection method based on
ResNeXt50, aiming to tackle the aforementioned challenges. It has three
main parts: (1) processing the dataset; (2) changing the trunk convolu­
tion and using the multi-scale feature fusion module SPPM (Soft Pool
(Stergiou et al., 2021) and Pyramid Pooling Module (Zhao et al., 2017));
and (3) adding focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) because of the uniqueness of
the network flow data and the unevenness of the dataset to improve the
model’s final detection ability.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:

adaptive pooling layer, thereby enhancing the model’s feature
capture capability.
(3) The model’s loss function has been improved to focal loss to
mitigate the impact of sample imbalances on classification.
The technology roadmap of this paper is shown in Fig. 1. The
remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the
related research work, including data imageization processing methods
and residual learning in the field of intrusion detection. Section 3 de­
scribes the theoretical background and specific improvements of the
data-to-image method in this paper and introduces the core components
of the proposed model. Section 4 conducts experimental analysis and
evaluation and verif-ies this paper’s method’s reasonableness and
effectiveness through multi-group comparison and ablation experi­
ments. Section 5 summarizes this paper and outlines future research
directions.
2. Related work
In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable achievements in
image recognition, speech recognition, natural language processing, and
beyond. Its excellent performance in processing complex data has led to
innovative approaches for dealing with multi-feature intrusion detection
data. Numerous researchers are actively introducing various neural
networks into the realm of intrusion detection. These deep learningbased intruder detection algorithms have further propelled the
advancement of the network intrusion field.
2.1. Some deep learning methods
Xu C et al. (Xu et al., 2018) proposed an intrusion detection tech­
nique that combines gate recurrent unit (GRU), multi-layer perceptron
(MLP), and recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures with a soft­
max module. They experimentally confirmed the enhanced efficiency of
the model in the field of intrusion detection. Liu H et al. (Liu et al., 2019)
introduced an end-to-end detection method for analyzing payloads
using deep learning models. They proposed classification methods based
on convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neural networks
(RNN) for attack detection. Lee J H et al. (Lee and Park, 2021) utilized a
generative adversarial network (GAN) to address dataset imbalance
problems by generating virtual data, coupled with a random forest (RF)
for intrusion detection classification. According to Fu Y et al. (Fu et al.,
2022), attention mechanisms are employed with bidirectional long
short-term memory (Bi-LSTM) networks for intrusion detection,
achieving high accuracy. However, the complexity of feature extraction

(1) A data-imaging process is introduced to convert network flow
data into a two-dimensional image; this addresses the limitation
of traditional methods, which fail to consider the spatial re­
lationships among features, and it enables the model to identify
potential relationships within the network flow data features.
(2) Following the above data image processing, a classification
model based on ResNeXt50 is suggested. This model uses aggre­
gated residual blocks instead of basic residual blocks to calculate
the feature maps, thereby enhancing its expressiveness without
adding extra parameters. Furthermore, enhancing the model’s
performance by adjusting its backbone convolutional structure
and integrating it with the multi-scale feature fusion module
SPPM. Within this framework, soft pool effectively addresses the
issue of feature map information loss encountered by the original

Fig. 1. This article’s technology roadmap.
2

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

might reduce the model’s ability to generalize. Cui J et al. (Cui et al.,
2023) proposed the use of stacked autoencoder (SAE) modules for
feature extraction, coupled with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) integrating Gaussian mixture models for classification. Dina A S
et al. (Dina et al., 2023) proposed the application of the focal loss
function to convolutional neural networks to address sample imbalance
issues in intrusion detection datasets. The above methods effectively
apply deep learning to intrusion detection and propose methods to solve
the data imbalance problem in network streams. However, most of the
above approaches are vector learning of individual data stream features,
which ignores the potential relevance of the intrusion data. Specifically,
they are unable to capture the spatial relationship between non-adjacent
features. In order to deal with this problem, this paper proposes a
method of data-to-image processing.
In addition, Lu K D (Lu et al., 2025) et al. proposed a lightweight
method, MODEO–CNN, based on multi-objective joint optimisation
combining Multi-Objective Discrete Extreme Optimisation (MODEO),
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), and Hyperparameter Optimisation
(HPO). The method uses a hybrid variable-length coding strategy to
characterise the network topology. It combines the principle of Pareto
Optimality to achieve better detection accuracy on Gas Pipeline, BoTIoT and Power System Attack datasets to achieve higher detection ac­
curacy. Zeng G Q et al. (Zeng et al., 2025) proposed EvoAAE, an unsu­
pervised anomaly detection method combining Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). By tuning the
hyperparameters and network architecture through improved Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO), they achieved higher accuracy in four IIoT
datasets.The above methods use sequence encoding to improve model
efficiency through automated search or adapt to unsupervised scenarios
with scarce labels, but in this paper, the method break through the
dependence of traditional sequence modelling methods on local features
by transforming network traffic data into image representations that
conform to the nearest-neighbour distributions of the features, and
explicitly capture the spatial correlations of the non-adjacent di­
mensions in the attack features.

spatial correlation of features, but the image-processing steps are more
complicated. The first method (Andresini et al., 2021) requires training
the autoencoder and then performing the nearest neighbor search in
order to complete the data image processing. The second method
(Andresini et al., 2021) necessitates the coordinate mapping of the
Cartesian coordinate system and employs the convex hull algorithm to
determine the image size; additionally, it must address the intra-pixel
collision issue (there is a case of multiple features within a pixel when
generating an image). In this paper, the proposed method does not
require complex operations. It can directly perform image trans­
formation on the pre-processed data.
2.3. Residual learning methods
CNNs based on residual learning have achieved outstanding results
in image recognition (Chen et al., 2019), and they are easier to train and
optimize than ordinary CNNs. The superiority of residual learning in
image classification and object recognition has been established in
numerous studies (Feng et al., 2020; McAllister et al., 2018; Li et al.,
2020). Therefore, many researchers have tried residual learning-based
CNN to detect network intrusions.
Man J. et al. (Man and Sun, 2021) constructed a deep network model
with residual blocks to achieve classification of network streaming data.
Duan X. et al. (Duan et al., 2023) proposed a method to find anomalies
that utilizes residual learning, wavelet transform, and multi-scale re­
sidual features to capture detailed information across different levels
and enhance detection performance. Sun M. et al. (Sun et al., 2022)
proposed a deep convolutional intrusion detection model that combines
residual units and employs SMOTE to handle unbalanced datasets. Zhao
G. et al. (Zhao et al., 2023) proposed an intrusion detection algorithm
that leverages a generative adversarial network (GAN) to enhance mi­
nority samples. Subsequently, they employ a gated recurrent unit (GRU)
to extract the time-series features of the samples. Finally, they utilize a
residual network (ResNet) along with Softmax to categorize and
normalize the results. The aforementioned research demonstrates the
effectiveness of residual learning in the field of intrusion detection. This
paper employs ResNeXt, which builds upon the foundation of residual
learning. The model integrates group convolution with residual
learning, enhancing its accuracy without altering the number of model
parameters, thereby effectively improving its efficiency. The validity of
the model is ultimately corroborated through experimental evaluation.
Table 1 summarizes the existing relevant research on network
intrusion detection in this paper, including the technologies, data sets,
and pros and cons used in the related work. This table provides a
valuable reference for understanding the current research status of
network intrusion detection technology.

2.2. 2D CNN methods
To address the issue of dimension mismatch between intrusion
detection data and deep learning models while maintaining the spatial
correlation of features, numerous scholars have made advancements in
the coding domain. These methods primarily involve mapping onedimensional data onto two-dimensional images, followed by image
classification processing.
Li Z et al. (Li et al., 2017) introduced a coding technique named
grayscale coding, which converts digital features into 8-bit binary pixels
for classification using an image classification model. In a subsequent
study, Kim T et al. (Kim et al., 2018) expanded this method by applying
it to pseudo-RGB images and employing convolutional neural networks
for classification. However, while these methods offer innovative ap­
proaches to intrusion detection, they have limitations. Specifically, they
can only map features into pixels in the order of their input, ignoring the
spatial relationships among features. Consequently, the classification
accuracy of the final model is not satisfactory (Liu et al., 2019).
According to Andresini G et al. (Andresini et al., 2021), an autoen­
coder (AE) was utilized to reduce the dimensionality, followed by
k-nearest neighbor (KNN) and clustering algorithms to create an image
representation and identify potential connections between adjacent data
points. Finally, a CNN was employed to categorize the data into groups.
In a separate paper (Andresini et al., 2021) authored by the same re­
searchers, they used DeepInsight (Sharma et al., 2019), a novel approach
for converting data into images. Subsequently, these images underwent
processing with Auxiliary Classifier GAN (ACGAN) to generate samples
for a few attack classes, thereby balancing the dataset and improving
classification accuracy. These two methods improve the shortcomings of
the above two parsimonious methods. They can effectively capture the

2.4. Discussion
This paper introduces a novel approach for data-to-image conver­
sion, aimed at enhancing the retention of spatial knowledge among
features. It offers a compact representation of the image for model
training and presents a method that combines multi-scale feature fusion
modules with a deep learning model.
While focal loss, pyramid pooling module (PPM), and residual net­
works have been utilized in prior research, our approach stands out due
to the specific combinations employed within these structures and their
practical effectiveness when integrated. Moreover, the central focus of
this paper is to validate the effectiveness and reliability of the proposed
data-to-image transformation method. Indeed, the method proposed in
this paper outperforms several other recent, related works in this field
on the same dataset. The research in this paper demonstrates the feasi­
bility of deriving a compact image representation of network flow data
based on the similarity between features. This approach better preserves
the spatial neighborhood structure of the features. Furthermore, this
paper pioneers the use of soft pooling in the field of intrusion detection.
3

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 1
Summary of existing methods for network intrusion detection: technology, data
set, and pros and cons.
Paper

Technique

DataSet

Pros/Cons

Xu C et al. (
Xu et al.,
2018)

Use the GRU to store
and extract features.
MLP pairs were used
for nonlinear
classification
decisions.

KDD 99 NSLKDD

Liu H et al. (
Liu et al.,
2019)

Learning features
from raw network
packets. Extracting
feature information
using word
embedding
techniques. Proposing
CNN and RNN-based
classifiers.
Generating Minority
Class Images Using
GAN. Using random
forest classifiers.
Expanding datasets
with adaptive
synthetic sampling.
Feature
dimensionality
reduction using a
stacked autoencoder.
A classifier was
proposed based on
attention mechanisms
and bidirectional
long-short-term
memory (Bi-LSTM).
Stacked autoencoders
(SAE) modules are
used to reduce the
dimensionality and
reconstruct the data.
Clustering based on
the Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) was
used to undersample
most class samples.
Enrich minority
samples with GMMbased Wasserstein
generative
adversarial networks.
Using CNN-LSTMbased classifiers.
Using focal loss to
cope with dataset
imbalance. Using
CNN and FNN as
classifiers,
respectively.

CNTC-2017
Webshell
DARPA1998
KDD99 CSIC2010 HTTP

Automatic feature
extraction. Multiple
models were
validated. High
accuracy. Using old
datasets. Using a 1D
data stream that
ignores relationships
between disjoint
features.
High accuracy in
selected datasets.
Model Complexity.
Using a 1D data
stream that ignores
relationships between
disjoint features.

Using multi-objective
optimisation methods
based on MultiObjective Discrete
Extreme Optimisation
(MOEDEO), Neural
Architecture Search
(NAS), and
Hyperparameter
Optimisation (HPO).

Gas Pipeline
BoT-IoT Power
System Attack

Lee J H et al.
(Lee and
Park,
2021)
Fu Y et al. (
Fu et al.,
2022),

Cui J et al. (
Cui et al.,
2023)

Dina A S
et al. (
Dina
et al.,
2023)

Lu K D (Lu
et al.,
2025)

CICIDS 2017

NSL-KDD

NSL-KDD
UNSW-NB15

Table 1 (continued )
Paper

Zeng G Q
et al. (
Zeng
et al.,
2025)

Li Z et al. (Li
et al.,
2017)

Kim T et al. (
Kim et al.,
2018)

Solved the data set
imbalance problem.
High computational
overhead.
Using old datasets.
Low accuracy. Using a
1D data stream that
ignores relationships
between disjoint
features.

Andresini G
et al. (
Andresini
et al.,
2021)

Andresini G
et al. (
Andresini
et al.,
2021)

Low accuracy.
Complex models with
high computational
overhead. Using a 1D
data stream that
ignores relationships
between disjoint
features.

Man J et al.
(Man and
Sun,
2021)

Bot-IoT WUSTLIIoT-2021
WUSTL-EHMS2020

An imbalance in the
number of dataset
categories was
considered. Proof of
the validity of the
focal loss. Using a 1D
data stream that
ignores relationships
between disjoint
features.
Designed a
lightweight
convolutional neural
network. High
detection accuracy.

Duan X et al.
(Duan
et al.,
2023)

Sun M et al.
(Sun

Technique
Using the new hybrid
variable-length
coding strategy.
Designing particle
swarm optimisation
strategies with
efficient binary
coding strategies
using unsupervised
anomaly detection
based on automatic
adversarial deep
learning.
Convert data to 8 × 8
grayscale images.
Validation using
ResNet and
GoogLeNet as
classifiers,
respectively.
Convert data to 12 ×
12 RGB-like images.
Using GooLeNet as a
classifier.

DataSet

Pros/Cons

SWaT, WADI
MSL, PSA

Solving the problem
of scarcity of tagged
data in IIoT

NSL-KDD

Using old datasets.
Data-to-image
methods are too
simple and ignore the
correlation between
features. Low
accuracy.
Correlation between
features ignored in
data-to-image
conversion. Low
accuracy.
Feature correlation is
considered in data-toimage conversion but
is computationally
complex. High
accuracy.

KDD Cup 1999
UNSW-NB15
IDS2017

Representation of
network streams as
2D images using
nearest neighbor
search and clustering
algorithms. Feature
dimensionality
reduction using selfencoders. Using a
custom CNN
structural classifier.
Representation of
network streams as
2D images using the
DeepInsight
algorithm. Generating
minority-class
samples using
ACGAN. Using a
custom CNN
structural classifier.

KDDCUP99
UNSW-NB15
CICDS2017

Convert the data to 14
× 14 images. Dealing
with dataset
imbalances using
focal loss. Creating
Deep Convolutional
Neural Network
Classifiers with
Residual Blocks.
Using batch
normalization and
global average
pooling to avoid
overfitting.
Multi-scale
generation of raw
flows using sliding
windows and wavelet
transforms. Feature
reconstruction using a
stacked autoencoder.
Constructing a
multiplexed residual
swarm network to
capture feature
information.
Generating Minority
Class Samples with
Borderline-SMOTE.

UNSW-NB15

KDDCUP99
UNSW-NB15
CICIDS2017
AAGM17

Novel and effective
data-to-image
method, but
computationally
complex and timeconsuming. A timeconsuming model
with high
computational
overhead. High
accuracy.
Using resize shapes
directly to convert
data to images,
ignoring the
correlation between
features. Low
accuracy.

KDD99 NSLKDD UNSWNB15
CICIDS2018

Model Complexity.
Low accuracy.

NSL-KDD

Using old dataset.

(continued on next page)

4

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

structure appears in Table 2.
The input of each sample into the model is achieved by processing
the data into two-dimensional grayscale images. In the initial stage of
convolution algorithms, features are extracted from grayscale images.
After the output feature maps are fed into the module for fusing multiscale features, fused feature maps containing different sensory fields
are generated. Finally, the fusion feature maps are input into the
grouped convolution module for training to yield the final classification
results.

Table 1 (continued )
Paper
et al.,
2022)

Zhao G et al.
(Zhao
et al.,
2023)

Technique
The data were
converted to 32 × 32
grayscale maps using
principal component
analysis incorporating
a bicubic
interpolation
algorithm. Creating
CNN structural
classifiers.
Balancing datasets
using GAN. Extracting
time-series features
using GRU.
Classification using
residual networks.

DataSet

Pros/Cons

NSL-KDD

Using old datasets.
High computational
overhead. High
accuracy.

3.2. Data pre-processing
The characteristics of the intrusion detection dataset indicate that
many data sets include character-based features such as protocols and
services, as well as other label features. Since non-numerical data is not
uniformly processed, it is necessary to process this non-numerical data.
Table 3 provides information on the non-numerical data feature types
and the appropriate processing operations.
The character features contained in the dataset must be numerically
processed using one-hot coding, while the label features must be labelcoded to obtain a dataset where all features are of a continuous type.
Additionally, due to the varying scales and disparities among each col­
umn feature, it is necessary to normalize the data according to Eq. (1). In

Experiments show that the combination of soft pool and multi-scale
feature fusion algorithms significantly enhances intrusion detection
classification accuracy.
3. FLSPPMRXt method
This section starts by explaining the structure of the ResNeXt-based
model, which is proposed in this paper. It then discusses the data preprocessing and data visualization methods. Finally, it introduces the
model’s main part, which is the multi-scale feature fusion module with
an improved pooling layer. The model structure of the intrusion detec­
tion method in this paper is shown in Fig. 2.

Table 2
Structure of FLSPPMRXt model.

3.1. FLSPPMRXt architecture
In this paper’s proposed FLSPPMRXt model, the initial convolution
of the backbone network consists of one 5 × 5 convolution coupled with
two 3 × 3 convolutions (the original backbone convolution in this model
was a 7 × 7 convolution), which is determined based on the results of the
ablation experiments in Section 4.6. After completing this step, the
structure employs a multi-scale feature fusion module to enhance the
model’s feature extraction abilities. For this application, the model
employs a grouped convolution with a channel count of four and a group
count of 32. The model is activated using the sigmoid function after
global average pooling and full connectivity. A description of the model

stage

output

ResNeXt-50(32 × 4d)

Conv1
Conv2
Conv3
Conv4

9×9
9×9
9×9
9×9

​

​
Conv6

5×5

Conv7

3×3

Conv8

2×2

Conv9

1×1

5 × 5, 64, stride 2, padding 4
3 × 3, 64, stride 1, padding 1
3 × 3, 64, stride 1, padding 1
Multi-scale feature fusion module -SPPM
⎡
⎤
1 × 1, 128
⎣ 3 × 3, 128, C = 32 ⎦ × 3
1 × 1, 256
⎡
⎤
1 × 1, 256
⎣ 3 × 3, 256, C = 32 ⎦ × 4
1 × 1, 512
⎡
⎤
1 × 1, 512
⎣ 3 × 3, 512, C = 32 ⎦ × 6
1 × 1, 1024
⎡
⎤
1 × 1, 1024
⎣ 3 × 3, 1024, C = 32 ⎦ × 3
1 × 1, 2048
Global average pool 2-d fc, sigmoid

Fig. 2. Structure of FLSPPMRXt model.
5

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

swap pair that yields the greatest error reduction. This process repeats
until convergence, yielding an optimal feature ordering. The Mr × Mc
image is then filled with feature values according to this ordering. In the
final image, semantically similar features (i.e., those with small dis­
tances in F) are assigned to spatially adjacent pixels (i.e., those with
small distances in I), forming a structured image with meaningful local
patterns.
This method calculates the error of both the initial feature rank
matrix and the pixel rank matrix. The feature rank matrix is optimized to
reduce error by swapping the rank order of features iteratively. After
error optimization, each sample Xi is finally transformed into an image
of Mr × Mc , where Mr × Mc = M.
The distance in the above method is calculated using Euclidean
distance, which treats differences between attributes (or measures) as
equal. However, when dealing with intrusion detection data, there are
large differences between different attributes, and using Euclidean dis­
tance may weaken some feature associations. Therefore, this paper im­
proves it to a Standardized Euclidean distance, which is standardized
according to Eq. (3) before performing the distance metric, where a
value of m indicates the mean value and a value of s indicates the
standard deviation.

Table 3
Types and operations of data features.
Feature Type

Operation

Character
Numerical
Categorical

One-Hot Encoding
–
Label Encoding

the equation, x represents each column feature, xmin denotes the mini­
mum value of each column feature, and xmax refers to the maximum
value of each feature in each column.
x∗ =

x − xmin
xmax − xmin

(1)

3.3. Improved data-to-image methods
This paper presents a data-to-image method by improving the algo­
rithm of the Image Generator for Tabular Data (Zhu et al., 2021),
comprising the following steps.
For the overall sample data X, let X = N × M; where M is the amount
of features and N is the number of samples, Xi,: , X:,j , Xi,j refer to the el­
ements of row i, column j and row i, column j respectively. A calculation
is made of the distance between features on a pairwise basis using a
distance metric, in which small distances correspond to small ranks and
large distances correspond to large ranks. This matrix F represents a
matrix of feature distance rank. Assuming the target image is of size Mr
×Mc (satisfying Mr × Mc = M), treat the image as a grid. Assign co­
ordinates to each pixel, compute the spatial distance between all pixel
pairs, and sort these distances in ascending order to obtain a pixel dis­
tance rank matrix I. In both instances, F and I are M ×M symmetric
matrices, which can be observed in the final generation of rank matrices
for feature distances and pixel distances in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b However,
comparing the two figures, the two matrices cannot be directly matched
because of their substantial differences, so it becomes necessary to
define the error function as follows:
err(F, I) =

M ∑
i− 1
∑
i=2

j=1

)
(
diff Fi,j , Ii,j

X∗ =

X− m
s

(3)

This paper proposes a data visualization method that employs a
standardized Euclidean distance to determine the initial ranking matrix
for feature distances and the ranking matrix for pixel distances. The
larger the distance, the higher the rank, and the darker the color of the
point, the more significant it becomes. As demonstrated in Fig. 3c, the
feature rank matrix has been optimized by taking into account the pixel
rank matrix, resulting in a closer alignment between the optimized
feature distance rank matrix and the matrix of pixel distance ranks
compared to the original matrix.
This article’s data image processing methods utilize three distance
measures: Euclidean distance, cosine distance, and Standardized
Euclidean (SeEuclidean) distance. All three distance measures can be
used to measure the similarity between features. Their formulas are
shown in Eqs. (4), (5), and (6), respectively, where xi and yi denote the
coordinates of different points in a particular dimension, respectively.
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
n
∑
d(x, y) =
(xi − yi )2
(4)

(2)

With this function, we can measure and optimize two matrices, where Fi,j
indicates the rank value of the ith feature and the jth feature, Ii,j contains
the rank value of the ith pixel, and the jth pixel, and the diff(:, :) function
determines the distance between Fi,j and Ii,j either by absolute or
squared.
Initially, the i-th feature is assigned to the i-th pixel. By swapping the
pixel assignment order of features (i.e., reordering the feature
sequence), the algorithm minimises err(F,I)to make F as close as possible
to I It iteratively selects a feature that has not been swapped for the
longest time, attempts to swap it with all other features, and chooses the

i=1

∑n
i=1 xi yi
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
cos(x, y) = 1 − √∑
∑n 2
n
2
i=1 xi
i=1 yi

(5)

√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
√ n (
√∑ xi − yi )2
d(x, y) = √
si
i=1

(6)

Fig. 3. Correlation matrix of normalized Euclidean distance generated images: (a) Feature rank matrix, (b) Pixel rank matrix, (c)Optimized feature matrix.
6

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Fig. 4 illustrates the images generated by each technique on
UNSW_NB15 dataset; Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b depict the image created by
Euclidean distance; Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d exhibit those derived from cosine
distance; and Fig. 4e and Fig. 4f demonstrate the graphics generation by
Standardized Euclidean distance. In the process of image generation, the
distance metric serves as a measure of similarity between two pairs of
features (represented by distance). The optimization process aims to
increase similarity (i.e., decreasing distance) and ultimately generate
image representations with tightly arranged similar features. According
to the figures, the image generated by Standardized Euclidean distance
exhibits a more compact feature representation (feature neighbor rep­
resentation with high similarity).
The data-to-image method proposed in this paper optimizes the
image transformation by minimizing the difference between the feature
distance ordering of tabular data and the pixel distance ordering of the
generated image. Each feature corresponds to one pixel, resulting in
similar features being displayed as closely adjacent pixels in the image.
This approach thereby facilitates the generation of images from network
streaming data.

̃
a=

∑ eai ∗ ai
∑
aj
j∈R e
i∈R

(7)
a

Where a represents the activation mapping of the region, ∑e i eaj repre­
j∈R

sents the activation weight, which is the sum of the natural exponential
of the activation value divided by the natural exponential of all activa­
̃ is the weighted sum of all weights and
tion values, and the final output a
the activation mapping a. The soft pooling accumulates activations in an
exponentially weighted manner, and all activations within the convo­
lution kernel contribute to the final result. The importance of activations
varies depending on the weight, with higher activations indicating more
significant characteristics of the feature map. By using this method, the
down-sampled activation mapping can improve the accuracy of the final
classification by retaining more information.
Fig. 5 provides a more detailed illustration of the improved multiscale feature fusion module. The enhanced SPPM module is capable of
effectively aggregating contextual information from diverse regions,
thus facilitating the model’s acquisition of global information.

3.4. Improved multi-scale feature fusion module
For deep learning networks, as the network becomes deeper, the
receptive field also increases, which can hinder the network’s ability to
effectively fuse global feature information, and PPM solves this problem.
However, the global average pooling (GAP) employed in PPM tends to
lose information during the compression process and has limited capa­
bilities for fusing and extracting information. Therefore, this paper
proposes an improvement by upgrading the pooling layer to a soft pool.
Soft pooling is a technique that retains the basic input attributes by
utilizing a SoftMax-based weighting system during the upscaling of
more intense feature activation values, as demonstrated in the following
equation:

Fig. 5. Structure of the SPPM module.

Fig. 4. Generate attack and normal images in different ways: (a) Normal image generated by Euclidean distance, (b)Attack image generated by Euclidean distance,
(c) Normal image generated by Cosine distance, (d)Attack image generated by Cosine distance, (e) Normal image generated by SeEuclidean distance, (f)Attack image
generated by SeEuclidean distance.
7

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

First, the model extracts features through the combined convolution
of the backbone. Next, the SPPM module extracts features at different
scales. Finally, the soft pooling generates four feature maps with
different sizes (1, 3, 5, and 7). Subsequently, each of these feature maps
is down-sampled using 1 × 1 convolution to ensure the correct number
of channels. Next, each feature map is up-sampled to its original size,
and finally, the channel dimensions are concatenated to obtain the
multi-scale feature-fused feature maps. Compared to the original Max
Pooling algorithm, the SPPM module incorporates feature information
from diverse sensory fields and sub-regions, while the application of soft
pooling further enhances the features and boots the model’s
performance.

(3) Classification model: A classification model FLSPPMRXt based on
ResNeXt50 is constructed, and the training set is redivided into a
training set and a validation set to train and tune the model for
intrusion detection purposes.
4.1. Evaluation metrics
To evaluate model performance in this paper using overall classifi­
cation accuracy (OA), recall (R), and F1 score (F1). OA shows intrusion
detection systems’s capability of recognizing samples accurately. Recall
refers to the capability of an intrusion detection system to detect all
attacks. F1 represents the harmonic mean of precision(P) and recall(R).
A higher F1 score generally indicates a better balance between accuracy
and completeness.

3.5. Loss function
By adjusting the internal weights, focal loss prevents a few samples
from poorly fitting and negatively impacting classification results. The
method involves adding a weight adjustment factor of (1 − p)γ to the
cross-entropy loss function to offset the effects of imbalances in the
number of rare sample categories or classification difficulty. The for­
mula can be stated as follows:
{
− α(1 − p)γ log(p) y = 1
Li =
(8)
− (1 − α)pγ log(1 − p) y = 0

OA =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

R=

TP
TP + FN

(10)

P=

TP
TP + FP

(11)

P⋅R
F1 − Score = 2⋅
P+R

The hyperparameter γ serves as a positive focus parameter, adjusting
the weights of both easy and hard-to-classify samples to direct the
model’s attention towards the latter. The hyperparameter α functions as
a balancing parameter, compensating for the disparity in the influence
of positive and negative samples on the loss values. Focused loss lowers
the loss contribution of easy-to-score samples by changing the weight
share between difficult and easy samples in the loss function. This
approach is beneficial because it simplifies the model’s task of detecting
abnormal traffic patterns, eliminating the need for complex weight
mappings.

(9)

(12)

Where TN represents the number of samples that are normal and
correctly identified; TP represents the number of samples that are
attacked and correctly identified; FN represents the number of samples
that are attacked but identified as normal; and FP represents the number
of samples that are normal but identified as attacked.
4.2. Environment and hyperparameter settings
The proposed model’s effectiveness has been validated on the NVI­
DIA GeForce RTX 3050Ti GPU model, operating under Windows.
TensFlow1.14 and PyTorch1.10 were used to build the model, and the
loss function’s hyperparameters were set to γ = 2, α = 0.25. In the
training process, a batch size of 64 was used, and optimization was
conducted using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-4.
To systematically select the optimal hyperparameters and evaluate
their impact on model performance, this paper conducts tuning exper­
iments on two key hyperparameters during the training process: batch
size and learning rate. The experimental results are shown in Table 4. As
seen from the table, there are some differences in model performance
under different combinations of batch size and learning rate. Among
them, when the batch size is 64 and the learning rate is 1e-4, the model
achieves the highest overall accuracy (93.2 %) and F1 score (95.2 %),

4. Experimental analysis and evaluation
The general flow chart for our model’s detection of abnormal
network data traffic is illustrated in Fig. 6.
(1) Data pre-processing: numerical processing of the character fea­
tures of the original data, execution of one-hot encoding and label
encoding operations, followed by data normalization.
(2) Data-to-Image: The processed data are mapped from onedimensional to two-dimensional image representation; a gray­
scale image is constructed for each network data, and its corre­
sponding labels are generated.

Fig. 6. Overall flow chart of FLSPPMRXt.
8

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

distance between characteristics and pixels. This method spreads similar
features to adjacent pixels to maximize feature correlation. Meanwhile,
DeepInsight, another data-to-image algorithm, generates images using
T-SNE projection and cannot represent features in the image using
pixels. The tabular image generator produces more feature-compact
images compared to the DeepInsight method and requires less training
time. Fig. 7d compares the two methods in terms of training time per
round.
By utilizing the improved Image Generator for Tabular Data, it will
be possible to overcome ignoring feature differences in the distance
metric algorithm. To determine the optimal method for generating the
image dataset required for this study, we will compare the performance
of three different metrics in image generation: Euclidean, Cosine, and
Standardized Euclidean. Figs. 7a, 7b and 7c illustrate the variations in
error that occur when using the three methods on different datasets for
image generation.
Fig. 7a, 7b, and 7c illustrate how the error value changes when
generating images for Euclidean distance, Cosine distance, and Stan­
dardized Euclidean distance on different datasets, respectively. The
subsequent graph demonstrates that matrix error values decrease as it­
erations increase. Fig. 7e and 7f represent the final error and the com­
parison of the time taken to generate the images using the three
approaches for different datasets, respectively. From Fig. 7, it is evident
that the Standardized Euclidean distance exhibits the most minor error
value and requires the least amount of time on the same dataset.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed data-to-image con­
version method, comparative experiments were conducted using a
simple 2D-CNN model. The experimental results of the model on images
generated by the proposed method and the DeepInsight method are
summarized in Table 6. On the NSL-KDD dataset, the proposed method
improved 3.73 % overall accuracy (OA) and 3.84 % in F1-score
compared to DeepInsight. A more pronounced performance gain was
observed on the UNSW-NB15 dataset, where the OA increased by 20.91
%, and the recall reached 85.6 %.
This paper further validates the superiority of standardized
Euclidean distances by training and testing the three approaches on
different datasets using the simple 2DCNN model proposed in (Andresini
et al., 2021). Each result is displayed in Fig. 8. Fig. 8a and 8b show the
test results on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD datasets, respectively. The
findings reveal that the OA, recall, and F1 scores for images generated
using Standardized Euclidean distance exceed those achieved by the
other two methods.
To compare the effectiveness of various generation methods, this
paper compares the error rates and time consumption of three distance
metric methods by utilizing a simple CNN model structure. Following
the above analysis, it is evident that the use of Standardized Euclidean
distance for image generation is both accurate and time-efficient.
Therefore, further experiments will be conducted utilizing images
generated by this method.
As shown in Fig. 9, the experiment also compared the overall clas­
sification accuracy, recall, and F1 score of images on UNSW_NB15
generated using the Standardized Euclidean distance in both simple
2DCNN models and more complex models such as ResNet50 and
ResNeXt50. The ResNeXt50 model outperformed the other two models
in all three indices, indicating its suitability as a benchmark model.

Table 4
Experimental results for different hyperparameter configurations.
batchsize

lr

OA

F1

R

128

1e-4
1e-3
1e-4
1e-3
1e-4
1e-3

92.2
92.7
93.3
92.6
92.3
91.8

94.1
94.8
95.2
94.8
94.3
93.8

92.1
98.1
96.3
99.5
94.1
91.1

​

64
​

32
​

indicating that the combination has strong generalisation ability while
maintaining good convergence. In addition, the recall rate of 96.3 % for
this configuration suggests that the model also performs well in identi­
fying attack samples.
In contrast, a larger learning rate (1e-3) improves the F1 score in
some settings. Still, the overall stability is slightly worse, especially at
smaller batch sizes (e.g., 32), where a significant performance degra­
dation occurs. Larger batch sizes (e.g., 128) are more efficient, but fail to
achieve better classification performance than smaller batch sizes in
most cases. Therefore, based on its comprehensive advantages in mul­
tiple evaluation indexes, batch size = 64 and learning rate = 1e-4 are
chosen as the default hyperparameter configuration of the model in this
paper.
4.3. Dataset introduction
This paper validated the model’s effectiveness using the publicly
available dataset . The UNSW-NB15 (Moustafa and Slay, 2015; Moustafa
and Slay, 2016) dataset consists of 44 feature attributes, including three
character feature attributes, one label attribute, and 40 numerical at­
tributes. These groups of features cover a wide range of attack types and
include real data on everyday activity on modern networks. They better
reflect the properties of modern network traffic data, making them
suitable for testing the performance of intrusion detection models. As
shown in Table 5, the training and test sets in the UNSW-NB15 dataset
contain 82,332 and 175,341 samples, respectively. The feature repre­
sentations of the dataset are presented along with the percentage and
number of normal and attack samples. After data-to-image processing,
the pre-processed data will be converted into 14 × 14 images. The
training set will be divided into training and validation sets according to
7:3. A total of 57,632 sample sets will be used for training, while 24,700
samples will be in the validation set.
The NSL_KDD dataset has 42 features, including three characterbased features, 36 numerical features and one labeled column. The
pre-processed data will be processed into 11 × 11 images, the training
set and validation set will be split according to the aforementioned rules,
and then the classification process will be carried out.
4.4. Analysis of data-to-image results
The Image Generator for Tabular Data algorithm assigns each feature
to a pixel in the image. It achieves this by minimizing the pairwise
Table 5
Description and feature type of the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD data.
Feature Type

Data Distribution

Total
Character
Numerical
Categories
Train set

​

​
​

​

​
​
​

​

Test set
​

​
​

​

Normal
Attack
Total
Normal
Attack

UNSW_NB15

NSL_KDD

44
3
40
1
Total
37,000 (44.9 %)
45,332 (55.1 %)
175,341
56,000 (31.9 %)
119,341 (68.1 %)

42
3
36
1
82,332
67,343 (53.5 %)
58,630 (46.5 %)
22,544
9711 (43.1 %)
12,833 (56.9 %)

4.5. Comparison test
The comparison test aims to assess the performance of the
FLSPPMRXt model by comparing it with other related works in the field,
utilizing the same dataset. This approach ensures that the evaluation is
unbiased and minimizes the influence of different data samples on the
results. For the UNSW_NB15 dataset, among the methods considered for
comparison are one-dimensional convolution (Lopez-Martin et al.,
2019), two-dimensional image convolution (Andresini et al., 2021; Man
and Sun, 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021), long
9

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Fig. 7. Training time and error variation of different methods on different datasets: (a) Euclidean error, (b) Cosine error, (c) SeEuclidean error, (d) Training time in
two different ways, (e) error variation, (f) Time to generate images.

that it performs well in balancing the recall and precision, and the recall
and precision reach 96.3 % and 94.0 %, which are at the top of all the
models, respectively. The results indicate the model performs well with
low leakage detection and false alarm rates. For the NSL_KDD dataset,
based on the OA metric, FLSPPMRX slightly outperforms SYN-GAN and
is the best performer among all models. In addition, although SOMKINN has the highest OA, its F1 score is significantly low, indicating
that there is a particular category recognition bias; while traditional
methods such as MLP and Naïve Bayes are relatively underperforming,
reflecting the advantages of deep learning models in processing complex
and high-dimensional data. Overall, this paper’s approach is more
competitive in intrusion detection tasks, proving the feasibility of this
approach.
In addition, specific traditional machine learning methods (e.g., RF,
MLP, etc.) perform well on specific metrics, but the overall performance
is much lower than that of deep learning models. However, machine
learning and deep learning algorithms ignore the spatial correlation
between network flow features in these comparative studies. In contrast,
the improved data image-based processing method considers the cor­
relation between features as much as possible by reducing the distance
error between features for imaging processing, which is the advantage of
this method, and the final experimental results also prove the reason­
ableness of the proposed theory.
The experimental results presented in this paper confirm the

Table 6
Comparison of results of different data to image methods on different datasets.
Method

OA

F1

R

NSLKDD

DeepInsight
Our Method
DeepInsight
Our Method

77.47
81.2
68.29
89.2

77.56
81.4
81.10
91.5

–
72.3
–
85.6

​

DateSet

UNSW_NB15
​

and short-term memory networks for network intrusion detection
(Halbouni et al., 2022), feedforward neural networks (FNN) or deep
neural networks (DNN) (Lin et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020; Halbouni
et al., 2022; Haitao et al., 2023), and machine learning techniques for
network intrusion detection (ZHANG et al., 2022). Table 7 shows the
results of testing this paper’s method on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD
datasets and the results of each metric for related studies under the same
task..
In related comparative work, overall classification accuracy, F1
score, recall, and precision are used as evaluation metrics and cover
many models such as traditional machine learning, deep learning, and
hybrid architectures. The FLSPPMRXt model proposed in this paper
performs well in all evaluation metrics. For the UNSW-NB5 dataset, its
Overall Accuracy (OA) reaches 93.3 %, significantly higher than other
methods. The F1 score of 95.2 % is at the top of the list, which indicates
10

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

that also focus on processing data streams into images. The data trans­
formation to image method proposed herein, as well as the model’s
performance on different datasets, is sufficiently superior.
4.6. Ablation experiments
The ablation experiments first confirmed the effectiveness of the
enhanced combined convolution. Subsequently, this study employed
various padding values to assess the impact of varying initial feature
map sizes on the final outcomes. Fig. 10 illustrates the fluctuations in
loss and accuracy curves across different approaches on the
UNSW_NB15 validation dataset.
In Fig. 10, it can be seen that there is less oscillation and an efficient
convergence rate when combining convolution with a feature map size
of 9 × 9. The experimental validation results for the test set are pre­
sented in Table 8, which compares the results obtained using different
methods of test validation. Among the first rows, the convolution kernel
is 7 × 7, and the corresponding feature map size is 7 × 7. The remaining
rows show the performance metrics of the convolution structure with
different output sizes, with a convolution kernel of 5 × 5 and differen
combinations of stride and padding, and output feature maps with sizes
of 7 × 7, 8 × 8, and 9 × 9, respectively.
Based on the results of the experiments, subsequent experiments will
use the ResNeXt50 model structure as a standard to extract initial fea­
tures by combining convolution with an output size of 9 × 9. Several
ablation tests have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
multi-scale feature fusion module, SPPM, and the focal loss method. The
experimental results on the UNSW_NB15 and NSL_KDD datasets,
respectively, are presented in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11 depicts a set of original experiments followed by five sets of
ablation experiments, arranged from bottom to top. The first set aims to
assess the effectiveness of focal loss, while the test set is devoted to
evaluating the ultimate model’s performance. A comarison of the first
set of experiments with the original experiments reveals that focal loss
can enhance model accuracy to a certain extent. Additionally, Fig. 12
illustrates the fluctuation patterns of both loss and accuracy on the
UNSW_NB15 validation dataset. This graph demonstrates that employ­
ing focal loss attenuates the oscillation of accuracy and loss values
within the validation set.
The second and third sets of experiments verify that the binary crossentropy (BCE) loss module works effectively when combined with the
PPM and SPPM modules. As shown in Fig. 11, the overall accuracy and
F1 score of the test set in the second set of experiments improved after
using the PPM module compared with the original experiments. After
using the improved SPPM module in the third set of experiments, the
model’s overall classification accuracy, recall rate, and F1 score all
improved compared to the first set of experiments. This shows that the
ideas in this paper work.
Moreover, a comparison between the second and third groups of
experiments reveals that the effect is significantly better when the SPPM
module is used. This demonstrates that SPPM, a multi-scale feature
fusion module enhanced by integrating soft pooling, is superior in
extracting features compared to the original PPM module. Soft pooling
enables the preservation of more feature details during multi-scale
feature extraction, thereby providing more feature information for the
final classification.
In the fourth and fifth experimental groups, it was confirmed that the
combinations of FL with PPM Or sppm were effective. Fig. 11 demon­
strates that both FL and PPM, as well as FL and SPPM, improved model
performance compared to the original model. Nevertheless, the combi­
nation of the SPPM module and focal loss exhibited the highest overall
classification accuracy and F1 scores, with a recall rate on the
UNSW_NB15 dataset reaching a high level of 96.3 %, leading to a su­
perior classification result.
Overall, the SPPM structure performs optimally in most metrics,
especially when combined with BCELoss and FocalLoss to achieve high

Fig. 8. 2DCNN classification OA, Recall, and F1 score for different methods: (a)
UNSW_NB15, (b) NSL_KDD.

Fig. 9. Classification OA, Recall, and F1 score of three models.

reliability and validity of the proposed approach, which involves
initially mapping network stream data into two-dimensional images and
subsequently utilizing these images as model inputs for training the
classification model. Although this concept has been explored in previ­
ous studies, this paper introduces a novel method of mapping data into
images. The proposed data imaging processing method addresses the
limitations of the previous methods (Li et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2025),
which overlooked the spatial correlation of features (Liu et al., 2019)
also refers to it as a weakness). Specifically, the imaging processing takes
into account the potential relationship between non-adjacent features,
offering simplicity in operation. It enables image processing of network
flow data without the need for complex model training, facilitating
integration with existing model structures, and enhancing the efficiency
of intrusion detection. Furthermore, this research introduces a model
structure that exhibits superior feature extraction capabilities. As shown
in Table 7, the proposed method exhibited superior accuracy in several
sets of comparative experiments, outperforming other 2D CNN methods
11

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Table 7
Results of this paper on the UNSW_NB15 and NSLKDD datasets and related work.
Dataset

Methods

Type

Year

OA ( %)

F1 ( %)

R

P

UNSW_NB15

FLSPPMRXt
TSDL (Khan et al., 2019)
CNN-1D (Lopez-Martin et al., 2019)
SAVAER-DNN (Yang et al., 2020)
MSCNN (Zhang et al., 2020)
Pelican (Wu et al., 2020)
RLF-CNN (McAllister et al., 2018)
MAGNETO− GAN (Andresini et al., 2021)
BCNN (Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021)
BCNN-DFS (Al-Turaiki and Altwaijry, 2021)
SAE-ELM-Ca (Kushwah and Ranga, 2022)
ICVAE-DNN (Halbouni et al., 2022)
ESWRF (ZHANG et al., 2022)
MSRC (Li et al., 2020)
SEMI-GRU (Haitao et al., 2023)
XGBoost-Simple-RNN (Kasongo, 2023)
LSTM (Kasongo, 2023)
GMM-WGAN Module (Cui et al., 2023)
IGRF-RFE (Yin et al., 2023)
FLSPPMRX
CRIPM-DM (Yuliana et al., 2024)
SOM-KINN (Iftikhar et al., 2025)
MLP (Iftikhar et al., 2025)
SYN-GAN (Rahman et al., 2024)
Naïve Bayes (Kumar and Nagalakshmi, 2024)

2D-CNN
AE
1D-CNN
FNN+DNN
2D-CNN
DNN (residual)
2D-CNN (residual)
2D-CNN+GAN
2D-CNN
2D-CNN
SAE-ELM
DNN
RF+SMOTE
SAE+ multi-channel residual block groups
FNN+GRU
RNN
LSTM
CNN+LSTM
MLP
2D-CNN
Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining
KNN
MLP
GAN
–

2023
2019
2019
2020
2020
2020
2021
2021
2021
2021
2022
2022
2022
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2023
2024
2024
2024
2024
2024

93.3
89.7
89.8
93.0
91.4
86.64
88.7
89.7
90.3
89.3
89.2
89.1
78.0
–
88.1
87.1
80.1
87.7
84.2
84.3
80
84.4
72.7
84.0
74.4

95.2
87.0
91.3
93.5
–
–
92.0
90.5
89.00
89.2
76.0
91.5
88.1
90.0
90.4
85.4
82.9
85.4
81
63.2
71.9
84.0
–

96.3
92.5
98.0
91.9
–
–
88.1
–
90.0
89.0

94.0
86.7
85.5
–
–
–
–
–
91.0
89.0

​

​
–
78.0
90.9
81.6
–
–
86.6
–
80.3
97
63.0
83.4
84.0
–

–
80.0
92.1
96.3
–
–
88.6
–
91.1
69
–
–
85.0
–

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​

NSL_KDD
​
​
​
​
​

Table 8
Different initial convolution methods’ OA, Recall, and F1 score.
Feature map size

kernel

Stride

Padding

OA

R

F1

7 × 7(Initial)
7×7
8×8
9×9

7×7
5×5
5×5
5×5

2
2
2
2

3
2
3
4

90.3
90.4
89.7
90.6

87.4
89.3
87.4
88.5

92.4
92.7
92.0
92.8

Fig. 10. Accuracy and loss values of models on UNSW_NB15 dataset trained in
different ways versus size: (a) Different methods and sizes of accuracy, (b)
Different sizes and methods of loss.

classification performance. Specifically, for the UNSW_NB15 dataset,
SPPM+FocalLoss achieves an accuracy of 93.3 %, with a high recall of
96.3 % and an optimal F1 score of 95.2 %. For the NSL_KDD dataset,
SPPM+BCELoss achieves an overall accuracy (OA) of 84.7 % with an F1

Fig. 11. OA, Recall, and F1 score for different modality combinations on
different datasets.

12

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

Fig. 12. Accuracy and loss on UNSW_NB15 dataset values of different loss functions: (a) Accuracy Comparison, (b) Loss value comparison.

score of 85.3 %. SPPM+FocalLoss improves its recall to 80.3 % with an
F1 score of 85.4 %, showing its stronger ability to identify the attack
class samples.
When comparing different ablation experiments, the proposed model
structure outperforms the original classification model in terms of
classification accuracy. This demonstrates the feasibility and effective­
ness of combining all the components proposed in this paper.

intrusion detection classification model, thereby addressing the chal­
lenge of detecting attack samples. This mitigates the impact of sample
category imbalances on categorization. Given the complexity and
imbalance of network flow data in real-world networks, the proposed
method effectively captures richer information pertaining to the char­
acteristics of the data flow. Consequently, the model possesses addi­
tional information for data flow classification and addresses the issue of
sample imbalance during training. this approach facilitates the devel­
opment of a more generalized model capable of accurately predicting
unseen.
Experiments conducted using UNSW_NB15, a widely recognized
dataset in the field of intrusion detection, validate the effectiveness of
the proposed model. Finally, numerous ablation experiments and com­
parisons demonstrate the paper’s method over other techniques ach­
ieves better classification performance with accuracy and F1 scores as
high as 93.3 % and 95.2 %, respectively.
Although the model has effectively distinguished between the cate­
gories of network flow data, several challenges remain to be addressed.
While the UNSW_NB15 dataset is indeed complex, it still falls short of
replicating real-world network traffic, particularly as intrusion detection
aims to achieve real-time monitoring, which imposes stringent re­
quirements on the speed and efficiency of the model. Therefore, in
future endeavors, we aim to identify datasets with broader actual traffic
coverage, thereby enhancing the model’s generalization capabilities and
effectiveness. In addition, there’s a need to optimize the model in a more
lightweight direction, striking a balance between performance and

5. Conclusion
Methods based on deep learning can uncover intricate intrinsic
feature connections at an abstract level, greatly enhancing detection
efficiency, reducing false positives and missed detections, and
improving the overall accuracy of detection.
This paper proposes an intrusion detection method, FLSPPMRXt,
which is based on ResNeXt50. This method uses a better data imaging
processing algorithm that can turn one-dimensional network flow data
features into a feature-compact image representation. This provides
deeper learning models with a better input format and enables the model
to learn how network flow data might be spatially related. Simulta­
neously, the proposed method fine-tunes the backbone convolution
structure of ResNeXt50. Then, it integrates a multi-scale feature fusion
module that enhances the pooling layer, thereby significantly improving
the model’s classification accuracy. The utilization of soft pooling en­
hances the model’s ability to capture feature information. The model
employs focal loss to alleviate the bias towards normal samples in the
13

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783

efficiency in practical deployments.

Intrusion Detection in IIoT. IEEe Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TDSC.2025.3545363.
Zeng, G.Q., Yang, Y.W., Lu, K.D., et al., 2025. Evolutionary Adversarial Autoencoder for
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection of Industrial Internet of Things. IEEe Trans. Reliab.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TR.2025.3528256.
Li, Z., Qin, Z., Huang, K., et al., 2017. Intrusion detection using convolutional neural
networks for representation learning. In: International conference on neural
information processing. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 858–866.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70139-4_87.
Kim, T., Suh, S.C., Kim, H., et al., 2018. An encoding technique for CNN-based network
anomaly detection. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data).
IEEE, pp. 2960–2965. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData.2018.8622568.
Liu, W., Liu, X., Di, X., et al., 2019b. A novel network intrusion detection algorithm based
on Fast Fourier Transformation. In: 2019 1st international conference on Industrial
Artificial Intelligence (IAI). IEEE, pp. 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICIAI.2019.8850770.
Andresini G., Appice A., Malerba D. Nearest cluster-based intrusion detection through
convolutional neural networks. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2021, 216: 106798. DOI:
10.1016/j.knosys.2021.106798.
Andresini, G., Appice, A., De Rose, L., et al., 2021b. GAN augmentation to deal with
imbalance in imaging-based intrusion detection. Future Generat. Comput. Syst. 123,
108–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.04.017.
Sharma, A., Vans, E., Shigemizu, D., et al., 2019. DeepInsight: a methodology to
transform a non-image data to an image for convolution neural network
architecture. Sci. Rep. 9 (1), 11399. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47765-6.
Chen, Z., Zhou, Y., Huang, Z., 2019. Auto-creation of effective neural network
architecture by evolutionary algorithm and ResNet for image classification. In: 2019
IEEE international conference on systems, man and cybernetics (SMC). IEEE,
pp. 3895–3900. https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2019.8914267.
Feng, M., Lu, H., Yu, Y., 2020. Residual learning for salient object detection. IEEE
Transact. Image Process. 29, 4696–4708. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TIP.2020.2975919.
McAllister, P., Zheng, H., Bond, R., et al., 2018. Combining deep residual neural network
features with supervised machine learning algorithms to classify diverse food image
datasets. Comput. Biol. Med. 95, 217–233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compbiomed.2018.02.008.
Li, T., Song, H., Zhang, K., et al., 2020. Recurrent reverse attention guided residual
learning for saliency object detection. Neurocomputing. 389, 170–178. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.12.109.
Man J., Sun G. A residual learning-based network intrusion detection system. Security
and Communication Networks, 2021, 2021: 1–9. DOI: 10.1155/2021/5593435.
Duan, X., Fu, Y., Wang, K., 2023. Network traffic anomaly detection method based on
multi-scale residual classifier. Comput. Commun. 198, 206–216. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.comcom.2022.10.024.
Sun, M., Liu, N., Gao, M., 2022. Research on Intrusion Detection Method Based on Deep
Convolutional Neural Network. In: Artificial Intelligence in China: Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in China. Singapore:
Springer Singapore, pp. 537–544. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-9423-3_67.
Zhao G., Ren C., Wang J., et al. IoT intrusion detection model based on gated recurrent
unit and residual network. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, 2023: 1–13.
DOI:10.1007/s12083-023-01510-z.
Zhu, Y., Brettin, T., Xia, F., et al., 2021. Converting tabular data into images for deep
learning with convolutional neural networks. Sci. Rep. 11 (1), 11325. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-021-90923-y.
Moustafa, N., Slay, J., 2015. UNSW-NB15: a comprehensive data set for network
intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set). In: 2015 military
communications and information systems conference (MilCIS). IEEE, pp. 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
Moustafa, N., Slay, J., 2016. The evaluation of Network Anomaly Detection Systems:
statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the comparison with the KDD99
data set. Informat. Secur. J. 25 (1–3), 18–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19393555.2015.1125974.
Khan, F.A., Gumaei, A., Derhab, A., et al., 2019. A novel two-stage deep learning model
for efficient network intrusion detection. IEEe Access. 7, 30373–30385. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2899721.
Lopez-Martin, M., Carro, B., Sanchez-Esguevillas, A., et al., 2019. Shallow neural
network with kernel approximation for prediction problems in highly demanding
data networks. Expert. Syst. Appl. 124, 196–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eswa.2019.01.063.
Yang, Y., Zheng, K., Wu, B., et al., 2020. Network intrusion detection based on supervised
adversarial variational auto-encoder with regularization. IEEe Access. 8,
42169–42184. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2977007.
Zhang, J., Ling, Y., Fu, X., et al., 2020. Model of the intrusion detection system based on
the integration of spatial-temporal features. Comput. Secur. 89, 101681. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cose.2019.101681.
Al-Turaiki I., Altwaijry N. A convolutional neural network for improved anomaly-based
network intrusion detection. Big Data, 2021, 9(3): 233–252. DOI:10.1089/big.20
20.0263.
Kushwah G.S., Ranga V. Detecting DDoS attacks in cloud computing using extreme
learning machine and adaptive differential evolution. Wireless Personal
Communications, 2022, 124(3): 2613–2636. DOI:10.1007/s11277-022-09481-9.
Halbouni, A., Gunawan, T.S., Habaebi, M.H., et al., 2022. CNN-LSTM: hybrid deep neural
network for network intrusion detection system. IEEe Access. 10, 99837–99849.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3206425.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jinxian Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding
acquisition, Conceptualization. Haidong Hou: Writing – original draft,
Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Liang Chang: Writing – review & editing,
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Jinxian Zhao reports financial support was provided by Heilongjiang
Province Department of Education.
Acknowledgement
This paper was financially supported by the Basic scientific research
business expenses of Provincial universities in Heilongjiang Province
(NO: 2022-KYYWF-0532 NO:2024-KYYWF-1060).
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available
in UNSW Canberra at ADFA at https://cloudstor.aarnet.edu.
au/plus/index.php/s/2DhnLGDdEECo4ys.
References
Hinton, G.E., Osindero, S., Teh, Y.W, 2006. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets.
Neural Comput. 18 (07), 1527–1554. https://doi.org/10.1162/
neco.2006.18.7.1527.
Anderson J.P. Computer security threat monitoring and surveillance. Technical Report,
James P. Anderson Company, 1980.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., et al., 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pp. 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
Wu, P., Guo, H., Moustafa, N., 2020. Pelican: a deep residual network for network
intrusion detection. In: 2020 50th annual IEEE/IFIP international conference on
dependable systems and networks workshops (DSN-W). IEEE, pp. 55–62. https://doi.
org/10.1109/DSN-W50199.2020.00018.
Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dollár, P., et al., 2017. Aggregated residual transformations for deep
neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 1492–1500. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.634.
Zhao, D., Ji, G., Zeng, S., 2023a. Network security situation assessment based on dual
attention mechanism and HHO-ResNeXt. Conn. Sci. 35 (1), 2174080.
Stergiou, A., Poppe, R., Kalliatakis, G., 2021. Refining activation downsampling with
SoftPool. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, pp. 10357–10366. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01019.
Zhao, H., Shi, J., Qi, X., et al., 2017. Pyramid scene parsing network. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2881–2890.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.660.
Lin, T.Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., et al., 2017. Focal loss for dense object detection. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
pp. 2980–2988. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.324.
Xu, C., Shen, J., Du, X., et al., 2018. An intrusion detection system using a deep neural
network with gated recurrent units. IEEe Access. 6, 48697–48707. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2867564.
Liu H., Lang B., Liu M., et al. CNN and RNN based payload classification methods for
attack detection. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2019, 163: 332–341. DOI: 10.1016/j.
knosys.2018.08.036.
Lee, J.H., Park, K.H, 2021. GAN-based imbalanced data intrusion detection system. Pers.
Ubiquitous. Comput. 25, 121–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-019-01332-y.
Fu, Y., Du, Y., Cao, Z., et al., 2022. A deep learning model for network intrusion detection
with imbalanced data. Electronics. (Basel) 11 (6), 898. https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics11060898.
Cui, J., Zong, L., Xie, J., et al., 2023. A novel multi-module integrated intrusion detection
system for high-dimensional imbalanced data. Appl. Intellig. 53 (1), 272–288.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03361-2.
Dina, A.S., Siddique, A.B., Manivannan, D., 2023. A deep learning approach for intrusion
detection in Internet of Things using focal loss function. Internet of Things 22,
100699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2023.100699.
Lu, K.D., Huang, J.C., Zeng, G.Q., et al., 2025. Multi-Objective Discrete Extremal
Optimization of Variable-Length Blocks-Based CNN by Joint NAS and HPO for

14

J. Zhao et al.

Computers & Security 161 (2026) 104783
J. Informat. Informat. Syst. Softw. Eng. Applic. (INISTA) 6 (2), 80–89. https://doi.
org/10.20895/INISTA.V6I2.1389.
Iftikhar, N., Rehman, M.U., Shah, M.A., et al., 2025. Intrusion Detection in NSL-KDD
Dataset Using Hybrid Self-Organizing Map Model. CMES-Comput. Model. Eng. Sci.
143 (1), 639–671. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmes.2025.062788.
Rahman, S., Pal, S., Mittal, S., et al., 2024. SYN-GAN: a robust intrusion detection system
using GAN-based synthetic data for IoT security. Internet of Things 26, 101212.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2024.101212.
Kumar, A.S., Nagalakshmi, T.J, 2024. Improving the accuracy of intrusion detection
system in the detection of DoS using Naive Bayes with Fisher’s score feature
elimination and comparing with Naive Bayes without feature elimination in wireless
adhoc network. In: AIP Conference Proceedings, 2871. AIP Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1063/5.0228014.

ZHANG, J., LI, H., LI, S., 2022. Research on Optimization of Random-Forest-Based
Network Intrusion Detection Model. Comput. Digital Eng. 50 (01), 106–110. https://
doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1672-9722.2022.01.021.
Haitao, L.I., Ruimin, W.A.N.G., Weiyu, D.O.N.G., Liehui, J.I.A.N.G., 2023. Semisupervised Network Traffic Anomaly Detection Method Based on GRU. Computer
Sci. 50 (3), 380–390. https://doi.org/10.11896/jsjkx.220100032.
Kasongo, S.M, 2023. A deep learning technique for intrusion detection system using a
Recurrent Neural Networks based framework. Comput. Commun. 199, 113–125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2022.12.010.
Yin, Y., Jang-Jaccard, J., Xu, W., et al., 2023. IGRF-RFE: a hybrid feature selection
method for MLP-based network intrusion detection on UNSW-NB15 dataset. J. Big.
Data 10 (1), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-023-00694-8.
Yuliana, Y., Supriyadi, D.H., Fahlevi, M.R., et al., 2024. Analysis of nsl-kdd for the
implementation of machine learning in network intrusion detection system.

15