10290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Large Language Model-Based Task Offloading and
Resource Allocation for Digital Twin Edge
Computing Networks
Qiong Wu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yu Xie, Pingyi Fan , Senior Member, IEEE, Dong Qin ,
Kezhi Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Nan Cheng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Khaled B. Letaief , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a general digital twin edge
computing network comprising multiple vehicles and a server. Each
vehicle generates multiple computing tasks within a time slot, leading to queuing challenges when offloading tasks to the server. The
study investigates task offloading strategies, queue stability, and resource allocation. Lyapunov optimization is employed to transform
long-term constraints into tractable short-term decisions. To solve
the resulting problem, an in-context learning approach based on
large language model (LLM) is adopted, replacing the conventional
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework. Experimental results demonstrate that the LLM-based method achieves
comparable or even superior performance to MARL.
Index Terms—Large language model, digital twin, resource
allocation, edge computing.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE growth of the Internet of things (IoT) has greatly
expanded vehicular applications, improving the driving

Received 21 April 2025; revised 21 July 2025; accepted 9 February 2026.
Date of publication 16 February 2026; date of current version 5 June 2026.
This work was supported in part by Jiangxi Province Science and Technology
Development Programme under Grant 20242BCC32016, in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62461036, Grant 62001201,
and Grant 61701197, in part by Basic Research Program of Jiangsu under
Grant BK20252084, in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2021YFA1000500(4), in part by the Hong
Kong Research Grant Council under the Area of Excellence (AoE) Scheme
Grant AoE/E-601/22-R, and in part by the 111 Project under Grant B23008.
Recommended for acceptance by J. Ko. (Corresponding author: Dong Qin.)
Qiong Wu and Yu Xie are with the School of Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China, and also with the
School of Information Engineering, Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of
Advanced Signal Processing and Intelligent Communications, Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330031, China (e-mail: qiongwu@jiangnan.edu.cn;
yuxie@stu.jiangnan.edu.cn).
Pingyi Fan is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, State Key
laboratory of Space Network and Communications, Beijing National Research
Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China (e-mail: fpy@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Dong Qin is with the School of Information Engineering, Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Signal Processing and Intelligent Communications, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China (e-mail: qindong@ncu.edu.cn).
Kezhi Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, Brunel University,
UB8 3PH London, U.K. (e-mail: kezhi.wang@brunel.ac.uk).
Nan Cheng is with the State Key Laboratory of ISN and the School of
Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
(e-mail: dr.nan.cheng@ieee.org).
Khaled B. Letaief is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
(e-mail: eekhaled@ust.hk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2026.3664866

experience [1], [2], [3]. However, this also leads to the generation
of a large number of computing tasks. Vehicles’ limited computing resources make independent task handling impractical [4],
[5], [6], [7]. This limitation often results in significant delays
due to the inability to process tasks promptly, thereby adversely
affecting the quality of service (QoS) of the applications.
To address this issue, vehicular edge computing (VEC) offers
a promising solution. VEC enables vehicles to offload tasks
to nearby servers by deploying VEC nodes or roadside units
along the road. These servers leverage their abundant computing
resources to process the diverse tasks generated by vehicles
and return the results efficiently [8], [9], [10], [11]. However,
VEC introduces new challenges. Environmental dynamics and
vehicle mobility often create uncertainty in the volume of tasks
offloaded by each vehicle [12], [13], [14], [15]. This uncertainty
leads to competition among vehicles for the server’s computing resources, ultimately affecting the processing efficiency of
offloaded tasks [16], [17], [18], [19]. As a result, effectively
scheduling task offloading and allocating server resources becomes a critical challenge.
Digital twin enables the simulation, analysis, and optimization of physical entities by creating digital replicas of real-world
objects [20], [21], [22], [23], such as vehicles, industrial machinery, and aviation engines. These digital replicas establish a full
life cycle model for their corresponding physical entities [24].
In addition, IoT advancements have greatly enhanced digital
twin capabilities. They now support not only unidirectional
information mirroring but also bidirectional interaction through
intra-twin communication [25]. Vehicles in dynamic environments can be virtually modeled by leveraging digital twin technology. Their digital replicas capture relevant vehicle information through intra-twin communication, enabling flexible task
offloading and dynamic scheduling of server resources [26],
[27], [28]. In a digital twin edge computing network, a vehicle
may run multiple applications simultaneously, generating diverse computational tasks within a single time slot, rather than a
single task as previously assumed. Additionally, task offloading
by multiple vehicles may impact edge server queue stability.
Therefore, developing a task offloading and resource allocation
scheme that ensures long-term queue stability becomes critically
important.
The popular way to face the above problems is the deep
reinforcement learning (DRL). The actions taken are gradually

1536-1233 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

optimized through the constant interaction of the agent with
the environment until the optimal action is obtained for the
highest long-term reward. However, this approach is not without
its drawbacks. DRL requires a lot of effort to adjust the model
parameters in the process of training the model, and non-optimal
parameters may cause the model to fall into a local optimum.
LLM, as a novel approach, due to its strong capability resulting
from multimodal pre-training, can save a lot of time and effort
in the inference, and only need to design the prompts for LLM.
Moreover, it is possible to further optimize the scheme obtained
by MARL with the help of LLM method.
In this paper, we construct a digital twin edge computing
network with a base station and a server.1 Facing the situation
that vehicles generate multiple types of computing tasks in a
single time slot, we analyze the delay and energy consumption of
each type of task under the influence of digital twin, and propose
a in-context learning method based on LLM to optimize the
average quality of service as well as the total energy consumption
of the whole system scenario. The main contributions of this
paper are as follows:
r We propose a generic digital twin edge network scenario
and analyze the server queue backlog issue arising from
vehicles generating heterogeneous tasks within a single
time slot. Furthermore, we examine the subsequent impact
of these queued tasks on both the system’s average QoS
and total energy consumption. To jointly optimize these
two key metrics, we formulate and solve a corresponding
optimization problem.
r We apply Lyapunov optimization to the constraints involving queue stability in the original problem, converting it
from a long-term stability problem to a short-term decision problem, and consequently reconstructing the original
problem.
r We propose a MARL-guided context-based LLM approach
to the problem. Specifically, the LLM is made to output solutions by designing prompts for the LLM and combining
them with a case set provided by MARL.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we first review related work on digital twins
in vehicular edge network, and then survey existing studies on
large models for connected car scenarios.
A. Digital Twin in VEC
There has been some literature on the utilization of DT under
VEC. In [12], Dai et al. used DT as well as deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) to optimize the offloading delay under adaptive
DT network. In [29], Zhang et al. utilized digital twins to guide
vehicles to aggregate edge services to minimize offloading costs.
In [30], Liao et al. developed a DT model about a driver to
predict his behavior in the context of an autonomous vehicle
and a human-driven vehicle. In [31], Zhang et al. constructed
a vehicle edge caching system by DT with VEC and used
1 The source code has been released at: https://github.com/qiongwu86/-LLMBased-Task-Offloading-and-Resource-Allocation-for-DTECN

10291

DRL to formulate the optimal scheme. In [32], Zheng et al.
proposed a DT-based prediction model to predict the waiting
time for a vehicle to connect to the network while using DRL to
minimize the long-term delay and energy consumption. In [33],
Zhao et al. input the global information of vehicles into the
DT model to assist the clustering algorithm in reducing the task
offloading range for the purpose of offloading prediction. In [34],
Li et al. modeled DTs for roadside units(RSUs), UAVs, and
vehicles to assist in task offloading for vehicles and management
of resources for RSUs and UAVs. These literatures have used
the DRL approach or machine learning algorithms in solving
optimization problems, and no literature has yet used the large
model approach to solve the problem.
B. Large Language Model
At present, the research on LLM for Edge Computing is still
in the exploratory stage. In [35], Zhou et al. used LLM to investigate the case of power allocation for the base station, and the
experiments show that LLM is able to avoid the tedious model
training and hyper-parameter fine-tuning of machine learning,
while achieving performance results comparable to those of
traditional DRL. In [36], Zhou et al. used generative AI for radio
resource allocation and task offloading in an edge-cloud network
to compute the content generation delay via LLM and optimize
the offloading decision using LLM. Simulations show that the
proposed context learning approach achieves satisfactory results
without specialized model training and fine-tuning compared to
traditional DRL. In [37], Lee et al. developed an LLM-based
resource allocation method for wireless communication systems
to maximize energy and spectrum efficiency, and confirmed the
applicability and feasibility of the scheme through experiments.
In [38], Fu et al. proposed a hybrid Intrusion detection systems
based on LLM to solve the intrusion detection problem in the
internet of vehicles. Experiments show that the proposed method
is able to make up for the shortcomings of traditional methods
in several aspects such as classification compared to machine
learning based methods. In addition, the proposed method performs well on multiple intrusion detection challenge datasets
and shows good generalized recognition ability for in-vehicle
networks of different vehicles. In [39], Liu et al. modeled a
RIS-based IoT communication system using LLM and proposed
an optimization strategy for wireless resource allocation, and
the simulation results demonstrate the advantages of LLMenhanced reconfigurable intelligent surface. In [40], Chen et al.
proposed a dual deep deterministic policy gradient framework
under the guidance of LLM to achieve efficient coordination
between connected electric vehicles and distributed networks.
Experiments show that the proposed method performs well in
scheduling tasks compared to traditional methods. All the above
literature have conducted a preliminary study on the application
of LLM in vehicular environment, but the study on the allocation
of vehicular resources and the generation of a queue of tasks for
vehicular environment has not been addressed.
As mentioned above, the literature related to digital twin vehicular network has not yet applied LLM whereas the literature
that has conducted a preliminary study on LLM has not yet dealt

10292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

addition, the server is equipped with NE blocks of CPU cores
and has a total resource of fE cycles per second for all CPUs.
A. Digital Twin Model
The digital twin model of vehicle n in the cloud can be
represented as
MnDT = {In , Γn (t)},

(1)

where In is configuration information for vehicle n, including velocity vn and position ln (t), Γn (t) is the information
about Task of vehicle n in time slot t, which denotes Γn (t) =
t
t
t
t
, Dn,2
, . . ., Dn,k
, . . ., Dn,K
}. Here, In and Γn (t) are un{Dn,1
related to each other, as In is the current operational state of the
vehicle as it travels, while Γn (t) represents the vehicular tasks
at a given time slot.
B. Communication Model
Since we deploy the digital twin in the cloud, we ignore
the communication time between the twin model and the VEC
server. In this scenario, we use orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing technique for communication. Therefore, the transmission rate between vehicle n and BS can be expressed as


t
g
p
n
n,b
,
(2)
rnt = w log2 1 +
ρ2

Fig. 1.

Digital Twin Vehicle Edge Network.

where w is the channel bandwidth, pn is the transmission power
t
is the channel gain between vehicle n and the
of vehicle n, gn,b
base station at time slot t, and ρ2 is the channel noise between
t
at the
vehicle n and the base station. For the channel gain gn,b
current time slot t, it can be modeled as [25]
t
gn,b
= |stn,b |2 htn,b ,

with vehicular resource allocation. Therefore, we try to utilize
LLM to conduct research on vehicular resource allocation in
digital twin edge network.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
Fig. 1 shows a system scenario in which we construct a digital
twin vehicular networking scenario with N vehicles traveling
on the road and a base station equipped with servers. It contains
two layers, i.e., the physical layer, which consists of N vehicles,
the base station and the server in the scenario, and the cloud
digital twin layer, which includes the digital mapping of the
entities in the physical layer on the cloud, i.e., the constructed
digital copies. Specifically, within the communication coverage
of the base station, a vehicle traveling along the road generates
K types of tasks to be processed at each time slot. For the sake
of this study, we assume that the vehicle always travels within
the BS coverage area. Due to limited vehicular resources, the
twin model of the vehicle in the cloud twin layer analyzes the
specific information about the tasks generated by the vehicle in
that time slot, and issues commands to offload each task to the
server through transmission with the base station, which has K
queues, and accepts the tasks from the vehicle. Then, it stores
them in separate dedicated queues before they are processed. In

(3)

where, htn,b is the large-scale fading component, which consists
of path fading and shadow fading, where the path fading can be
calculated as 128.1 + 37.6 log10 (Dis(Vn , BS)), and the shadow
fading follows the log normal distribution. dis(Vn , BS) is the
distance between vehicle n and BS. stn,b is the small-scale channel fading component, which follows the circularly symmetric
complex Gaussian with unit variance. To characterize it, we use
a first-order Gaussian Markov process for this purpose. Thus, it
can be updated in a way that can be expressed as
t
stn,b = κst−1
n,b + en,b ,

(4)

where κ is the correlation coefficient and etn,b is the channel
innovation process with distribution CN (0, 1 − κ2 ). The correlation coefficient κ can be expressed as κ = J0 (2πfd Δt), where
J0 (•) is the zeroth-order Bessel function, and fd is the maximum
Doppler frequency, which can be computed as fd = (vn fc )/c,
fc is the carrier frequency, and c is the transmission rate of the
electromagnetic wave.
C. Queue Model
At the beginning of time slot t, vehicle n generates K
types of computing tasks, and thus, we denote the k-th type
t
. Upon receiving the offloading policy, vehicle
of them as Dn,k

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

n executes the offloading scheme for task k. Specifically, the
t
t
|Dn,k
| portion of task k to the
vehicle will offload the ωn,k
t
t
k-th queue at the VEC, |Dn,k | being the size of task Dn,k
.
The cumulative amount of the k-th type of tasks arriving at
queue k within the time interval [t1 , t2 ) can be denoted as
t
t
Ck (t1 , t2 ) = Σtt21 −1 ΣN
n=1 ωn,k |Dn,k |, where t1 and t2 are two
adjacent time slots. For the tasks in the queue, the server executes
a resource allocation policy to allocate resources to the tasks in
each queue. We denote the CPU frequency required to process
per bit of data for the k-th type of tasks as ck . Thus, the number
of k-th type tasks processed by the VEC server at time slot t can
fE ΣN

αt

n=1 n,k
t
, where αn,k
denotes the
be expressed as φk (t) =
ck
proportion of resources for the k-th task of processing vehicle n
and fE is the total computing resources of the server. Therefore,
the backlog of queue k at time slot t + 1 can be expressed
as [41], [42]

qk (t + 1) = [qk (t) + Zk (t) − φk (t)]+ ,

(5)

t
t
where Zk (t) = ΣN
n=1 ωn,k |Dn,k | denotes the number of tasks

of type k that arrive at queue k at time slot t. Since the tasks
generated in each time slot enter the queue, maintaining queue
stability is essential. If the queue is not kept stable, then the tasks
arriving at the queue are at risk of being discarded, which is
clearly not in line with the needs of the vehicle itself. Therefore,
we denote maintaining strong stability of queue k as [43]
1 
E[qk (s)] < ∞,
t s=0
t−1 K

lim sup

t→∞

(6)

k=1

it is important to note that our work focuses on the long-term
stability of the queue under this network, which is manifested
by ensuring that the length of this queue is stable rather than
continuously growing as time increases.

real physical entity, the CPU frequency allocated by the VEC
server to the k-th class task of vehicle n actually has an estimated
est
[26], which in turn has a bias in the latency of the
bias Δfn,k
final processing of the task, which is denoted as Δtest
n,k , which
can be calculated as
t
t
est
|Dn,k
|ck Δfn,k
ωn,k
(8)
Δtest
n,k = −
t f )(Δf est + αt f ) ,
(αn,k
E
n,k
n,k E
therefore, for the delay tedge
n,k obtained after edge processing, it
can be finally represented as
tedge
n,k =

t
t
t
| ωn,k
|Dn,k
|ck
|Dn,k
+
+ Δtest
n,k .
t
t
rn
αn,k fE

edge
tn,k = tlocal
n,k + tn,k .

t
t
)|Dn,k
|ck
(1 − ωn,k
,
fv

(7)

where fv is the vehicle’s own computing resources. For the
offloading part of the task, it first needs to be transmitted to the
server, and after it enters the server’s queue, the server executes
a resource allocation policy to allocate CPU frequencies to
process it. In addition, it should be noted that due to the mapping
difference between the digital twin model in the cloud and its

(10)

To measure the relationship between the delay for completing
a class k task for vehicle n and its maximum delay limit, we
express it in terms of QoS, which can be calculated as [44]
tn,k
max ,
Tn,k

Un,k (t) = 1 −

(11)

since the number of tasks generated by vehicle n in a single time
slot is K, the average QoS for vehicle n is expressed as
1 
Un,k (t),
K
K

Unave (t) =

(12)

k=1

thus, for this network, the average QoS of the whole system can
be expressed as
1  ave
U (t),
N n=1 n
N

D. Computing Model

tlocal
n,k =

(9)

t
, it needs to complete both local and
For completing the task Dn,k
offload processing, so its final processing delay can be expressed
as

U sys (t) =
1) Qos: Vehicle n generates tasks and then offloads them
according to the offloading policy, for the k-th type of tasks, it
t
t
, when ωn,k
= 0, it
will be partially offloaded according to ωn,k
t
will be processed directly locally, when 0 < ωn,k < 1, it indicates that the task will be partially offloaded for processing, and
t
= 1, it will be completely offloaded for processing.
when ωn,k
We let Dn denote the set of tasks generated by vehicle n.
t
among them, we denote it as
For the k-th type of tasks Dn,k
t
t
max
max
Dn,k = {|Dn,k |, Tn,k }, where Tn,k
is the maximal latency
limit of the k-th type of tasks generated by vehicle n. Therefore,
when the k-th type of tasks of vehicle n is executed locally, its
latency can be calculated as

10293

(13)

2) Energy: In addition to focusing on the QoS affected by
processing delay under this system, the energy consumption of
the system is equally important. Under this system, the total
energy consumption is mainly divided into local processing energy and edge processing energy. For the local processing energy
consumption, it is mainly generated when the vehicle’s own
computing resources are used to process the local computing
tasks, which is calculated as follows
E local (t) =

K
N 


fv 3 κve tlocal
n,k ,

(14)

n=1 k=1

where κve denotes the effective switching capacitance of the
computing device on the vehicle. For the calculation of the edge
energy consumption, since it mainly involves the consumption
of the CPU power of the server, based on the dynamic frequency
regulation method that is widely used to construct the real CPU
power consumption, the edge energy consumption is calculated
as [41]

3
K
t
fE ΣN
n=1 Σk=1 αn,k
edge
se
,
(15)
E (t) = NE κ
NE

10294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

where κse denotes the effective switching capacitance parameter
of the server hardware, which has the server hardware itself to
decide. For the total energy consumption of the system under
this network, it consists of the local energy consumption and the
edge energy consumption, so we can get
E sys (t) = E local (t) + E edge (t),

(16)

E. Optimization Problem
Our goal is to maximize the average QoS of the system under
this network while minimizing the total energy consumption
of the system as much as possible, therefore, we construct the
following optimization problem:
P1 :

(

min

t
ωn,k
,αtn,k

)

−U sys (t) + E sys (t)

1 
s.t. lim sup
E[qk (s)] < ∞
t→∞
t s=0

Let Zkmax serves as an upper bound for Zk (t), then Zk (t) ≤ Zkmax
t
can be obtained. Moreover, since ΣN
n=1 αn,k ≤ 1 in φk (t) =

t
fE ΣN
n=1 αn,k
, according to the drift plus penalty bound [45], the
ck

first term on the right-hand side of (19) can be upper bounded
by

1  K
E Σk=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t))2 |Q(t)
2

1 
2
2
≤ E ΣK
k=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t) )|Q(t)
2


2
fE
1
max 2
= E ΣK
(Z
)
−
|Q(t)
k=1
k
2
ck
= B.

(17a)

Bringing the result into (19), then

t−1 K

(17b)

ΔQ(t) ≤

k=1

max
tn,k ≤ Tn,k
K
t
est
ΣN
n=1 Σk=1 αn,k fE + Δfn,k ≤ fE
t
ωn,k
∈ [0, 1]

(17c)


|Q(t) .

We then employ the opportunistic minimization of expectations technique for the second term on the right-hand side of
(21), after which we obtain the following result


t
fE ΣN
n=1 αn,k
K
− Zk (t) . (22)
ΔQ(t) ≤ B − Σk=1 qk (t)
ck

(18)

where Q(t) = [q1 (t), q2 (t), . . ., qK (t)] is the backlog of the
queue at time slot t. Let L(Q(t)) denote the Lyapunov function
used to measure the average queue backlog, which is denoted
2
as L(Q(t)) = 12 ΣK
k=1 (qk (t)) . Squaring both sides of (5) and
bringing the Lyapunov function (18), then

1  K
E Σk=1 (Zk (t) − φk (t))2 |Q(t)
2


+ E ΣK
k=1 qk (t) (Zk (t) − φk (t)) |Q(t) ,

t
fE ΣN
n=1 αn,k
ΣK
k=1 qk (t) Zk (t) −
ck

(17e)

In this section, we will use Lyapunov optimization to pair
transform the long-run stability problem of the queue into a
short-run problem. Let ΔQ(t) denote the conditional Lyapunov
shift at time slot t, which is represented as

ΔQ(t) ≤



(21)

F. Lyapunov Optimization



B+E



(17d)

In particular, constraint (17b) indicates they need to ensure the
stability of the queue in order to avoid tasks being discarded, constraint (17c) indicates that the latency obtained from completing
the task must not exceed the maximum latency limit, constraint
(17d) indicates that the computational resources consumed by
the offload processing portion of all vehicle-generated tasks
must not exceed the maximum amount of resources of the VEC
server itself, and constraint (17e) indicates a range of values for
the offloading policy. Note that constraint (17b) is affected by
the offloading decision, which is interconnected with the resource allocation decision, and both affect constraint (17c).
Thus, the complexity of this interaction makes it difficult to
solve problem P 1 using traditional operations. In order to overcome this suffering, we transformed the problem constraints and
reconstructed the problem using Lyapunov optimization.

ΔQ(t) = E {L(Q(t + 1)) − L(Q(t))|Q(t)} ,

(20)

(19)

fE ΣN

αt

n=1 n,k
Let
− Zk (t) be denoted by , so we finally rewrite
ck
(22) as ΔQ(t) ≤ B − ΣK
k=1 qk (t). According to conditional
Lyapunov shift theory, if the upper bound on the Lyapunov shift
ΔQ(t) is B − ΣK
k=1 qk (t) for each time slot t, we can rewrite
the constraints(16b) in Problem 1 as

1 
B
E [qk (s)] ≤ .
t s=0

t−1 K

lim sup

t→∞

(23)

k=1

In this scenario, to maintain the stability of the queue, it is
sufficient to ensure that the conditional Lyapunov shift has a
minimal tight upper bound, i.e., there exists an optimal an,k (t) to
minimize the right-hand side of (22). Combining this short-term
decision problem with problem P 1, we get problem P 2:


t
fE ΣN
n=1 αn,k
K
P 2 : t mint βΣk=1 qk (t) Zk (t) −
ck
(ωn,k ,αn,k )
+ (−U sys (t) + E sys (t))

(24a)

max
tn,k ≤ Tn,k

(24b)

K
t
est
ΣN
n=1 Σk=1 αn,k fE + Δfn,k ≤ fE
t
ωn,k
∈ [0, 1]

(24c)
(24d)

where β is a non-negative tradeoff factor.
The reconstructed problem P 2 solves the long-run decisionmaking problem, but the problem is still a complex optimization
problem. We choose to utilize LLM-based in-context learning to

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

solve the problem, but before we can do so, we need to obtain a
example set which got after training through the MARL method.
IV. PROPOSED SOLUTION
To address the optimization problem, we first employ MARL
to obtain an initial set of cases, and then utilize LLM to optimize
the actions learned from this case set.
A. MARL-Based Case Set
The framework required for MARL, i.e. state, action, reward
function, needs to be constructed.
1) State: In this setting, we let the state consist of the task
Γn (t), vehicle position ln (t), vehicle speed vn , channel gain
t
, i.e.
gn,b


t
,
(25)
sn (t) = Γn (t), ln (t), vn , gn,b
therefore, the environment state is S(t) = {sn (t)}N .
t
and the resource
2) Action: We take the offloading ratio ωn,k
t
ratio an,k as the actions executed by the agent n after obtaining
the observation, i.e.

 t
t
an (t) = ωn,k
,
(26)
, αn,k
after that, we can get the overall action, which is represented as
A(t) = {an (t)}N .
3) Reward: After considering various constraints, the reward
function is expressed as
K
t
est
rn (t) = Unave − η fE − ΣN
n=1 Σk=1 an,k fE + Δfn,k

,
(27)
where η is a weight parameter used to keep the two terms on the
right-hand side of the equation to an order of magnitude. Then,
the long-term discount reward is Rn (t) = Σtt0 γn rn (t), where t0
is the previous time, γn is the discount factor. We can achieve
the optimal action by maximizing the long-term discount reward
of each agent.
The algorithm procedure follows the implementation in [26].
Among the neural networks involved in the algorithm are the actor network, critic network and their respective target networks.
Their specific structure is as follows:
Actor: We categorize the actor network into three layers:
the input layer, the fully connected layer, and the output layer.
The fully connected layer consists of three hidden layers and
a softmax layer. The first two hidden layers use the rectified
linear unit (ReLu) function as an activation function and the third
hidden layer uses the tangent (tanh) function as an activation
function. Since the actor network is divided into two parts, we
will explain the estimated actor network and the target actor
network separately.
The input is the current state for the estimated actor network,
including the computing tasks generated by the vehicle, the vehicle position, the vehicle speed and the channel gain. The current
state is passed through three hidden layers after outputting the
probability of possible actions. Then after passing through the
softmax layer, the total probability of all actions is set to 1.
Finally, agent n randomly selects one of the outputs.

10295

Critic: The structure of the critic network also includes an
input layer, a fully connected layer and an output layer. The
difference is that there is no softmax layer in the fully connected
layer, only three hidden layers, and their activation functions are
Relu, Relu and Tanh respectively.
The inputs to the estimation critique network are the states
and actions of all agents at the current epoch, and the output is
the Q value.
After the case set obtained through MARL training we use
the LLM based on in-context learning to learn the case set and
then complete the decision-making for the randomly arriving
real-world situations.
B. In-Context Learning-Based Approach
In-context learning means that LLM can learn from human
characters, such as task descriptions and task solution cases, in
order to improve the performance of the target task. Context
learning can be defined as [35]
Dtask × texample × st × LLM ⇒ At ,

(28)

where Dtask is the task description, texample is a collection
of some cases under time slot t, st is the environment state
under the current time slot t, which is related to the target task,
LLM is the LLM model, as well as At is the output result of
LLM. Specifically, by inputting a description Dtask of the task
we need to solve to the LLM, the LLM learns from the set of
cases texample , and then makes a decision At on the target task
under the current time slot t based on the current state of the
environment st . In the following, we will make a decision At
on the task description Dtask and the set of cases texample are
described.
1) Task Description: Dtask is important for LLM to provide
key information about the problem to be solved. Typically, a
task description Dtask consists of three parts, which are task
goal, task definition, and additional rules. Below is the prompt
we designed to inspire the LLM, which contains a specific
description of the task.

For the task goal, it specifically refers to “you need to output
the action based on the dataset and in the given state, and

10296

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Overall design of LLM-based context learning.

only the action and no other information”. Then we set the
task definition to output dimension-specific actions in a given
environment state, e.g., when the number of vehicles in the
environment changes, the LLM must take this situation into
account. After that the case set is represented as “Here is a
dataset you can use for prediction”. Finally, we set up additional
response rules. That is ”an offloading decision and resource
allocation task”, where the goal is to output offloading decision
and resource allocation ratios from 0 to 1, because the former
requires LLM to focus on the decision-making process, while
the latter facilitates subsequent data extraction.
The above task description provides a template for the definition of optimization tasks through formatted natural language,
which avoids the complexity that would arise from dedicating a
specific model for this purpose. Moreover, it is also user-friendly,
as the operator only needs to make simple additions or deletions
to the task descriptions without any specialized knowledge of
optimization.
Overall, the design of prompt requires the abstraction of the
optimization problem into natural language. The body of the
prompt to address the context of the optimization problem, then

the purpose of the cue needs to be designed, in addition to adding
some guiding words in order to allow LLM to understand the
problem to be solved in the context of the case set.
2) Case Set: Examples are also critical for LLM in contextual learning, so the selection of cases must be careful. This
is because on the one hand cases are an important factor in
LLM decision making, and LLM relies on cases to justify its
decisions, and on the other hand because the invocation of LLM
models usually has a token limitation, which means that it is not
possible for us to send a large number of examples. Moreover,
since the state of the environment in the scenario of this paper
is continuous, which means that the number of cases is infinite,
picking the most relevant and functional cases is challenging. We
choose the set of examples converged by MARL training in the
previous section. It should be noted that the case set obtained by
MARL is only preliminary, and it needs to be further optimized
by LLM based on the cases in it.
3) LLM-Based Context Learning: Fig. 2 shows the general
design of LLM-based context learning. Specifically, when a
vehicle in the physical layer generates a class K task at time slot
t, it means that the information of the vehicle has changed, and

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

10297

TABLE I
ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS

therefore, it will synchronize the information to the twin model
in the cloud digital twin layer via intra-twin communication.
Then, the twin model will invoke the LLM, i.e., it will input
the prompt into the LLM and the LLM will make a decision
for the new task state based on the historical dataset and it will
make two types of decisions, i.e., task offloading decision and
resource allocation decision. After making the decisions, the
cloud will return these two types of decisions to the vehicle and
the server respectively. After receiving the offloading decision,
the vehicle will offload the generated task to the server’s queue.
The server, on the other hand, will calculate and process the
resource allocation for the tasks in the queue according to the
resource allocation decision, and the result of the processing will
be returned to the vehicle. At the same time, it will be added to
the dataset as a new example.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The simulation environment in this paper is implemented
under Python 3.11.0 and the LLM model used is Llama 3.1-8b.
In terms of the environment setup, the parameters are set as
shown in Table I. Specifically, the bandwidth w is set to 20 MHZ,
the transmission power pn is 200 mW, the channel noise ρ2 is
−110 mdB, and the carrier frequency fc is 2 GHZ. In addition,
the amount of the vehicle’s own computing resources fv is
5 GHZ, the velocity of the vehicle vn is randomly chose in
[10, 15]m/s, the transmission rate of the electromagnetic is
3 × 108 m/s and the total amount of resources of the edge
t
| is randomly chose
serversfE is 400 GHZ. The task size |Dn,k
in [1000,1500]Byte and the frequency required per bit of the
data ck is 0.25 MHZ/Byte. The effective switching capacity of
the vehicle’s vehicular devices κve is 10−28 , and that of the
servers hardware has an effective switching capacity κse of
1
(400GHZ)3 , and the number of CPUs on the server NE is 10.
In the experimental part, we set the non-negative coefficient β
in Problem 2 to 1. The discount factor γn is 0.95 and the updated
rate λ is 0.01.

Fig. 3. Comparison of system energy consumption between LLM, SARL and
MARL with different estimation bias.

well as the activation function are the same as described in
Section IV-B. For SARL, the number of hidden layers is the
same but the activation function of the neural network is ReLu
function.
C. Performance Evaluation

B. Baseline Algorithm
We compared with current popular deep reinforcement learning algorithms, i.e. multi-agent or single-agent reinforcement
learning (SARL). For MARL, the number of hidden layers as

Fig. 3 shows the system energy consumption of LLM, MARL,
and SARL for different twin mappings. In Fig. 3(a), it can
be seen that for all the discussed methods, the system energy
consumption increases with the number of vehicles, where

10298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Fig. 4. Comparison of task processing latency for LLM, SARL, and MARL
with different estimation biases.

Fig. 6. Comparison of Edge Energy and Resource Ratios for LLM, SARL,
and MARL with Different Estimation Biases.

Fig. 5. Comparison of QoS of LLM, SARL and MARL with different estimation biases.

SARL has the highest energy consumption while LLM is able
to achieve similar results as MARL. The energy consumption
of SARL is higher since making decisions based on local information, having relatively weak capability for task offloading
and resource scheduling. In order to be able to make a more
specific comparison, we can get through Fig. 3(b) that the
energy consumption achieved by MARL is higher than that
obtained through LLM. On the other hand, in order to compare
the situation under different estimation biases, we see through
Fig. 3(c) that the energy consumption achieved by LLM is lower
when the bias is positive than when it is negative. This is because,
when the bias is positive, the amount of resources estimated by
the digital twin will be higher, and therefore, less resources will
be subsequently invested, but on the contrary, more resources
will be invested.
Fig. 4 compares the task processing latency of LLM, SARL,
and MARL for different estimation biases. It can be seen that
the task processing delay increases with the number of vehicles.
In addition, SARL, as mentioned in the previous section, makes
decisions based on local information and thus fails to obtain
the optimal scheduling plan, i.e., SARL cannot adapt to the

environment of intense competition for resources. In contrast,
LLM achieves better results than MARL because LLM performs
comprehensive learning of the environment based on a typical
set of cases and makes smart inference decisions on new cases.
On the other hand, the delay when the bias is positive is lower
than when it is negative. This is due to the fact that, as mentioned
earlier, the amount of resources estimated by the digital twin is
higher when the bias is positive, which naturally leads to lower
latency.
Fig. 5 shows the comparison of LLM, SARL and MARL in
terms of QoS. We can get that QoS decreases as the number
of vehicles increases. In this case, the negative value of QoS
for SARL is due to the fact that SARL’s task processing delay is
higher than the maximum delay tolerance due to poor scheduling
scheme in case of higher number of vehicles as shown in Fig. 4.
On the other hand, even though the QoS is also decreasing, the
performance achieved by LLM is better than MARL.
Fig. 6 compares the edge energy and resource ratios of LLM,
SARL, and MARL for different estimation biases. It can be seen
that SARL achieves the lowest edge energy consumption, which
is due to its relatively weak ability to schedule resources as well
as offload tasks, as mentioned earlier. In addition, LLM is higher
than MARL in terms of edge consumption and resource share,
regardless of whether the deviation is positive or negative. This is

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

because, as illustrated in Fig. 4, LLM occupies more computing
resources in order to get lower processing latency, which leads
to an increase in the resource share, and occupying more computational resources leads to higher edge energy consumption.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we considered the problem of generating multiple tasks by vehicles in a single time slot and queuing of
tasks in the server under digital twin edge networks, while
constructing a preliminary optimization problem by analyzing
this situation. Since the preliminary constructed problem has
a long term decision constraint that is difficult to solve, we
used Lyapunov optimization to transform this condition into a
short term decision. After constructing the new problem, we
utilized the LLM method, which is not widely used in the
field of IoT today, to solve the problem. Experimental results
have shown that the LLM-based In-context learning method
can achieve similar or even better performance than the widely
popular MARL. However, the method proposed in this paper
also has limitations, such as the speed of operation of LLM
is dependent on the performance of the hardware deployed.
Therefore, there is a requirement for the deployment cost. In
addition, overly complex optimization problem is a challenge for
LLM. Therefore, in the future work, we will try to decompose
the complex problem into several sub-problems and hand them
over to LLM for processing. At the same time, we will also
consider lightweight models to minimize deployment costs. We
summarize them as follows:
r The LLM can understand the tasks to be accomplished and
the objectives of the tasks to be achieved through the cue
words we designed.
r The LLM is able to learn the characteristics of the task
to be accomplished from a typical case set and can make
reasoned decisions for new tasks.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Cao, Z. Li, X. Liu, Z. Lv, and H. He, “Mobility-aware multiobjective
task offloading for vehicular edge computing in digital twin environment,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3046–3055, Oct. 2023.
[2] X. Wang, K. Tao, N. Cheng, Z. Yin, Z. Li, and Y. Zhang, “RadioDiff:
An effective generative diffusion model for sampling-free dynamic radio
map construction,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 738–750, Apr. 2025.
[3] R. Sun, N. Cheng, C. Li, F. Chen, and W. Chen, “Knowledge-driven deep
learning paradigms for wireless network optimization in 6G,” IEEE Netw.,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 70–78, Mar. 2024.
[4] Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, and Q. Fan, “Time-dependent performance modeling
for platooning communications at intersection,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 19, pp. 18500–18513, Oct. 2022.
[5] Q. Wu, S. Wang, H. Ge, P. Fan, Q. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “Delay-sensitive
task offloading in vehicular fog computing-assisted platoons,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2012–2026, Apr. 2024.
[6] Q. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Fan, P. Fan, C. Zhang, and Z. Li, “High stable and
accurate vehicle selection scheme based on federated edge learning in
vehicular networks,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1–17, Mar. 2023.
[7] Y. Zhang et al., “An efficient caching and offloading resource allocation
strategy in vehicular social networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73,
no. 4, pp. 5690–5703, Apr. 2024.
[8] T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D. Sabella,
“On multi-access edge computing: A survey of the emerging 5G network
edge cloud architecture and orchestration,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1657–1681, May 2017.

10299

[9] Q. Wu, Y. Zhao, Q. Fan, P. Fan, J. Wang, and C. Zhang, “MobilityAware
cooperative caching in vehicular edge computing based on asynchronous
federated and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 66–81, Jan. 2023.
[10] J. Shen, N. Cheng, X. Wang, F. Lyu, W. Xu, and Z. Liu, “RingSFL:
An adaptive split federated learning towards taming client heterogeneity,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5462–5478, May 2024.
[11] N. Cheng, F. Lyu, W. Quan, C. Zhou, H. He, and W. Shi, “Space/Aerialassisted computing offloading for IoT applications: A learning-based
approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1117–1129,
May 2019.
[12] Y. Dai and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive digital twin for vehicular edge computing
and networks,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 48–59, Mar. 2022.
[13] W. Wang et al., “Value matters: A novel value of information-based
resource scheduling method for CAVs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73,
no. 6, pp. 8720–8735, Jun. 2024.
[14] W. Feng, S. Lin, N. Zhang, G. Wang, B. Ai, and L. Cai, “Joint C-V2X based
offloading and resource allocation in multi-tier vehicular edge computing
system,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 432–445,
Feb. 2023.
[15] Q. Ren et al., “Resource allocation and slicing strategy for multiple
services co-existence in wireless train communication network,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 401–414, Jan. 2025.
[16] Z. Zhang, Q. Wu, P. Fan, N. Cheng, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “DRLBased optimization for AoI and energy consumption in C-V2X enabled
IoV,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2144–2159,
Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TGCN.2025.3531902.
[17] X. Gu, Q. Wu, P. Fan, N. Cheng, W. Chen, and K. B. Letaief, “DRLBased federated self-supervised learning for task offloading and resource
allocation in ISAC-Enabled vehicle edge computing,” Digit. Commun.
Netw., vol. 11, pp. 1614–1627, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.dcan.2024.12.009.
[18] X. Gu et al., “DRL-Based resource allocation for motion blur resistant
federated self-supervised learning in IoV,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
no. 6, pp. 7067–7085, Mar. 2025.
[19] Y. Xie et al., “Resource allocation for twin maintenance and task processing in vehicular edge computing network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
no. 15, pp. 32008–32021, Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3576582.
[20] Z. Shao et al., “Semantic-aware spectrum sharing in Internet of Vehicles
based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 23, pp. 38521–38536, Dec. 2024.
[21] Z. Zhou et al., “Secure and latency-aware digital twin assisted resource
scheduling for 5G edge computing-empowered distribution grids,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 4933–4943, Jul. 2022.
[22] C. Zhou, J. Gao, M. Li, N. Cheng, X. Shen, and W. Zhuang, “Digitaltwin-Based 3-D map management for edge-assisted device pose tracking
in mobile AR,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 17812–17826,
May 2024.
[23] Z. Yin, N. Cheng, T. H. Luan, Y. Song, and W. Wang, “DT-Assisted multipoint symbiotic security in space-air-ground integrated networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5721–5734, 2023.
[24] Z. Wang et al., “Mobility digital twin: Concept, architecture, case
study, and future challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18,
pp. 17452–17467, Sep. 2022.
[25] J. Zheng et al., “Digital twin empowered heterogeneous network selection
in vehicular networks with knowledge transfer,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 12154–12168, Nov. 2022.
[26] C. Xu, Z. Tang, H. Yu, P. Zeng, and L. Kong, “Digital twin-driven
collaborative scheduling for heterogeneous task and edge-end resource via
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3056–3069, Oct. 2023.
[27] T. Liu, L. Tang, W. Wang, Q. Chen, and X. Zeng, “Digital-twin-Assisted
task offloading based on edge collaboration in the digital twin edge
network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1427–1444, Jan. 2022.
[28] E. Zhang, L. Zhao, N. Lin, W. Zhang, A. Hawbani, and G. Min, “Cooperative task offloading in cybertwin-assisted vehicular edge computing,”
in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput., 2022,
pp. 66–73.
[29] K. Zhang, J. Cao, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive digital twin and multiagent
deep reinforcement learning for vehicular edge computing and networks,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1405–1413, Feb. 2022.
[30] X. Liao et al., “Driver digital twin for online prediction of personalized lane-change behavior,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 15,
pp. 13235–13246, Aug. 2023.
[31] K. Zhang, J. Cao, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin empowered
content caching in social-aware vehicular edge networks,” IEEE Trans.
Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 239–251, Feb. 2022.

10300

[32] J. Zheng et al., “Data synchronization in vehicular digital twin network: A
game theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 11,
pp. 7635–7647, Nov. 2023.
[33] L. Zhao et al., “A digital twin-assisted intelligent partial offloading approach for vehicular edge computing,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 3386–3400, Nov. 2023.
[34] B. Li, W. Xie, Y. Ye, L. Liu, and Z. Fei, “FlexEdge: Digital twin-enabled
task offloading for UAV-Aided vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 11086–11091, Aug. 2023.
[35] H. Zhou et al., “Large language model (LLM)-enabled in-context learning for wireless network optimization: A case study of power control,”
2024, arXiv:2408.00214.
[36] H. Zhou et al., “Generative AI as a service in 6G edge-cloud: Generation
task offloading by in-context learning,” 2024, arXiv:2408.02549.
[37] W. Lee and J. Park, “LLM-Empowered resource allocation in wireless
communications systems,” 2024, arXiv:2408.02944.
[38] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid
network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language models,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb. 2025.
[39] Q. Liu, J. Mu, D. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, and T. Hong, “LLM enhanced
reconfigurable intelligent surface for energy-efficient and reliable 6G IoV,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1830–1838, Feb. 2025.
[40] X. Chen, X. Lu, Q. Li, D. Li, and F. Zhu, “Integration of LLM and human–
AI coordination for power dispatching with connected electric vehicles
under SAGVNs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1992–2002,
Feb. 2025.
[41] Q. Wu, W. Wang, P. Fan, Q. Fan, J. Wang, and K. B. Letaief, “URLLCAwared resource allocation for heterogeneous vehicular edge computing,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 11789–11805, Aug. 2024.
[42] X. Tan, M. Wang, T. Wang, Q. Zheng, J. Wu, and J. Yang, “Adaptive task
scheduling in digital twin empowered cloud-native vehicular networks,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8973–8987, Jun. 2024.
[43] M. J. Neely, “Stochastic network optimization with application to communication and queueing systems,” Synth. Lectures Commun. Netw., vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 1–211, Sep. 2010.
[44] L. Tang, Z. Cheng, J. Dai, H. Zhang, and Q. Chen, “Joint optimization of
vehicular sensing and vehicle digital twins deployment for DT-Assisted
IoVs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 11834–11847,
Aug. 2024.
[45] Y. Li, S. Xia, M. Zheng, B. Cao, and Q. Liu, “Lyapunov optimization based
trade-off policy for mobile cloud offloading in heterogeneous wireless
networks,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 491–505, First
Quarter, 2022.

Qiong Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in information and communication engineering from National Mobile Communications Research
Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in
2016. From 2018 to 2020, he was a postdoctoral
researcher with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He is
currently an associate professor with the School of
Internet of Things Engineering, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China. He is a Senior Member of China Institute of Communications. He has published more
than 100 papers in high impact journals and conferences, and authorized more
than 30 patents. He was elected as one of the world’s top 2% scientists in
2024 and 2022 by Stanford University. He has received the young scientist
award for ICCCS’24 and ICITE’24. He won the high-impact paper of Chinese
Journal of Electronics award. He has been awarded the National Academy of
Artifical Intelligence (NAAI) Certified AI senior engineer, and was the excellent
reviewer for Computer Networks in 2024. He has severed as the editorial board
member of Sensors and CMC-Computers Materials & Continua, the early career
editorial board member of Radio Engineering and Chinese Journal on Internet of
Things, the lead guest editor of Sensors, CMC-Computers Materials & Continua,
Radio Engineering and Frontiers in Space Technologies, the guest editor of
Electronics and Chinese Journal on Internet of Things, the TPC co-chair of
WCSP’22, the workshop chair of NCIC’23/25, ICFEICT’24/25, CIoTSC’24,
IAIC’24, RFAT‘25 and FRSE’25, as well as the TPC member and session chair
for more than 10 international Conferences. His current research interest focuses
on vehicular networks, autonomous driving communication technology, and
machine learning.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2026

Yu Xie received the BS degree from the Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, China, in
2022, and the MS degree from Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, China, in 2025. His research interests include
digital twin, resource allocation, reinforcement learning, and vehicular edge computing.

Pingyi Fan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, in 1994. He is a professor
and the director of open source data recognition innovation center, Department of Electronic Engineering,
Tsinghua University. He is member (Academician)
of the United States national academy of artificial intelligence (NAAI), fellow of IET and IET fellowship
international assessor. From 1997 to 1999, he visited
the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
and the University of Delaware in the United States.
He also visited many universities and research institutes in the United States,
Europe, Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore. He has obtained many research
grants, including national 973 Project, 863 Project, mobile special project and the
key R&D program, national natural funds and international cooperation projects.
He has published more than 600 papers (ORCID) including 171 IEEE journals
and more than 10 ESI highly cited papers as well as 4 academic books. He
also applied for more than 40 national invention patents, 7 international patents.
He won 2025 NAAI AI Exploration Award, and 10 best paper awards of IEEE
international conferences, including IEEE ICCCS2023 and 2024, ICC2020 and
Globecom 2014, and received the best paper award of IEEE TAOS Technical
Committee in 2020, the excellent editor award of IEEE TWC (2009), the most
popular scholar award 2023 of AEIC, the second natural Prize of CIC (2023) and
several international innovation exhibition medals, i.e. Gold Medal at the Russian
Invention Exhibition-2024, Silver Medal at Geneva Invention Exhibition-2023,
and Silver Medal at Paris Invention Exhibition-2023 etc. and served as the
editorial board member of several Journals, including IEEE and MDPI. He is
currently an associate editor of IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking (TCCN), the editorial board member of Open Journal of
Mathematical Sciences and IAES international journal of artificial intelligence,
the deputy director of China Information Theory society, the co-chair of China’s
6G-ANA TG4, and the chairperson of Network and Communication Technology
Committee of IEEE ChinaSIP. His current research interests are in 6G wireless
communication network and machine learning, semantic information theory and
generalized information theory, Big Data processing theory, intelligent network
and system detection, etc.

Dong Qin received the PhD degree in information and
communication engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2016. He joined the School
of Information Engineering, Nanchang University, in
2016. His current research interests lie in the area of
cooperative communication and OFDM techniques.

Kezhi Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
PhD degree from the University of Warwick, U.K.
He is a professor with the Department of Computer
Science, Brunel University of London, U.K. His
research interests include wireless communications,
mobile edge computing, and machine learning. He is
a Clarivate Highly Cited researcher in 2023-2024.

WU et al.: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED TASK OFFLOADING AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR DIGITAL TWIN EDGE COMPUTING

Nan Cheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE
and MS degrees from the College of Electronics and
Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2009 and 2012, respectively, and the
PhD degree from the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2016. He was a postdoctoral
fellow with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada, from 2017 to 2019. He is currently
a professor with the State Key Laboratory of ISN
and with the School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University,
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. He has published more than 90 journal papers in IEEE
Transactions and other top journals. His current research focuses on B5G/6G,
AI-driven future networks, and space–air-ground integrated networks. He serves
as an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Vehicle Technology, IEEE
Open Journal of the Communication Society, and Peer-to-Peer Networking and
Applications, and serves/served as a guest editor for several journals.

10301

Khaled Ben Letaief (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS
(Hons.), MS, and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA,
in 1984, 1986, and 1990, respectively. From 1990 to
1993, he was a faculty member with the University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Since 1993,
he has been with The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong, where
he is currently the New Bright professor of engineering. At HKUST, he has held many administrative
positions, including an Acting Provost, the dean of
Engineering, the head of the Electronic and Computer Engineering Department,
and the director of the Hong Kong Telecom Institute of Information Technology.
He is an internationally recognized leader in wireless communications and
networks. His research interests include artificial intelligence, mobile cloud
and edge computing, tactile Internet, and sixth-genereation (6G) systems. In
these areas, he has more than 720 articles with over 44,450 citations and an
H-index of over 100 along with 15 patents, including 11 U.S. inventions. He
served as a member for the IEEE Board of Directors from 2022 to 2023. He
is a member with the National Academy of Engineering, USA, and the Hong
Kong Academy of Engineering Sciences; and a fellow with the Hong Kong
Institution of Engineers. He is well recognized for his dedicated service to
professional societies and IEEE, where he served in many leadership positions,
including the president of the IEEE Communications Society from 2018 to
2019, the world’s leading organization for communications professionals with
headquarter in New York City, and members in 162 countries. He is recognized
by Thomson Reuters as an ISI Highly Cited Researcher and was listed among
the 2020 top 30 of AI 2000 Internet of Things Most Influential Scholars.
He was a recipient of many distinguished awards and honors, including the
2007 IEEE Communications Society Joseph LoCicero Publications Exemplary
Award, the 2009 IEEE Marconi Prize Award in Wireless Communications,
the 2010 Purdue University Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineer
Award, the 2011 IEEE Communications Society Harold Sobol Award, the 2016
IEEE Marconi Prize Paper Award in Wireless Communications, the 2016 IEEE
Signal Processing Society Young Author Best Paper Award, the 2018 IEEE
Signal Processing Society Young Author Best Paper Award, the 2019 IEEE
Communication Society and Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award,
the 2021 IEEE Communications Society Best Survey Paper Award, and the
2022 IEEE Communications Society Edwin Howard Armstrong Achievement
Award. He is the founding editor-in-chief of the prestigious IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications. He has been involved in organizing many flagship
international conferences.