IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

487

Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection
Based on Graph Attention Auto-Encoder
Zekang Wang , Fuxiang Yuan , Han Qiu , Yan Liu , and Xiangyang Luo

Abstract—The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) enables the
exchange of routing information between Autonomous Systems
(ASes). The lack of routing verification makes it susceptible
to routing anomalies with major impact. Detecting large-scale
routing anomalies is crucial for monitoring network operation
status. However, existing methods are affected by interference
from non-important ASes and insufficient labeled data, necessitating improvements in detection performance. In this paper,
a large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection method based
on a graph attention auto-encoder is proposed. First, normal
BGP data is collected to construct AS-level topology graphs.
Then, the graph attention auto-encoder model is pre-trained on
topology graphs, where an attention mechanism is introduced
to assign higher weights to important ASes. Next, the AS-level
topology graph sequence is extracted from BGP data, and
the pre-trained model is utilized to obtain AS embeddings.
Finally, the AS embedding is classified to detect large-scale BGP
routing anomalies based on multi-layer perceptron. The largescale BGP routing anomaly event dataset is constructed using
4,577,384 routing announcements, and extensive experiments are
conducted. The results show that the proposed method has
significant advantages. Compared with typical methods BSVM,
BLSTM, BMLP, BGNN, BGIN, and BGAE, the detection accuracy
increased by 14.47%, 3.73%, 8.11%, 2.64%, 5.99%, and 1.04%,
respectively.
Index Terms—BGP routing anomaly detection, graph attention
auto-encoder, autonomous system, graph representation learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE INTERNET consists of over 80,000 Autonomous
Systems (ASes), and ASes exchange routing information
via the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). However, BGP
was not designed with a routing trusted verification

T

Received 16 January 2025; revised 25 August 2025; accepted 1 November
2025. Date of current version 29 December 2025. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No. 2022YFB3102900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. U23A20305), the Key Research and Development Project of Henan
Province (No. 221111321200), the Innovation Scientists and Technicians
Troop Construction Projects of Henan Province (No. 254000510007), the
Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province of China (No. 242300421415),
and the Key Science and Technology Project of Henan Province of China
(No. 252102211091). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was F. Valenza. (Corresponding author:
Xiangyang Luo.)
Zekang Wang, Fuxiang Yuan, Yan Liu, and Xiangyang Luo are with the
State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing,
Zhengzhou 450000, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Cyberspace
Situation Awareness of Henan Province, Zhengzhou 450000, China (e-mail:
wangzk_ieu@sina.com;
rookieyfx@163.com;
ms.liuyan@foxmail.com;
luoxy_ieu@sina.com).
Han Qiu is with the Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou
450000, China (e-mail: qiuhan410@aliyun.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3631527

mechanism [1], [2], which makes the Internet susceptible
to routing anomalies such as network outages [3] caused
by route leaks [4], prefix hijacking [5], and configuration
errors [6]. According to the impact scope of anomalies,
they can be categorized into small-scale and large-scale
routing anomalies [7], in which large-scale routing anomalies seriously impact network reachability [8]. Large-scale
routing anomaly detection is of great significance in monitoring Internet operation status and maintaining network
stability [9].
Machine learning has been widely applied in large-scale
BGP routing anomaly detection for years, achieving many
outstanding scientific achievements. Traditional methods based
on machine learning extract anomaly detection features manually from routing information tables and UPDATE messages,
including statistical features [10], [11] (e.g., the number of
UPDATE messages, the average length of AS_PATH) and
graph features [12], [13] (e.g., clustering coefficient, centrality). The machine learning model is trained to detect
large-scale BGP routing anomalies. However, the process of
manually extracting and selecting features relies on domain
knowledge. With the development of deep learning, the emergence of automatic feature extraction methods is expected to
solve such problems. In these methods, graph representation
learning [14] can effectively encode high-dimensional sparse
graph structure data into low-dimensional dense vectors [15],
while preserving structural information in graphs, providing a
new way for BGP routing anomaly detection. In recent years,
some studies have attempted to apply graph representation
learning to large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection tasks.
Based on graph convolutional neural network [16], graph
isomorphism network [17], and graph auto-encoder [18], the
information of neighbor nodes is aggregated to update AS
embeddings, and large-scale BGP routing anomaly is detected
by classifying the AS embedding.
Existing large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection methods based on graph representation learning have made initial
progress but still have some problems. Significant differences
exist in the possibility of large-scale BGP routing anomalies
caused by different ASes [19]. However, existing typical
detection methods aggregate features of neighbor ASes indiscriminately, either by averaging or summing, to update AS
embeddings, resulting in anomaly detection facing interference
from many non-important or even irrelevant ASes. In addition, existing methods typically train detection models in a
supervised manner, which requires a large amount of labeled
BGP data. However, BGP anomaly data is insufficient. These

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

problems affect the effectiveness of large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection.
To solve the above problems, we propose a novel method
based on a graph attention auto-encoder for detecting largescale BGP routing anomalies. The attention mechanism is used
to assign higher weights to important ASes when aggregating
neighbor node information, minimizing the interference of
non-important ASes on anomaly detection. The reliance on
labeled data is reduced by pre-training the graph attention
auto-encoder model. The main contributions of this paper are
as follows.
• A framework for detecting large-scale BGP routing
anomalies using a method based on a graph attention
auto-encoder is proposed. The proposed method learns
graph representations of Internet AS-level topologies
based on a graph attention auto-encoder and utilizes a
multi-layer perceptron to classify the AS embedding,
achieving anomaly detection. Our method also provides
a list of possible anomaly origin ASes, narrowing down
the scope of anomaly origin AS localization.
• The attention mechanism is introduced into the graph
auto-encoder for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. When aggregating node features of neighbor ASes,
the attention mechanism evaluates the importance of
ASes and assigns weights to them, paying more attention
to important ASes that may cause large-scale BGP routing anomalies. This mechanism reduces interference from
non-important ASes and improves detection accuracy.
• Normal behavior of BGP routing is learned based on
unsupervised learning. The graph attention auto-encoder
model is pre-trained on normal BGP data to learn
routing behavior patterns, reducing the dependence on
labeled routing data. The model effectively captures the
proximity and hierarchy properties of Internet AS-level
topologies, which represent the AS routing roles.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II discusses the related work of large-scale BGP
routing anomaly detection. Section III elaborates on the
proposed method based on a graph attention auto-encoder,
detailing the framework, model architecture, and effectiveness
analysis of the method. Section IV validates the effectiveness
of the proposed method and compares it with existing typical
detection methods. Finally, the conclusion summarizes our
findings and outlines future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
We introduce the definition and classification of large-scale
BGP routing anomalies, and analyze existing typical methods
for detecting large-scale BGP routing anomalies.
A. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly
BGP is the most widely used inter-domain routing protocol [20], but it has obvious security flaws in design [21], [22].
This protocol lacks an effective inherent mechanism to verify
the authenticity and validity of route announcements. As a
result, the Internet becomes vulnerable to routing anomalies,
such as network outages caused by configuration errors or

Fig. 1. Illustration of large-scale BGP routing anomalies. (1) Route leaks:
Routes from AS8 and AS9 are propagated to unintended ASes, including
AS11 and AS12. (2) Prefix hijacking: AS1 owns the network prefix a.b.c.*/24,
but the attacker AS5 illegitimately announces a route containing this network
prefix. According to the BGP shortest path principle, the traffic is redirected
to AS5.

malicious attacks [23]. According to the scope of impact,
these anomalies can be divided into small-scale and large-scale
routing anomalies. Large-scale routing anomalies [8] usually
cause a large number of IP address prefixes to be unreachable,
and the anomalies can be observed by most routing collectors,
posing a serious threat to inter-domain routing security.
Common large-scale BGP routing anomalies include route
leaks [24] and prefix hijacking [25], as shown in Fig. 1.
Route leaks are typically caused by misconfigurations made
by network operators [26], where legitimate routing paths
are exposed to unintended ASes [27], putting critical Internet
infrastructure at risk. Prefix hijacking refers to an attack where
the attacker forges network reachability information and AS
path information to announce that they own the victim’s IP
address prefix [28], deceiving BGP routers to select incorrect
paths and redirecting network traffic to other ASes [29],
thereby stealing user sensitive data [30]. Detecting large-scale
BGP routing anomalies is of great importance for protecting
critical Internet infrastructure and ensuring the security of user
data [31].
B. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection Methods
Anomaly detection is one of the important branches of data
mining. Its goal is to identify abnormal data, which is widely
used in different scenarios [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37],
[38], [39]. Early large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection
methods include time series analysis [40], statistical pattern
recognition [41], and reachability test [42]. In recent years,
machine learning has shown good performance in large-scale
BGP routing anomaly detection [43]. Machine learning-based
detection methods are currently the mainstream approach.
These methods focus on how to extract features effectively.
Currently, there are two approaches for feature extraction:
manual extraction and automatic extraction based on graph
representation learning.
1) Methods Based on Manual Feature Extraction:
Traditional methods detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies
by manually extracting features. The extracted features can

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

be mainly categorized into two types: statistical features and
graph features.
When large-scale BGP routing anomalies occur, relevant features of UPDATE messages change significantly.
Al-Rousan and Trajković [10] extracted 17 statistical features,
including the number of UPDATE messages, the announcement interval time, and the average length of AS_PATH.
These features were selected using fisher score and mRMR
algorithms, and a support vector machine classifier was trained
to detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies. Dong et al. [11]
extracted 33 statistical features regarding AS prefixes, peers,
and paths. A long short-term memory model combined with
a self-attention mechanism was utilized to detect large-scale
BGP routing anomalies, in order to reduce the impact of noise
in BGP data.
Graph features reflect overall structural changes in Internet
AS-level topology when large-scale BGP routing anomalies
occur. Sanchez et al. [12] compared large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection performance of graph features such as
centrality, clustering coefficient, average degree of neighbor
nodes, and maximum connected subgraph size using a multilayer perceptron. Huang et al. [13] extracted degree centrality
and closeness centrality features of ASes, achieving real-time
detection of large-scale BGP routing anomalies by analyzing
changes in AS centrality.
However, manual feature extraction and selection can easily
lead to feature redundancy or the omission of important
features. In addition, feature design is time-consuming and
costly, which affects the accuracy of large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection.
2) Methods Based on Graph Representation Learning for
Feature Extraction: Graph representation learning [14] can
represent a graph as a low-dimensional vector while retaining
most network structure information. The features can be
automatically extracted by inputting the graph and a small
number of initial node features into a graph representation
learning model. In recent years, some studies have made
progress in large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection based
on graph representation learning.
Hoarau et al. [16] first designed a graph neural network
model suitable for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection.
By aggregating the embeddings of neighbor ASes averagely,
AS embeddings are iteratively updated without manual feature
extraction. Then, AS embeddings are classified based on a
multi-layer perceptron to achieve large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection. Latif et al. [17] utilized the number of
UPDATE messages sent and received by ASes as the initial
node features and applied a graph isomorphism network model
to automatically extract deep features of AS-level topologies
for large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. This model
employs a specialized information aggregation mechanism,
which updates AS embeddings by summing the embeddings
of neighbor ASes and the ASes themselves, allowing for a
more accurate distinction between similar AS-level topologies.
Hoarau et al. [18] utilized a graph auto-encoder to learn graph
representations of AS-level topologies. The graph convolutional network is used as the encoder. The AS embeddings are
updated by aggregating the information from neighbor ASes

489

averagely. During the training process, the error for all ASes
is computed to update model parameters, capturing routing
behavior patterns of different ASes.
In summary, while large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection methods based on graph representation learning have
made initial progress, they still have some problems. Existing
typical detection methods assign equal weights to all neighbor ASes when aggregating their information to update AS
embeddings, assuming that different ASes causing largescale BGP routing anomalies have the same possibility.
However, ASes that trigger large-scale BGP routing anomalies
are usually important nodes with larger network scales and
significant network positions [19]. The existing method aggregates features of neighbor ASes by averaging or summing,
which ignores the differences in importance between different
ASes. As a result, anomaly detection faces interference from
many non-important, even irrelevant ASes. Furthermore, BGP
anomaly data samples are insufficient, and it is not guaranteed
that all data can be accurately labeled. This makes it challenging to obtain a large amount of accurately labeled BGP
anomaly data required for supervised learning. These problems
affect the effectiveness of anomaly detection.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
To solve the problems of interference from non-important
ASes and the insufficiency of labeled BGP anomaly data, we
propose a large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection method
based on a graph attention auto-encoder.
A. Overview
Considering that large-scale BGP routing anomalies are primarily characterized by significant changes in the existence of
AS links [8], we represent the Internet AS-level topology as an
undirected graph G = (V,E,X). Here, V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN },
where vi denotes an AS and N is the number of ASes. E =
{e1 , e2 , . . . , eM }, ej indicates an edge between ASes, and M
denotes the number of edges. X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } represents
the initial node features of ASes, and xk indicates the number
of IP prefixes announced by an AS, reflecting its network size
and connectivity capability. The notations used in the paper
are summarized in Tab. I.
The overview architecture of our proposed framework is
shown in Fig. 2, which consists of two stages. In the graph
attention auto-encoder model pre-training stage, the model is
pre-trained in an unsupervised manner on AS-level topologies
without anomalies to learn normal BGP routing behaviors.
In the large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection based on
multi-layer perceptron stage, the encoder from the pre-trained
graph attention auto-encoder model is utilized to generate AS
embeddings of the AS-level topology graph sequence. The AS
embedding is classified using a multi-layer perceptron to detect
large-scale BGP routing anomalies. For a specific AS, if an
anomaly is detected, the result ŷ = 1 is output. Otherwise,
ŷ = 0.
B. Framework
The main steps of the proposed framework are as follows.

490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed detection framework. The framework consists of two stages: graph attention auto-encoder model pre-training and large-scale
BGP routing anomaly detection based on multi-layer perceptron.

Stage 1: Graph attention auto-encoder model
pre-training.
Step 1: Construct Internet AS-level topology graphs.
Routing information tables and UPDATE messages, which do
not involve large-scale BGP routing anomalies, are collected,
and AS paths are extracted. Considering path information
may contain erroneous data, we clean it. Reserved ASes have
special purposes and sometimes appear in AS paths, which
are eliminated. There are many cases where the same ASes
are added to AS paths. Duplicate ASes are removed. Internet
Exchange Points (IXPs) are excluded because they do not
participate in the routing decision process. Operation and
maintenance personnel may have routing configuration errors,
resulting in self-loops in AS paths, so we filter them out.
On this basis, AS-level topology graphs in normal state are
constructed.
Step 2: Obtain graph representations of AS-level topologies.
AS-level topology graphs are input into the encoder of the
constructed graph attention auto-encoder model. Stacked graph
attention layers encode AS-level topology graphs, mapping
high-dimensional graph structure data to a low-dimensional
representation space. The attention mechanism is introduced to
dynamically adjust the weights of AS embeddings within AS
neighbors, focusing on important ASes that may be involved
in large-scale BGP routing anomalies. The AS embeddings
are iteratively updated by aggregating node embeddings of
neighbor ASes, outputting graph representations of AS-level
topologies Z ∈ RS ×N .
Step 3: Reconstruct adjacency matrices of AS-level
topology graphs. The decoder of the constructed graph

TABLE I
L IST OF N OTATIONS

attention auto-encoder model receives graph representations
generated by the encoder, and maps them back to the original
data space, reconstructing the adjacency matrix of the AS-level

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

topology graph. The model is trained by minimizing the
error between the real and reconstructed adjacency matrices,
updating the model weights to effectively learn graph representations of AS-level topologies under normal BGP routing
behavior.
Stage 2: Large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection
based on multi-layer perceptron.
Step 1: Construct a graph sequence of Internet AS-level
topologies. Routing information tables and UPDATE messages
within the detection period are collected from multiple vantage
points deployed across the Internet. The AS paths are extracted
and preprocessed to remove erroneous data, including reserved
ASes, duplicate ASes, IXPs, and self-loops. At different
timestamps, AS-level topology graphs are extracted from the
preprocessed path information, forming a sequence of graphs
Gseq = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, where the number of topology
graphs is T.
Step 2: Obtain node embeddings of ASes in graph sequence
of AS-level topologies. The graph sequence is input into
the encoder of the pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder
model. During pre-training, this model has learned normal
BGP routing behavior patterns. Therefore, the weights of
the encoder are kept unchanged. The attention mechanism is
utilized to assign higher weights to important ASes, generating
AS embeddings Zn = {zn1 , zn2 , . . . , znT } ∈ RS ×T of the ASlevel topology graph sequence Gseq , where zni is the node
embedding of AS n in the AS-level topology graph Gi .
Step 3: Detect large-scale BGP routing anomalies using a
multi-layer perceptron. The AS embedding Zn is flattened into
one-dimensional vector Ẑn . When large-scale BGP routing
anomalies occur, ASes exhibit abnormal routing behavior,
and the AS embeddings generated by the pre-trained graph
attention auto-encoder model will significantly differ from
the embeddings in normal state. Therefore, a multi-layer
perceptron is employed to classify these embeddings. The AS
embeddings are passed through the input, hidden, and output
layers, learning complex mapping relationships between features. This enables the detection of large-scale BGP routing
anomalies, with the output of final detection results ŷ.
C. Graph Attention Auto-Encoder Model Pre-training
The proposed method learns from a large amount of unlabeled BGP data without anomalies, capturing normal routing
behavior patterns. The graph attention auto-encoder model
consists of an encoder and a decoder. The architecture of the
encoder and decoder, as well as the loss function, are described
as follows.
1) Encoder Architecture: The encoder comprises two
graph attention layers, as shown in Fig. 3. The first graph
attention layer transforms initial AS features into AS embeddings that contain network structure information. The second
graph attention layer updates AS embeddings and learns more
complex, deeper features. ReLU is used as the activation
function between two neural network layers.
The process of aggregating AS neighbors’ features based
on the graph attention layer is shown in Fig. 4. First, since the
dimension of initial node features is small, a learnable weight

491

Fig. 3. The architecture of the encoder. The encoder computes coefficients
between ASes using an attention mechanism, and iteratively updates AS
embeddings.

Fig. 4. The process of aggregating AS neighbors’ features based on the
graph attention layer. It consists of two parts: attention coefficient calculation
and new feature calculation.

matrix is used for feature enhancement. Then, the correlation
coefficient is obtained by concatenating and mapping the
features of AS itself and neighbor nodes. Next, the correlation
coefficient is normalized to compute the attention coefficient.
Finally, the features of neighboring ASes are weighted and
summed according to the attention coefficients. The new AS
embedding is obtained after being processed by a nonlinear
activation function.
The features of AS i and its neighbor AS j are concatenated
and linearly transformed using a learnable weight matrix
W(k ) . After performing the self-attention operation on ASes,
(k )
the correlation coefficient eij between the two ASes is
obtained, as shown in Equation (1),



T
(k )
(k −1)
(k −1)
(1)
eij = LeakyReLU a(k ) W(k ) zi
||W(k ) zj
T

where a(k ) is a learnable weight vector of the k th encoder
(k −1)
is the node embedding of AS i output from
layer, and zi
(0)
th
the (k − 1) encoder layer. zi = xi denotes the initial node
feature.
It is necessary to use the same scale when comparing the
correlation coefficients between ASes. Therefore, the correlation coefficient is normalized using the Softmax function, as
shown in Equation (2). The complete method for calculating
attention coefficients is shown in Equation (3).



(k )
exp eij
(k )
(k )


αij = Softmax eij
= 
(2)
(k )
l∈Ni exp eil




T
(k −1)
(k −1)
||W(k ) zj
exp LeakyReLU a(k ) W(k ) zi
(k )




αij = 
(k )T W(k ) z (k −1) ||W(k ) z (k −1)
l∈Ni exp LeakyReLU a
i
l




(3)

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 6. The architecture of the multi-layer perceptron model. The model
consists of input, hidden, and output layers, each layer fully connected to the
next. The activation function of hidden layers is ReLU, while the activation
function of the output layer is Softmax.
Fig. 5.
Illustration of the multi-head attention mechanism (H = 4).
AS1 updates its node embedding within neighbor ASes using the multihead attention mechanism, where different colors represent different attention
heads.

difference between the real adjacency matrix and reconstructed
adjacency matrix, as expressed in Equation (7),
LGATE = −

The new node embedding of AS i is computed using the
learned attention coefficients. The AS embedding output by
the k th graph attention layer in the encoder is shown in
Equation (4). The graph representation of AS-level topology
(k ) (k )
(k )
is denoted as Z (k ) = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zN },
(k )

zi

=


j ∈Ni



(k )
(k −1)
αij σ W(k ) zj

(4)

where σ denotes a nonlinear activation function.
The multi-head attention mechanism refers to the use of
H groups of mutually independent attention heads, where the
node embeddings output by each attention head are either
concatenated or averaged to obtain final node embedding, as
shown in Fig. 5. The multi-head attention mechanism enables
the graph attention layer to capture richer network information
and reduce random noise interference.
The graph attention layer constructed in this paper computes
multiple independent attention heads simultaneously, thereby
enhancing the representational capacity of the model. The
output AS embeddings are averaged, as shown in Equation (5).
(k )

zi

=

H
1   (k ,h)  (k ,h) (k −1) 
αij σ W
zj
H

(5)

h=1 j ∈Ni

2) Decoder Architecture: Since the graph representation of
AS-level topology already contains node attributes of ASes
and network structural information, an inner product decoder
is employed to reconstruct the adjacency matrix. This approach
is simple and efficient, with the computation process given in
Equation (6),


Â = σ Z Z T
(6)
where, σ represents the Sigmoid activation function.
3) Loss Function: The training objective of the graph
attention auto-encoder model is to minimize the reconstruction
error of the adjacency matrix. In this paper, binary crossentropy [18] is used as the loss function to measure the

N N
 
1 
Aij log Âij
Ep
i=1 j =1

−

N N

 
1  
(7)
1 − Aij log 1 − Âij
En
i=1 j =1

where, Ep represents the number of positive edges in ASN
N
level topology, Ep =
i=1
j =1 Aij , and En represents
the number of negative edges in AS-level topology, En =
N
N
i=1
j =1 (1 − Aij ).
D. Large-Scale BGP Routing Anomaly Detection Based on
Multi-Layer Perceptron
The pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder model has
learned graph representations of AS-level topologies without
large-scale anomalies. The AS-level topology graph sequence
is input into the encoder of the pre-trained model to generate
AS embeddings. Since there is a significant difference between
the embeddings of normal ASes and those with anomalies,
a classifier is utilized to detect large-scale BGP routing
anomalies. The multi-layer perceptron [16], [18] can better
classify AS embeddings that contain nonlinear relationships
through a multi-layer neural network structure. Therefore,
the multi-layer perceptron is selected as the classifier. The
architecture of the constructed multi-layer perceptron and the
loss function are described as follows.
1) Multi-Layer Perceptron Architecture: The architecture
of the multi-layer perceptron model constructed in this paper
is shown in Fig. 6. The AS embedding is flattened into a
one-dimensional vector and passed through the input layer to
hidden layers. Each neuron in hidden layers performs weight
and bias operations, as shown in Equation (8), followed by
a nonlinear transformation using an activation function. The
output is passed to the next hidden layer or the output layer,
which generates the prediction probabilities of the normal and
abnormal classes. The class with the highest probability is
selected as the final detection result, as shown in Equation (9),
(l)

hi

=

s

(l−1) (l−1)
(l−1)
wij
hj
+ bi

(8)

j =1

ŷ = arg max ŷk
k

(9)

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

(l)

where hi

(l−1)

represents the hidden layer output, wij

493

is the

(l−1)

weight connecting different neurons, and bi
is the bias
term.
2) Loss Function: The binary cross-entropy is adopted as
the loss function, as shown in Equation (10), to compute
the error between the anomaly detection result and the true
class. The error is backpropagated from the output layer to
hidden layers to update model parameters, including weights
and biases,

TABLE II
T HE D EGREE AND ASR ANK OF AS ES T HAT T RIGGER L ARGE -S CALE
BGP ROUTING A NOMALIES

1 
[yi log(ŷi ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ŷi )] (10)
LMLP = −
N
N

i=1

where N denotes the number of samples, yi represents the
true class of the sample, and ŷi refers to the large-scale BGP
routing anomaly detection result output by the multi-layer
perceptron model.
E. Effectiveness Analysis
We evaluate the proposed method’s effectiveness from the
following two aspects: the effectiveness of obtaining AS
embeddings based on a graph attention auto-encoder and the
effectiveness of learning normal BGP routing behavior in an
unsupervised manner.
1) Obtaining AS Embeddings Based on a Graph Attention
Auto-Encoder: Existing large-scale BGP routing anomaly
detection methods based on graph representation learning
aggregate node embeddings of neighbor ASes using averaging
or summing techniques. However, Comarela and Crovella [19]
analyzed a large number of historical BGP data and found
that ASes triggering large-scale BGP routing anomalies are
typically those with larger network scales and significant
positions in the network. We collect all routing information
tables [44], [45], [46] from December 1, 2024, to extract AS
paths. We preprocess the path information and then construct
the Internet AS-level topology graph to calculate the degrees
of ASes. The degree and ASRank1 (ranked by the number
of direct and indirect customers) of the ASes that trigger
large-scale BGP routing anomalies are shown in Tab. II.
AS174, AS12389, and other ASes exhibit large degrees and
rank highly in ASRank. In contrast, the average degree of
the topology is 5.53. This suggests that existing methods,
which aggregate AS neighbor information indiscriminately to
obtain AS embeddings, involve many non-important or even
irrelevant neighbor ASes, affecting the effectiveness of largescale BGP routing anomaly detection.
We introduce an attention mechanism into graph autoencoder, learning AS embeddings using a graph attention
auto-encoder. The proposed graph attention auto-encoder consists of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder computes
attention coefficients α between each AS and its neighbor
nodes based on the scale and network structure of ASes,
assigning higher attention to important ASes that are more
likely to cause large-scale BGP routing anomalies. The
encoder outputs a low-dimensional graph representation of
the AS-level topology. The decoder reconstructs the adjacency
1 https://asrank.caida.org/

matrix Â from the graph representation of AS-level topology. The graph attention auto-encoder model learns a graph
representation that contains rich information by minimizing
the error between the true and reconstructed adjacency matrices, thereby more accurately capturing the state of AS-level
topology.
Overall, it can be concluded that obtaining AS embeddings
based on a graph attention auto-encoder is effective.
2) Learning Normal BGP Routing Behavior in an
Unsupervised Manner: Machine learning-based methods consider large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection as a binary
classification problem. The detection result ŷ ∈ {0, 1}.
Potential anomalies are detected by learning the differences
between the AS embeddings under normal conditions and
those during large-scale BGP routing anomalies. Existing
methods typically rely on supervised learning to learn BGP
routing behaviors, requiring labeled anomaly data. However,
BGP anomaly data is insufficient, and the accuracy of labeled
anomaly data cannot be guaranteed. Obtaining a large and
accurate labeled dataset of BGP anomaly events is challenging,
which impacts the effectiveness of large-scale BGP routing
anomaly detection.
We mine a large amount of unlabeled normal BGP data
using a graph attention auto-encoder. The model is pre-trained
in an unsupervised manner to learn normal BGP routing
behaviors. When large-scale BGP routing anomalies occur
in the Internet, ASes exhibit anomalous routing behaviors,
with significant changes in their connection relationships with
other ASes. The pre-trained graph attention auto-encoder
model cannot accurately reconstruct such anomalous AS-level
topologies, and the output AS embeddings show significant
differences from the embeddings of normal AS-level topologies. As shown in Fig. 7, for different large-scale BGP routing
anomaly events, the reconstruction error for normal AS-level
topologies is small and remains stable, while the reconstruction
error for abnormal AS-level topologies is large and fluctuates
significantly.
Overall, it can be concluded that learning normal BGP
routing behavior in an unsupervised manner is effective.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
conduct detection experiments on a dataset consisting of four

494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE III
E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Fig. 7. Comparison of reconstruction errors between AS-level topologies with and without anomalies. During anomalies, ASes exhibit abnormal routing
behaviors. The pre-trained model fails to accurately learn such AS embeddings, and the reconstruction error of the AS-level topology increases rapidly and
becomes unstable.

large-scale BGP routing anomaly events. The experiments
were executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Xeon
Gold 6248 CPU, 256 GB RAM, and NVIDIA RTX 4090.
All methods were implemented with Pytorch geometric library
and scikit-learn library. The proposed method is compared
with existing typical detection methods, and its superiority is
analyzed.

TABLE IV
L ARGE -S CALE BGP ROUTING A NOMALY E VENTS

A. Experimental Settings
The experimental settings in this paper are shown in
Tab. III, including the dataset, parameter settings, comparative
methods, and evaluation metrics.
1) Dataset: We construct the dataset using large-scale BGP
routing anomaly events (TTNet, IndoSat) adopted by existing
typical detection studies [11], [12], [16], as well as recent
large-scale BGP routing anomaly events (Rostelecom, India).
The detailed information of anomaly events is shown in
Tab. IV.
Existing studies widely utilize publicly available BGP data
to analyze anomaly events. The BGP data collection projects,
including RouteViews2 and RIPE RIS,3 deploy route collectors
around the world to obtain real-time BGP data. We utilize the
BML tool [47] to automatically collect routing information
tables and UPDATE messages about historical anomaly events,
2 https://www.routeviews.org/routeviews/
3 https://www.ripe.net/ris/

containing 3,038,314 routing announcement records. The AS
paths are extracted to construct AS-level topology graphs,
which are used as positive samples. Routing information tables
and UPDATE messages are collected one day before historical
anomaly events, containing 1,539,070 routing announcement
records. We manually check this routing data based on three
authoritative sources, including Oracle blogs,4 BGPStream,5
and BGPMon.6 During these periods, no large-scale BGP
routing anomalies are reported. Therefore, we extract AS
path information to construct AS-level topology graphs, which
are used as negative samples. There are 8 samples, with a
ratio of positive to negative samples of 1:1. For different
samples, the total duration of BGP data collection is 1 hour.
To balance the detection accuracy and inference time, we
4 https://blogs.oracle.com/
5 https://bgpstream.caida.org/
6 https://www.bgpmon.net/

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

495

TABLE V
R ESULTS OF L ARGE -S CALE BGP ROUTING A NOMALY D ETECTION

extract AS-level topology graphs with a two-minute interval.
Each sample consists of 30 AS-level topology graphs, G =
{G1 , G2 , . . . , G30 }.
2) Parameter Settings: The model performance is evaluated using leave-one-out cross-validation. One anomaly event
from the dataset is used as the test set, while the remaining
anomaly events serve as the training set. This process is
repeated, with each anomaly event used as the test set. The
final performance evaluation is the average of experimental
results across all test sets. To minimize the impact of randomness, we repeated the experiment 50 times. Grid search
is employed to tune model hyperparameters. The optimal
parameters for the Graph Attention Auto-Encoder (GATE)
model are a learning rate of 0.001, batch size of 16, attention
heads of 4, node embedding dimension of 16, and training
epochs of 100. The optimal parameters for the Multi-layer
Perceptron (MLP) model are a learning rate of 0.001, output
feature dimensions of 64, 32, and 1 for the input, hidden, and
output layers, respectively, and training epochs of 100.
B. Comparison of Detection Performance
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
compare it with typical detection methods based on manual
feature extraction, including BSVM [10], BLSTM [11], and
BMLP [12], as well as typical detection methods based on
graph representation learning for feature extraction, including
BGNN [16], BGIN [17], and BGAE [18].

The proposed method and existing typical detection methods are used to detect large-scale BGP routing anomaly
events. The experimental results are shown in Tab. V. The
best result for each evaluation metric is highlighted in
bold and underlined. The confusion matrix is shown in
Fig. 8. For different large-scale BGP routing anomaly events,
the proposed method achieves average values of accuracy,
precision, recall, F1 score, and FPR of 97.3%, 98.0%, 96.5%,
97.2%, and 2.0%, respectively, outperforming all existing
typical detection methods. The proposed method achieves
the lowest FPR, indicating that it can effectively reduce
false alarms while maintaining high detection accuracy. The
experimental results show that the proposed method is effective. Utilizing a graph attention auto-encoder can generate
AS embeddings with richer information, thereby enhancing the detection performance of large-scale BGP routing
anomalies.
However, existing typical methods perform poorly in detecting recent anomaly events, including Rostelecom and India.
The proposed method also has misclassifications. This can
be attributed to the continuous expansion of Internet ASlevel topology, with a significant increase in the number
of nodes and edges. During the TTNet anomaly event on
December 24, 2004, there were 18,780 ASes and 69,691
edges. During the India anomaly event on April 16, 2021, the
number of ASes increased to 71,387 and the number of edges
increased to 322,593. As the network becomes increasingly
complex, interference from non-important, even irrelevant

496

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Confusion matrix heatmap. The figure demonstrates the detection performance of different methods on multiple anomaly event datasets.

ASes makes large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection more
challenging.
C. Attention Coefficient Analysis
We present a statistical analysis of attention coefficients
learned by the constructed graph attention auto-encoder model
and compare them with the same weights assigned to neighbor
ASes.
The entropy of the attention coefficients is computed to
quantify their distribution, as shown in Equation (11). A lower
entropy value indicates a highly concentrated distribution of
attention coefficients, with an entropy of 0 signifying that the
attention is entirely focused on a single AS. A higher entropy
value indicates a more dispersed distribution of attention
coefficients, with the highest entropy log(Ni ) occurring in the
case of a uniform distribution,



 
(11)
αij log αij
H {αij }j ∈N (i) = −
j ∈N (i)

where Ni is the number of neighbor nodes of AS i.
For different large-scale BGP routing anomaly events, the
entropy distribution of attention coefficients is statistically analyzed to produce a Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
curve, as shown in Fig. 9. The attention coefficient entropy
values learned by the proposed graph attention auto-encoder
model are predominantly concentrated between 0 and 0.5,
significantly higher than those under a uniform distribution.
The model exhibits a lower entropy distribution of attention
coefficients, suggesting that it focuses more on certain important ASes, thereby improving the accuracy of large-scale BGP
routing anomaly detection.

Fig. 9. Comparison of AS attention coefficient entropy distributions. We
compare the entropy of attention coefficients learned by the proposed method
with a uniform distribution, where the same weights are assigned to all
neighboring ASes.

ASes, as shown in Equations (12) and (13). The set of
adjacent ASes with different proportions of common neighbors
|N (v )∩N (v )|
is denoted as Eadj = {(vi , vj ) | |N (vi )∪N (vj )| ≥ τ }, and
i
j
the set of non-adjacent ASes is denoted as Enon–adj =
/ E }.
{(vi , vj ) | vi = vj ∧ (vi , vj ) ∈


dE zvi , zvj = zvi − zvj 2 =

zvi ,k − zvj ,k

2

(12)

k =1

D. Representational Capacity Evaluation
We evaluate the representational capacity of the proposed
method from two perspectives: proximity and hierarchy.
1) AS Proximity: We use the similarity metric s(vi , vj )
based on Euclidean distance dE (zvi , zvj ) to evaluate the
embedding differences between adjacent and non-adjacent

d 


s(u, v ) =

1


1 + dE z v i , z v j

(13)

The adjacent AS sets are constructed with common neighbor
proportions more than 25%, 50%, and 75%, respectively. Five
thousand non-adjacent ASes are randomly sampled to form the

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

497

Fig. 12. Detection accuracy using different parameter combinations. The
detection accuracy is highest when L = 2, S = 16.

Fig. 10. CDF of node embedding similarity for adjacent and non-adjacent
ASes. For adjacent ASes, the proportion of common neighbors is set to 0.25,
0.5, and 0.75, respectively.

including Tier 1 Internet service providers, whose degrees are
significantly higher than other ASes. Conversely, stub ASes
are located at the low tier of the Internet, accessing the Internet
via core ASes or their downstream networks. To verify the
representational capacity of AS hierarchy, we utilize the t-SNE
method [48] to reduce the high-dimensional AS embedding to
two dimensions for visual analysis.
The results of t-SNE dimensionality reduction visualization
for different anomaly events are shown in Fig. 11. Core
ASes (the top 10 ASes by degree), stub ASes (ASes with
a degree of 1), and other ASes are marked with different
colors. It can be observed that the node embeddings of core
ASes are relatively concentrated in distribution, exhibiting
high similarity. In contrast, the node embeddings of stub ASes
are widely dispersed, demonstrating significant heterogeneity.
These results indicate that the proposed method effectively
captures the hierarchical structure inherent in the Internet ASlevel topology.
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis

Fig. 11. The results of dimensionality reduction visualization for different
anomaly events via t-SNE. There is a significant difference in the distribution
of node embeddings between core ASes and stub ASes.

non-adjacent set. The embedding similarity between AS pairs
within the adjacent and non-adjacent AS sets is calculated, and
the CDF of similarity is shown in Fig. 10. The experimental
results indicate that the embedding similarity of adjacent
ASes is significantly higher than that of non-adjacent ASes.
Furthermore, as the proportion of common neighbors increases
(i.e., the topological structure becomes more similar), the
embedding similarity of adjacent ASes increases. These findings demonstrate that the proposed method effectively captures
the proximity between ASes.
2) AS Hierarchy: The Internet AS-level topology exhibits
a hierarchical structure. Core ASes are located at the high tier
of the Internet and form the backbone of global connectivity,

We analyze the impact of key parameters of the graph
attention auto-encoder on large-scale BGP routing anomaly
detection performance.
The key parameters of the graph attention auto-encoder
include the depth of the encoder L and the dimension of the
AS embedding S. The encoder takes the AS embedding as
input and outputs the transformed embedding. The depth of
the encoder determines the scope of information propagation.
The AS embedding is a low-dimensional vector containing
graph structural information, and its dimension influences the
model’s representational capacity.
We set L = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and S = {1, 4, 8, 16, 32}.
Large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection experiments are
conducted using different parameter combinations. The detection accuracy is shown in Fig. 12. L = 2, S = 16 is the optimal
parameter combination, with a detection accuracy of 97.3%.
The experimental results indicate that properly increasing the
depth of the encoder can improve detection accuracy. But
over-smoothing occurs when the depth of the encoder is too
large, causing the node embeddings of different ASes to tend
to be the same. Conversely, if it is too large, it may include

498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE VI
A BLATION E XPERIMENT R ESULTS C OMPARISON

noise and significantly increase computational resource
consumption.
F. Ablation Studies
To evaluate the contribution of different components of
the proposed method for large-scale BGP routing anomaly
detection, we conduct ablation experiments on the attention mechanism, MLP model, and phased training strategy
employed in the proposed method.
Graph auto-encoder and graph attention auto-encoder are
selected to obtain AS embeddings, and these embeddings
are classified using Support Vector Machine (SVM), Fully
Connected Layer (FC), and MLP models, respectively. The
models are trained with joint training and phase-based training
strategies, respectively. The average prediction performance on
different anomaly events for the combinations of models and
training strategies is shown in Tab. VI.
In terms of embedding acquisition, the detection
performance of the graph attention auto-encoder outperforms
that of the graph auto-encoder. This indicates that by
introducing the attention mechanism, the model can focus
more on important ASes where large-scale BGP routing
anomalies are likely to occur, thus improving the accuracy of
anomaly detection. In terms of embedding classification, the
MLP model performs significantly better than the SVM and
FC models, capturing the complex nonlinear relationships in
AS embeddings. In terms of training strategies, the detection
accuracy is higher under the phase-based training strategy.
The unsupervised loss aims to learn the features of the
normal topology, while the supervised loss aims to distinguish
anomalous states. There is some conflict between these two
optimization objectives, and joint training in the second stage
results in a decline in prediction performance.
G. Anomaly Origin AS Localization
Based on the differences between the AS embeddings during
anomaly events and those in a normal network state, we
provide a list of possible anomaly origin ASes.

Fig. 13. Ranking of node embedding differences of anomaly origin ASes.
The node embedding difference rankings of the anomaly origin ASes are all
within the top 10 for different anomaly events.
TABLE VII
L IST OF P OTENTIAL A NOMALY O RIGIN AS ES

We use Euclidean distance to evaluate the differences
in node embeddings of all ASes after an anomaly event
occurs. The ranking of the differences in node embeddings
for anomaly origin ASes is shown in Fig. 13. For the TTNet
anomaly event, the node embedding difference of the anomaly
origin AS9121 consistently ranked first. For the IndoSat
anomaly event, 8 minutes after the anomaly occurred, the node
embedding difference of the anomaly origin AS4761 ranked
first, indicating that the impact of the event spread gradually,

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

499

TABLE VIII
T HE I NFERENCE T IME OF D IFFERENT D ETECTION M ETHODS

and the illegal routing went through a period of rerouting in
the network. For the Rostelecom event, the node embedding
difference of the anomaly origin AS12389 ranked within the
top ten. Since the event lasted for a short time, the anomaly
origin AS returned to normal after 10 minutes. For the India
anomaly event, the node embedding difference of the anomaly
origin AS55410 ranked within the top five.
Although not all anomaly events exhibit the largest node
embedding differences for the anomaly origin ASes, in practical applications, the list of potential anomaly origin ASes can
be inferred based on the node embedding differences, as shown
in Tab. VII. The actual anomaly origin ASes are highlighted
in bold and underlined, and their node embedding difference
rankings are all within the top 10. This suggests that inferring
potential anomaly origin ASes based on node embedding differences helps significantly narrow down the scope of anomaly
origin AS investigations, supporting anomaly traceability and
localization.
H. Analysis of Inference Times and Response Times
We compare the inference times of the proposed method
and existing typical detection methods for different large-scale
BGP routing anomaly events, and we analyze the response
time of the proposed method.
1) Inference Times: Both the proposed method and existing
typical methods consider large-scale BGP routing anomaly
detection as a binary classification problem. They use machine
learning to train detection models and deploy the trained
models for anomaly detection, performing the inference process. Therefore, we compare the inference times for detecting
anomalies on raw BGP data using the trained model in
seconds, as shown in Tab. VIII. It can be seen that the
proposed method does not provide the fastest inference time,
but it is much faster than the BMLP method. This indicates
that the proposed method sacrifices some time to improve
detection accuracy. In the future, the lightweight large-scale
BGP routing anomaly detection method will be the focus of
our research.
2) Response Times: Additionally, we analyze the response
time of the proposed method, which is the time interval from
the occurrence of the anomaly to its successful detection by
the model [16]. For different anomaly events, we sequentially
collect BGP data within the time window [t0 − 30, t0 + t],
from 30 minutes before the anomaly event occurs to t minutes
after its occurrence. t = {2, 4, 6, . . . , 30}. This data is used for

Fig. 14.
Comparison of detection performance at different times after
anomaly events occur. The detection performance gradually improves and then
tends to stabilize.

model training and testing. The average detection performance
under different time windows is shown in Fig. 14.
The experimental results indicate that 4 minutes after the
anomaly event occurs, the accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score,
and FPR are 81.3%, 87.9%, 72.5%, 79.5%, and 10.0%, respectively, achieving preliminary anomaly detection. Subsequently,
the detection performance gradually improves. Ten minutes
after the anomaly event occurs, the accuracy, precision, recall,
F1 score, and FPR are 96.8%, 97.5%, 96%, 96.7%, and
2.5%, respectively, and the detection performance eventually
stabilizes. This demonstrates that the proposed method is
capable of detecting large-scale BGP anomalies in a short
period. In the future, we will further investigate its real-time
detection performance in practical deployment applications.
V. C ONCLUSION
To solve the problems of interference from non-important
ASes and the insufficiency of labeled anomaly data in existing
typical detection methods, we propose a large-scale BGP
routing anomaly detection method based on a graph attention auto-encoder. The proposed method pre-trains the graph
attention auto-encoder model to obtain AS embeddings and
classifies them based on the multi-layer perceptron to achieve
large-scale BGP routing anomaly detection. The experimental
results on four large-scale BGP routing anomaly event datasets
show that the proposed method achieves higher detection
accuracy than existing typical methods. In future work, the

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

lightweight anomaly detection method will be the focus of
our research. And we will continue to evaluate our method by
running it in a live deployment.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. S. Silva and L. F. M. de Moraes, “GonoGo—Assessing the confidence
level of distribute intrusion detection systems alarms based on BGP,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 209–219, Feb.
2025.
[2] S. Murphy, “BGP security vulnerabilities analysis,” IETF, RFC 4272,
2006.
[3] C. Hu, K. Chen, Y. Chen, B. Liu, and A. V. Vasilakos, “A measurement
study on potential inter-domain routing diversity,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 268–278, Sep. 2012.
[4] J. Li et al., “RoLL +: Real-time and accurate route leak locating with
AS triplet features at scale,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 6,
pp. 1–16, Dec. 2024.
[5] P. Sermpezis et al., “ARTEMIS: Neutralizing BGP hijacking within a
minute,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 5263–5278, Dec.
2018.
[6] S. Deshpande, M. Thottan, and B. Sikdar, “An online scheme for the
isolation of BGP misconfiguration errors,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 78–90, Jun. 2008.
[7] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “Suitability of
graph representation for BGP anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 46th
Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2021, pp. 305–310.
[8] M. Chen, M. Xu, Q. Li, and Y. Yang, “Measurement of large-scale BGP
events: Definition, detection, and analysis,” Comput. Netw., vol. 110,
pp. 31–45, Dec. 2016.
[9] P. Francois, O. Bonaventure, B. Decraene, and P.-A. Coste, “Avoiding
disruptions during maintenance operations on BGP sessions,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1–11, Dec. 2007.
[10] N. M. Al-Rousan and L. Trajković, “Machine learning models for
classification of BGP anomalies,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. High Perform.
Switching Routing, 2012, pp. 103–108.
[11] Y. Dong, Q. Li, R. O. Sinnott, Y. Jiang, and S. Xia, “ISP self-operated
BGP anomaly detection based on weakly supervised learning,” in Proc.
IEEE 29th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols, 2021, pp. 1–11.
[12] O. Sanchez, S. Ferlin, C. Pelsser, and R. Bush, “Comparing machine
learning algorithms for BGP anomaly detection using graph features,”
in Proc. 3rd ACM CoNEXT Workshop on Big Data, Mach. Learn. Artif.
Intell. Data Commun. Netw., 2019, pp. 35–41.
[13] J. Huang, M. Odiathevar, A. Valera, J. Sahni, M. Frean, and W. K. Seah,
“Realtime BGP anomaly detection using graph centrality features,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2024, pp. 222–233.
[14] S. Khoshraftar and A. An, “A survey on graph representation learning
methods,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–55,
2024.
[15] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “BGP2Vec: Unveiling the latent characteristics
of autonomous systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 4516–4530, Dec. 2022.
[16] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “BGNN: Detection
of BGP anomalies using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Comput. Commun., 2022, pp. 1–6.
[17] H. Latif, J. Paillissé, J. Yang, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. Barlet-Ros,
“Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for BGP anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Graph Neural Netw., 2022,
pp. 7–12.
[18] K. Hoarau, T. Razafindralambo, and P. U. Tournoux, “Unsupervised
representation learning for BGP anomaly detection using graph autoencoders,” ITU J. Future Evol. Technol., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 120–133,
2024.
[19] G. Comarela and M. Crovella, “Identifying and analyzing high impact
routing events with pathMiner,” in Proc. ACM Internet Meas. Conf.,
2014, pp. 421–434.
[20] J. Li, V. Giotsas, Y. Wang, and S. Zhou, “BGP-multipath routing
in the Internet,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 2812–2826, Sep. 2022.
[21] N. Rodday et al., “The resource public key infrastructure (RPKI):
A survey on measurements and future prospects,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2353–2373, Apr. 2024.
[22] G. He, W. Su, S. Gao, J. Yue, and S. K. Das, “ROAchain: Securing route
origin authorization with blockchain for inter-domain routing,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1690–1705, Jun. 2021.

[23] B. Al-Musawi, P. Branch, and G. Armitage, “BGP anomaly detection
techniques: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 377–396, 1st Quart., 2017.
[24] Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, N. Li, and H. Gao, “LeakFocus: Catching the
perpetrator in routing leak event,” Comput. Security, vol. 150, Mar. 2025,
Art. no. 104300.
[25] M. Kowalski and W. Mazurczyk, “Toward the mutual routing security
in wide area networks: A scoping review of current threats and
countermeasures,” Comput. Netw., vol. 230, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 109778.
[26] J. C. Cardona, S. Vissicchio, P. Lucente, and P. Francois, “‘I can’t get
no satisfaction’: Helping autonomous systems identify their unsatisfied
interdomain interests,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 43–57, Mar. 2016.
[27] M. Zeng, D. Li, P. Zhang, K. Xie, and X. Huang, “Federated route leak
detection in inter-domain routing with privacy guarantee,” ACM Trans.
Internet Technol., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2023.
[28] T. Holterbach, T. Alfroy, A. Phokeer, A. Dainotti, and C. Pelsser, “A
system to detect forged-origin BGP hijacks,” in Proc. USENIX Symp.
Netw. Syst. Design Implement., 2024, pp. 1751–1770.
[29] N. Rodday, G. D. Rodosek, A. Pras, and R. van Rijswijk Deij,
“Exploring the benefit of path plausibility algorithms in BGP,” in Proc.
IEEE Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., 2024, pp. 1–10.
[30] M. Zeng, X. Huang, P. Zhang, and D. Li, “Understanding the impact of
outsourcing mitigation against BGP prefix hijacking,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 202, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108650.
[31] B. A. Scott, M. N. Johnstone, and P. Szewczyk, “A survey of advanced
border gateway protocol attack detection techniques,” Sensors, vol. 24,
no. 19, p. 6414, 2024.
[32] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
[33] B. Du, R. Zhao, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A spectral-spatial based local
summation anomaly detection method for hyperspectral images,” Signal
Process., vol. 124, pp. 115–131, Jul. 2016.
[34] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Beyond background feature
extraction: An anomaly detection algorithm inspired by slowly varying
signal analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1757–1774, Mar. 2016.
[35] R. Zhao and L. Zhang, “GSEAD: Graphical scoring estimation for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 725–739, Feb. 2017.
[36] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A robust background regression based score estimation algorithm for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” ISPRS J. Photogrammetry Remote Sens., vol. 122,
pp. 126–144, Dec. 2016.
[37] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
[38] Z. Yang et al., “A multi-scale mask convolution-based blind-spot
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
no. 16, p. 3036, 2024.
[39] R. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Meng, and F. Shao, “A novel fully convolutional
auto-encoder based on dual clustering and latent feature adversarial
consistency for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
no. 4, p. 717, 2024.
[40] C. Labovitz, G. R. Malan, and F. Jahanian, “Internet routing instability,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 515–528, Oct. 1998.
[41] S. Deshpande, M. Thottan, T. K. Ho, and B. Sikdar, “An online
mechanism for BGP instability detection and analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Comput., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 1470–1484, Nov. 2009.
[42] C. Zheng, L. Ji, D. Pei, J. Wang, and P. Francis, “A light-weight
distributed scheme for detecting IP prefix hijacks in real-time,” ACM
SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 277–288, 2007.
[43] N. H. Hammood, B. Al-Musawi, and A. H. Alhilali, “A survey of BGP
anomaly detection using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Appl. Techn. Inf. Security, 2021, pp. 109–120.
[44] Z. Jin, X. Yin, X. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, and J. Wu, “TopoScope:
Recover AS relationships from fragmentary observations,” in Proc. ACM
Internet Meas. Conf., 2020, pp. 266–280.
[45] K. G. Leyba, J. J. Daymude, J.-G. Young, M. E. J. Newman, J. Rexford,
and S. Forrest, “Cutting through the noise to infer autonomous
system topology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2022,
pp. 1609–1618.
[46] Z. Wang, F. Yuan, R. Li, M. Zhang, and X. Luo, “Hidden AS link
prediction based on random forest feature selection and GWO-XGBoost
model,” Comput. Netw., vol. 262, May 2025, Art. no. 111164.

WANG et al.: LARGE-SCALE BGP ROUTING ANOMALY DETECTION

501

[47] K. Hoarau, P. U. Tournoux, and T. Razafindralambo, “BML: An efficient
and versatile tool for BGP dataset collection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. Workshops, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[48] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.

Han Qiu received the Ph.D. degree from
Information Engineering University, China, 2008,
where she is a Professor. Her research focuses on
inter-domain routing security and network security
evaluation.

Zekang Wang is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the State Key Laboratory
of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced
Computing and also with the Key Laboratory
of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of Henan
Province. His main research interests include
Internet measurement, network security, and network
topology analysis.

Yan Liu is a Professor with the State Key
Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
Advanced Computing and also with the Key
Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness
of Henan Province. Her research interests lie in
cyberspace surveying and mapping.

Fuxiang Yuan is a Lecturer with the State
Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
Advanced Computing and also with the Key
Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of
Henan Province. His main research interests include
cyberspace surveying and mapping, Internet measurement, and network security.

Xiangyang Luo is a Professor with the State
Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and
Advanced Computing and also with the Key
Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of
Henan Province. He is the author or the co-author
of more than 200 refereed international journals and
conference papers. He has obtained the support of
the National Natural Science Foundation of China
and the National Key Research and Development
Program of China. His main research interests lie in
multimedia security and cyberspace surveying and
mapping.