This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

Lightweight Privacy-Preserving IDS for ITS:
Integrated Federated Learning
and Blockchain
Jiawei Zha , Guoan Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Li Jin , Shuping Dang , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Wei Duan

Abstract—As intelligent transportation systems (ITS) become
more integrated into modern infrastructure, vehicular communication systems face increasing cybersecurity threats. Traditional
centralized intrusion detection system (IDS) has significant limitations in terms of the scalability, privacy preservation, and trust
establishment, which are critical challenges in ITS environments.
To address these issues, this paper proposes an intrusion detection method tailored specifically for ITS, integrating federated
learning (FL) and blockchain technology to create a secure,
scalable, and privacy-preserving threat detection system for the
Internet of Vehicle (IoV). The proposed method utilizes FL for
distributed model training, avoiding the sharing of raw data
and employing encryption techniques to protect user privacy at
the edge devices. Blockchain technology ensures the integrity
and tamper-proof nature of model updates and fosters trust
between entities. Moreover, to accommodate the heterogeneous
and dynamic data environment in IoV, the method supports both
independent and identically distributed (IID) and non-IID data
scenarios, enhancing the system’s adaptability and robustness.
Given the computational limitations of vehicular devices, this
work incorporates knowledge distillation and lightweight model
designs, effectively reducing the local computational burden.
Experimental results demonstrate the significant effectiveness of
the proposed approach: on the CICIDS2017 dataset, the model
achieves an accuracy of 97.10% with 11,904 parameters and a
memory consumption of 0.045MB; on the Car-Hacking dataset,
it achieves an accuracy of 99.10% with 9,989 parameters and a
memory consumption of 0.038MB; on the CICIoV2024 dataset,
it achieves an accuracy of 99.65% with 9,861 parameters and
a memory consumption of 0.038MB. Compared to traditional
baseline models, the proposed approach significantly reduces both
the number of training parameters and memory consumption,
while maintaining high accuracy, making it highly suitable
for deployment in resource-constrained vehicular environments
within ITS.

Received 16 August 2025; revised 12 December 2025; accepted 29 January
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62471258 and Grant 62571278, in part
by the Key Research and Development Program of Nantong under Grant
GZ2024002, in part by Nantong Municipal Science and Technology Program
for Social Livelihood under Grant MS2024068, and in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Nantong under Grant JC2024103. The Associate Editor
for this article was X. Li. (Corresponding authors: Guoan Zhang; Li Jin.)
Jiawei Zha, Guoan Zhang, Li Jin, and Wei Duan are with the School
of Information Science and Technology, Nantong University, Nantong
226019, China (e-mail: 2330320030@stmail.ntu.edu.cn; gzhang@ntu.edu.cn;
jin.li@ntu.edu.cn; sinder@ntu.edu.cn).
Shuping Dang is with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical Engineering, University of Bristol, BS8 1UB Bristol, U.K. (e-mail:
shuping.dang@bristol.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3661633

Index Terms—Federated learning, blockchain, knowledge distillation, intrusion detection, IoV.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the development and increasing sophistication
of the Internet of Vehicle (IoV) [1], [2], [3], vehicles are facing an escalating array of cybersecurity threats,
including hacker attacks, malware, and unauthorized access.
These threats will jeopardize the functionality of vehicles and
the safety of passengers. As a result, the robust intrusion
detection system (IDS) has become an urgent necessity in
IoV [4], [5], [6], [7]. The primary objective of IDS is to
safeguard the integrity and security of both onboard and
external networks by addressing increasingly complex threats.
In IoV, IDS implements multi-layered defenses, involving
access control mechanisms to prevent unauthorized access,
and comprehensive traffic analysis to identify potential attack
behaviors. For example, IDS deployed at network gateways
can intercept malicious packets before they propagate, while
in-vehicle IDS is normally integrated within the controller area
network (CAN) [8], [9], [10], electronic control units (ECUs),
and various sensors to provide comprehensive protection.
However, as vehicle interconnectivity continues to increase,
IDS also evolves, offering adaptive solutions to emerging
threats and ensuring robust security for modern automotive systems. By leveraging artificial intelligence technologies
(AI), IDS can adaptively learn and update attack signatures,
thereby improving detection accuracy and efficiency, meanwhile enhancing its adaptive capabilities [11], [12], [13].
In recent years, machine learning-based intrusion detection
methods have been widely researched and applied in intelligent
transportation systems. Yang et al. [14] proposed a multitiered
hybrid IDS that integrates both signature-based and anomalybased detection mechanisms to address known and unknown
attacks in vehicular networks. Lu et al. [15] developed a deep
convolutional factorization machine-based IDS for CAN bus
data. It captured both local features and interaction information
between high-order and raw binary features, achieving the
precision, accuracy, and F1 scores of 0.868, 0.918, and 0.923,
respectively. Sayem et al. [16] presented a deep learningbased ensemble framework, including dynamic preprocessing,
optimal feature selection, and handling of imbalanced data. It
achieved 90.6% and 99.6% accuracy on two publicly available

1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

and popular network traffic datasets, namely UNSW-15 and
CICIDS2017. Zhang et al. [17] introduced a transformerbased transfer learning system, which analyzed spatiotemporal
sequences, along with a self-supervised box classification
mechanism to enhance detection of unknown threats. Wu et al.
[18] proposed an intelligent IDS combining fuzzy rough sets,
generative adversarial network (GAN), and convolutional neural network (CNN), leveraging big data mining and efficient
feature extraction for intrusion detection.
Despite such advances, IDS still faces significant privacy
and trust challenges in the IoV. Vehicle-generated data inherently contains sensitive user information, and the lack of
effective privacy protection not only undermines trust but also
increases the risk of non-compliance with data regulations.
This absence of privacy protection further complicates the
establishment of trust between onboard units, cloud servers,
and security centers, creating barriers to effective collaboration. To address such issues, several studies have applied
federated learning (FL) for intrusion detection in certain fields.
Cui et al. [19] designed a collaborative intrusion detection
system (CIDS), using FL for collaborative model training
among software-defined networking (SDN) nodes. Liu et al.
[20] developed a delay and energy-efficient asynchronous FL
framework for intrusion detection for heterogeneous industrial internet of things (IoT) environments. Zhang et al. [21]
proposed an anomaly-based federated IDS with a hierarchical
aggregation scheme using weighted voting. Aouedi et al. [22]
introduced a federated semi-supervised approach leveraging
labeled and unlabeled data collaboratively. However, without
encryption, FL is still vulnerable to gradient leakage.
Meanwhile, to improve IDS accuracy, increasingly complex deep learning models have been developed. However,
their deployment in vehicular environments is constrained by
severe resource limitations. In the IoV, ECUs are with limited
computing power, memory, and energy, making it difficult
to run large models in real-time. Lightweight deep learning
models aim to reduce complexity and speed up inference
through simpler structures and efficient computations, while
maintaining acceptable accuracy.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose a lightweight
privacy-preserving IDS based on blockchain and FL. Unlike
our previous work [23], which enhanced the performance of
IDS in IoV by leveraging knowledge graphs and machine
learning techniques to improve detection capabilities against
various types of attacks, our previous work conducted intrusion
detection on a centralized server, and utilized shapley additive
explanations (SHAP) for interpretability analysis to enhance
the transparency of the model’s decision-making process. Our
main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
• This paper introduces an intrusion detection approach
specifically designed for IoV, integrating blockchain,
FL, and advanced AI models to ensure the security of
vehicular data. By leveraging the distributed ledger characteristic of blockchain, data integrity and transparency
are guaranteed. The application of FL addresses issues
related to data privacy and decentralized storage, enabling
collaborative training among vehicles without sharing raw
data or compromising security.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

• Constructing a domain-specific knowledge graph from
vehicular IDS datasets by transforming raw traffic records
into semantically rich entities and relationships. This
graph-based structured representation not only facilitates
advanced feature extraction, enabling the capture of highorder dependencies and contextual correlations, but also
significantly reduces redundancy and noise in the input
data, leading to substantially improved intrusion-detection
accuracy and robustness.
• Our work employs a model compression technique,
specifically knowledge distillation, to transfer knowledge from a complex teacher model to a more compact
and efficient student model. The process of transferring
knowledge enables the student model to leverage the
representations and decision-making capabilities learned
by the teacher model, while maintaining a reduced computational overhead.
• We propose a federated model parameter encryption
and decryption mechanism based on CRT, and employ
parallel batch encryption, which enables lightweight and
parallelizable protection of model updates without relying
on heavyweight cryptographic primitives such as rivestshamir-adleman (RSA) or homomorphic encryption (HE).
Furthermore, it incurs much lower overhead in terms of
encryption and decryption time.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the preliminary background. Section III details
our proposed methodology. Section IV provides the experimental evaluation. Finally, section V concludes this paper.
II. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we present the foundational concepts underlying the techniques employed in this study, including CRT,
blockchain, and FL.
A. Chinese Remainder Theorem
CRT, which was first appeared in the 3rd century in the
work Sunzi Suanjing by the Chinese mathematician Sunzi, in
its modern form, CRT has been widely used in areas such
as computer science, cryptography, parallel computing, and
error-correcting codes [24].
The theorem primarily addresses the solution of systems of
simultaneous linear congruences of the following type:
8
x ≡ a1 (mod m1 ),
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
< x ≡ a2 (mod m2 ),
(1)
..
ˆ
ˆ
.
ˆ
ˆ
:
x ≡ ak (mod mk ),
when the moduli m1 , m2 , . . . , mk are pairwise coprime, the
above system has a unique solution modulo M = m1 m2 · · · mk ,
and its solution can be explicitly constructed as:
x≡

k
X
i=1

ai Mi yi

(mod M),

(2)

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

3

where Mi = mMi , and yi is the modular inverse of Mi modulo
mi , satisfying
Mi yi ≡ 1 (mod mi ).
(3)
Clearly, this formulation guarantees both the existence and
uniqueness of the solution, providing an efficient computational method. By allowing computations to be carried out
in parallel over smaller moduli and then recombined, CRT
significantly enhances computational efficiency.
B. Blockchain
Blockchain is a decentralized, transparent, tamper-resistant
distributed ledger technology. Initially proposed by Satoshi
Nakamoto in 2008 to support the bitcoin system, it leverages
cryptographic techniques to eliminate the need for trusted
centralized institutions, enabling the immutable recording and
updating of information across untrusted participants.
A blockchain is composed of a series of blocks connected
in chronological order. Each block typically consists of the
following components:
• Hash value of the previous block Hi−1 ,
• Timestamp T i ,
• Random number Ni ,
• Merkle root MT i ,
• Block body {T X1 , T X2 , . . . , T Xn }, containing a list of
transactions.
The complete data content of block Bk , denoted as Dk ,
includes all transactions and metadata (e.g., timestamp, merkle
root),
Dk = {T X1 , T X2 , . . . , T Xn , T k , Nk , MT k },
(4)
where each block’s hash value Hi is computed from its
contents as:
Hi = Γ(Hi−1 k Dk ),
(5)
with Γ as a cryptographic hash function i.e., SHA-256, and k
as the concatenation.
Because each block includes the hash of the previous block,
the blocks are chained together. Thus, any modification to one
block will affect all subsequent blocks’ hash values, ensuring
the immutability of overall system.
If an attacker attempts to tamper with the data Dk in block
Bk , then all hash values from Hk onward should be recomputed
to preserve the chain’s integrity, otherwise, the chain becomes
invalid. For instance, if the data is modified as D0k , then the
new hash value becomes:
Hk0 = Γ(Hk−1 k D0k ) , Hk .

(6)

Before being tampered, the hash value of the next block is
determined by the current block, obtained from:
Hk+1 = Γ(Hk k Dk+1 ).

(7)

Then the modified Hk+1 can be defined as:
0
Hk+1
= Γ(Hk0 k Dk+1 ) , Hk+1 .

(8)

0
Because Hk0 , Hk , Hk+1
, Hk+1 also holds. By induction, for
0
all i ≥ k, we have Hi , Hi . That is, all subsequent hash values
are altered. The above process demonstrates the robust security
of blockchain in safeguarding data integrity and privacy.

Fig. 1. Fundamental workflow of FL.

C. Federated Learning
FL is a distributed collaborative training framework in
which each participant (client) retains its local data and collaboratively trains a global model through periodic exchange
of model parameters, rather than sharing raw data directly.
The main process is illustrated in Fig. 1, which can be
summarized as follows:
1) The central server initializes the global model parameters upon startup.
2) Each client downloads the global model and performs
local training using its private data to obtain local model
updates each round.
3) All local model parameters are uploaded to the central
server for aggregation.
4) The server aggregates the local parameters (e.g., via
weighted averaging) to obtain an updated set of global
model parameters for the next training round.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The proposed scheme consists of eight stages: real-world
attack scenario, system model, data preprocessing, model
distillation, local model training, parameter encryption, global
model aggregation, and local model updating.
A. Real-World Attack Scenario
As shown in Fig. 2, this section presents specific attack
scenarios that vehicles may encounter in intelligent transportation systems (ITS). Hackers can directly infiltrate vehicles
and control their in-vehicle networks (e.g., controller area
network, CAN), or they can penetrate further by attacking
various communication links associated with the vehicle (i.e.,
the vehicle’s external networks), ultimately gaining control of
the vehicle. Once a vehicle is compromised, it may become a
malicious node and launch attacks on other vehicles, posing
a significant threat to public safety. In the following, we will
analyze the various attacks depicted in the figure in details.
V2V link attack: Hackers can disrupt or hijack the communication link between vehicles (V2V), allowing them to
forge or alter information transmitted between vehicles. Such
attacks could lead to the failure of collaboration between
vehicles, causing traffic accidents or operational errors, which

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 2. The real-world attack scenario for IoV in ITS.
Fig. 3. System architecture of the proposed scheme.

in turn affects vehicle coordination and cooperation, severely
compromising traffic safety.
V2I link attack: Hackers can attack the communication
link between vehicles and infrastructure (V2I), such as by
tampering with traffic signals or accessing traffic control information. This type of attack can disrupt traffic control systems,
potentially causing system crashes or operational errors, which
can affect the normal operation of the entire traffic network and
pose significant public safety risks.
V2N link attack: Hackers can communicate with vehicles
through the network link (V2N), forging or altering commands
from external networks, leading to faults in the vehicle control systems or the leakage of sensitive data. This type of
attack could result in the loss of vehicle functionality or data
breaches, threatening vehicle safety and user privacy.
V2P link attack: Hackers can compromise the communication link between vehicles and pedestrians (V2P), potentially
endangering pedestrian safety or causing misunderstandings or
incorrect responses during interactions between vehicles and
pedestrians. This attack not only jeopardizes pedestrian lives
but could also negatively impact the normal functioning of the
traffic system.
In-vehicle attack: Attackers can target the vehicle’s CAN
by sending large amounts of invalid or malicious data, causing
the vehicle control system to overload. As a result, the vehicle
may experience system failures or loss of control, leading to
more severe traffic accidents.
Consequently, in the context of in-vehicle networks, IDS
can be deployed on the ECU or the in-vehicle gateway
to monitor communication data flows within the vehicle’s
internal network, identifying potential malicious attacks. For
IDS deployment in external vehicular networks, it can be
positioned at locations such as road side units (RSUs), V2V
communication nodes, and cloud-based security centers, where
it can continuously monitor and analyze network traffic in realtime to detect anomalous behaviors or attacks.
B. System Model
In light of the requirements of the above intelligent transportation system, we propose an intrusion detection method,

as illustrated in Fig. 3. To protect vehicular privacy data, we
employ a FL distributed framework, where local training is
performed on individual vehicles. Once the teacher model
training is completed, the vehicles perform the training of the
student model locally. After training, the model parameters
are uploaded and stored on blockchain to prevent tampering.
Each block generates a unique hash value: if a malicious
user attempts to alter the model parameters, the hash value
will change, thereby ensuring integrity. Then, a randomly
selected aggregator performs parameter aggregation for the
current training round, producing a unified set of model
parameters. These aggregated parameters are subsequently
uploaded back to the blockchain, after which local models
retrieve the updated parameters and retrain until optimal accuracy is achieved. The following descriptions provide detailed
explanation of the content in the figure:
• RSU: As a central node in the network, the RSU is
responsible for aggregating and coordinating data transmission between different vehicles and may also act as
an aggregator. The RSU can also maintain the blockchain
to verify and record all model updates.
• Teacher Model: The teacher model is used in the RSU
for model management, acting as a mechanism to transfer
knowledge. It serves as a guide for other vehicles (student
models), allowing them to obtain knowledge from the
teacher model for better training outcomes.
• Blockchain: In the context of ITS, blockchain technology
is introduced primarily to address the trust establishment
and secure collaboration challenges in the distributed
vehicular networks. In an open environment consisting
of numerous vehicles and roadside units, ensuring the
immutability and traceability of key information such as
model updates is crucial. Blockchain, with its decentralized, transparent, and tamper-resistant distributed ledger
properties, provides a trustworthy collaborative platform
for all participants. Any updates to model parameters
are encrypted and chained in the blockchain. If any
malicious node attempts to alter the data, its behavior

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

5

Fig. 4. Constructed knowledge graph on CICIDS2017, Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024 dataset.

will be immediately detected due to the breakage of
the hash chain, effectively preventing model poisoning
attacks. This creates a trust mechanism that does not rely
on a central authority, which is crucial for the safetycritical systems of intelligent transportation. In section II,
we provide a specific analysis and proof of blockchain’s
immutability feature, which ensures data integrity and
trust within the system.
• Lock: The yellow lock icon in the figure represents the
encryption operation, ensuring that data remains secure
and is not tampered with or accessed by unauthorized
entities during the process of uploading and downloading model parameters to and from the blockchain. The
gray lock icon represents the decryption operation, used
for decrypting during global parameter aggregation and
vehicle parameter updates.
C. Data Preprocessing
First, we preprocess the datasets related to IoV, including
Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and CICIDS-2017, which contain
normal network traffic data and various types of attack data.
These datasets include some missing values and outliers.
The preprocessing procedure involves data cleaning, feature
selection, followed by knowledge graph construction, and
finally, standardization.
1) Data Cleaning: Raw data containing missing values or
outliers is removed to ensure that the processed dataset is free
of such irregularities.
2) Feature Selection: We employ a machine learning model
to assess the importance of features and select the top 23
features based on their importance ranking, along with their
corresponding label columns.
3) Knowledge Graph Construction: Vehicular network
attacks often exhibit contextual associations and higher-order
dependencies, which traditional feature vectors struggle to
effectively capture. The construction of the knowledge graph is
primarily aimed at significantly enhancing the deep semantic
understanding of complex and intricate attack patterns in
IDS. Prior to constructing the knowledge graph, data cleaning
and feature selection are performed to remove redundant and

irrelevant features, thereby reducing the dimensionality of
the dataset. Subsequently, we construct the datasets into a
knowledge graph using the resource description framework
(RDF). Knowledge graphs possess strong expressive capabilities for modeling attack categories and network behavior
characteristics, effectively capturing high-order correlations in
attack patterns. By leveraging rich semantic representations,
knowledge graphs can automatically uncover latent relationships between features.
Specifically, knowledge information is stored in the form of
RDF triples (s, p, o), where s represents the subject, used to
identify the entity or concept being asserted, p symbolizes
the predicate, used to describe the relationship or attribute
between the subject and object, and o means the object,
indicating the value or entity connected to the subject through
the predicate. In the process of constructing RDF triples, we
first use rdflib.Graph() to create an RDF graph, and then define
a namespace to uniformly identify entities and properties. Subsequently, we iterate through each row of the dataset, defining
each piece of network traffic data as an RDF entity and adding
traffic features as the corresponding properties. Additionally,
an attack type (label) is assigned as a property of each record in
the dataset. For example, each row of the preprocessed dataset
is treated as a network flow and assigned a unique identifier,
such as the entity f low1. If it is identified as a DoS attack,
it can be represented as ( f low1, is, DoS ), or if its Flow IAT
Mean is X, it is represented as ( f low1, hasFlowIAT Mean, X).
The triple representation forms the basic structure of the
knowledge graph, facilitating the structured organization and
retrieval of interconnected information. Finally, all generated
triples are added to the graph for the construction of the
knowledge graph. We visualize the constructed knowledge
graph, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Furthermore, the knowledge
graph shown in Fig. 4(a) does not encompass all three datasets
used in this study. It is specifically the knowledge graph
constructed from the CICIDS2017 dataset. In order to ensure
the clarity and readability of the content in the figure, we
only present a portion of it. The knowledge graphs constructed
from the other two datasets, namely the Car-Hacking and
CICIoV2024 datasets, are shown in Fig. 4(b-c). Similarly, data

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

cleaning process is initially performed, with the distinction
that no feature selection was conducted for the Car-Hacking
and CICIoV2024 datasets. We extracted features such as CAN
ID, packet size, and vehicle sensor data, and subsequently
transformed them into RDF triples. Following this, knowledge
graphs are constructed.
4) Standardization: Different features may have varying
scales and magnitudes (e.g., port numbers may range in the
thousands, while packet sizes may reach the millions). Without standardization, certain features may disproportionately
influence gradient updates during model training, leading to
oscillations or even failure to converge. For instance, in neural
networks, unnormalized data can easily result in vanishing or
exploding gradients. Therefore, we apply min-max normalization, calculated as follows:
x − xmin
.
(9)
X=
xmax − xmin
D. Model Distillation
With the continuous limitations in computational resources,
memory, and power consumption of IoV devices, especially in
real-time intrusion detection tasks that require processing large
amounts of network traffic data, running traditional large deep
learning models becomes extremely challenging. To effectively
address this issue, this paper proposes a lightweight model
design method based on knowledge distillation to alleviate
the computational burden on vehicular devices and improve
model efficiency. Therefore, for the local models, we adopt
a model compression technique known as knowledge distillation, which transfers knowledge from a complex teacher
model to a smaller, more efficient student model. The teacher
model is usually trained on computationally abundant cloud
servers or RSUs, while the student model is deployed on
vehicular devices with limited computational resources. In this
way, the student model not only learns the high-level feature
representations and decision-making abilities embedded in
the teacher model but also maintains a low computational
and storage demand, ensuring efficient operation on vehicular
devices.
The knowledge distillation process is outlined in Algorithm 1. During the knowledge distillation process, the
temperature parameter is set to 5.0. This parameter controls
the smoothness of the student model’s output, enhancing the
model’s learning capability. And the weight ratio between
the distillation loss and the true label loss (i.e., alpha) is
initially set to 0.8 to enhance the model’s learning ability while
minimizing the computational burden on resource-constrained
vehicles. As training progressed, the alpha value gradually
decreases to 0.3 to balance the distillation loss and the student
model’s training on the true labels. Moreover, we implement
two callback functions:
• ReduceLROnPlateau: This strategy dynamically adjusts
the learning rate by monitoring the training loss. If the
loss fails to decrease for two consecutive epochs, the
learning rate is halved, with a lower bound set at 1×10−6 .
• EarlyStopping: An early stopping mechanism that halts
training if the loss shows no improvement for three

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Algorithm 1 Knowledge Distillation
Input: Teacher model fT , training data X, training labels y,
epochs E, batch size B, temperature T , loss weight α
Output: Trained student model fS
1: Get teacher logits t ← fT (X)
2: Define callbacks:
callbacks = [
ReduceLROnPlateau(monitor=’loss’,
factor=0.5,
patience=2, min lr=1e-6, verbose=True),
EarlyStopping(monitor=’loss’, patience=3, restore b
est weights=True, verbose=True),]
3: for epoch  (1, E + 1) do
4:
for batch  (0, len(X), B) do
5:
Get current batch:
6:
X batch = X[batch: batch + B]
7:
y batch = y[batch: batch + B]
8:
t batch = t[batch: batch + B]
9:
Get Student predictions: s ← fS (X batch)
10:
Calculate distillation loss:
11:
distill loss ← KL (softmax(tbatch /T ), softmax(s/T ))·
(T 2 )
12:
Calculate student loss: student loss
←
CCE(y batch, s)
13:
Combined loss: total loss ← α·student loss+(1−
α) · distill loss
14:
Update the student model fS through total loss and
gradients
15:
Weight pruning for the student model fS
16:
end for
17: end for
18: return fS
consecutive epochs, automatically restoring the model
weights from the epoch with the lowest loss.
Additionally, we employ the neural network weight pruning method (apply pruning), whose core functionality is to
reduce the number of effective parameters in the model by
setting weights with absolute values smaller than a specified
threshold to zero, thereby achieving model compression and
acceleration. This method accepts an optional parameter, pruning threshold (default value: 0.01), to control the intensity of
pruning: a higher threshold leads to more aggressive pruning
(more weights are zeroed out), while a lower threshold results
in more conservative pruning (retaining more weights).
E. Local Model Training
Within the framework of IoV, the data generated by vehicles
contains a substantial amount of sensitive information, which
is subject to stringent data protection regulations. Traditional
centralized processing methods present a significant risk of
privacy leakage. Therefore, to address the privacy and distributed characteristics of data in ITS, we employ the FL
framework for local models. In this approach, local vehicles
only need to upload model parameters rather than raw data,
fundamentally preventing data from leaving the vehicle. This
approach aligns perfectly with the stringent privacy and compliance requirements of ITS. Otherwise, in the real world, the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

7

Fig. 5. Data sample distribution on each client under the IID setting.

Fig. 6. Data sample distribution on each client under the non-IID setting.

data on each client may not follow an identical distribution.
We consider two distinct scenarios: IID and non-IID. In the
IID scenario, the samples in the dataset are independent and
identically distributed, meaning that the data from each vehicle
share similar distributions and categories. To achieve this, we
employ stratified sampling to ensure that the data distribution
across local vehicles aligns with the global dataset. This
approach helps simulate a real-world scenario where multiple
devices share similar data distributions, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
To simulate a more challenging scenario, the data distribution
in the Non-IID mode is randomly disturbed, resulting in
discrepancies in the data distributions between vehicles. This
makes model training more challenging for each vehicle.
To address this, we introduce a dynamic non-IID sampling
method, which incorporates an appropriate deviation factor
to simulate the data heterogeneity that may exist between
different vehicles in real-world settings, as shown in Fig. 6.
In our experiments, we set up 10 vehicles, with each vehicle
independently training its local model and utilizing the global
model’s weights for training. In the first training round, each
vehicle initializes the model parameters, while subsequent
rounds utilize the aggregated global model parameters from
the previous round. During each iteration process, local vehicles train their models based on their own data and then
submitted the model updates to the global model. After each
iteration, all local vehicles send their updated model weights to
the server for weighted aggregation. Additionally, both local
vehicles and the global model are trained for 25 iterations.
During the model training process, the local models used by
the vehicles are either trained based on knowledge distillation
from a teacher model or through conventional training, with a
multilayer perceptron (MLP) serving as the base architecture.
And we use the adam optimizer with an initial learning
rate set to 0.001. The batch size is set to 32, which was

determined based on empirical values from multiple tests
conducted during the experiments. Meanwhile, we employe
a dropout layer to prevent overfitting, with the dropout rate
set to 0.2. To further prevent overfitting, L2 regularization is
applied to the weights of all fully connected layers, with a
regularization coefficient of 1e-4.
To achieve optimal classification performance, we incorporate two loss functions during model distillation: Kullbackleibler (KL) divergence and categorical cross-entropy (CCE),
which are combined to compute the total loss function, as
formalized in Algorithm 1. KL divergence is primarily used in
the knowledge distillation process. Specifically, during student
model training, the KL divergence quantifies the discrepancy
between the output probability distribution (softmax outputs)
of the student model and the soft targets (probability distribution) generated by the teacher model [25], [26], [27]. CCE
measures the difference between the model’s predictions and
the ground-truth labels in classification tasks [28], [29], [30].
The mathematical formulations of these loss functions are:


X
P(xi )
DKL (P k Q) =
P(xi ) log
,
(10)
Q(xi )
i
distill loss = DKL
student loss = −



c
X


P(t) P(s)
k
,
T
T

(11)

ytrue,i log(ystudent,i ),

(12)

i=1

total loss = α · student loss + (1 − α) · distill loss
!
c
X
=α −
ytrue,i log(ystudent,i )
i=1




P(t) P(s)
+ (1 − α) DKL
k
.
T
T

(13)

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Eqs. (10) and (11) represent the KL divergence functions.
Specifically, Eq. (10) denotes the KL divergence after temperature scaling, while Eq. (11) corresponds to the KL divergence
without temperature scaling, commonly referred to as the
distillation loss. The loss function used for the student model
is defined in Eq. (12), based on the cross-entropy loss. The
total loss function is described in Eq. (13). In these equations,
i denotes the class index (e.g., class 1, class 2, etc.), P(xi )
represents the probability predicted by the teacher model for
class i, while Q(xi ) denotes the corresponding probability
predicted by the student model. P(t) and P(s) refer to the
full probability distributions output by the teacher and student
models, respectively. The parameter T is the temperature
coefficient, which controls the smoothness of the output
distributions during distillation. ytrue,i indicates the groundtruth distribution for class i, typically expressed in one-hot
encoding, and ŷstudent,i denotes the predicted probability for
class i output by the student model.
Algorithm 2 Model Parameters Encryption
Input: Client 1 to n model parameters Wi,r , security parameters
Output: Encrypted model parameters CT i,r
1: Vectorize parameters: W i,r = ϕ(Wi,r )
N
N
P
P
bi,r = W i,r −
2: Blind: W
Mi( j,r) +
M (i,r)
j
j=1

j=1

Split the parameters into m random blocks {b(i,r)
k }, ensuring
linear reconstructability
Pm
4: Use CRT to encrypt blocks: CT i =
k=1 bk S k T k mod (S )
5: Return encrypted model parameters CT i,r

3:

To further enhance privacy and reduce storage overhead,
each client employs CRT to encrypt each block. Specifically,
given the following congruence system:
8
CT 1,r ≡ b(i,r)
(mod p1 ),
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(i,r)
<
CT 2,r ≡ b2
(mod p2 ),
(15)
.
..
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
:
CT m,r ≡ b(i,r)
(mod pm ).
m
CRT ensures that each partial value bk (the k-th parameter block from Step 3 in Algorithm 2) can be uniquely
embedded into the final ciphertext CT i,r while remaining
recoverable during decryption. Leveraging CRT, the original model parameters are first encoded (i.e., converted into
integers) and subsequently partitioned into multiple random
smaller blocks. Each block can be encrypted independently
and in parallel, enabling efficient computation on low-power
multi-core platforms. This approach is particularly well suited
for resource-constrained vehicular network scenarios. The
encryption process can be formulated as:
CT i,r =

m
X

bk S k T k mod (S ),

(16)

k=1

where bk denotes the k-th parameter block generated in Step 3,
S k represents a modulus from the predefined modulus set S
for constructing congruence equations, T k is the multiplicative
inverse or construction factor corresponding
Q to modulus S k
that satisfies CRT conditions, and S (S = m
k=1 pk ) serves as
the composite modulus enabling all encrypted blocks to be
incorporated into a unified congruence system.
G. Global Model Aggregation

F. Parameter Encryption
After completing local model training, client Ci obtains
the local model parameters Wi,r for round r. To protect
privacy, each client encrypts its model parameters according
to Algorithm 2. First, to convert original model parameters
into integers for encoding, the transformation function ϕ(x) is
defined as follows:
(
˘

˘
x × 10t ,
if x × 10t − x × 10t < 0.5,
˘
ϕ(x) = 
(14)
x × 10t + 1, otherwise,
where t is a positive integer (e.g., t = 5), which controls the
precision of the transformed model parameters. If the decimal
part of x × 10t is less than 0.5, the value is rounded down,
otherwise, it is rounded up.
Then, blinding encoding is applied to enhance security.
Specifically, random matrices Mi( j,r) and M (i,r)
are used to perj
form weighted masking and shifting, ensuring that the original
parameters cannot be directly inferred, even if ciphertexts are
exposed.
Subsequently, random block partitioning is performed, splitbi,r into m random blocks {b(i,r) } while preserving linear
ting W
k
reconstructability. This ensures that no single block contains
complete parameter information, instead, all blocks must be
combined to recover the original data.

Upon receiving all model upload transactions from local
clients, blockchain validators must first verify the validity
of the submitted transactions. Subsequently, an aggregator is
randomly selected to perform the aggregation operation, as
detailed in Algorithm 3. It primarily consists of the following
three steps:
Step 1: Transaction validation. The system verifies the
integrity of each block to detect potential malicious attacks
or tampering. Any unauthorized modification to a block will
alter its corresponding hash value, which can be identified
by examining the complete blockchain and verifying the
previous hash values.
Step 2: Aggregator selection and operation. After all
local clients upload their locally trained model parameters, the
designated aggregator (central server) retrieves these encrypted
model parameters from the blockchain and computes their
aggregated value.
Step 3: Block generation. The aggregated parameters for
round r of the specific model training task are encrypted and
packaged into a new block, denoted as blockr , which is then
appended to the blockchain.
H. Local Model Updating
During the update phase, each client Ci extracts the aggregated parameters from blockr and executes the decryption

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

Algorithm 3 Model Aggregation
Input: Encrypted model parameters stored in the blockchain
N
{CT i,r }i=1
Output: New block blockr
1: Verify the transactions uploaded by local clients
2: Randomly select an aggregator from all nodes
N
P
3: Compute the aggregation value: wr =
CT i,r
i=1

Encrypt the aggregation parameter wr and generate new
block blockr
5: Return the new block blockr

4:

Algorithm 4 Decryption and Update
Input: Aggregated and encrypted model parameter wr
Output: Decrypted model parameter Wr
(r)
1: Decrypt aggregated parameter wr : Bk = wr mod pk
(r)
2: Convert Bk from
finite field to integers using:
(
(r)
 
B
−
pk , pk /2 ≤ B(r)
(r)
k
k < pk
= (r)
3: f −1 Bk
(r)
Bk ,
0 ≤ Bk < pk /2
m
P
4: Sum all transformed values: W r =
B(r)
k
r
Compute final parameters: Wr = 10Wt ×N
Return Wr

protocol specified in Algorithm 4. Firstly, the initial decryption
step applies modular reduction to ciphertext wr , producing
m
discrete values {B(r)
k }k=1 through the operation:
B(r)
k = wr mod (pk )

TABLE I
C ONFUSION M ATRIX

and 64 GB of RAM. The system operated on a 64-bit
Microsoft Windows 10 Professional (version 22H2, build
19045.3803) with UEFI firmware and a polestar Z790 MATX D4 motherboard. The hardware platform, identified as
device XS-20250502KFBO, provided sufficient computational
capacity for model training and evaluation under realistic
experimental conditions.
B. Dataset

k=1

5:
6:

9

(17)

where the set {pk } consists of pre-selected pairwise distinct
large prime numbers, which are employed to implement CRTbased encryption/decryption mechanism.
Then, negative value handling is performed. Through the
function
f −1i, map B(r)
∈ [0, pk ) to the symmetric interval
k
h
pk −1 pk −1
− 2 , 2 , supporting the aggregation of negative values
(e.g., model parameters may be negative).
Sum all transformed values B̂(r)
k to obtain W r , then divide
by 10t × N to get the aggregated model parameters Wr for
round r. The calculation formulas can be obtained from:
m
X
Wr =
B̂(r)
(18)
k ,
k=1

Wr
,
(19)
10t × N
where 10t is the quantization factor and N is the number of
local clients.
Wr =

The datasets utilized in this work include Car-Hacking,
CICIoV2024, and CICIDS2017, each serving distinct purposes in the evaluation of IDS and vehicular network security.
A detailed overview of each dataset is provided as follows:
Car-Hacking Dataset: This dataset primarily contains
attack behavior data from vehicular networks, making it a
crucial resource for evaluating IDS in the context of IoV.
This dataset is collected from a simulated vehicular network
environment, which includes both normal traffic and various
attack types, such as denial of service (DoS) attacks, spoofing,
and unauthorized access. The Car-Hacking dataset provides
an invaluable resource for assessing the resilience of IDS
models in detecting and mitigating security threats within the
automotive network environment.
CICIoV2024 Dataset: This dataset is specifically designed
for research in the security of vehicular networks, with a
focus on testing the effectiveness and robustness of intrusion
detection systems in an IoV context. It includes a wide array
of network traffic data, along with various attack behaviors
associated with vehicular communication systems. This dataset
is particularly useful for evaluating IDS performance under
real-world conditions, where vehicular networks face a range
of sophisticated and evolving attack vectors.
CICIDS2017 Dataset: This dataset, released by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC), is widely regarded as
one of the standard datasets for network traffic intrusion detection. It includes both normal network traffic and numerous
types of cyber-attacks, such as brute force attacks, botnet
traffic, and DoS attacks. This dataset is extensively used to
benchmark IDS algorithms and has become a key resource
in the field of network security, facilitating the evaluation of
detection systems in a variety of attack scenarios.

IV. E XPERIMENT AND E VALUATION
A. Environment Setup

C. Evaluation Metrics

The proposed method was implemented utilizing several
python libraries, including scikit-learn, base64, rdflib, numpy,
hashlib, tensorFlow, pytorch, and seaborn. All experiments
were conducted on a high-performance workstation equipped
with an intel (R) core (TM) i7-14700HX processor (20 physical cores, 28 logical threads, base frequency of 2.10 GHz)

To evaluate the detection performance, we defined a confusion matrix as shown in Table I.
In Table I, TP denotes the number of network flows that
are actually anomalous and correctly predicted as anomalous.
FN represents the number of network flows that are actually
anomalous but incorrectly predicted as normal. FP indicates

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

the number of network flows that are actually normal but
erroneously predicted as anomalous. TN corresponds to the
number of network flows that are both actually normal and
correctly predicted as normal.
Specifically, based on this confusion matrix, we define several metrics to assess their ability to predict whether a network
flow is normal or anomalous. The following performance
indicators are used to evaluate the classification effectiveness:
TP + TN
,
(20)
ACC =
T P + T N + FP + FN
where accuracy (ACC) represents the proportion of correctly
predicted packets to the total number of packets. Higher
values indicate better performance. While accuracy provides
an overall indication of the classifier’s performance, it does
not fully capture the model’s effectiveness when dealing with
imbalanced datasets or different types of classification errors.
Following accuracy, precision (P) focuses specifically on the
positive predictions made by the model.
TP
,
(21)
P=
T P + FP
where P measures the impact of misclassified instances on
correctly classified instances. In addition to precision, recall
(R) provides insight into how well the model detects actual
anomalies.
TP
R=
,
(22)
T P + FN
where R is the ratio of correctly predicted attacks to the actual
attack traffic. Finally, the F1-score combines precision and
recall into a single metric.
P·R
F1 − score = 2 ·
,
(23)
P+R
where the F1-score represents the harmonic mean of precision
and recall, serving as a comprehensive performance metric.
Moreover, we comprehensively evaluate key performance
metrics such as model complexity, the number of trainable
parameters, and memory consumption, which are specifically
defined as follows: providing quantitative guidance for model
selection in practical applications.
Model complexity: This reflects the structural intricacy of
a model, typically quantified by metrics such as the number of
network layers, neuron count (for neural networks), or decision rules (for tree-based models). Higher model complexity
may enhance representational capacity but can also lead to
overfitting and increased computational overhead.
Trainable parameters: This refers to the total number
of learnable weights and bias terms in a model. A larger
parameter count generally implies stronger fitting capability
but significantly raises computational resource demands and
training time costs. The parameter count for each layer is
calculated as:
Player = (Nin + 1) · Nout ,
(24)
where Nin is the input dimension (i.e., the number of neurons
in the previous layer), and Nout is the output dimension (i.e.,
the number of neurons in the current layer). Then, the total
number of parameters is the sum of all layer parameters:
X
Ptotal =
Player .
(25)
layer

Memory consumption: This quantifies the dynamic memory usage during model training and inference, primarily
influenced by parameter scale, batch processing data size,
and intermediate activation values. Excessive memory requirements may hinder the model’s deployability on resourceconstrained devices. assuming each parameter (including
weights and biases) occupies 4 bytes, the memory consumption is calculated as:
M = Ptotal · 4.

(26)

These metrics collectively form a balanced evaluation framework for model performance and computational
efficiency.
D. Evaluation Results
The proposed method adopts a lightweight model design,
which reduces memory consumption and the number of
parameters by simplifying the neural network architecture. In
addition, knowledge distillation is utilized. By leveraging the
soft labels provided by the teacher model, the local model
can effectively learn the teacher’s knowledge and achieve
relatively high accuracy, thereby achieving a balance between
computational load and detection accuracy.
We evaluate our method on three datasets and observe
high performance. Specifically, on the Car-Hacking and
CICIoV2024 datasets, the model achieves an accuracy exceeding 99%. On the CICIDS2017 dataset, the accuracy reaches
over 97%, as shown in Table II. The differences in detection
accuracy can be attributed to two factors: differences in
datasets and data distribution. Car-Hacking and CICIoV2024
datasets primarily simulate various attack types targeting vehicles, with a focus on security issues in in-vehicle networks.
Their attack patterns are relatively concentrated, resulting in
better model performance on these datasets. CICIDS2017
dataset contains external network traffic data, which has a
wider variety of attacks and encompasses a broader range
of network security threats. Its complexity and the diversity of attacks may cause the model to perform slightly
worse on certain attack categories, particularly in terms of
intrusion detection accuracy. As well as, the difference in
data distribution is another important factor contributing to
performance fluctuations. In practical applications, the data
from vehicular devices and networks are often not independent
and identically distributed (non-IID). As a result, the model
may not generalize well due to the large variability between
the data, leading to a decrease in accuracy. Furthermore, we
calculate the number of parameters and memory consumption
of the local model and compare it with the baseline models.
According to Eq.(25) to Eq.(26), the number of parameters
in the proposed model on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and
CICIDS2017 datasets is 9,989, 9,861, and 11,904, respectively, with corresponding memory consumption of 0.038 MB,
0.038 MB, and 0.045 MB. In contrast, MLP model exhibits
parameter counts of 44,293, 44,228, and 48,007 on the same
datasets, with memory consumption of 0.169 MB, 0.168 MB,
and 0.183 MB, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
Typically, the traditional MLP consists of at least three
hidden layers with 256, 128, and 64 neurons, whereas our

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

11

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF M ETHODS ON T HREE DATASETS

Fig. 7. Comparison of model paramers and memory usage.

Fig. 8. Accuracy comparison of the proposed method on three datasets under IID and non-IID conditions.

proposed lightweight model consists of only two layers with
128 and 64 neurons. Although the proposed model exhibits
lower accuracy than the conventional MLP across all three
datasets, it significantly reduces the number of parameters

and memory usage to approximately one-quarter of that of
the baseline model.
To further evaluate the classification performance,
Figs. 9–11 present the heatmaps of the proposed model on

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 9. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the Car-Hacking dataset.

Fig. 10. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the CICIoV2024 dataset.

Fig. 11. Heatmap on multi-class classification on the CICIDS2017 dataset.

the three datasets in the process of model training, which are
essentially confusion matrices. The horizontal axis (Predicted

Labels) represents the categories predicted by the model,
while the vertical axis (True Labels) indicates the true labels.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION ON D IFFERENT DATASETS U NDER IID AND
N ON -IID C ONDITIONS

Each cell in the matrix reflects the relationship between
predicted and actual categories. Values along the diagonal
represent correctly classified samples, whereas off-diagonal
values indicate misclassifications. The color intensity of each
cell corresponds to the magnitude of the value. From the
heatmaps, it is evident that the proposed IDS model achieves
satisfactory classification results across all datasets.
Considering that client data in real-world scenarios is often
non-IID, we conduct comparative experiments under both IID
and non-IID settings. As shown in Fig. 8, the accuracy under
the non-IID setting is initially lower than that under the IID
setting, but both scenarios converge to high accuracy after
several rounds of training. This demonstrates that the proposed
scheme is well-suited not only for IID but also for more
realistic non-IID environments, highlighting its robustness and
practical applicability. To enhance the comprehensiveness of
the experimental evaluation, we add the evaluation metrics
defined in Eq.(21) to Eq.(23) (i.e., precision (P), recall (R), and
F1-score), as shown in Table III. The model achieves precision
of 99.86%, recall of 99.83%, and F1-score of 99.84% on the
Car-Hacking dataset, precision of 99.91%, recall of 99.91%,
and F1-score of 99.91% on the CICIoV2024 dataset, and
precision of 97.82%, recall of 97.73%, and F1-score of 97.70%
on the CICIDS2017 dataset. Under the non-IID scenario, the
model achieves precision of 99.78%, recall of 99.73%, and
F1-score of 99.75% on the Car-Hacking dataset, precision
of 99.88%, recall of 99.88%, and F1-score of 99.88% on
the CICIoV2024 dataset, and precision of 97.13%, recall of
96.98%, and F1-score of 96.94% on the CICIDS2017 dataset.
The evaluation metrics above indicate that, with IID data,
the distribution is more uniform, leading to better training
performance and more stable results.
Moreover, to comprehensively evaluate the performance
of the proposed method, we conduct a comparative analysis
against several mainstream deep learning models, including
CNN, long short-term memory networks (LSTM), MLP, and
transformer architectures. As shown in Table II, the comparison spans multiple dimensions of multi-class classification
tasks, such as classification accuracy, the number of model
parameters, and memory consumption. Next, we will provide a
detailed explanation of the settings for the comparison models.
The CNN model performs feature extraction and classification through convolutional layers and fully connected layers.
The first convolutional layer has 256 neurons, followed by two
additional convolutional layers with 128 and 64 neurons, using
the ReLU activation function. A maxPooling1D layer is used
to reduce the feature map size, and the final classification is
done using a fully connected layer with a softmax activation
function. The model is trained using the adam optimizer

13

with a categorical cross-entropy loss function, a batch size
of 128, and 100 epochs. The LSTM model consists of three
LSTM layers with 256, 128, and 64 neurons, respectively,
to capture temporal dependencies in sequential data. ReLU
activation is applied to the fully connected layers, and the
output layer uses a softmax activation function for multi-class
classification. To prevent overfitting, a 50% dropout layer is
included. The model is trained using the adam optimizer with
a categorical cross-entropy loss function, a batch size of 128,
and 100 epochs. The transformer model, suitable for sequence
data classification, includes multi-head self-attention layers
and position-wise feed-forward networks. The input is first
mapped to a 64-dimensional embedding space through a dense
layer, followed by several transformer blocks. Information is
aggregated through a global average pooling layer, and a dense
layer with a ReLU activation function and a dropout layer
are applied to prevent overfitting. The output layer uses a
softmax activation function. The model is trained using the
adam optimizer with sparse categorical cross-entropy loss, a
batch size of 32, and 100 epochs.
Experimental results demonstrate that although our method
exhibits slightly lower accuracy than certain deep learning
models on specific datasets, it significantly outperforms them
in terms of parameter efficiency and memory utilization. In
the Car-Hacking dataset, the parameter count of our approach
is only 8.01% of that of CNN, 22.55% of MLP, 1.95%
of LSTM, and merely 0.31% of the transformer. On the
CICIoV2024 dataset, the parameter count accounts for just
7.93% compared to CNN, 22.30% of MLP, 1.93% of LSTM,
and 0.31% of the transformer. Similarly, on the CICIDS2017
dataset, our method requires only 9.56% of the parameters
of CNN, 24.80% of MLP, 2.31% of LSTM, and 0.36% of
transformer. However, this lightweight design slightly reduces
the accuracy. To select the appropriate model configuration
based on different application requirements, we balance the
following factors. For applications that require high accuracy,
more complex models can be chosen, although this will
increase memory and computational burdens. To this end,
we adjust the MLP model architecture and conduct relevant
experiments for validation. The adjusted MLP consists of three
hidden layers, with 128, 128, and 64 neurons in each layer.
In both IID and non-IID scenarios, the accuracy on the CarHacking dataset reaches 99.85% and 99.80%, respectively; on
the CICIoV2024 dataset, the accuracy is 99.98% and 99.97%,
and on the CICIDS2017 dataset, the accuracy is 98.10% and
97.96%. Compared to the 128-64 MLP, this adjustment leads
to significant accuracy improvements. Specifically, the accuracy on the Car-Hacking dataset increases by approximately
0.7%, on the CICIoV2024 dataset by about 0.3%, and on
the CICIDS2017 dataset by around 1%. Besides, we compare
the average processing time per packet under different MLP
architectures, as shown in Fig. 12(a) displays the average
processing time per packet for the 128-64 MLP model architecture: 0.013 ms on the Car-Hacking dataset, 0.015 ms on
the CICIoV2024 dataset, and 0.020 ms on the CICIDS2017
dataset. Fig. 12(b) presents the average processing time per
packet for the 128-128-64 MLP model architecture: 0.015 ms
on the Car-Hacking dataset, 0.017 ms on the CICIoV2024

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF THE N UMBER OF PARAMETERS AND ACCURACY U NDER D IFFERENT MLP A RCHITECTURES

Fig. 12. Average processing time per data packet.

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTION AND D ECRYPTION T IME FOR D IFFERENT
M ETHODS IN O NE FL ROUND W ITH MLP(128-64)

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTION AND D ECRYPTION T IME FOR D IFFERENT
M ETHODS IN O NE FL ROUND W ITH MLP(128-128-64)

dataset, and 0.026 ms on the CICIDS2017 dataset. Compared
to the 128-64 MLP, the average processing time per packet
increased by 0.02 ms, 0.02 ms, and 0.06 ms on the three
datasets, respectively. Similarly, we also compared the number
of parameters and memory consumption, as shown in Table IV.
In terms of the number of parameters, the adjusted 128-12864 MLP model had 26,501, 26,371, and 28,423 parameters
on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024, and CICIDS2017 datasets,
respectively, with memory consumption of 0.101 MB, 0.101
MB, and 0.108 MB. Compared to the 128-64 MLP, the
number of parameters increase by 16,512, 16,510, and 16,519,
and memory consumption increased by 0.063 MB, thereby
increasing the computational burden on onboard resources.
In addition, in our proposed scheme, the encryption and
decryption method based on CRT is compared with two widely
used cryptographic RSA and HE in terms of encryption and
decryption time performance, as shown in Table V.
The CRT-based method demonstrates superior efficiency in
both encryption and decryption phases, with an encryption

time of only 19.93 ms and a decryption time of 19.02
milliseconds. In contrast, RSA exhibits a clear disadvantage
in processing time, requiring 24.83 ms for encryption and
41.13 ms for decryption. In addition, HE exhibits significantly
higher computational overhead due to its inherent complexity,
with encryption and decryption times of 35.14 milliseconds
and 215.30 ms, respectively. These results clearly indicate that
HE may introduce substantial performance costs in such application scenarios compared to CRT and RSA. Similarly, the
encryption and decryption time vary depending on the MLP
model architecture. Therefore, we conduct relevant experiments to evaluate the impact of encryption methods on system
latency. As shown in Table VI, the encryption and decryption
time for CRT are 31.92 ms and 30.9 ms, respectively, for RSA,
they are 65.86 ms and 112.43 ms, and for HE, the encryption
and decryption times are 65.42 ms and 408.46 ms, respectively.
It is evident that, apart from CRT, the other two encryption
methods have relatively high encryption and decryption times.
To ensure that the encryption and decryption time do not
exceed the system’s latency requirements, we adopt a strategy
of compressing the model parameters in this paper. This
approach reduces the parameter size, thereby lowering the
computational overhead during encryption and decryption.
This ensures that the system can meet the stringent real-time
requirements of ITS while maintaining high accuracy.
These findings strongly indicate the potential of the
proposed method for deployment in resource-constrained
vehicular environments, such as in-vehicle systems within
intelligent transportation networks.
V. C ONCLUSION
To protect vehicular privacy data, this paper proposed a
lightweight intrusion detection method for IoV based on FL

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ZHA et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PRIVACY-PRESERVING IDS FOR ITS: INTEGRATED FL AND BLOCKCHAIN

and blockchain technology. In this framework, each vehicle
trained a model locally and shares only model parameters, thereby significantly reducing the risk of data leakage.
Moreover, blockchain was employed to prevent malicious
participants from tampering with locally trained model parameters. In addition, knowledge distillation was also utilized
to compress the model, leading to substantial reductions in
parameter count and memory consumption for local devices.
Experiments conducted on the Car-Hacking, CICIoV2024,
and CICIDS2017 datasets demonstrated that, compared with
baseline models, the proposed approach achieved a parameter
size of only 9989, 9861, 11904 and a memory footprint of
0.039, 0.038, 0.045 MB. The relevant code has been uploaded
to GitHub for readers to replicate the experimental results:
zhajiawei666/Lightweight-Privacy-Preserving-IDS-for-ITS. In
future work, we plan to further improve the model architecture to enhance detection accuracy on the CICIDS2017
dataset.
R EFERENCES
[1]

H. Sedjelmaci, N. Kaaniche, A. Boudguiga, and N. Ansari, “Secure
attack detection framework for hierarchical 6G-enabled Internet of
Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2633–2642,
Feb. 2024.
[2] X. Li et al., “Cognitive AmBC-NOMA IoV-MTS networks with IQI:
Reliability and security analysis,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2596–2607, Feb. 2023.
[3] W. Jiang and X. Lv, “A distributed Internet of Vehicles data
privacy protection method based on zero-knowledge proof and
blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 6332–6345,
May 2024.
[4] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage
intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using
rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[5] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
2025.
[6] Y. Wu et al., “Intrusion detection for Internet of Things: An anchor
graph clustering approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
pp. 1965–1980, 2025.
[7] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
“IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
[8] A. Chougule, I. Kulkarni, T. Alladi, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu,
“HybridSecNet: In-vehicle security on controller area networks through
a hybrid two-step LSTM-CNN model,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 73, no. 10, pp. 14580–14591, Oct. 2024.
[9] X. Lin et al., “ByCAN: Reverse engineering controller area network
(CAN) messages from bit to byte level,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 21, pp. 35477–35491, Nov. 2024.
[10] H. J. Jo and W. Choi, “A survey of attacks on controller area networks
and corresponding countermeasures,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6123–6141, Jul. 2022.
[11] X.-Y. Kong and G.-H. Yang, “An intrusion detection method based on
self-generated coding technology for stealthy false data injection attacks
in train-ground communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8468–8476, Aug. 2023.
[12] Y. Xue, J. Pan, Y. Geng, Z. Yang, M. Liu, and R. Deng, “Realtime intrusion detection based on decision fusion in industrial control
systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 2, pp. 143–153,
2024.
[13] L. Wei, J. Yang, H. Jin, J. Cui, J. Li, and D. He, “Sustainable learningbased intrusion detection system for VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 10080–10091, Jul. 2025.
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.

15

[15] Y. Lu, Y. Guo, S. Chen, and J. Li, “An intrusion detection model based
on deep convolutional factorization machine for controller area network
bus in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 22,
pp. 36203–36213, Nov. 2024.
[16] I. Mohammed Sayem, M. Islam Sayed, S. Saha, and A. Haque, “ENIDS:
A deep learning-based ensemble framework for network intrusion
detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 5,
pp. 5809–5825, Oct. 2024.
[17] T. Zhang et al., “Hybrid transfer and self-supervised learning approaches
in neural networks for intelligent vehicle intrusion detection and
analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 7677–7692, Apr.
2025.
[18] Y. Wu, L. Nie, S. Wang, Z. Ning, and S. Li, “Intelligent intrusion detection for Internet of Things security: A deep convolutional generative
adversarial network-enabled approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
no. 4, pp. 3094–3106, Feb. 2023.
[19] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
[20] S. Liu et al., “Delay and energy-efficient asynchronous federated
learning for intrusion detection in heterogeneous industrial Internet of
Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 14739–14754, Apr.
2024.
[21] J. Zhang, C. Luo, M. Carpenter, and G. Min, “Federated learning for
distributed IIoT intrusion detection using transfer approaches,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8159–8169, Jul. 2023.
[22] O. Aouedi, K. Piamrat, G. Müller, and K. Singh, “Federated semisupervised learning for attack detection in industrial Internet of Things,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 286–295, Jan. 2023.
[23] L. Jin et al., “Intrusion detection for duture ITS: Integrated knowledge
graph and artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 14680–14689, Oct. 2025.
[24] J. Zhang, J. Cui, H. Zhong, Z. Chen, and L. Liu, “PA-CRT: Chinese
remainder theorem based conditional privacy-preserving authentication
scheme in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 722–735, Mar. 2021.
[25] S. Ji, Z. Zhang, S. Ying, L. Wang, X. Zhao, and Y. Gao,
“Kullback–Leibler divergence metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2047–2058, Apr. 2022.
[26] F. E. Tosun, A. M. H. Teixeira, J. Dong, A. Ahlén, and S. Dey,
“Kullback-leibler divergence-based observer design against sensor bias
injection attacks in single-output systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 20, pp. 2763–2777, 2025.
[27] X.-X. Ren, G.-H. Yang, and X.-G. Zhang, “Historical data-based
stealthy attack design on cyber-physical systems under Kullback–Leibler
divergence,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6664–6672,
Apr. 2024.
[28] Y. Ho and S. Wookey, “The real-world-weight cross-entropy loss
function: Modeling the costs of mislabeling,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 4806–4813, 2020.
[29] H. N. Monday et al., “Enhancing ECG classification in cardiac diagnostics: A novel approach using adaptive focal cross-entropy loss function,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 7161–7174, Oct.
2025.
[30] C. Sun, H. Li, M. Song, and S. Hong, “A ranking-based cross-entropy
loss for early classification of time series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 11194–11203, Aug. 2024.
[31] A. R. Javed, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. G. Reddy,
“CANintelliIDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller
area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr. 2021.
[32] S. Cherfi, A. Lemouari, and A. Boulaiche, “MLP-based intrusion detection for securing IoT networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 33, no. 1,
p. 20, Jan. 2025.
[33] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection
system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[34] Z. Zeng, B. Zhao, X. Deng, X. Liu, J. Zheng, and J. Chen, “Toward intelligent attack detection with causal transformer in Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 10751–10767, Apr. 2025.
[35] H. Zhang et al., “Efficient and secure outsourcing scheme for RSA
decryption in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8,
pp. 6868–6881, Aug. 2020.
[36] S. Reddi et al., “Privacy-preserving electronic medical record sharing
for IoT-enabled healthcare system using fully homomorphic encryption,
IOTA, and masked authenticated messaging,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 10802–10813, Sep. 2024.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Jiawei Zha received the B.E. degree from Xuzhou
University of Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2023.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the School of Information Science and Technology,
Nantong University, Nantong, China. His current
research focuses on intrusion detection in vehicular
networks.

Guoan Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in precision instruments, the M.S. degree
in automatic instruments and equipment, and the
Ph.D. degree in communication and information systems from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in
1986, 1989, and 2001, respectively. He is currently
a Full Professor with the School of Electronics and
Information, Nantong University, Nantong, China.
His current research interests include cognitive wireless networks and vehicular ad hoc networks.

Li Jin received the B.S. degree in computer science
and technology degree from Nanjing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in
2004, the M.S. degree in soft engineering from
Southeast University, Nanjing, in 2007, and the
Ph.D. degree in communication and information
system from Nantong University, Nantong, China, in
2020. She is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Information Science and Technology,
Nantong University. Her research interests include
wireless communication, artificial intelligence, and
vehicular networks.

Shuping Dang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. (Hons.) degree in electrical and electronic
engineering from The University of Manchester,
Manchester, U.K., the B.Eng. degree in electrical
engineering and automation from Beijing Jiaotong
University, Beijing, China, in 2014, via a joint “2+2”
Dual-Degree Program, and the D.Phil. degree in
engineering science from the University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K., in 2018. He has joined Research
and Development Center, Huanan Communication
Company Ltd., after graduating from the University
of Oxford and was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Computer, Electrical and
Mathematical Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. He is currently a Lecturer with the School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical Engineering,
University of Bristol, Bristol, U.K. His research interests include 6G communications, wireless communications, wireless security, and machine learning
for communications.

Wei Duan received the Ph.D. degree from Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, South Korea, in
2017. He is currently a Full Professor with Nantong
University, Nantong, China. He has participated in
the World Class University Project, sponsored by
the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant
funded by the Korean Ministry of Education Science
and Technology as a Vice Head Researcher. He has
authored more than 90 journal articles. His research
interests include a variety of topics in the areas
of wireless communications. He served as a Guest
Editor for IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL Special Issue on Near-Field
Communications (NFC) in Internet of Everything, IEEE Network Special
Issue on Near-Field Communications: Challenges and Opportunities in the
Networking Landscape, and China Communications Special Issue on New
Advances in Nonorthogonal Multiple Access; and a Lead Guest Editor for
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Special Issue on Architectures, Challenges, and Opportunities within 6G Emerging Technologies. He
is an Editor of Frontiers in Communications and Networks.