IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

5943

Log Anomaly Detection via Transformers
Pre-Trained on Massive Unlabeled Data
Senming Yan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Lei Shi , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Jing Ren , Member, IEEE, Wei Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Limin Sun , and Wei Zhang , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Cyber attacks pose serious threats to computer systems. Automatically detecting anomalous patterns in system logs
is critical for identifying and mitigating security risks. However,
as log data grows increasingly complex and labeled logs remain
scarce, existing detection methods face significant challenges. To
address these issues, we introduce the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm for log analysis and propose a hybrid pipeline tailored for accurate and low-cost log anomaly detection. Specifically,
we employ a masked log reconstruction strategy to pre-train a
Transformer encoder–based foundation model by leveraging the
sequential dependencies in unlabeled logs. The model is then finetuned on an event prediction task to derive the anomaly detector. To reduce computational and storage overhead, we further
design a knowledge distillation method tailored for compressing
log anomaly detectors. Beyond fitting the detector’s outputs, our
method also exploits its internal representations to transfer richer
knowledge. Experiments on the HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird
public datasets demonstrate that our framework outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines in multiple metrics. Empirical evaluation on a reconstructed HDFS dataset confirms that it can adapt
to real-world scenarios where labeled data is scarce. Moreover,
through our knowledge distillation approach, the lightweight detectors achieve outstanding performance with substantially lower
overhead, while maintaining robustness in real-world scenarios.
Index Terms—Cyber security, log analysis, log anomaly detection, pre-trained model.
Received 22 October 2025; revised 18 December 2025; accepted 9 January
2026. Date of publication 15 January 2026; date of current version 27 January
2026. This work was supported in part by the Major Key Project of Pengcheng
Laboratory under Grant PCL2024A03, in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China under Grant 2020YFA0711400, in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U20A20156 and
Grant 92467201, in part by the Key Research Project of Chinese Academy of
Sciences under Grant RCJJ-145-24-17, and in part by Beijing Natural Science
Foundation under Grant L234033. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Yuan
Wu. (Corresponding author: Wei Wang.)
Senming Yan and Limin Sun are with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China, and also with the School
of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408,
China (e-mail: yansenming@iie.ac.cn; sunlimin@iie.ac.cn).
Lei Shi is with the School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China (e-mail: shi.lei@sjtu.edu.cn).
Jing Ren is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary
Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China, and also with
the School of Information and Communication Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail:
renjing@uestc.edu.cn).
Wei Wang is with the Department of Strategic and Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail:
wei_wang@ieee.org).
Wei Zhang is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, The University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2033, Australia
(e-mail: w.zhang@unsw.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3654089

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background and Motivations
ITH the rapid advancement of modern information technologies such as cloud computing, artificial intelligence,
and the Internet of Things (IoT), cyberattacks have become a
major threat to cyberspace [2], [3], [4], [5] and are increasingly
extending into the physical world [6]. Exploiting networks as a
medium, attackers adopt sophisticated and diverse techniques
to compromise the availability, integrity, and confidentiality
of computer systems [7]. To identify and mitigate such cyber
threats, a practical approach is to analyze system operation logs
to detect anomalies and implement corresponding countermeasures.
Modern computer systems generate logs to record their critical runtime information [8]. The ever-increasing complexity
of computer systems and the exponentially growing amount of
log data render manually analyzing logs infeasible [9]. Consequently, automatic log analysis and anomaly detection have been
developed as effective technologies to monitor the security status
and therefore safeguard computer systems [10], [11], [12], [13].
Log anomaly detection refers to identifying atypical behaviors that fall outside the expected patterns of normal system
operations. The anomalies in logs indicate the presence of
system failures and even malicious attacks. System operators
leverage log anomaly detection methods to identify anomalies
before further taking mitigation measures. Log anomaly detection methods utilize structured log data as inputs, which are
typically generated by parsing raw logs. The objective of log
anomaly detection is to accurately classify input logs as either
normal or abnormal. Its core methodologies focus on analyzing
the discernible patterns within logs and distinguishing normal
log patterns from abnormal ones.
Numerous log anomaly detection methods are proposed in
existing works. Some researchers propose to extract quantitative
features from log sequences and leverage classic machine learning (ML)-based algorithms to detect anomalous patterns [14],
[15]. Different from classic ML-based methods, since logs are
essentially structured time-series event sequences, they can be
processed as natural language. Therefore, sequential deep learning (DL)-based models, even Large Language Models (LLMs)
are leveraged for analyzing logs and detecting anomalies [12],
[16], [17].
Despite achieving high detection performance, existing methods still face some significant challenges, making them difficult

W

2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5944

to apply in real-world scenarios: (i) as modern computer systems
evolve, the types of system logs become more diverse, and the
volume of log data is exploding, leading to the demand for
developing more powerful log anomaly detectors; (ii) existing
methods commonly train anomaly detectors on labeled logs,
which are scarce in real-world scenarios, as the amount of log
data is extremely large and manual labeling requires heavy labor
work; (iii) most existing works only consider the performance
metrics of anomaly detectors but ignore the computational and
storage overhead issues, limiting their practical deployment.
B. Our Contributions
Since logs are essentially time series data, we design a Transformer encoder-based model to acquire both learning capabilities and computing efficiency. We propose a hybrid training
method following the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm as
in Large Language Models [18]. Specifically, to exploit the
information within massive unlabeled logs, i.e., the volume of
unlabeled log data is significantly larger than manually labeled
ones, we pre-train a foundation model to learn the sequential
features in logs with an input-masking-inspired self-supervised
training task, i.e., masked log reconstruction. Then, we fine-tune
it for the event prediction task to discern abnormal patterns
and gain advanced detection capabilities for complex log data.
To reduce the computational and storage overhead of our log
anomaly detector, we propose a knowledge distillation method
to compress the fine-tuned model while preserving its detection performance. We also implement a framework for online
anomaly detection, including data processing, model training,
model compression, and anomaly detection modules. We evaluate our log anomaly detection framework on three widely
used public datasets, including HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird. The evaluation results demonstrate the advantages of our
framework.
To summarize, in this work, we have mainly made the following contributions:
r We propose the masked log reconstruction approach to
pre-train a Transformer-based foundation model and finetune it for the event prediction task to train the detector.
Inspired by input masking-based pre-training objectives,
our proposed training approach effectively exploits the
bidirectional sequential information of log data.
r We propose a hybrid pipeline tailored for log anomaly
detection. Different from existing works, our framework
follows the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, which
exploits unlabeled data and reduces the demand for manual
labeling.
r We propose a multi-level knowledge distillation approach
for log anomaly detection, which leverages both internal
and external information from Transformer-based anomaly
detectors. The distilled detector has high computational
and storage efficiency while maintaining outstanding detection capabilities.
r We evaluate our framework on three public datasets, and
our framework outperforms the existing state-of-the-art
methods. Also, we simulate real-world scenarios where

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

unlabeled logs are hard to acquire. Our framework is the
one that is still effective in such scenarios.
C. Paper Structure
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We introduce related works and present essential background knowledge
regarding system log analysis, generative pre-trained transformers, and knowledge distillation in Section II. Then, we give an
overall introduction to our hybrid log anomaly detection framework in Section III. After that, in Section IV, we describe our
pre-training, fine-tuning, knowledge distillation, and anomaly
detection approaches in detail. We introduce the experiment
settings in Section V. We conduct several experiments and
analyze the results in Section VI. Finally, conclusions and some
future work directions are presented in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review the existing research works on system log analysis, log anomaly detection, generative pre-trained
Transformers, and knowledge disillation, to provide sufficient
background and identify the main research gaps.
A. System Log Analysis
Modern computer systems generate logs to record their critical runtime events. By analyzing logs, system operators are capable of monitoring the operational status of computer systems
and taking measures when anomalies occur. Therefore, as the
requirements for the availability of computer systems increase,
it is critical to effectively analyze system logs to maintain high
reliability [19], [20].
System logs are structured text printed by logging software,
i.e., loggers. Generally, loggers generate log entries by populating predefined templates with parameters that record the critical
operating status. In order to extract effective information for
system administrators from massive log data, researchers have
made significant progress in a wide range of fields such as log
parsing, log anomaly detection, and system failure detection [8],
[19].
Since logs are essentially semi-structured data generated by
logging software, it is significant for automatic analysis tools
to extract key information from raw logs and generate structured data, which is the purpose of log parsing techniques.
An example of log parsing is illustrated in Fig. 1. A raw log
message generated by the Hadoop Distributed File System
(HDFS) is processed by the log parser. The log message is
a natural language-like string containing information about a
system event, including time, level, operations, etc. Log parsers
aim to extract this information into a structured format. However,
the contents of the log messages are difficult to extract, since their
formats are customized by developers. To this end, log parsing
methods are proposed to automatically identify the format of
log messages, i.e., log templates, to provide structured data
for the subsequent log analysis process. As a necessary step
in automatic log analysis, researchers have proposed a variety
of log parsing methods [21], [22], [23] and developed a series of

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

Fig. 1.

An example of log parsing on the HDFS dataset.

log parsing tools [24], [25], [26], [27]. In this work, we use the
Drain parser [25] to process raw logs and generate log templates
in order to provide structured data for our Transformer-based
anomaly detector.
B. Log Anomaly Detection
In this work, we focus on the log anomaly detection task,
which aims to analyze log data and recognize anomalous patterns
automatically. The general process of log anomaly detection is
shown in Fig. 2. First, raw logs are processed by log parsers
to extract structured data, according to which log events are
extracted. Then, the log events are sorted by timestamps, and
thus time-series event sequences are acquired. After that, the
extracted event sequences are input into the log anomaly detector. Finally, the detector identifies whether anomalous patterns
exist in the event sequences. Therefore, the core technology of
log anomaly detection is to learn and identify the key features
that distinguish normal logs from anomalous ones [33].
Previous works have proposed numerous methods for log
anomaly detection, which can be generally categorized into two
types: (I) classic ML-based and (II) DL-based techniques. We
systematically summarize and discuss them in the following.
1) Classic ML-Based Methods: Some works propose to extract statistical features and then train classic ML models for
anomaly detection [14], [15], [28]. Xu et al. [14] propose
to extract statistical features of events and parameters in raw
logs. Then, they use the PCA algorithm to detect anomalies.
Lin et al. [15] propose the LogCluster method, which clusters
log sequences according to quantitative features and generates
representative samples for anomaly detection. Restricted to the
quality of extracted features and learning capabilities, these
classic ML-based methods perform poorly in production environments. To alleviate this problem, Luo et al. [29] propose a
Noise-Contrastive Learning (NCL) technique to create synthetic
negative samples for binary classification and further use an
ensemble of decision tree models to capture the dependencies

5945

in log event sequences. However, these ML-based methods are
still limited by feature engineering and difficulties in processing
high-dimensional, contextual information in log data.
2) DL-Based Methods: To alleviate the shortcomings of classic ML-based methods, some works use DL models to learn
sequential log features automatically [33]. Some research works
preprocess raw logs into image-like data and propose to use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn the spatial features
end-to-end. Lu et al. [34] propose a framework combining the
logkey2vec encoding technique and multiple 1D-CNN models
to accurately detect anomalies on the HDFS dataset. Wang et al.
[35] propose to use the temporal convolutional network (TCN)
for log anomaly detection to leverage both temporal and spatial
information in log sequences.
As system logs are essentially time-series semi-structured
data, most DL-based methods detect abnormal patterns in a
way similar to processing natural language. Some researchers
propose to train recurrent neural network (RNN)-based models
for anomaly detection [12], [13], [36], [37]. DeepLog [12]
first suggests using the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
model [38] to learn the contextual features of normal log
event sequences and detect abnormal patterns based on its
predictions. LogAnomaly [13] extends DeepLog and proposes the Template2Vec approach to extract both sequential
and quantitative features. Thanks to the richer information
extracted by Template2Vec, LogAnomaly achieves stronger
detection capabilities. Unlike these works, some researchers
also use the Bi-directional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) models to learn
the bi-directional contextual log features, which are reported
to outperform traditional LSTM-based methods [39], [40].
Yu et al. [39] propose to use the attention-based Bi-LSTM
model [41] to replace the classic LSTM model for predictionbased log anomaly detection. Zhang et al. [42] propose to
train a sentiment language model based on logging-related
source codes and use a Bi-LSTM model for log anomaly detection. In addition to the variants of LSTMs, researchers use
the gated recurrent unit (GRU) model [43], which is also a
commonly used RNN model, to learn sequential features in logs
in order to achieve higher computational efficiency [44], [45],
[46], [47].
Researchers also propose to use the autoencoder architecture
for log anomaly detection. The autoencoder is a self-supervised
learning model consisting of an encoder and a decoder, where
the encoder compresses the input data into low-dimensional
vectors, and the decoder aims to reconstruct them into the
original data [48]. Autoencoder is originally designed for feature compression and generative tasks, but has recently been
used for anomaly detection [49]. Zhang et al. [50] propose
to use an attention-based deep neural network (DNN) to capture the contextual information in log data and then train an
autoencoder-based architecture to detect anomalies based on
the reconstruction loss. Wang et al. [51] propose to use the
BERT model to acquire contextual features and use the variational autoencoder (VAE) [52] for log anomaly detection.
Wadekar et al. [53] combines both convolutional autoencoder
(CAE) and VAE models for hybrid, self-supervised log anomaly
detection. Wu et al. [54] propose the Pre-LogMGAE framework

5946

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

The general process of log anomaly detection.

that combines the masked graph autoencoder model with contrastive learning for self-supervised pre-training and anomaly
detection. In addition to the autoencoder, as a DL-based generative model, the generative adversarial network (GAN) is also
introduced to the log anomaly detection task [55], [56].
With the rapid progress of DL, the Transformer architecture has taken enormous advantage in various fields [57], [58]
and thus is leveraged for log anomaly detection [59], [60],
[61]. Recently, researchers have also proposed to leverage the
powerful learning capabilities of LLMs for log analysis [62],
[63], [64]. Sakong et al. [65] propose a Transformer-based
framework that uses the Drain parser and Doc2Vec embedding
for reconstruction-based log anomaly detection. Guo et al. [30]
propose the LogBERT framework, which trains a BERT-like
model as the anomaly detector by generating masked tokens
in normal sequences. Xiao et al. [31] propose Loader, which
uses multiple Transformer layers to analyze log patterns and
proposes a ‘Top-P’ algorithm to detect anomalies. In [1], we
propose a detection framework to train a Transformer encoderbased detector with pre-training and fine-tuning approaches.
Le et al. [32] propose to leverage the BERT model to process
and analyze raw logs, reducing the reliance on log parsers.
Then, the BERT model is adapted for a binary classification
task. Recently, language models have also been applied for
log anomaly detection. Guo et al. [66] propose a pre-training
and fine-tuning pipeline to adapt language models for binary
classification of log lines. Han et al. [17] propose to pre-train
a GPT-2 language model and fine-tune it using reinforcement
learning to detect anomalies. Although achieving high detection
performance, these advanced DL-enhanced methods lead to
relatively heavy runtime overhead. Ott et al. [67] propose to
use different pre-trained language models, such as BERT and
GPT-2, to generate embedded representations for log messages,
to enhance the robustness and generalization capabilities of
DL-based log anomaly detectors.
C. Generative Pre-Trained Transformers (GPTs)
Since being first proposed in 2017, the Transformer architecture has achieved dominant advantages in many fields, such as
natural language processing [68], computer vision [69], recommender systems [70], etc. The original Transformer architecture
contains multiple encoder and decoder layers, which leverage
the positional encoding and self-attention mechanism to learn
the complex contextual features in the input data [68]. As the
scale of Transformer-based models continues to increase in
these years, traditional supervised learning approaches are less

effective. In addition, the lack of labeled data is another difficulty
in supervised learning. To this end, the ‘pre-training and finetuning’ paradigm is widely applied in the deep learning domain.
For instance, researchers from OpenAI pre-train a Transformer
decoder-based foundation language model with the next-tokenprediction task, and then fine-tune it to downstream generative
tasks with Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based algorithms to
align with humans and acquire the Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPTs) model [18], [71], [72].
The ‘pre-training and fine-tuning’ paradigm includes pretraining and fine-tuning phases. The goal of the pre-training
phase is to learn the basic semantic features in input data, without
considering the downstream tasks. Researchers typically use
self-supervised learning to pre-train the foundation models. In
the fine-tuning phase, the foundation models are further trained
to fit specific downstream tasks. To fine-tune the foundation
models, the parameters of their low-level layers are usually
frozen, and they are optimized using labeled data from specific
tasks. Our framework applies the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm. We pre-train the foundation model to learn the general
semantic features in log sequences. Then, we fine-tune the foundation model to the event prediction task. As introduced above,
labeled log data is difficult to acquire in real-world scenarios.
The pre-training phase is suitable for extracting and learning
features in unlabeled data, which makes our framework perform
well in such scenarios.
D. Knowledge Distillation
Rapid development of ML, especially DL technologies, has
brought significant changes to many fields, but it also faces the
challenges of high computing and storage overhead. For example, it is difficult to deploy large-scale DL models on embedded
devices with limited energy and hardware resources. Therefore, DL-based models need to be compressed to be suitable
for deployment in such scenarios. To this end, the knowledge
distillation method is proposed to effectively compress the scale
of DL models while retaining acceptable performance. As a
transfer learning method, knowledge distillation leverages the
‘Teacher-Student’ architecture and aims to transfer dark knowledge, i.e., the hidden knowledge learned from training data, from
a large-scale teacher model to a lightweight student model [73].
Hinton et al. [74] propose a temperature-based (T emp) Softmax
function to extract dark knowledge and generate soft labels (qi )
from output logits (zi ), which is defined as
exp(z i /T emp)
.
qi = 
j
j exp(z /T emp)

(1)

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

5947

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF LOG ANOMALY DETECTION METHODS

The knowledge distillation uses both soft labels and ground truth
labels (i.e., hard labels) to train the lightweight student model.
Unlike hard labels, soft labels contain the understanding and
preferences of the teacher model, thus improving the generalization capabilities of the trained student model [74]. In recent
years, numerous knowledge distillation methods have been proposed to adapt to different model compression tasks, such as
adversarial distillation, multi-teacher distillation, cross-modal
distillation, etc [75], [76], [77]. Due to the efficient transfer
learning abilities of knowledge distillation, it is also applied
in natural language processing, computer vision, recommender
systems, and cybersecurity domains [73], [78], [79].
In this work, we leverage the powerful model compression and
knowledge-transfer capabilities of the knowledge distillation
techniques and propose a multi-level distillation method suitable
for log data.
E. Summary
We systematically review and compare the representative
log anomaly detection methods in Table I. Although existing
approaches have achieved strong detection performance, several
critical challenges remain to be addressed:
r As system logs grow increasingly complex and large-scale,
there is a need to develop more powerful log anomaly
detection models.
r In practice, high-quality, manually labeled log data
for training is scarce, yet most existing methods rely

heavily on such data. Therefore, the information contained
in unlabeled logs should be fully exploited.
r Most existing studies focus primarily on performance
while overlooking runtime overhead, which limits their
applicability in real-world deployments.
In this work, we propose a hybrid log anomaly detection framework to address the aforementioned challenges. The
framework adopts a pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm to
fully exploit unlabeled logs and reduce the reliance on labeled
training data. It employs a multi-layer Transformer encoder
architecture to effectively capture contextual dependencies in
log event sequences. Furthermore, to enhance its practicality in
real-world deployments, the framework integrates a multi-level
knowledge distillation technique to achieve accurate and costefficient anomaly detection.

III. OVERVIEW OF OUR FRAMEWORK
In this paper, we introduce the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm to the log analysis domain and propose a hybrid log
anomaly detection framework. We first pre-train a foundation
model on large-scale unlabeled log data to learn the basic sequential features. Then, we fine-tune it on labeled logs to discern
outlier patterns and gain anomaly detection capabilities. After
that, the fine-tuned model is further compressed while preserving its performance. The trained detector identifies anomalous
patterns by comparing its predictions with ground-truth events.

5948

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

The overview of our framework.

Our framework exploits sequential information within logs to
achieve better performance in real-world scenarios.
As shown in Fig. 3, our framework includes four modules:
(i) Data Preprocessing, (ii) Model Training, (iii) Model Compression, and (iv) Anomaly Detection. Specifically, raw logs are
processed into event sequences in the first module. The second
module uses the extracted sequences to train the foundation
model and then the prediction model with self-supervised learning. The third module uses the knowledge distillation technique
to compress the fine-tuned model. Finally, the compressed prediction model serves as the anomaly detector in the last module.
We give a detailed introduction to our framework as follows.
A. Data Preprocessing Module
Loggers typically populate predefined templates and print
out logs, which are formatted strings that record critical runtime information of computer systems. Therefore, massive raw
logs can be processed into events according to log templates,
which significantly reduces the amount of input data. We sort
the extracted events by timestamp to generate structured event
sequences. After that, these event sequences serve as input data
for subsequent modules.
B. Model Training Module
According to previous works [12], [13], there are specific sequential patterns within logs that distinguish normal sequences
from abnormal ones. The objective of log anomaly detection
is to identify these patterns from time series log data, which is

very similar to processing and analyzing natural language. In
other words, our aim is to understand the language that the log
data speaks. Therefore, we design our model training module
referring to some state-of-the-art techniques in the NLP field.
Log event sequences are first encoded into vectors. Since the
scale of log templates is relatively small in common systems,
we select One-Hot encoding as the vectorization approach,
which is simple yet sufficient for our task. Our model training module follows the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm.
Specifically, in the pre-training phase, we propose the masked
log reconstruction-based technique to train a foundation model,
which learns the contextual features in event sequences. Then,
in the fine-tuning phase, we train the foundation model to make
correct predictions on the next log events in normal sequences,
which actually gives the model the ability to learn normal
patterns. After that, the fine-tuned prediction model is further
compressed in the next module.
C. Model Compression Module
Existing research works rarely consider the computational
efficiency or storage overhead of log anomaly detectors. Thus,
in the model compression module, we aim to leverage knowledge distillation to train a compressed model while preserving the high performance of the fine-tuned prediction model.
Specifically, we propose a multi-level knowledge distillation
method suitable for sequential log data. Our knowledge distillation method calculates three separate loss values to train the
compressed model so that the compressed model achieves high

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

5949

Fig. 4. An illustration of our proposed pre-training and fine-tuning methods. After pre-training, the Transformer layers (green part) are frozen and serve as the
backbone of the fine-tuned model.

prediction performance while accurately fitting the fine-tuned
model. After model compression, the lightweight distilled model
serves as the anomaly detector in the next module.
D. Anomaly Detection Module
We deploy the compressed event prediction model as the
log anomaly detector, which continuously predicts the next
events based on previous event sequences. In particular, the
fine-tuned model from the second module can also serve as an
anomaly detector because the model compression module only
reduces its scale. Since the prediction model is trained to learn
normal patterns, it detects anomalies simply by comparing the
predictions with actual events.
IV. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we give a detailed introduction to our pretraining, fine-tuning, and knowledge distillation methods. These
methods are leveraged in the second and third modules of our
log anomaly detection framework.
A. Pre-Training Based on Masked Log Reconstruction
In the pre-training phase, the foundation model learns the
semantic features. Transformers [68] have achieved dominant
advantages in multiple fields, which are extremely suitable for
processing time series data and significantly outperform RNN
models. Therefore, we use the Transformer as the basis of our
foundation model. It leverages multiple Transformer encoder
layers to learn the sequential patterns and concatenates fully
connected layers to generate outputs.
Inspired by BERT [80] and Masked Autoencoder [81], we
pre-train the foundation model using input masking techniques,

the core idea of which is to train models to learn key features
by recovering masked inputs. In this paper, we introduce the
input masking technique to the field of log analysis and propose
a masked log reconstruction approach for pre-training. Our
approach randomly masks part of the input events and trains
the model to automatically recover the original sequences. The
process of our mask-based pre-training methods is shown in
Fig. 4(a).
To illustrate our approach, suppose that an original sequence Sorigin has L events, then we have Sorigin =
1
2
3
L
, Sorigin
, Sorigin
, . . ., Sorigin
]. To acquire the masked
[Sorigin
sequence, we randomly choose L ∗ r events with a masking
rate (r) and replace them with a masking token ([mask]).
Assuming that the second event is masked, the masked se1
, [mask],
quence (Smask ) is formulated as Smask = [Sorigin
3
L
Sorigin , . . ., Sorigin ]. Given masked sequences, the foundation
model is trained to accurately recover the masked sequences,
i.e., to maximize the probabilities of outputting the corresponding original sequences. Therefore, the loss function is defined
as the distance between the output vector (X recover ) and the
original vector (X origin ), where X origin is the vectorized input
sequence. In this paper, we leverage the Mean-Squared Error
(MSE) loss to measure the distance. Supposing that X j is the
j th value in the vectors, the loss function of our pre-training
approach is formulated as
Losspt = M SE_Loss (X origin , X recover )
2
1  j
X origin − X jrecover .
L j=1
L

=

(2)

To train the foundation model, we continuously update its
parameters to minimize the loss value. After pre-training, the

5950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

foundation model obtains the contextual information in the input
log sequences. The trained foundation model is further finetuned in the next phase.
B. Fine-Tuning Based on Next Event Prediction
As mentioned above, the foundation model learns the semantic features from the log data. Although the pre-trained model
contains valuable information, it is insufficient for detecting
anomalies. Therefore, we fine-tune the foundation model to
a downstream task, i.e., next event prediction, which aims to
predict the next events according to previous sequences. We
train the model on labeled data so that it learns specific patterns
that distinguish normal sequences from abnormal ones.
To accomplish the prediction task, as shown in Fig. 3, we
initially modify the structure of the trained foundation model
by removing its output layers and freezing the parameters of
the Transformer encoder layers since the semantic features are
contained in these layers. Then, we concatenate a fully connected
classifier to the modified foundation model, which aims to output
the probabilities of the next events. Actually, other ML models
that have prediction capabilities can act as the classifier, e.g.,
LSTM, 1D-CNN, etc. We fine-tune the prediction model by
continuously optimizing the parameters of the concatenated
classifier. Consequently, the fine-tuning phase requires much
less training time than pre-training.
As shown in Fig. 4(b), the modified model takes previous sequences as inputs and outputs the predictions of the next events,
which are vectors containing the probabilities that different
events occur next. To train the prediction model, we iteratively
sample fixed-length sequences from labeled datasets as inputs
and the next events as labels. Given previous sequences, the
model aims to maximize the probabilities that target events are
correctly predicted. Therefore, the loss function is defined as the
difference between the output probabilities (Y output ) and the
vectorized target label (Y true ). Using the Cross-Entropy (CE)
loss to measure the difference, the loss function is formulated as
Lossf t = CE_Loss(Y output , Y true )
=−

n


Y itrue log Y ioutput ,

(3)

i=1

where n is the number of log event types and Y i is the probability
value of the ith event.
In the fine-tuning phase, all the training data are extracted from
normal logs. After training, the prediction model learns normal
sequential patterns and can accurately predict normal events.
The fine-tuned prediction model is adopted for log anomaly
detection.

deployment. To this end, we introduce the knowledge distillation technique into our framework. In this work, we propose a
multi-level knowledge distillation method suitable for log data,
which are essentially large-scale serialized sequences of discrete
log events. We distill our fine-tuned prediction model using
our knowledge distillation method to compress it. The distilled
prediction model has a significant decrease in the number of
parameters, storage usage, and inference time. We will give
a detailed introduction to our proposed knowledge distillation
method in the following.
As introduced in Section II, knowledge distillation is a widely
applied compression method in the DL domain. In the classic
knowledge distillation framework, the student model continuously learns knowledge from the teacher model, so that the
small-scale student model can achieve generalization capabilities similar to the teacher model. In our framework, the finetuned prediction model serves as the teacher, while a small-scale
transformer-based model is trained as the student. The student
model has a similar structure to the teacher model, with fewer
Transformer encoder layers and a smaller hidden vector size.
The overview of our knowledge distillation method is shown
in Fig. 5. To train the student model, we first need to extract fixedlength input sequences from the training dataset. Let Xinput be
a vectorized input sequence that is fed into both the teacher
and student models. The teacher model then produces a logit
Y teacher and the student model produces a logit Y student . After
that, these output logits are further calculated by the Softmax
function to acquire the output probabilities, i.e., Qteacher and
Qstudent . Suppose that Y j is the probability of the j th value in
Y , Qi is the probability of the ith event. The Softmax function
is calculated by comparing a single logit with others, which is
formulated as
exp(Y i /T emp)
,
Qi = n
j
j=1 exp(Y /T emp)

where T emp is the temperature parameter. A larger temperature
value makes the output probability distribution smoother. The
output probability vector of the teacher model (Qteacher ) is the
soft label of the input sequence. Since the goal of knowledge
distillation is to compress the teacher model while preserving
its generalization capabilities, the student model is trained to fit
the teacher model. In other words, given an input sequence, the
student model is trained to minimize the distance between the
soft label (Qteacher ) and the output vector (Qstudent ). Using the
KL Divergence method to measure the distance, the distillation
loss function is defined as
Lossdistill = DKL (Qstudent ||Qteacher )
=

n

i=1

C. Knowledge Distillation for Efficient Log Anomaly
Detection
The storage and computing efficiency of log anomaly detectors is critical to deployment in real-world scenarios. However,
existing research works rarely consider either storage or computing efficiency issues, which leads to difficulties in real-world

(4)

Qistudent log

Qistudent
,
Qiteacher

(5)

where i is the index of Qteacher and Qstudent .
In addition to training the student model to fit the teacher
model, we also expect the student model to perform well on the
log event prediction task. To this end, the student model is trained
to fit the ground-truth labels, not just soft labels. Therefore,
the training goal is similar to the fine-tuning phase, which is

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

5951

Fig. 5. The overview of our knowledge distillation method. As in the shaded area, we extend the conventional knowledge distillation method by introducing an
additional loss term to measure the distance between the hidden representations of two models.

to maximize the probability that the student model accurately
predicts the ground truth event. The loss function is defined as
the distance between the output vector (Qstudent ) and the target
label (Y true ). Using CE loss, the prediction loss function is
formulated as
Losspred = CE_Loss(Qoutput , Y true )
=−

n


Y itrue log Qioutput .

(6)

i=1

Unlike conventional knowledge distillation methods, we propose to learn not only the outputs of the teacher model but also its
hidden representations in intermediate layers. The Transformer
layers in our prediction model include the sequential features
learned from log event sequences. In order to make the student
model learn more knowledge from the teacher model, we propose to extend the conventional knowledge distillation method
by additionally training the student model to fit the outputs of the
hidden layers in the teacher model. As shown in the shaded area
in Fig. 5, we extract the output of the final Transformer encoder
layer from both the student and teacher models, i.e., H student
and H teacher . Our training goal is to maximize the probability
that the student model outputs the same hidden vector as the
teacher model. Therefore, the loss function is defined as the
distance between H student and H teacher . Using MSE loss to
measure the distance, the hidden loss function is formulated as
Losshidden = M SE_Loss(H student , H teacher )
1 j
=
(H
− H jteacher )2 ,
h j=1 student
h

(7)

assuming that h is the size of the hidden vector and j is the index
of the hidden vector.
The overall loss function of our knowledge distillation method
is defined as the combination of the above three loss functions:
LossKD = α · Lossdistill + β · Losspred + γ · Losshidden ,
(8)
where α, β, and γ are parameters to control the ratio of these
losses. To train the student model, we iteratively extract fixedlength log event sequences from the training dataset as input.
Then, we feed the input sequences into both the teacher and
student models to acquire outputs and calculate the loss values,
based on which the parameters of the student model are updated.
After knowledge distillation, the student model acquires comparable performance with the original prediction model with much
lower computational and storage overhead.
D. Anomaly Detection With Pre-Trained Transformers
After the pre-training, fine-tuning, and knowledge distillation
phases, the prediction model effectively learns the sequential
patterns of normal logs. It is capable of predicting the next events
in normal logs according to previous sequences. Therefore, the
behaviors of a functioning system can be precisely predicted
by the model. In this way, outlier system operations that are
beyond the expectations of the model are detected as anomalies.
Inspired by this, we implement a prediction-based anomaly
detection approach in our framework. Specifically, given input
sequences, the trained prediction model outputs vectors containing the probabilities that certain log events will occur next. As
the fine-tuned prediction model makes accurate predictions on
normal logs, the ground truth events are expected to appear in
the events with top-k probabilities; otherwise, anomaly patterns

5952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Algorithm 1: Log Anomaly Detection.

Isolation Forest [28], and LogCluster [15] implemented in
Loglizer.1 For DL-based methods, we evaluate six stateof-the-art anomaly detectors, including Deep Autoencoder,
DeepLog [12], LogAnomaly [13], Loader [31], LogGPT [17],
and LogBERT [30].
C. Implementation Details

are identified. The algorithm for online anomaly detection is
presented in Algorithm 1.
V. EVALUATION SETTINGS
A. Datasets
We evaluate our method on three popular public log
datasets [82], including the HDFS dataset [83], the BGL
dataset [84], and the Thunderbird [84] dataset. The detailed
information about these datasets is introduced as follows.
HDFS: The Hadoop File System (HDFS) dataset contains
11,175,629 logs collected from a Hadoop cluster deployed on
200 Amazon EC2 nodes. These logs record 29 different types of
log events in the Hadoop system. The dataset is further processed
and labeled by human experts. There are 575,061 blocks in the
cluster, 16,838 of which are manually labeled as abnormal.
BGL: The BGL dataset is collected from the BlueGene/L
(BGL) supercomputer system at Lawrence Livermore National
Labs (LLNL). The BGL dataset contains 4,747,963 logs, among
which 348,460 logs are labeled abnormal. These logs include
377 different types of log events in the BGL supercomputer.
Thunderbird (TBird): The TBird dataset records runtime logs
collected from the Thunderbird supercomputer system at Sandia
National Labs (SNL). As in previous work, we extract the first
20,000,000 lines of log messages from the raw data, among
which 41,543 lines are labeled as abnormal. After log parsing,
these logs include 1,207 different types of log events in the
Thunderbird supercomputer.
B. Baselines
In this paper, we compare our framework with nine baseline methods. For ML-based methods, we evaluate PCA [83],

For the HDFS dataset, we use the regex tool to extract log
events according to the open-source log templates provided by
Xu et al. [83]. For BGL and TBird datasets, we use the Drain
parser to extract log templates and structured log data from raw
logs [24], [25]. We use the sliding window to extract fixed-length
sequences with sequence_length = 10 and step_size = 1.
Then, we leverage one-hot encoding (HDFS and BGL) and
word embedding (TBird) to obtain vectorized representations.
In the pre-training phase, we initialize the Transformer-based
foundation model with hidden_size = 128. We set the number
of Transformer encoder layers as 12 for the HDFS dataset and
4 for the BGL dataset. We randomly mask 10% of the input
events to pre-train the foundation model. To detect anomalies,
considering the size of event templates, the value of k is set
as 3, 39, and 120 for the HDFS, BGL, and TBird datasets,
respectively.
For RNN-based baselines, we set num_layers = 2
and hidden_size = 64 for both the DeepLog and
LogAnomaly models. For Transformer-based baselines, we set
hidden_size = 64, num_layers = 4, and num_headers = 4
for the Deep Autoencoder, Loader, and LogBERT. We train the
above DL-based baseline models for 500 epochs to achieve the
best performance. For the LLM-enhanced LogGPT method, we
set num_layers = 4 and num_headers = 4 for the GPT-2
language model. We pre-train LogGPT for 100 epochs and
fine-tune it for 20 epochs with the RL algorithm to achieve the
best performance.
To evaluate our knowledge distillation method, we set
num_layers = 1 and hidden_size = 8 for the student model.
The fine-tuned prediction model serves as the teacher model.
We set α = 1.0, β = 1.0, and γ = 2.0 for our knowledge distillation method. For the baseline distillation method, which only
leverages distillation and prediction losses, we set α = 1.0 and
β = 1.0. We train both student models for 100 epochs to achieve
the best performance.
We run all the experiments on a server with Ubuntu 20.04,
Intel Xeon 2.90 GHz CPU, 256 GB memory, and NVIDIA
RTX A6000 GPUs. We implement our method and the baseline
models with Python 3.9 and PyTorch 2.5.
D. Evaluation Metrics
In our experiments, we count the TP, FP, TN, and FN values
and compute the following three metrics to evaluate all methP
TP
ods, including P recision = T PT+F
P , Recall = T P +F N , and
P recision∗Recall
F 1 Score = 2 ∗ P recision+Recall .
To evaluate our knowledge distillation method, we calculate three indicators to measure the computational and storage
1 Loglizer. https://github.com/logpai/loglizer. [9]

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

5953

TABLE II
EVALUATION OF OVERALL PERFORMANCE

Fig. 6.

Dataset partition in our experiments.

overhead of log anomaly detectors, including the number of
parameters, the number of Floating Point Operations (FLOPs),
and inference time (Infer Time) for each input sequence. For
the inference time metric, we first warm up the GPUs for 1,000
repetitions and then measure the inference time of a single input
sequence (batch_size=1) 1,000 times. We report the average
inference time to ensure reliable results.
VI. EVALUATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we aim to answer the following research
questions to evaluate our proposed framework:
RQ1: How is the overall detection performance of the proposed framework compared to the SOTA baselines?
RQ2: How does the proposed framework perform in realworld scenarios where high-quality labeled training data is
scarce?
RQ3: How effective is the proposed knowledge distillation approach? How much is the inference overhead of the compressed
model for real-world deployment?
RQ4: Is the proposed knowledge distillation approach robust
to real-world scenarios?
A. Evaluation of Overall Performance (RQ1)
In the first experiment, we compare the overall performance
of our framework with baselines on the HDFS, BGL, and TBird
datasets. It is notable that the HDFS dataset is divided according

to block_id, and the BGL and TBird datasets are divided by time.
These datasets are split as shown in Fig. 6(a). For our framework,
we pre-train the foundation model on Dataset 1 and fine-tune
it on Dataset 2. For the baselines, we train them on a dataset
combining Dataset 1 and Dataset 2. We test all the methods on
Dataset 3 and Dataset 4.
The experimental results are shown in Table II. Overall, our
framework achieves the best performance among all methods,
which indicates that it learns semantic features from normal
log data and effectively detects outlier log patterns. Although
ML-based methods achieve high performance in specific metrics (e.g., PCA achieves 100% recall on the HDFS and TBird
datasets), their overall performance is much lower than DLbased methods, proving that such methods have lower learning
abilities than DL models.
Among all the DL-based methods, AE achieves relatively
poor results (92.06% F1 score on HDFS, 30.52% F1 score
on BGL, and 92.08% F1 score on TBird). Especially on the
BGL dataset, AE has serious overfitting problems. The other six
DL-based models, including DeepLog, LogAnomaly, Loader,
LogGPT, LogBERT, and our framework, achieve higher detection performance. On the HDFS dataset, our method achieves
99.50% precision, 99.43% recall, and 99.47% F1 score, all
of which outperform the DL-based baseline models. On the
BGL dataset, the DL-based baselines achieve comparable performance while our method achieves 99.28% precision, 98.81%
recall, and 99.05% F1 score, significantly outperforming other
DL-based models. Besides, on the TBird dataset, all the DLbased methods perform well, and our method achieves the
best performance among them with 99.96% F1 score. These
experimental results indicate that our method detects more
anomalies while triggering fewer false alarms, which is critical
for deploying anomaly detectors in production environments.
It is also shown that the Transformer-based architecture
and the training methods in our framework play a significant
role. Among the DL-based detectors, our method, Loader, and
LogBERT utilize the Transformer Encoder-based architecture
to extract and learn the sequential features within log data,
while DeepLog and LogAnomaly use the LSTM model. The
evaluation results show that these Transformer-based methods
outperform the LSTM-based ones on the HDFS and BGL

5954

datasets, demonstrating the superiority of the Transformer-based
architecture. Moreover, our method performs better than Loader
and LogBERT models on all three datasets, which indicates that,
following the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, our training
method makes the model learn more key features and better
distinguish unexpected patterns.
To conclude, in the first experiment, we train and evaluate
our method and nine baseline models on three public datasets,
where all the data are assumed to be labeled, which conducts
an overall evaluation of all these methods and provides unified
metrics of their performance. Experimental results show that our
framework achieves the best performance among these methods.
In the following experiment, we will further prove the superiority
of our framework in real-world scenarios.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE III
EVALUATION OF REAL-WORLD SCENARIOS ON THE HDFS DATASET

B. Evaluation of Real-World Scenarios (RQ2)
In the second experiment, we compare the performance of our
framework and the DL-based baselines in real-world scenarios.
As described above, existing works typically train their anomaly
detection models on normal log data and test them on both
normal and abnormal data. They assume that all the log data
in the dataset is labeled. However, labeled log datasets are
extremely difficult to obtain, as manually labeling logs requires
a heavy workload. Therefore, the amount of unlabeled log data is
significantly larger than the labeled data in real-world scenarios.
We believe that it is essential to evaluate anomaly detectors in
such circumstances.
We reconstruct the HDFS dataset to simulate real-world scenarios. As shown in Fig. 6(b), abnormal data is divided into two
parts, where Dataset 4 contains α% of it and Dataset 5 contains
the rest. For our framework, we first pre-train the foundation
model on an unlabeled dataset combining Dataset 1 and Dataset
4, and then fine-tune it on Dataset 2. We train the baselines on a
dataset combining Dataset 1, Dataset 2, and Dataset 4 to obtain
fair evaluation results. All methods are tested on Dataset 3 and
Dataset 5.
We select the value of α as 20, 40, and 60 to construct our
datasets and run the experiments on these datasets separately. As
shown in Table III, the evaluation metrics prove that our framework remarkably outperforms the baselines. More importantly,
the performance of the baseline models drops significantly
compared to the first experiment (α = 0), while our framework
achieves similar performance, making our method the only one
that can adapt to real-world scenarios where unlabeled logs
are leveraged for training. As trained on unlabeled datasets,
the baselines learn the sequential features within normal and
abnormal logs, making these patterns more indistinct and thus
resulting in significant degradation in performance. Unlike them,
our framework first pre-trains the foundation model to exploit
unlabeled data and then fine-tunes it on labeled data to acquire
detection capabilities. Consequently, our framework performs
well in real-world scenarios.
In addition, it is also shown that the performance of our framework decreases slightly as α increases. With more abnormal data
combined in the pre-training phase, the foundation model learns
more abnormal patterns. Given the same fine-tuning dataset, it

is more difficult for the fine-tuned model to distinguish between
normal and abnormal patterns. Despite a slight degradation in
detection performance, our framework is the only method that
achieves acceptable evaluation results.
To summarize, in the second experiment, we prove that our
framework is suitable for real-world scenarios. Among all DL
methods, our framework is the only one that achieves high
performance in such scenarios.
C. Evaluation of Knowledge Distillation (RQ3)
In the third experiment, we evaluate the performance of our
model compression method on HDFS, BGL, and TBird datasets.
As introduced above, the knowledge distillation framework
consists of a teacher model and a student model, aiming to
transfer knowledge from the teacher to the student. In our
framework, the fine-tuned model serves as the teacher model,
while a Transformer-based model with a similar architecture
serves as the student model. It is worth noting that the student
model has fewer layers and smaller hidden sizes than the teacher
model, as our goal is to compress the fine-tuned model. We
evaluate our knowledge distillation method on the datasets of
the first experiment. In addition to the performance metrics, we
also calculate the number of parameters, FLOPs, and inference
time for the teacher model, the student model, and DL-based
baselines, in order to prove the advantages of our knowledge
distillation method.
The evaluation results are shown in Table IV. On all three
datasets, the student model achieves comparative performance
to the teacher model. On HDFS and TBird datasets, the distilled
model slightly overfits on normal data, thus detecting a few more
false positives. Despite this, the distilled student model achieves
high detection performance on all three datasets (99.56% on
HDFS, 99.05% on BGL, and 99.93% on TBird), proving that our

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

5955

TABLE IV
EVALUATION OF OUR KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION METHOD

knowledge distillation method is capable of retaining the high
detection performance of original detectors. More importantly,
the compressed model has low computational overhead and
storage usage. On the HDFS dataset, our knowledge distillation method reduces the number of parameters by 95.01%,
the number of FLOPs by 98.23%, and the inference time by
88.82%. On the BGL dataset, our method reduces the number
of parameters by 20.29%, the number of FLOPs by 70.72%, and
the inference time by 68.16%. Meanwhile, on the TBird dataset,
our method reduces the number of parameters by 13.76%,
the number of FLOPs by 28.14%, and the inference time by
57.14%. The significant decline in these indicators demonstrates
that our knowledge distillation method effectively improves the
computational and storage efficiency of the fine-tuned prediction
model. Moreover, it is also shown in Table IV that the distilled
student model achieves higher detection performance than the
DL-based baselines with much lower computational overhead.
To conclude, the third experiment proves that our knowledge
distillation method can significantly compress the scale of log
anomaly detectors while preserving comparable detection performance. After knowledge distillation, the lightweight model
has significantly lower runtime overhead, which is suitable
for real-world deployment where computational and storage
resources are limited.
D. Evaluation of Our Knowledge Distillation Approach in
Real-World Scenarios (RQ4)
In this experiment, we evaluate the robustness of our knowledge distillation approach in real-world scenarios where labeled
data is scarce. To this end, we use the same dataset as the second
experiment. Specifically, we leverage the proposed knowledge

TABLE V
EVALUATION OF KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION IN REAL-WORLD SCENARIOS

distillation method to compress the three models trained in the
second experiment, which are pre-trained with 20%, 40%, and
60% abnormal data, respectively.
The evaluation results are shown in Table V. It is shown that
the detection performance of all three student models decreases
slightly after knowledge distillation, which is caused by the
reduction in capacity of the lightweight models. Despite the
slight performance degradation, our distilled lightweight model
achieves significantly higher performance than the DL-based
baselines, as shown in Table III. In addition, the advantages are
even greater when more abnormal data are mixed. These results
prove that our distilled lightweight models perform well in the
simulated real-world scenarios, demonstrating the robustness of
our knowledge distillation approach.
E. Ablation Study on Training Pipeline
To illustrate the effectiveness of our hybrid training method,
we compare it with a Transformer-based prediction model
trained with supervised learning. The baseline shares the same

5956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY ON TRAINING PIPELINE

TABLE VIII
ABLATION STUDY ON KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

TABLE VII
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF PRE-TRAINING TASKS

architecture as our fine-tuned model and is trained with a supervised task, i.e., log event prediction.
We conduct experiments on a dataset as that in the first experiment. The results are shown in Table VI. Overall, our training
method performs better than the supervised learning method on
all datasets. Since these models share the same architecture, the
evaluation results demonstrate the advancement of our hybrid
training pipeline.
F. Evaluation of Pre-Training Task
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed masking-based
pre-training task, i.e., Masked Log Reconstruction (MLR), we
conduct a comparative experiment against the BERT MLM
approach. In the experiments, we pre-train two foundation
models with the MLR and MLM tasks, respectively, and then
fine-tune them on the next event prediction task for anomaly
detection. The model architecture, the fine-tuning approach, and
all hyperparameters are set to the same for the two methods.
The evaluation results are shown in Table VII. It is shown
that, pre-trained with our proposed MLR task, the detection
performance of fine-tuned detectors is significantly improved on
all three datasets, demonstrating the advantage of our proposed
pre-training approach tailored to log anomaly detection.
G. Ablation Study on Knowledge Distillation
We evaluate our Multi-Level Knowledge Distillation
(MLKD) approach in this experiment. We compare it to the
conventional knowledge distillation framework, which only uses
the prediction and distillation losses to transfer knowledge. We
evaluate these two methods on the HDFS, BGL, and TBird
datasets.

Fig. 7.

Evaluation of masking rate in pre-training.

The evaluation results are shown in Table VIII. On the HDFS
and TBird datasets, our MLKD method achieves higher F1
Scores than conventional knowledge distillation. On the BGL
dataset, limited by the data scale, our method achieves comparative performance to the baseline. These results indicate
that, trained with the additional hidden loss, the student model
acquires more knowledge from the teacher model. In conclusion,
we prove that our multi-level knowledge distillation method exceeds conventional methods in knowledge transfer capabilities.
H. Evaluation of Hyperparameter Sensitivity
1) Masking Rate: We evaluate the effectiveness of our
masking-based pre-training approach under diverse input masking rates, including 10%, 20%, 30%, and 50%, on three public datasets. The evaluation results are presented in Fig. 7. It
is shown that the detection performance decreases with bigger masking rates, and the best performance is achieved with
masking rate = 10%.
2) Temperature Coefficient: We evaluate the effectiveness
of our knowledge distillation method with diverse temperature
settings, including 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0. The evaluation
results are presented in Fig. 9. It is shown from the figure
that the optimal knowledge distillation results occur when the
temperature coefficient is set to 1.0 or 2.0.
3) Multi-Level Knowledge Distillation Coefficients: We
evaluate the contributions of the three coefficients, i.e., α, β,
and γ, in our multi-level knowledge distillation approach (8).
We conduct a grid search over the three coefficients, each taking
values from {1.0, 2.0}, and then evaluate the distilled detectors

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

Fig. 8.

5957

Training and inference time consumption of DL-based models.

TABLE IX
EVALUATION OF MULTI-LEVEL KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION COEFFICIENTS

Fig. 9.

accordingly. The evaluation results are presented in Table IX.
The coefficient setting reported in our work (α=1.0, β=1.0,
γ=2.0) achieves the best performance across datasets.
I. Evaluation of Time Consumption
The application of DL technology has greatly improved the
performance of log anomaly detectors, but their runtime overhead has also increased. The time consumption of the training
and inference phases in DL-based approaches is critical to
real-world deployment. Specifically, the inference time affects
the feasibility of actual deployment, while the training time

Evaluation of temperature settings in knowledge distillation.

affects the overhead of online training of the detector. To this
end, we measure the training and inference time cost of our
method and the DL-based baselines, which are shown in Fig. 8.
Different phases of model training, including pre-training (PT),
fine-tuning (FT), and knowledge distillation (KD), are evaluated
separately.
For inference overhead, it is shown that the inference time of
our fine-tuned model is relatively low among all DL-based methods. After knowledge distillation, the inference cost is further
reduced. With the high detection performance, our framework is

5958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

extremely suitable for real-world deployment. For training time
consumption, the training overhead of our framework is higher
than the RNN-based baseline (DeepLog and LogAnomaly), but
is comparable to the Transformer-based methods. We believe
that the additional training consumption of our framework is
acceptable, considering its outstanding performance.
J. Limitations and Future Work
Despite the high performance and efficiency, our study has
potential limitations. First, our data preprocessing and input
encoding approaches are based on pre-defined log templates.
Although log templates can be automatically extracted by
parsers, such template-based methods hardly generalize to new
types of logs. To this end, we suggest studying LLM-enhanced
template-free methods that directly process unstructured, natural
language-like log data. Second, our Transformer encoder-based
framework introduces additional runtime overhead compared to
conventional ML and DL-based methods. Therefore, in future
work, we aim to investigate the application of other lightweight
techniques, such as model quantization and pruning, in this field.
Finally, due to the robustness issues of DL models, it is possible
that our approach is vulnerable to AI-based attacks, such as
adversarial examples and backdoor attacks, motivating us to
study the adversarial robustness of DL-based detectors in future
work.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a hybrid framework for log
anomaly detection. Our framework follows the pre-training and
fine-tuning paradigm to leverage log data and achieve better
learning capabilities. We have proposed the masked log reconstruction approach to pre-train a Transformer-based foundation
model and fine-tune it to detect anomalous log patterns. We have
also proposed a knowledge distillation technique to compress the
fine-tuned model while maintaining its performance. Evaluation
results on three widely used public datasets show that our
framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods and is
ideal for real-world applications.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Yan et al., “Log-based anomaly detection with transformers pre-trained
on large-scale unlabeled data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Denver,
CO, USA, Jun. 2024, pp. 1–6.
[2] B. C. Das, M. H. Amini, and Y. Wu, “Security and privacy challenges of
large language models: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 6,
pp. 1–39, Feb. 2025.
[3] B. Yuan et al., “Minimizing financial cost of DDoS attack defense in clouds
with fine-grained resource management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2541–2554, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
[4] Y. Otoum, A. Asad, and A. Nayak, “Blockchain meets adaptive honeypots:
A trust-aware approach to next-gen IoT security,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 13, pp. 2270–2287, 2026.
[5] Y. Gong, C. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Zero-day malware defence with limited
samples,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 340–347, 2024.
[6] Y. Qin, X. Yang, L.-X. Yang, and K. Huang, “Mitigating social engineering
attacks through cost-effective security awareness training policy,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3145–3158, Jul./Aug. 2025.
[7] Y. Xia, X. Liu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “FCLA-DT: Federated continual
learning with authentication for distributed digital twin-based industrial
IoT,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 362–373, 2024.

[8] A. J. Oliner, A. Ganapathi, and W. Xu, “Advances and challenges in log
analysis,” Commun. ACM, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 55–61, 2012.
[9] S. He, J. Zhu, P. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience Report: System log
analysis for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel.
Eng., Ottawa, ON, Canada, Oct. 2016, pp. 207–218.
[10] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Online streaming parsing of large unstructured system logs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 2213–2227,
Nov. 2019.
[11] R. Christensen and F. Li, “Adaptive log compression for massive log data,”
in Proc. SIGMOD Conf., Jun. 2013, pp. 1283–1284.
[12] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dallas, TX, USA, Oct. 2017,
pp. 1285–1298.
[13] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., Macao, China, Aug. 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
[14] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. A. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Online system problem detection by mining patterns of console logs,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Miami, FL, USA, Dec. 2009,
pp. 588–597.
[15] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based
problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int.
Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, May 2016, pp. 102–111.
[16] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
autoencoders,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 665–674.
[17] X. Han, S. Yuan, and M. Trabelsi, “LogGPT: Log anomaly detection via
GPT,” in Proc. IEEE BigData, Sorrento, Italy, Dec. 2023, pp. 1117–1122.
[18] L. Ouyang et al., “Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Nov. 2022,
pp. 27730–27744.
[19] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 130:1–130:37, 2022.
[20] Z. Chen, J. Liu, W. Gu, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience report: Deep
learning-based system log analysis for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:
2107.05908.
[21] V. Beck, M. Landauer, M. Wurzenberger, F. Skopik, and A. Rauber,
“System log parsing with large language models: A review,” 2025,
arXiv:2504.04877.
[22] Y. Liu et al., “Interpretable online log analysis using large language
models with prompt strategies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Program.
Comprehension, Lisbon, Portugal, Apr. 2024, pp. 35–46.
[23] Z. Ma, D. J. Kim, and T. P. Chen, “LibreLog: Accurate and efficient
unsupervised log parsing using open-source large language models,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM ICSE, Ottawa, ON, Canada, May 2025, pp. 924–936.
[24] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Softw. Eng. Pract., Montreal, QC,
Canada, May 2019, pp. 121–130.
[25] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv.,
Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 33–40.
[26] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in
Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining, Barcelona, Spain, Dec. 2016,
pp. 859–864.
[27] H. Hamooni, B. Debnath, J. Xu, H. Zhang, G. Jiang, and A. Mueen,
“LogMine: Fast pattern recognition for log analytics,” in Proc. 25th ACM
Int. Conf. Inform. Knowl. Manage, Indianapolis, IN, USA, Oct. 2016,
pp. 1573–1582.
[28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Data Mining, Pisa, Italy, Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[29] P. Luo et al., “System log anomaly detection with noise-contrastive learning and pattern feature,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 11–24,
2026.
[30] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBert: Log anomaly detection via BERT,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., Shenzhen, China, Jul. 2021, pp. 1–8.
[31] T. Xiao et al., “Loader: A log anomaly detector based on transformer,”
IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3479–3492, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[32] V. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,”
in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., Melbourne,
VIC, Australia, Nov. 2021, pp. 492–504.
[33] M. Landauer, S. Onder, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection in log data: A survey,” Mach. Learn. Appl., vol. 12,
2023, Art. no. 100470.

YAN et al.: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION VIA TRANSFORMERS PRE-TRAINED ON MASSIVE UNLABELED DATA

[34] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in Big Data
system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int.
Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Intl Conf. Pervasive
Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput. Cyber Sci. Technol.
Congr., Aug. 2018, pp. 151–158.
[35] Z. Wang, J. Tian, H. Fang, L. Chen, and J. Qin, “LightLog: A lightweight
temporal convolutional network for log anomaly detection on the edge,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. 108616.
[36] R. Xiao, H. Chen, J. Lu, W. Li, and S. Jin, “AllInfoLog: Robust diverse
anomalies detection based on all log features,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2529–2543, Sep. 2023.
[37] Y. Fadili, Y. El Yamani, J. Kilani, N. El Kamoun, Y. Baddi, and F. Bensalah,
“An enhancing timeseries anomaly detection using LSTM and Bi-LSTM
architectures,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Wireless Netw. Mobile Commun.,
2024, pp. 1–6.
[38] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[39] D. Yu, X. Hou, C. Li, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, and N. Li, “Anomaly detection
in unstructured logs using attention-based Bi-LSTM network,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Netw. Intell. Digit. Content, Beijing, China, Nov. 2021,
pp. 403–407.
[40] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified
deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc.
IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Coimbra, Portugal, Oct. 2020,
pp. 92–103.
[41] Z. Huang, W. Xu, and K. Yu, “Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for
sequence tagging,” 2015, arXiv: 1508.01991.
[42] D. Zhang, D. Dai, R. Han, and M. Zheng, “SentiLog: Anomaly detecting
on parallel file systems via log-based sentiment analysis,” in Proc. ACM
HotStorage. Virtual Event, Jul. 2021, pp. 86–93.
[43] J. Chung, Ç. Gülçehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014, arXiv:
1412.3555.
[44] A. Farzad, “Log message anomaly detection with oversampling,” Int. J.
Artif. Intell. Appl., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 53–65, 2020.
[45] S. Gu, Y. Chu, W. Zhang, P. Liu, Q. Yin, and Q. Li, “Research on
system log anomaly detection combining two-way slice GRU and GAattention mechanism,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Big Data, 2021,
pp. 577–583.
[46] C. Li, J. Mo, G. Zhou, and G. Li, “Log anomaly detection based on parallel
fusion of CNN and GRU,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2024,
pp. 1–8.
[47] W. Yuan, S. Ying, X. Duan, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, and J. Shang, “MidLog:
An automated log anomaly detection method based on multi-head GRU,”
J. Syst. Softw., vol. 226, 2025, Art. no. 112431.
[48] P. Li, Y. Pei, and J. Li, “A comprehensive survey on design and application
of autoencoder in deep learning,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 138, 2023,
Art. no. 110176.
[49] K. Berahmand, F. Daneshfar, E. S. Salehi, Y. Li, and Y. Xu, “Autoencoders
and their applications in machine learning: A survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
vol. 57, no. 2, 2024, Art. no. 28.
[50] L. Zhang et al., “LogAttn: Unsupervised log anomaly detection
with an autoencoder based attention mechanism,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Knowl. Sci., Eng. Manage., Tokyo, Japan, Aug. 2021, vol. 12817,
pp. 222–235.
[51] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Wang, and Z. Cao, “Log sequence anomaly
detection method based on contrastive adversarial training and dual feature
extraction,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 69.
[52] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, Apr. 14-16, 2014,
pp. 1–14.
[53] A. Wadekar, T. Gupta, R. Vijan, and F. Kazi, “Hybrid CAE-VAE for
unsupervised anomaly detection in log file systems,” in Proc. 10th
Int. Conf. Comput., Commun. Netw. Technol., Kanpur, India, Jul. 2019,
pp. 1–7.
[54] A. Wu and Y. Kwon, “Pre-LogMGAE: Identification of log anomalies
using a pre-trained masked graph autoencoder,” in Proc. 43rd Int. Symp.
Reliable Distrib. Syst., Charlotte, NC, USA, Sep. 2024, pp. 294–306.
[55] X. Han and S. Yuan, “Unsupervised cross-system log anomaly detection
via domain adaptation,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inform. Knowl.
Manage., Queensland, Australia, Nov. 2021, pp. 3068–3072.
[56] X. Duan, S. Ying, W. Yuan, H. Cheng, and X. Yin, “A generative adversarial networks for log anomaly detection,” Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng., vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 135–148, 2021.

5959

[57] M. Ma, L. Han, and C. Zhou, “Research and application of
transformer based anomaly detection model: A literature review,”
2024, arXiv:2402.08975.
[58] B. Liu, X. Liu, S. Gao, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4CP: Adapting large
language models for channel prediction,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 113–125, 2024.
[59] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly
detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020.
[60] Q. Du, L. Zhao, J. Xu, Y. Han, and S. Zhang, “Log-Based anomaly
detection with multi-head scaled dot-product attention mechanism,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Database Expert Syst. Appl., Virtual Event, Sep. 2021,
vol. 12923, pp. 335–347.
[61] R. Xiao, W. Li, J. Lu, and S. Jin, “ContexLog: Non-parsing log anomaly
detection with all information preservation and enhanced contextual
representation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 4750–4762, Aug. 2024.
[62] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. A. Azad, “LogFiT: Log
anomaly detection using fine-tuned language models,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1715–1723, Apr. 2024.
[63] Z. Zhang, S. Li, L. Zhang, J. Ye, C. Hu, and L. Yan, “LLM-LADE: Large
language model-based log anomaly detection with explanation,” Knowl.
Based Syst., vol. 326, 2025, Art. no. 114064.
[64] X. Li et al., “AnomalyGen: An automated semantic log sequence generation framework with LLM for anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:
2504.12250.
[65] W. Sakong, J. Kwon, K. Min, S. Wang, and W. Kim, “Anomaly transformer
ensemble model for cloud data anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cloud
Comput., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1305–1313, Oct.–Dec. 2024.
[66] H. Guo et al., “Logformer: A pre-train and tuning pipeline for log anomaly
detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Vancouver, BC, Canada,
Feb. 2024, pp. 135–143.
[67] H. Ott, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, S. Nedelkoski, and O. Kao, “Robust
and transferable anomaly detection in log data using pre-trained language models,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., 2021,
pp. 19–24.
[68] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[69] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
Virtual Event, Austria, May 2021, pp. 1–22.
[70] F. Sun et al., “Bert4rec: Sequential recommendation with bidirectional
encoder representations from transformer,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf.
Inform. Knowl. Manage., Beijing, China, Nov. 2019, pp. 1441–1450.
[71] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. B. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei,
“Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences,” in Proc. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 4299–4307.
[72] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv: 2303.08774.
[73] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[74] G. E. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[75] X. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Sun, and J. Qi, “KDGAN: Knowledge distillation
with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
Montréal, QC, Canada, Dec. 2018, pp. 783–794.
[76] S. Gupta, J. Hoffman, and J. Malik, “Cross modal distillation for supervision transfer,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las
Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 2827–2836.
[77] N. Papernot, M. Abadi, Ú. Erlingsson, I. J. Goodfellow, and K. Talwar,
“Semi-supervised knowledge transfer for deep learning from private training data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, France,
Apr. 2017, pp. 1–16.
[78] D. Liu, P. Cheng, Z. Dong, X. He, W. Pan, and Z. Ming, “A general
knowledge distillation framework for counterfactual recommendation via
uniform data,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inform.
Retrieval, Virtual Event, China, Jul. 2020, pp. 831–840.
[79] N. Papernot, P. D. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distillation
as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, San Jose, CA, USA, May 2016,
pp. 582–597.
[80] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang.
Technol., Minneapolis, MN, USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.

5960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[81] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. B. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022,
pp. 15979–15 988.
[82] M. Landauer, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “A critical review of common log data sets used for evaluation of sequence-based anomaly detection
techniques,” in Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., 2024, vol. 1, pp. 1354–1375.
[83] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. A. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., Haifa, Israel, Jun. 2010, pp. 37–46.
[84] A. J. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
Netw., Edinburgh, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 575–584.

Senming Yan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.E. degree in software engineering
from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2020. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China and also with
the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests
include network security, zero trust security, and AI
for security.

Lei Shi (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.E. degree from Electronic Information School,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2021. She is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Integrated Circuits (School of Electronic
Information and Electrical Engineering), Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Her research
interests include network security, intrusion detection, cybersecurity situational awareness, and AI for
security.

Jing Ren (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees in communication engineering from
the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China, in 2007
and 2015, respectively. She is currently an Associate Researcher with UESTC and Research Assistant
with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Her
research interests include network architecture and
protocol design, software-defined networking, and
network security.

Wei Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from Central South University, Changsha,
China, in 2010, the M.S. degree from Southeast
University, Nanjing, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D.
degree from The University of New South Wales,
Sydney, NSW, Australia, in 2017. From 2018 to 2021,
he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with The
University of New South Wales. He is currently a
Senior Research Scientist (equivalent to Associate
Professor) with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen,
China. His research interests include millimeterwave
communications and machine learning for wireless communications. Dr. Wang
was the recipient of 2023 IEEE ComSoc AP Outstanding Young Researcher
Award and Best Paper Awards in the IEEE ICCC 2016, 2024. He is the Editor
of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING. He was the Editor of IEEE
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS and Co-Chair of multiple symposia and
workshops at major IEEE conferences.

Limin Sun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 1988 and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. He is also with the School
of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests include
mobile vehicle networks, Internet of Things security,
and wireless sensor networks.

Wei Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
from The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, in 2005. He is currently a Professor with the
School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW, Australia. His research focuses on 6 G communications and networks. He was the recipient of
the IEEE Communications Society Joseph LoCicero
Award for Exemplary Service to Publications in 2024.
He was an IEEE ComSoc Distinguished Lecturer
from 2016 to 2017. Within the IEEE ComSoc, he
has taken many leadership positions, including the Chair of the Wireless
Communications Technical Committee from 2019 to 2020, Vice Director of
the Asia–Pacific Board from 2016 to 2021, Editor-in-Chief of IEEE WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 2016 to 2019, Member-at-Large on the Board
of Governors from 2018 to 2020, Technical Program Committee Chair of APCC
2017 and ICCC 2019 and 2024, Award Committee Chair of the Asia–Pacific
Board, and Award Committee Chair of the Technical Committee on Cognitive
Networks. He has been the Vice President of IEEE Communications Society,
since 2022.