IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

1363

LogInstruct: Knowledge-Driven Instruction Synthesis
for Enhancing LLM-Based Log Analysis
Lipeng Ma , Yixuan Li , Weidong Yang , Member, IEEE, Mingjie Zhou , Mingyu Zhao ,
Ben Fei , Member, IEEE, Shuhao Li , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Sihang Jiang , and Yanghua Xiao

Abstract—Logs are vital for monitoring service health and troubleshooting in large-scale online service systems. Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated potential for automated log analysis. However, existing general LLMs
face two key challenges in log analysis: a lack of domain-specific
knowledge and limited adaptability to diverse log analysis tasks.
To address these limitations, we propose LogInstruct, a novel
LLM-based knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework
designed to enhance the log analysis capabilities of LLMs. LogInstruct bridges the domain knowledge gap by organizing log-specific
knowledge into a structured knowledge tree to guide the synthesis of
instruction. To ensure the diversity of instructions and hierarchical
log analysis skills, we leverage Bloom’s Taxonomy to synthesize log
instructions of varying difficulty levels, not only covering a wide
range of log analysis scenarios but also progressively challenging the model’s reasoning abilities. LogInstruct synthesizes 88 K
high-quality instruction datasets without manual intervention. Experiments demonstrate that open-source LLMs fine-tuned on our
dataset achieve state-of-the-art performance across five distinct log
analysis tasks, outperforming proprietary LLMs such as GPT-4o.
Index Terms—Log analysis, large language model, data
synthesis, instruction tuning.

I. INTRODUCTION
OGS serve as critical records of service runtime status,
such as cloud platforms and edge clouds, playing a pivotal
role in troubleshooting and monitoring service health [1], [2],
[3]. Traditional log analysis methods, which rely heavily on
experienced specialists manually inspecting vast amounts of
log data, are often labor-intensive and inefficient [4]. Thus,
automated log analysis has emerged as a promising solution,
leveraging algorithms and machine learning models to extract

L

Received 6 August 2025; revised 17 December 2025; accepted 7 January
2026. Date of publication 21 January 2026; date of current version 10 April 2026.
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai
under Grant 24ZR1405000 and in part by the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program
of CPSF under Grant GZC20242252. (Corresponding authors: Weidong Yang.)
Lipeng Ma, Yixuan Li, Weidong Yang, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li, Sihang
Jiang, and Yanghua Xiao are with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: lpma21@m.fudan.edu.cn;
yxli24@m.fudan.edu.cn; wdyang@fudan.edu.cn; mjzhou19@fudan.edu.cn;
shli23@m.fudan.edu.cn; jiangsihang@fudan.edu.cn; shawyh@fudan.edu.cn).
Mingyu Zhao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Electronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
(e-mail: myzhao@nwpu.edu.cn).
Ben Fei is with the Department of Information Engineering, the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: benfei@cuhk.edu.hk).
Our source code and synthesized data are available at https://github.com/
LeaperOvO/LogInstruct.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3656204

meaningful insights from log data [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14]. In recent years, the remarkable success of large
language models (LLMs) in natural language processing (NLP)
has spurred growing interest in their application to automated
log analysis. By integrating advanced prompting strategies and
capitalizing on their powerful understanding and reasoning capabilities, LLM-based approaches [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
[20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25] have demonstrated significant
progress in log analysis tasks such as log parsing and anomaly
detection.
Despite these advancements, LLMs still face two critical
limitations when applied to log analysis. First, they suffer from a
domain knowledge gap. Logs are typically concise, highly condensed, and filled with domain terminology [17], [20], [26], [27],
[28], such as IP, Port, Parameters, yet general LLMs are trained
on general-purpose datasets, limiting their ability to understand
logs effectively. This knowledge gap results in inaccurate inferences. Second, LLMs exhibit limited adaptability to diverse log
analysis tasks. Real-world log analysis tasks, from simple log interpretation to complex fault diagnosis and solution recommendation, require distinctly different analysis logic and thought.
While general LLMs are optimized for general-purpose human
intents [29], [30], they lack specialized reasoning capabilities
and do not align with the task-specific demands of log analysis.
To adapt general-purpose LLMs to specific domains, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [31], [32], [33] on high-quality instruction datasets has proven effective across specialized domains
such as code generation [34], [35], medical applications [36],
and legal analysis [37]. However, constructing high-quality instruction datasets for log analysis presents unique challenges.
On one hand, manually creating high-quality instruction data is
labor-intensive and costly. On the other hand, existing public
datasets for log analysis are limited in diversity, failing to generalize across real-world scenarios. For example, the previous
study [12] has shown that the log duplication rate in the public
datasets HDFS and Thunderbird exceeds 99% . Additionally,
these public datasets frequently exhibit simplistic data patterns
[12], [38], limiting their ability to develop advanced log analysis
capabilities. In real-world scenarios, high-quality log analysis
data currently remains dependent on expert-labeled data.
To overcome the challenges of manual data construction,
LLM-based data synthesis has recently emerged as a promising alternative [39], [40]. However, applying these methods to log analysis introduces two critical challenges. First,
general-purpose LLMs often generate inaccurate or irrelevant

1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

log analysis instructions. The task of log analysis is knowledgeintensive, requiring a comprehensive knowledge chain that encompasses familiarity with the syntax and semantics of logs,
recognition of patterns and anomalies, and ultimately, an understanding of troubleshooting strategies to resolve faults. This
knowledge gap makes it challenging to synthesize effective log
analysis instructions. Second, covering a wide range of log
analysis tasks with varying cognitive difficulty is essential but
challenging. Real-world log analysis involves different levels of
analytical difficulty, from simple log interpretation to complex
fault resolution. Without explicit modeling of difficulty hierarchy, LLMs may develop fragmented log analysis competencies,
excelling at simple pattern matching but collapsing when faced
with complex troubleshooting scenarios.
In this work, we propose LogInstruct, a novel LLM-based
knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework designed to
enhance the LLMs’ log analysis capabilities. Specifically, to
bridge the knowledge gap, we first introduce domain knowledge for each log from the documentation, such as background
descriptions and solution strategies, and organize this fragmented knowledge into a structured knowledge tree that presents
knowledge clearly and systematically, facilitating LLMs to fully
utilize this information for synthesis instructions. To ensure the
diversity of instructions and hierarchical log analysis skills, we
introduce Bloom’s Taxonomy [41], [42], a hierarchical cognitive
framework that helps synthesize log instructions of varying
difficulty levels based on the knowledge tree. By mapping
log analysis tasks onto different levels of cognitive difficulty,
synthesized instructions that not only cover a wide range of
log analysis scenarios but also progressively challenge LLM’s
reasoning abilities.
Using LogInstruct, we synthesize 88K high-quality instructions for log analysis without manual intervention. We evaluate our framework by fine-tuning Qwen2.5 of varying sizes
on the synthesized instructions and assessing its performance
across five distinct log analysis tasks. Our experiments demonstrate that models fine-tuned on our synthesized data achieve
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, significantly outperforming proprietary LLMs such as GPT-4o. Additionally, our findings reveal critical insights into LLM instruction fine-tuning
for log analysis: domain knowledge accumulation is critical, and instruction hierarchy matters. These findings provide
actionable guidelines for future research in LLM-driven log
analysis.
This paper presents the following key contributions:
1) To our best knowledge, we are the first to introduce
the knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework
designed for log analysis. By leveraging LLMs as data
synthesis engines and integrating domain knowledge,
our framework synthesizes 88K high-quality instructions
without manual intervention.
2) We introduce the domain knowledge of logs for ensuring the accuracy and relevance during instruction
synthesis. To ensure diversity, we introduce hierarchical instruction synthesis based on Bloom’s Taxonomy,
facilitating the development of diverse log analysis
capabilities.

3) We synthesize 88K instructions and demonstrate their
effectiveness through fine-tuning and extensive experiments, achieving SOTA performance and providing critical insights for future research.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Large Language Models for Log Analysis
Recent advances in LLMs have demonstrated significant
potential in automated log analysis tasks, addressing critical
tasks ranging from foundational log parsing to advanced failure
diagnostics. For instance, LLMParser [43] systematically evaluates various LLMs on log parsing and demonstrates that LLMs
significantly outperform state-of-the-art parsers by leveraging
their in-context learning capabilities. Similarly, frameworks like
LogPrompt [44], DivLog [15], LILAC [18], SelfLog [45], and
LogBatcher [46] showcase the effectiveness of LLMs in parsing structured and semi-structured logs without the need for
extensive task-specific fine-tuning. Beyond log parsing, LLMs
have also been applied to higher-order analysis tasks. Methods
like LogGPT [47], LogPrompt [44], LogLLM [48], LogExpert
[21], AdaptiveLog [22], and OpenRCA [24] utilize LLMs for
anomaly detection, root cause analysis, and solution recommendation.
Despite their promise, domain knowledge gaps and limited
adaptability remain challenges when adapting LLMs for log
analysis. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a novel
knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework, enabling
LLMs to improve their log analysis capabilities with instruction
tuning.
B. Synthesizing Instruction Tuning Data
Due to the huge computational overhead of pre-training,
instruction tuning has become essential for adapting LLMs to
domain-specific tasks [31], [32], [33]. By training on highquality instruction datasets, researchers have successfully enhanced their performance in areas such as code generation [34],
[35], medical diagnosis [36], and legal analysis [37]. However,
constructing high-quality datasets for domain-specific tasks like
log analysis is particularly challenging due to the diversity of
scenarios and the cost of annotation. To address the high costs
of manual annotation, researchers have turned to LLM-based
data synthesis, which involves generating synthetic instruction datasets using LLMs [39], [40]. However, general-purpose
LLMs often suffer from hallucination and inaccuracy when
applied to the highly technical field of log analysis. Furthermore,
ensuring diversity and relevance in synthesized instructions remains a critical challenge. Existing general-purpose instruction
synthesis works [32], [49], [50] focus on human instruction
alignment and cannot be applied to industrial log analysis scenarios.
Considering the LLM-based data synthesis technique for log
analysis remains underexplored, to address these limitations,
we explore leveraging LLM to synthesize instruction data tailored specifically for log analysis. By constructing a structured
knowledge tree to integrate domain-specific information and

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

Fig. 1.

The pipeline of LogInstruct.

leveraging Bloom’s Taxonomy to model instructions of varying
difficulty, LogInstruct ensures both accuracy and diversity in the
generated data.
III. METHODS
A. Overview
Fig. 1 shows the overall pipeline of LogInstruct, which is
divided into two stages: knowledge tree construction and instruction synthesis. In the knowledge tree construction stage,
we collect raw logs and corresponding documentation as input,
which provides sufficient background information, such as description, cause, and solutions. Then we employ the LLM to
extract knowledge and organize it into a structured knowledge
tree. In the instruction synthesis stage, we take the constructed
knowledge tree as the foundation, and then employ the LLM
to synthesize instructions of different difficulty levels. After
instruction synthesis, we also evaluate and refine the synthesized
instructions to ensure the quality of the instructions. Finally,
these synthesized instructions will be used to fine-tune the
open-source LLM and get the log analysis-specific LLM. In
the following sections, we describe the details of LogInstruct.
B. Knowledge Tree Construction
LLMs are usually unable to understand logs accurately when
they lack domain knowledge, which leads to the inability to
generate effective log analysis instructions. To mitigate this,
we incorporate domain-specific knowledge for each log entry
by leveraging publicly available documentation. Documentation
serves as a repository of domain-specific knowledge, offering
detailed background information, such as descriptions of log
events, their causes, and potential solutions.
However, documentation is often verbose and fragmented,
which poses challenges for LLMs to effectively extract and
utilize key knowledge. To address this, we systematically organize the extracted information into a knowledge tree structure
for each log entry. This structured organization enables more
precise knowledge extraction and facilitates the generation of
high-quality log analysis instructions.
We construct a knowledge treeT reei for eachlog logi , the
k n
knowledge tree T reei = rooti {nodeki }m
k=1 {leafi }k=1

1365

comprises three fundamental components: 1) Root Node rooti ,
which represents the core issue derived from the log message, synthesized into a concise phrase (e.g., “Database
Connection Failure”). It serves as the semantic anchor
for subsequent knowledge organization. 2) Branch Nodes
{node1i , node2i , ..., nodem
i }, these nodes serve as intermediate
categories that organize domain knowledge into different groups
(e.g., error causes, parameter information, impact scope). The
identification and granularity of these branches are determined
automatically by the LLM, guided by prompts to classify and,
when appropriate, further subdivide knowledge categories based
on logical coherence. 3) Leaf Nodes {leafi1 , leafi2 , ..., leafin },
which represent the most atomic knowledge units, each encapsulating a complete and non-redundant fact derived from
the documentation. This hierarchical organization guarantees
that each root-to-leaf path forms a complete, non-redundant
knowledge chain, ensuring both comprehensive coverage and
logical clarity.
The domain knowledge for each log entry is sourced from
its corresponding publicly available documentation, which is
typically in HTML format. We first employ XPath queries
to precisely extract the relevant textual information for each
log. To transform these unstructured text passages into a form
usable for instruction synthesis, we leverage the semantic
understanding capability of LLMs with prompt engineering.
This process converts raw text into a hierarchical Knowledge Tree. The construction proceeds through three distinct
stages:
1) Root Node Identification: The LLM analyzes the raw log
message to identify its core semantic issue (e.g., ”Database
Connection Failure”), ignoring variable parameters. This
becomes the root node of the tree.
2) Branch Node Categorization: The LLM classifies related
knowledge from documentation into distinct categories
and summarizes the category with keywords as the branch
node. To ensure a consistent starting point for categorization across different logs, the prompt supplies a set of seed
categories (e.g., “Description”, “Causes”, “Impact”). The
LLM is instructed to classify the documentation content
into these or other logically distinct categories, using a
keyword or short phrase to label each branch node. For
each branch, the LLM is prompted to check if the category
contains subcategories or heterogeneous information. If
so, it refines the branch to ensure logical clarity and capture
multi-level details. For example, the possible causes of the
log can be further divided into direct causes and indirect
causes.
3) Leaf Node extraction: Finally, for the content under each
terminal branch, the LLM is prompted to extract atomic,
non-redundant factual statements. Verbose descriptions
are condensed into concise knowledge units, which become the leaf nodes attached to their corresponding
branches. To ensure knowledge richness, we filter out
knowledge trees with fewer than three leaf nodes.
To ensure seamless integration with downstream stages of our
framework, we constrain the LLM to output the final Knowledge Tree in a rigorously defined JSON schema. This schema

1366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

mandates the structure, node types, parent-child relationships,
and text formatting. To promote consistency and handle noisy
documentation, we implement three key mechanisms. First, any
output that violates the predefined JSON schema will be automatically captured, triggering re-generation attempts. If violated
again, it will be directly discarded. Second, after tree construction, the structured JSON is fed back to the LLM with a prompt
asking it to verify the logical coherence of each root-to-leaf
path and to identify any contradictory information or logical
gaps. Based on this feedback, specific branches can be revised.
Third, for missing information, we instruct the LLM not to
fabricate content. If documentation lacks critical details, omit
the corresponding branches or leaf nodes rather than filling in
with assumptions. For redundant information, the prompt for
leaf node generation explicitly requires “non-redundant” fact
extraction, guiding the LLM to merge semantically equivalent
statements.
C. Instruction Synthesis
The instruction synthesis module (as shown in Fig. 2) is
responsible for creating high-quality instruction data tailored
to log analysis tasks, which comprises two components: LLMdriven Instruction Generation and Evaluation and Refinement.
Details of both components are described next.
1) Instruction Generation: The process of instruction generation is focused on constructing synthetic data with the LLM
that facilitates fine-tuning of open-source LLM for log analysis tasks. The generated data is structured into three fields:
“instruction”, “input”, and “output”. The instruction field represents the query to the model, the input field contains raw log
data, and the output field provides the expected reasoning or
response. To avoid ambiguity, we denote the “instruction” field
by instruction question and the “output” field by response. The
instruction generation process takes as input a raw log entry and
its corresponding knowledge tree, and the LLM is required to
traverse the knowledge tree based on breadth-first traversal and
cover more than 90% of the leaf nodes. The generation process
comprises two main steps: Question Generation and Response
Generation.
Question Generation: To comprehensively design a variety of
real-world log analysis questions and capture different analytical
perspectives, we draw inspiration from Bloom’s Taxonomy [41],
[42]. Specifically, we utilize prompting strategies to systematically guide the LLM in generating diverse log analysis questions
that span a range of cognitive difficulty levels, grounded in
the structured knowledge tree. By explicitly defining difficulty
requirements within the prompts, the LLM can craft different
questions that range from straightforward factual queries to
advanced multi-step reasoning tasks. This approach ensures that
the model is trained on instructions across multiple cognitive
levels, enhancing its ability to adapt to a wide array of log analysis scenarios. Specifically, we design three different instruction
difficulties:
r L1 (Easy - Remember & Understand): L1 questions are
designed around a single path within the knowledge tree
and focus on fundamental knowledge and comprehension.

These instructions provide a basic understanding of log
content, requiring the LLM to identify core issues or facts
without the need for advanced reasoning. This helps the
model acquire essential domain knowledge and bridge
existing gaps in general LLMs.
r L2 (Medium - Apply & Analyze): L2 questions emphasize localized analysis and reasoning that span multiple
branches of the knowledge tree. These instructions require
the LLM to integrate and apply knowledge from several
related information, fostering a deeper understanding of
the log context and encouraging more advanced analytical
thinking.
r L3 (Hard - Synthesize & Predict): L3 questions focus
on comprehensive analysis across the entire knowledge
tree and require the LLM to conduct system-level reasoning, often involving hypothetical scenarios or multistep problem-solving. The LLM design questions from a
holistic perspective, considering interactions across the full
scope of the knowledge tree, to address more complex and
realistic log analysis tasks.
To explicitly model the knowledge sources of each instruction
question, the LLM plans how to utilize different paths within the
knowledge tree to design questions of varying difficulty. This
ensures that the generated instructions are logically grounded in
domain knowledge. To maintain balance across difficulty levels,
we generate three instructions for L1 and 2–3 instructions each
for L2 and L3 per log entry. Additionally, we ensure that the
generated queries are diverse in phrasing and structure, avoiding
repetitive instruction questions.
Response Generation: The responses are synthesized by
leveraging the knowledge tree to provide accurate and contextually relevant answers to the questions. The complexity of
the response depends on the difficulty level of the instruction.
Specifically, for L1 instructions, responses are concise and directly summarize factual information from the knowledge tree.
For L2 instructions, responses provide step-by-step reasoning,
integrating knowledge from multiple branches of the knowledge
tree. For L3 instructions, responses involve predictive reasoning and systematic analysis, describing the potential impacts
or outcomes of specific scenarios. Responses for L2 and L3
instructions emphasize clarity and logical coherence, avoiding
repetition of knowledge tree content while maintaining alignment with the domain knowledge.
The final instruction data is output in a structured JSON format
for convenient data acquisition, including a detailed plan for
instruction generation and the synthesized data.
2) Evaluation and Refinement: To ensure the quality and
diversity of the generated instructions, a robust evaluation and
refinement process is implemented in the LogInstruct framework. This process is designed to systematically evaluate the
generated instructions and refine them to meet predefined quality
standards. Specifically, we evaluate the quality of the generated
instructions along three key dimensions: Coverage, Diversity,
and Correctness. Instructions failing to meet the requirements
in any of these dimensions are refined with the LLM, ensuring the final instruction dataset is comprehensive, diverse, and
accurate.

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

1) Coverage: The coverage dimension measures the comprehensiveness of the instructions in terms of the tree paths,
ensuring that the synthesized instructions fully utilize the tree
paths to generate questions and answers that cover all relevant
aspects of the log. For evaluation, we compute the ratio of the
number of utilized leaf nodes to the total number of leaf nodes
in the knowledge tree for each log. If the coverage rate falls
below 90% , the LLM is prompted to generate additional easy
questions targeting the missing leaf nodes. By enforcing high
coverage, the process guarantees that relevant knowledge points
are represented in the synthetic instruction set.
2) Diversity: The diversity dimension evaluates the variety
of instruction questions generated for the same log. High diversity in instruction questions prevents overfitting and provides a
broader range of learning scenarios for the follow-up training
[32], [51]. Following previous works [32], we compute the
ROUGE-L overlap between newly generated instructions and
existing instructions for the same log. For different instruction
questions on the same log, only instructions with a ROUGE-L
overlap score less than 0.5 are retained, ensuring sufficient
similarity between questions. If ROUGE-L exceeds 0.5, the
LLM is prompted to rewrite the instructions. The rewriting process emphasizes semantic variation while maintaining logical
consistency with the original instruction.
3) Correctness: The correctness evaluates the accuracy of the
responses generated for each instruction question. The correctness of responses is critical for ensuring the reliability of the
instruction dataset. Each instruction-response pair is verified
by the LLM itself by re-referencing the knowledge tree, the
verification determines whether the response aligns with the provided knowledge. If responses that deviate from the knowledge
tree or exhibit inaccuracies, the LLM is prompted to regenerate
corrected answers.
This evaluation and refinement stage is a cornerstone of the
LogInstruct framework, ensuring that the synthesized instruction dataset is of high quality.
D. Finetuning the LLM with Instructions
After the creation of the instructions, we merge all datasets
with different difficulty levels to fine-tune the open-source LLM.
Following the standard instruction-tuning process, it takes one
foundation LLM as the backbone, then the LLM gradually aligns
its output with ideal log analysis results by predicting the next
tokens in the Response conditioned on an input Instruction.
Specifically, we concatenate the instruction and input log as a
prompt and train the model to generate the instance output in a
standard supervised way.
Denote the instruction instance by {(xi , yi )|xi =
instructioni + inputi , yi = outputi , i ∈ [1, N ])},
which
represents elements in the constructed instruction data set I.
The optimization objective of SFT is to make the foundation
LLM θ reasoning with professional analysis for each instruction
and input log, which can be formulated as:
LSF T = argmax

N

i=1

logP (yi |xi ; θ)

(1)

1367

TABLE I
STATISTICS OF DATASET USED FOR INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS.

IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Data Preparation
To mitigate the risk of data leakage from existing public
system logs (e.g., distributed or operating system logs) that may
have been included in LLM pretraining corpora, our experiments
focus on network device logs, which are independently developed by vendors (e.g., Huawei, H3C) for specialized hardware
and protocols, offering richer technical semantics. Due to rapid
product iterations and customized development, vendor-specific
logs are rarely included in publicly available LLM pre-training
datasets.
We manually collect 13,161 unique logs and related documentation from the latest publicly available technical references
provided by Huawei1 and H3C2 (Detailed statistics are provided
in Table I). All raw logs and documentation are also publicly
available in our repository for subsequent research, where each
log entry is accompanied by a corresponding documentation
page, providing an explanation of the log, descriptions of its
parameters, potential causes, and recommended handling procedures. Based on this raw data, we synthesize 88K instruction
data with GPT-4o for log analysis.
B. Implementation Details
1) Instruction Synthesis Settings: LogInstruct requires only
a single LLM to perform knowledge tree construction, instruction synthesis, and instruction refinement. In the main experiments, we utilize GPT-4o as the LLM, processing 13,161
log-documentation pairs to synthesize instructions. We utilize
HTTP requests to invoke the OpenAI APIs and interact with
GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06). To enhance the diversity of the
instructions, the temperature is set to 0.8 during synthesis.
2) Instruction Tuning Setting: Following the paradigm shift
towards generative large language models pioneered by the GPT
series, the decoder-only architecture has emerged as the dominant and often more performant framework in contemporary
NLP [52], [53]. In line with this trend, our instruction tuning experiments utilize open-source LLMs based on the decoder-only
Transformer architecture.
We employ the LLaMA-Factory [54] to fine-tune the
Qwen2.5-Instruct [55] series of models, including 1.5B and 7B
versions. This allows us to compare the performance of LLMs
with different sizes on the synthesized instruction datasets. For
fair evaluation, we set the batch size to 32, the learning rate
to 3.0e-5 with a cosine learning rate scheduler, and train for 5
1 https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/en/index.html
2 https://www.h3c.com/en/Support

1368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE II
DATASETS OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS LOG FOR EVALUATION

epochs in all experiments. Our fine-tuning process is conducted
on a Linux server with a single NVIDIA A100 GPU.
3) Evaluation Setting: We leverage vLLM3 to accelerate
the inference process on open-source LLMs. To increase the
stability of LLM’s output, we set the temperature of LLMs to 0
during evaluation. For fairness in comparison, all LLMs follow
the same in-context learning setting with 4 examples and provide
the same prompt and examples during inference.
C. Downstream Tasks
Traditional log analysis tasks, such as log parsing and anomaly
detection, have been extensively studied in the past decade, with
many datasets sourced from LogHub [56]. However, as recently
demonstrated in benchmark studies on LogHub, many methods
[10], [15], [16], [18], [43] have already achieved perfect or nearperfect parsing accuracy on these datasets. Similarly, datasets
for anomaly detection often feature relatively simple anomaly
patterns [12], [38], allowing simple machine learning models
(e.g., KNN) to achieve nearly perfect performance. This leaves
limited room for further improvement and fails to sufficiently
evaluate the capabilities of advanced models.
To address these limitations and comprehensively evaluate
model performance, we construct five downstream tasks based
on network device logs, spanning two dimensions: log understanding and log analysis applications. Specifically, log understanding tasks include two tasks and focus on semantic understanding capabilities, which serve as the foundational skills
required for log analysis. And application tasks include three
tasks grounded in real-world operational scenarios, which aim
at evaluating the practical application capabilities of models in
analyzing logs. Table II provides detailed statistics for each task
dataset. All publicly available datasets are hosted in our GitHub
repository to facilitate reproducibility and future research. In
the following sections, we introduce the five tasks and their
evaluation metrics.
1) Log Understanding Tasks:
r Log Interpretation (LI): The Log Interpretation task aims
to convert raw log data into clear, human-readable insights
that highlight the key issues indicated in the logs. This
task evaluates a model’s ability to semantically understand
the critical information embedded in logs and generate
coherent explanations.
Dataset and Metric: Following KnowLog, we build
datasets from public product documentation containing
log entries paired with expert-written explanations. To ensure high-quality, redundant or unfocused explanations are
3 https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm

manually filtered, retaining only concise, key-informationcentric explanations. The final datasets employ raw logs as
input and their verified explanations as ground truth, which
is a generation task.
We employ BLEU and BERTScore as the evaluation metrics to capture lexical overlap semantic similarities, where
BLEU measures n-gram (n = 1 to 4) overlap between
generated and reference texts, and BERTScore evaluates
semantic similarity using contextual embeddings.
r Log Summarization (LS): The Log Summarization task
aims to extract and condense the essential information from
raw logs into concise summaries, evaluating the model’s
ability to identify essential information.
Dataset and Metric: We build datasets from the collected
network device logs, where the structure of each network
device log contains a brief “summary” field (e.g., Brief:
AS_PATH_EXCEED_MAXNUM) and a “log message”
field. To prevent data leakage, we remove the summary
field and use the log message as input, with the summary
field serving as ground truth.
We adopt BLEU and ROUGE-1 as the evaluation metrics.
BLEU emphasizes lexical precision, ROUGE-1 measures
the recall of overlapping single words between generated
texts and reference texts. These metrics are widely used
in summarization tasks [57] to balance conciseness and
informativeness.
2) Log Application Tasks:
r Solution Recommendation (SR): The Solution Recommendation task provides actionable solutions to address issues
indicated in logs. It evaluates a model’s ability to analyze
logs comprehensively and recommend relevant commands
or steps for troubleshooting, which is a critical requirement
in real-world operational scenarios.
Dataset and Metric: We collect logs paired with troubleshooting solutions from Huawei and H3C public forums
as datasets. Specifically, user-submitted issues containing
error logs are collected as input, and the highest-voted
solutions are used as ground truth.
We employ BLEU and ROUGE-L as the evaluation metrics,
where BLEU emphasizes exact command/term matching,
and ROUGE-L measures the longest common subsequence
(LCS) between generated and reference texts, capturing
structural coherence at the sentence level.
r Potential Failure Prediction (PFP): This task focuses on
predicting whether a given log indicates a potential system
or device failure. It is framed as a binary classification problem to distinguish failure-indicative logs and notificationindicative logs.
Dataset and Metric: The datasets are collected from
Huawei and H3C Reference Guides, which annotate logs
with risk levels (e.g., Emergency, Informational). Logs
indicating failure to the system are marked as True, while
others are labeled as False.
As the binary classification task, we report Precision, Recall, and F1-score on the True (anomaly) class as evaluation metrics.
r Root Cause Analysis (RCA): Root Cause Analysis identifies the underlying causes of anomalies based on log data,

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

1369

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT LLMS ON GENERATION TASKS

which is framed as a multi-class classification problem
where the model must assign logs to one of several predefined error categories.
Dataset and Metric: The datasets are constructed by collecting user-submitted issues from Huawei’s public forums. Only discussions analyzing the causes of errors are
included. The final dataset consists of five error categories,
such as communication or device failures.
As an unbalanced multiclass classification task and considering the importance of different classes, we report
Accuracy and Weighted-F1 as evaluation metrics.

D. Baselines
We evaluate LogInstruct against the following baseline:
1) Pre-trained Language Models: We include BERT [8],
[58], Biglog [59], and KnowLog [17] as baselines, where
BERT is the first and most widely used pre-trained model for
log analysis, Biglog excels in capturing essential features with
pre-training on logs, and KnowLog enhances its performance
with knowledge-enhanced pre-training on log corpus. These
pre-trained models are fine-tuned on specific tasks before prediction. For each task, we manually annotate 200 training samples
for fine-tuning. However, since these models are not designed
for text generation, we limit their evaluation to classification
tasks. For generative log analysis tasks, we employ Flan-T5
(version: flan-t5-large) [60] as a baseline. It is a widely used
sequence-to-sequence model that has undergone large-scale
instruction tuning, endowing it with instruction-following and
text-generation capabilities suitable for our evaluation.
2) General proprietary LLMs: We select two proprietary
LLMs (ChatGPT (version: gpt-3.5-turbo-0613) and GPT-4o
(version: gpt-4o-2024-08-06)) as baselines due to their amazing
application potential in multiple domains, where we query them
with OpenAI APIs.
3) General open-source LLMs: Considering practical deployment resources, we include several open-source LLMs
(under 8B parameters) spanning diverse model architectures,
including Qwen2.5-Instruct-[1.5B, 3B, 7B][55], Mistral-7BInstruct, and Llama3.1-8B-Instruct[61].

4) Task-specific fine-tuned (FT) LLM: Instruction tuning is
a common approach to adapt open-source LLMs for domainspecific tasks [20], [31]. For this baseline, we manually annotate
200 training samples for each task and combine them into an
instruction dataset for fine-tuning. For fair comparison, we finetune it on the same open-source LLM (Qwen2.5-Instruct).
E. Evaluations
We evaluate LogInstruct by answering the following research
questions (RQs):
1) RQ1: How effective is LogInstruct compared with the
current mainstream LLMs on downstream tasks?: We conduct
extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of LogInstruct, comparing it with baselines across a range of log analysis tasks. As shown in Tables III–IV, LogInstruct achieves
SOTA performance across all tasks except log Summarization,
where proprietary LLMs exhibit marginally superior results.
Notably, LogInstruct surpasses the best baseline by an average
of 16.88% F1-score on the Potential Failure Prediction task.
This significant improvement validates the effectiveness of our
knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework in enhancing
LLMs’ capacity for log analysis.
First, while pre-trained models (BERT, BigLog, and
KnowLog) achieve reasonable performance on classification
tasks, their performance plateaus when faced with tasks requiring deeper semantic understanding and reasoning. The results
from FLAN-T5 indicate a noticeable performance gap when
compared to current mainstream LLMs. This gap can be primarily attributed to its more limited knowledge base and comparatively weaker instruction-following proficiency. Second, proprietary LLMs exhibit remarkable semantic understanding across
general domains. While they excel in tasks like Log Summarization, where semantic understanding plays a dominant role, they
fall short in other knowledge-intensive analysis tasks when compared to LogInstruct. Notably, Qwen2.5-1.5B fine-tuned with
LogInstruct consistently outperforms proprietary LLMs in most
log analysis tasks. This suggests that domain-specific instruction
tuning can compensate for smaller LLM sizes by aligning LLMs
with log analysis tasks and domain knowledge. General opensource LLMs underperform due to their lack of log-specific
knowledge, which confirms that our synthesized instructions

1370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT LLMS ON CLASSIFICATION TASKS

effectively bridge the domain knowledge gap in open-source
LLMs. Third, the task-specific fine-tuned (FT) LLM exhibits
limited improvements, primarily due to the scarcity and simplicity of annotated data. In contrast, LogInstruct leverages domain
knowledge and hierarchical difficulty modeling, enabling significant performance improvements across all tasks. This highlights
the critical role of incorporating domain knowledge and varying
cognitive complexity in developing LLMs capable of handling
complex log analysis scenarios. Finally, Qwen2.5-7B tuned
with LogInstruct consistently outperforms its 1.5B counterpart,
indicating that stronger base models better utilize synthesized
instructions. This suggests that selecting open-source LLMs
with robust foundational capabilities can further amplify the
benefits of instruction tuning.
To further evaluate the quality of responses generated by
models fine-tuned with LogInstruct, we conduct a comparative
analysis of their outputs. Specifically, we focus on the Solution
Recommendation task for this analysis, as it demands longer,
more coherent, and highly readable responses. Considering evaluation costs, we randomly sample 200 queries from the Huawei
dataset for evaluation.
For each query, we collect responses from both the base LLM
(before fine-tuning) and its counterpart fine-tuned with LogInstruct. An LLM-as-a-Judge approach [50] is then employed to
compare these paired responses. The judge model is instructed to
select the better response based on a comprehensive evaluation
across three dimensions: Usefulness, Relevance, and Accuracy.
To mitigate potential evaluation bias, we report results using two
distinct judge models: GPT-4 and DeepSeek-R1. Considering
that LLMs may be sensitive to the order of presented options,
we follow the calibration method introduced by Wang et al. [62].
For each test case, we query the judge model twice: once with the
LogInstruct response first, and once with the baseline response
first. The final comparative result is aggregated from these two
prompts.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 3, which shows
the win rate of the LogInstruct-tuned models against their base
counterparts. The fine-tuned models demonstrate significantly
higher response quality. The 1.5B model fine-tuned with LogInstruct achieves a win rate exceeding 45% . This performance

gain becomes more pronounced with a stronger base model:
the fine-tuned 7B model attains a win rate of over 65% . These
results indicate that our instruction tuning effectively enhances
the models’ ability to follow complex instructions and produce
superior responses.
In conclusion, the performance gains highlight the effectiveness of LogInstruct in synthesizing high-quality instruction
data for log analysis tasks. By incorporating systematic domain
knowledge and hierarchical difficulty modeling, LogInstruct
empowers LLMs to tackle a wide range of log analysis tasks
with enhanced reasoning capabilities.
2) RQ2: How effective is LogInstruct in generalization ability?: To evaluate the generalization ability of the instructions
synthesized by logInstruct, we design experiments with a focus
on its performance in analyzing unseen logs. While the synthetic
instructions are derived from logs of Huawei and H3C, including
two devices: Switches and Routers, we additionally collect logs
from Security devices, which are not part of the instruction
synthesis process. This setup ensures that our evaluation measures the model’s ability to generalize in an unseen domain.
For the evaluation of LogInstruct’s practicality, we focus on
the log application tasks, as they reflect real-world operational
scenarios. Specifically, we evaluate three log application tasks
and one log understanding task using Security device logs. Of
these tasks, the RCA task is evaluated using Huawei Security
device logs only, as data from other vendors was unavailable.
For the remaining tasks, we report the average results across the
HW and H3C Security datasets.
The results of the experiments are shown in Fig. 4, which
indicates that across all tasks, LLMs fine-tuned on our synthesized instruction data consistently achieved the best performance, significantly outperforming the baselines. Notably,
the improvement on the Potential Failure Prediction task is
particularly pronounced, where the F1-score of LogInstruct exceeded the best-performing baseline, GPT-4o, by an impressive
23.36% . First, when compared to the general LLMs, LogInstruct exhibits substantial improvements, which demonstrates
that the knowledge-driven instructions endowed the models
with domain-specific insights, enabling them to generalize effectively to diverse scenarios. Second, task-specific fine-tuned

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

1371

Fig. 2. The framework of Instruction Synthesis, which comprises two components: LLM-based Instruction Generation and Evaluation and Refinement. The first
component synthesizes instruction data of different difficulty levels with the knowledge tree. The last component evaluates and refines the synthesized instructions
to ensure the quality.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

Evaluation results of LogInstruct on Solution Recommendation task.

LLMs (FT-LLMs) show limited improvements due to the lack of
diverse data, and LogInstruct shows consistently better performance. The diverse and hierarchical instructions synthesized by
LogInstruct equipped LLMs to handle diverse domain logs more

Performance of LogInstruct on unseen logs.

effectively, alleviating inherent gaps in understanding logs and
tasks.
A critical requirement for log analysis models in production
is robust generalization, as real-world system logs are inherently unstable. Logging statements are frequently updated by
developers during software evolution, leading to the continuous emergence of new yet semantically similar log messages.

1372

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Performance of LogInstruct on evolved logs.

Studies indicate that approximately 20% –45% of logging statements may change throughout a system’s lifetime [6]. To assess
whether models fine-tuned with LogInstruct merely memorize
static log patterns or learn to perform generalized reasoning,
we evaluate their performance on evolved logs. We conduct this
evaluation on two tasks: Potential Failure Prediction and Root
Cause Analysis. Following prior works [6], [63], we simulate
log evolution by applying semantics-preserving transformations
to the original Huawei log data. Specifically, we perform synonym replacement on the original log messages using WordNet,
substituting certain tokens with their synonyms while strictly
preserving the original semantic meaning and associated labels. To test varying degrees of change, we apply different
replacement ratios based on the token count of the original
logs.
The results are presented in Fig. 5, which demonstrates that
models fine-tuned with LogInstruct maintain stable performance
on the evolved logs across both tasks, with no noticeable degradation. This consistency indicates that the models’ effectiveness
does not rely on memorizing specific log instances. Instead, it
suggests that the synthetic instruction data enhances the model’s
ability to generalize understanding, enabling it to perform precise analysis. This provides strong evidence for the effectiveness
of this framework in boosting model generalization capabilities.
Consequently, the results affirm that LogInstruct exhibits
strong generalization capabilities, synthesizing transferable domain knowledge and diverse instructions. This adaptability
makes LogInstruct a promising tool for tackling diverse realworld log analysis scenarios.
3) RQ3: How effective is LogInstruct with different proportions of knowledge injection?: To investigate the impact of
knowledge coverage density on the effectiveness of synthetic
instructions, we conduct experiments by sampling instruction
data for the same log entry at varying proportions and training
Qwen2.5-7B on these subsets. This allows us to control the
proportion of domain knowledge accessible for each log entry.
Given that the log summarization task primarily focuses on
semantic understanding with minimal reliance on knowledge,
we exclude it from the evaluation and focus on the remaining
four tasks.
As shown in Fig. 6, the results reveal several insights regarding
the relationship between knowledge injection proportions and
model performance. First, as the proportion of injected domain
knowledge increases, the model’s performance improves consistently across all tasks. This underscores the importance of domain knowledge in synthetic instruction generation, especially

Fig. 6. Performance of LogInstruct with different proportions of knowledge
injection.

for complex log analysis tasks. Second, different log analysis
tasks exhibit varying levels of dependency on domain knowledge. For relatively simpler tasks such as Log Interpretation,
injecting 20% of the domain knowledge already leads to a significant performance boost. Beyond this threshold, the performance
plateaus. In contrast, more complex tasks such as Root Cause
Analysis, which involve reasoning and multi-step inference,
show continuous performance improvements as the proportion
of injected knowledge increases. Third, domain knowledge must
reach a critical mass before the model exhibits a breakthrough
in performance. For example, in the Potential Failure Prediction
task, the model demonstrates slow performance gains when the
knowledge proportion is below 40% . However, when the proportion increases to 60% , the model’s performance experiences
a breakthrough, with an F1 score improvement of 17.1% on
average. This suggests that insufficient domain knowledge fails
to unlock the model’s full potential, while a more comprehensive
knowledge coverage enables the model to achieve significant
capability gains.
In conclusion, domain knowledge is essential for boosting
model performance, particularly for complex reasoning tasks.
While simpler tasks benefit from minimal knowledge injection,
more complex tasks require a critical mass of domain knowledge
to unlock the model’s full potential.
4) RQ4: How effective is LogInstruct at different difficulty
levels of instruction?: To investigate how instruction difficulty
impacts the fine-tuning of log analysis LLMs, we systematically evaluate the LLM trained on instruction sets of varying
complexity: Easy, Medium, Hard, and their combinations. The
evaluation is performed on four downstream tasks, focusing on
the log application task given its practicality.
The results are shown in Fig. 7, which reveals that different
difficulty levels of instructions play complementary roles in
enhancing log analysis capabilities. First, we find that easy
instructions yield the most significant improvement and outperform those fine-tuned on medium or hard instructions, unlike
prior findings in mathematical reasoning and code generation
[64], [65], [66], [67], where complex instructions are critical for

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

1373

Fig. 8. Performance of different open-source LLMs for instruction Synthesis
with LogInstruct framework.

Fig. 7.

Performance of different difficulty levels of instruction.

enhancing reasoning. Especially in the RCA task, the model
fine-tuned only on hard instructions exhibits a performance
drop. Even hybrid medium or hard instruction sets underperform
easy instructions alone, highlighting the foundational role of
basic domain knowledge in bridging the inherent knowledge
gap of general LLMs. Hence, we can infer that easy instructions
explicitly incorporate domain knowledge, which serves as a prerequisite for advanced reasoning. Without this grounding, complex instructions become ambiguous, leading to hallucinated or
incoherent responses. Second, while easy instructions provide
the foundational knowledge, combining them with medium and
hard instructions further enhances the model’s reasoning capabilities. Easy instructions establish the knowledge infrastructure,
while complex instructions utilize and connect this knowledge
for advanced inference tasks.
In summary, easy instructions are indispensable for addressing the domain knowledge gap in general LLMs, serving as
prerequisites for complex log analysis capabilities. Furthermore,
combining easy and complex instructions ensures balanced improvements in foundational knowledge and reasoning capabilities, highlighting the importance of instruction diversity and
progression in fine-tuning LLMs for log analysis. LogInstruct
ensures that the model is both knowledgeable and capable of
handling complex reasoning tasks.
5) RQ5: How effective is LogInstruct based on open-source
LLMs for instruction synthesis?: To address enterprise concerns
around data privacy and proprietary LLMs dependencies, we
evaluate whether LogInstruct can synthesize high-quality instructions using open-source LLMs as substitutes. Specifically,
we evaluate two open-source LLMs of varying capabilities
(Qwen2.5-7B and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B) to analyze
the impact of LLM’s capacity on instruction synthesis quality.
For the evaluation, we fine-tune the Qwen2.5-7B model and report results on three application tasks due to their comprehensive
requirements for both semantic understanding and reasoning
capabilities.
As shown in Fig. 8, models fine-tuned on instructions synthesized by R1-Distill-32B achieve comparable results with
GPT-4o synthesized data, demonstrating that open-source LLMs

Fig. 9.

Ablation studies for LogInstruct.

can effectively replace proprietary models for instruction synthesis, addressing concerns around data privacy and API costs.
On the other hand, Qwen2.5-7B synthesized instructions underperformed the other two models. The performance gap between Qwen2.5-7B and R1-Distill-Qwen-32B highlights the
importance of choosing a base model with sufficient semantic understanding and reasoning capabilities for instruction
synthesis.
In conclusion, LogInstruct can effectively utilize open-source
LLMs to synthesize instructions for log analysis tasks, which
highlights the practicality of open-source LLMs as replacements
for proprietary LLMs, addressing privacy concerns and reducing
API costs without compromising performance.
F. Ablation Studies
To further validate the importance of domain knowledge and
instruction quality during instruction synthesis, we analyze the
effects of removing key components in the instruction synthesis
process and evaluate their impact on Qwen2.5-7B’s performance. After fine-tuning Qwen2.5-7B with different instructions, we report results on three log application tasks.
1) Domain Knowledge Ablation: We remove domain knowledge from the instruction synthesis process, and the LLM is
only provided with raw log data and tasked with designing
multiple instructions directly. As shown in Fig. 9, results show
that removing domain knowledge leads to a significant performance drop across all tasks. For example, on the Potential
Failure Prediction task, the F1 score dropped by an average
of 20.13% . This highlights the indispensable role of domain
knowledge in guiding the instruction generation process. Without domain knowledge, the synthetic instructions often contain
hallucinated responses and fail to address critical aspects of log
analysis.

1374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 11.

Fig. 10.

Statistical analysis of instruction data.

2) Instruction Quality Ablation: Since the effect of knowledge coverage was already studied in RQ3, here we focus on
the diversity and correctness of instructions and remove the
corresponding evaluation modules in LogInstruct. It can be
found that the removal of specific modules consistently leads
to performance degradation, which highlights the importance of
each evaluation module. However, the degree of performance
decline varies, where the removal of correctness validation
leads to a more pronounced performance decline compared to
the removal of diversity validation. This result highlights that
while diverse instructions contribute to broader task coverage,
correctness is fundamental for ensuring reliable and accurate
model outputs.

Distribution of Leaf Nodes and Rouge-L among instruction questions.

To further evaluate the overall diversity of synthesized instructions, we first plot the distribution of semantic embeddings for all
instruction questions (in Fig. 10(b)) and analyze their verb-noun
structure using the Berkeley Neural Parser [68]. Specifically,
we extract the root verbs and their first direct noun objects,
and plot the top 6 most common root verbs and their top 5
direct noun objects in Fig. 10(a). The results demonstrate diverse
intents and textual formats in the instructions. In Fig. 10(c), we
also present the length distributions of the instruction questions
and output responses, where we observe a positive correlation
between instruction difficulty and the length of questions and
responses. These findings underscore the ability of LogInstruct
to synthesize high-quality, diverse instruction data. In addition,
we manually verified 200 cases from the synthesized dataset and
found no significant errors.
C. Case Studies

V. DISCUSSION
A. Cost Analysis
To analyze the cost of synthesis instructions with LLMs, we
count the API cost of GPT-4o. The average cost of constructing
multiple instruction data for one log entry using GPT-4o is
$0.1, with the cost of synthesizing one single instruction data
averaging $0.013. This demonstrates that LogInstruct is both
cost-efficient and scalable, making it a feasible solution for
large-scale instruction generation.
B. Instruction Diversity
To quantitatively characterize the synthesized dataset, we
first conduct an empirical analysis focusing on two aspects: the
granularity of the constructed knowledge trees and the diversity
of the generated instructions. First, we calculate the number
of leaf nodes for each log entry in both the Huawei and H3C
datasets, which reflects the amount of atomic knowledge extracted per log. The distribution is presented in Fig. 11(a). The
result reveals that most logs in the Huawei and H3C datasets
are associated with approximately 8 leaf nodes, demonstrating
rich knowledge granularity. Second, we compute the ROUGE-L
score between instruction questions generated for the same log.
The distribution of these scores is shown in Fig. 11(b). The
average ROUGE-L score is below 0.2, indicating low textual
overlap among instructions derived from the same knowledge
source.

1) Instructions with Different Difficulty Levels: To illustrate
the effectiveness of instruction synthesis with varying difficulty
levels, we present a case study analyzing three log analysis instructions of increasing complexity: easy, medium, and
hard.
As shown in Fig. 12, the easy instruction focuses on extracting parameters from the log (e.g., site ID, IP address, route
distinguisher). This foundational task provides explicit domain
knowledge, bridging the domain knowledge gap of generalpurpose LLMs and enabling them to understand log syntax and
semantics. The medium instruction requires reasoning about the
potential consequences of ignoring the log alert, such as service
disruptions or network instability. This level of complexity
connects foundational knowledge to domain-specific reasoning,
training the model to analyze operational impacts. The hard
instruction demands a comprehensive action plan to mitigate
service interruptions (e.g., scheduling changes, implementing
redundancy, and monitoring traffic). It emphasizes strategic
planning and multi-step reasoning, preparing the model for
complex troubleshooting scenarios.
These examples highlight how hierarchical instructions progressively enhance LLMs’ log analysis capabilities. Easy instructions inject essential knowledge, medium and hard instructions enable advanced reasoning capabilities. By synthesizing
instructions across these difficulty levels, we ensure the progressive enhancement of LLM capabilities, enabling them to
address diverse and complex log analysis tasks effectively. This

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

Fig. 13.

1375

Examples of instructions about whether introducing knowledge.

domain knowledge is indispensable for synthesizing highquality instructions.
Fig. 12.

Examples of instructions with different difficulty levels.

hierarchical framework not only improves task performance
but also highlights the value of combining foundational knowledge with advanced reasoning in developing robust log analysis
LLMs.
2) Instructions about Whether Introducing Knowledge: To
illustrate the importance of domain knowledge in synthesizing
effective log analysis instructions, we provide a comparative
case study involving three examples of instruction synthesis:
one generated by our LogInstruct framework, which integrates
domain knowledge, and two generated by GPT-4o without access to domain knowledge.
As shown in Fig. 13, the first example demonstrates the
effectiveness of LogInstruct in synthesizing accurate and actionable instructions. By leveraging domain knowledge such as
command usage and diagnostic procedures, the generated instruction aligns with real-world log analysis practices, enabling
engineers to address the issue efficiently. The second example shows that the absence of domain-specific understanding
leads to an instruction that deviates from the actual problem
context. The instruction assumes that configuring the port as
a backup will resolve the speed difference issue, but this solution is irrelevant to the actual problem. Such outputs can
mislead engineers, resulting in wasted effort and delayed troubleshooting. The third example shows that the output contains
hallucinated information. The log message does not indicate a
complete failure of the stack port, nor does it mention communication loss. Such inaccuracies arise from the lack of domain
knowledge and can lead to critical misunderstandings in log
analysis tasks. This case study demonstrates that incorporating

D. Threats to Vadility
1) Privacy Issue: Log data often contains sensitive information, raising privacy concerns when using proprietary LLMs.
To address this, LogInstruct is designed as a general framework
that supports integration with both proprietary and open-source
LLMs, enabling local data processing and avoiding risks associated with external APIs.
2) Randomness: Randomness in LLM inference and prompt
construction may pose a threat to the validity of our experiments.
To ensure stability, we set the temperature to 0 for all LLMs
during evaluation, ensuring stable and deterministic outputs.
Furthermore, all LLMs are evaluated using the same prompt
templates and examples. This consistency minimizes bias introduced by prompt variation and ensures fairness in comparative
evaluations.
3) Data Leakage: Data leakage is also a potential threat to
validity in studies employing LLMs to evaluate, wherein LLMs
may have inadvertently memorized content from their extensive
pre-training corpora. This could compromise the authenticity of
their performance on evaluation data. In our work, we argue that
this risk is minimal. The pre-training data for general-purpose
LLMs primarily consists of web texts, news, books, and encyclopedias (e.g., Wikipedia) [52]. In contrast, the network device
logs used in our study are vendor-specific and collected from
recent software versions, making their appearance in general
public corpora highly unlikely.
To empirically support this claim, we conduct a comparative
analysis between 1,000 randomly sampled Wikipedia passages
(representing a common pre-training corpus) and 1,000 log
messages from our dataset. First, we compute the perplexity
of a general LLM on both datasets. As shown in Fig. 14, the

1376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

of our synthesized data on encoder-decoder architectures (e.g.,
T5-based models). A broader comparative study across different
model architectures in the future could yield more generalizable
insights into the framework’s effectiveness.
VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 14. Distribution of Perplexity and BLEU scores for LLMs on Wikipedia
and Log corpus.

LLM exhibits significantly lower perplexity on Wikipedia text,
indicating high familiarity. Conversely, the perplexity on log data
is markedly higher, suggesting the LLM is far less exposed to
such content. Second, we assess the LLM’s ability to complete
partial sequences. We provide the first 30% of tokens from each
sample and prompt the LLM to complete the following content.
We then calculate the BLEU score between the generated content
and the original ground truth. As shown in Fig. 14, the average
BLEU score is high for Wikipedia completions but negligible
(below 0.01) for log completions, further confirming the LLM’s
lack of prior exposure to the specific log patterns.
These results indicate a very low risk of data contamination
from pre-training, thereby strengthening the validity of our
experimental findings.
E. Limitation
First, the current experiments in this work focus on network
device logs. Although the results are encouraging, the applicability of LogInstruct to other domains remains unexplored.
Real-world systems often generate diverse types of logs across
different industries, such as cloud services, financial systems,
and IoT environments. Future work will expand the evaluation
to a broader range of log domains to validate the framework’s
adaptability and robustness in more diverse scenarios.
Second, LogInstruct employs the knowledge tree constructed
from publicly available documentation to guide instruction synthesis. While this approach is effective in organizing domain
knowledge, fault reports in real-world environments often incorporate diagnostic processes of experts, which are not currently
utilized. Integrating such expert-driven diagnostic processes
could significantly enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities
and better learn expert-level cognitive processes. In the future,
we hope to collaborate with companies to obtain real failure
reports for synthesizing richer, more reasoning-enhanced instructions.
Third, our study fine-tunes LLMs based on the prevalent
decoder-only architecture. We have not explored the impact

In this paper, we introduce LogInstruct, a knowledge-driven
instruction synthesis framework designed to enhance LLMs’
capabilities in automated log analysis. By incorporating domain
knowledge through a carefully constructed knowledge tree and
leveraging Bloom’s Taxonomy to design hierarchical instructions, LogInstruct improves the capabilities of LLMs in log
analysis. Through the synthesis of 88K high-quality instructions
and fine-tuning of Qwen2.5 models, we achieve state-of-the-art
performance across five log analysis tasks, demonstrating the
critical role of domain knowledge and hierarchical instruction
design in improving LLM performance.
REFERENCES
[1] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[2] S. Zhang et al., “Failure diagnosis in microservice systems: A comprehensive survey and analysis,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 2024.
[3] S. Zhang et al., “No more data silos: Unified microservice failure diagnosis
with temporal knowledge graph,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 17, no.
6, pp. 4013–4026, Nov./Dec. 2024.
[4] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud
systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1253–1263.
[5] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. 2017
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[6] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817.
[7] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified
deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc.
IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 92–103.
[8] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., 2021,
pp. 492–504.
[9] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep learning: How far are we?,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
pp. 1356–1367.
[10] Y. Liu et al., “UniParser: A unified log parser for heterogeneous log data,”
in Proc. ACM Web Conf.2022, 2022, pp. 1893–1901.
[11] S. Yu, P. He, N. Chen, and Y. Wu, “Brain: Log parsing with bidirectional
parallel tree,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3224–3237,
Sep./Oct. 2023.
[12] B. Yu et al., “Deep learning or classical machine learning? An empirical
study on log-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf.
Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[13] S. Zhang et al., “Robust failure diagnosis of microservice system
through multimodal data,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 3851–3864, Jun. 2023.
[14] C. Zhang, T. Jia, G. Shen, P. Zhu, and Y. Li, “MetaLog: Generalizable
cross-system anomaly detection from logs with meta-learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12.
[15] J. Xu, R. Yang, Y. Huo, C. Zhang, and P. He, “DivLog: Log parsing with
prompt enhanced in-context learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf.
Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12.
[16] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 2438–2449.
[17] L. Ma et al., “KnowLog: Knowledge enhanced pre-trained language model
for log understanding,” in Proc. 46th ieee/acm Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024,
pp. 1–13.

MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS

[18] Z. Jiang et al., “LiLac: Log parsing using LLMs with adaptive parsing
cache,” Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 137–160, 2024.
[19] A. Zhong et al., “LogParser-LLM: Advancing efficient log parsing with
large language models,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4559–4570.
[20] Y. Liu et al., “LogLM: From task-based to instruction-based automated
log analysis,” IEEE/ACM 47th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Pract., pp. 401–412,
2025.
[21] J. Wang et al., “LogExpert: Log-based recommended resolutions generation using large language model,” in Proc. 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th Int. Conf.
Softw. Eng.: New Ideas Emerg. Results, 2024, pp. 42–46.
[22] L. Ma et al., “AdaptiveLog: An adaptive log analysis framework with the
collaboration of large and small language model,” ACM Trans Softw. Eng.
Methodol., pp. 1–43, 2025.
[23] M. Astekin, M. Hort, and L. Moonen, “A comparative study on large
language models for log parsing,” in Proc. 18th ACM/IEEE Int. Symp.
Empirical Softw. Eng. Meas., 2024, pp. 234–244.
[24] J. Xu et al., “OpenRCA: Can large language models locate the root cause
of software failures?,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2025, pp. 1–29.
[25] V.-H. Le, H. Zhang, and Y. Xiao, “Unleashing the true potential of
semantic-based log parsing with pre-trained language models,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 47th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2025, pp. 711–711.
[26] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. web Serv., 2017,
pp. 33–40.
[27] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw. Eng. Pract., 2019,
pp. 121–130.
[28] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge graph,”
IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507, May 2023.
[29] J. Achiam et al., “Gpt-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774.
[30] A. Liu et al., “DeepSeek-V3 technical report,” 2024, arXiv:2412.19437.
[31] S. Zhang et al., “Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1–36, 2026, .
[32] Y. Wang et al., “Self-instruct: Aligning language models with selfgenerated instructions,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023, pp. 13484–13 508.
[33] Z. Chen et al., “Agent-FLAN: Designing data and methods of effective
agent tuning for large language models,” in Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics ACL 2024, 2024, pp. 9354–9366.
[34] Y. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Ding, and L. Zhang, “MagiCoder: Empowering
code generation with OSS-instruct,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2024, pp. 52632–52 657.
[35] W. U. Ahmad et al., “OpenCodeInstruct: A large-scale instruction tuning
dataset for code LLMs,” 2025, arXiv:2504.04030.
[36] X. Zhang, C. Tian, X. Yang, L. Chen, Z. Li, and L. R. Petzold, “AlpaCare:
Instruction-tuned large language models for medical application,” 2023,
arXiv:2310.14558.
[37] Z. Zhou et al., “LawGPT: A chinese legal knowledge-enhanced large
language model,” 2024, arXiv:2406.04614.
[38] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly
detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting
Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1404–1415.
[39] Z. Tan et al., “Large language models for data annotation and synthesis: A
survey,” in Proc. 2024 Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.,
2024, pp. 930–957.
[40] K. Wang et al., “A survey on data synthesis and augmentation for large
language models,” 2024, arXiv:2410.12896.
[41] M. T. Chandio, S. M. Pandhiani, and R. Iqbal, “Bloom’s taxonomy:
Improving assessment and teaching-learning process,” J. Educ. Educ.
Develop., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 203–221, 2016.
[42] S. Elkins, E. Kochmar, J. C. Cheung, and I. Serban, “How teachers
can use large language models and Bloom’s taxonomy to create educational quizzes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 38, no. 21, 2024,
pp. 23084–230 91.
[43] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “LLMParser:
An exploratory study on using large language models for log parsing,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
[44] Y. Liu et al., “Interpretable online log analysis using large language
models with prompt strategies,” in Proc. 32nd IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Prog.
Comprehension, 2024, pp. 35–46.
[45] C. Pei et al., “Self-evolutionary group-wise log parsing based on large
language model,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2024,
pp. 49–60.

1377

[46] Y. Xiao, V.-H. Le, and H. Zhang, “Stronger, cheaper and demonstrationfree log parsing with LLMs,” 2024, arXiv:2406.06156.
[47] J. Qi et al., “LogGPT: Exploring ChatGPT for log-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun., Data
Sci. Syst., Smart City Dependability Sensor, Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl.,
2023, pp. 273–280.
[48] W. Guan, J. Cao, S. Qian, J. Gao, and C. Ouyang, “LogLLM: Log-based
anomaly detection using large language models,” 2024, arXiv:2411.08561.
[49] D. Zhang et al., “SciInstruct: A self-reflective instruction annotated dataset
for training scientific language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 1443–1473.
[50] C. Xu et al., “WizardLM: Empowering large pre-trained language models
to follow complex instructions,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024, pp. 1–22.
[51] C. Zhou et al., “LIMA: Less is more for alignment,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 55006–550 21.
[52] W. X. Zhao et al., “A survey of large language models,” 2023,
arXiv:2303.18223.
[53] T. Wang et al., “What language model architecture and pretraining objective works best for zero-shot generalization?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2022, pp. 22964–22984.
[54] Y. Zheng, R. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. YeYanhan, and Z. Luo, “LLaMAfactory:
Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100 language models,” in Proc. 62nd Annu.
Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024, pp. 400–410.
[55] A. Yang et al., “Qwen2. 5 technical report,” 2024, arXiv:2412.15115.
[56] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “LogHub: A large collection of
system log datasets for AI-driven log analytics,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int.
Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2023, pp. 355–366.
[57] H. Zhang, J. Cai, J. Xu, and J. Wang, “Pretraining-based natural language
generation for text summarization,” in Proc. 23 rd Conf. Comput. Natural
Lang. Learn., 2019, pp. 789–797.
[58] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LanoBERT: System log anomaly detection
based on BERT masked language model,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 146,
2023, Art. no. 110689.
[59] S. Tao et al., “Biglog: Unsupervised large-scale pre-training for a unified
log representation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 31st Int. Symp. Qual. Service,
2023, pp. 1–11.
[60] H. W. Chung et al., “Scaling instruction-finetuned language models,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 25, no. 70, pp. 1–53, 2024.
[61] A. Grattafiori et al., “The LLaMA 3 herd of models,” 2024,
arXiv:2407.21783.
[62] X. Wang et al., “MINT: Evaluating LLMs in multi-turn interaction with
tools and language feedback,” Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025, pp. 1–35.
[63] L. Ma et al., “Luk: Empowering log understanding with expert knowledge
from large language models,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp.
2764–2786, Oct. 2025.
[64] K. Zhou et al., “JiuZhang3. 0: Efficiently improving mathematical reasoning by training small data synthesis models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 1854–1889.
[65] Y. Huang et al., “Key-point-driven data synthesis with its enhancement on
mathematical reasoning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, no.
23, 2025, pp. 24176–24184.
[66] Z. Tang, X. Zhang, B. Wang, and F. Wei, “MathScale: Scaling instruction
tuning for mathematical reasoning,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2024, pp. 47885–47 900.
[67] Z. Bi, N. Zhang, Y. Jiang, S. Deng, G. Zheng, and H. Chen, “When do
program-of-thought works for reasoning?,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 38, no. 16, 2024, pp. 17691–17 699.
[68] N. Kitaev and D. Klein, “Constituency parsing with a self-attentive encoder,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2018,
pp. 2676–2686.

Lipeng Ma received the BS degree in information
security from the Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 2019. He is
currently working toward the PhD degree in computer
science with Fudan University. His research interests
include knowledge graph applications, large language
models, software engineering, and AIOps.

1378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Yixuan Li received the master of Science (MSc)
degree in applied mathematics from The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, in 2024. She is currently
working toward the PhD degree with the College of
Computer Science, Fudan University. Her research
interests include code intelligence, large language
models (LLMs), and point cloud completion (her
MSc degree research focus).

Ben Fei (Member, IEEE) received the MS degree
from the Department of Materials Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China, in 2021, and the Ph.D.
degree from the School of Computer Science, Fudan
University, in 2024. He is currently a postdoc with
the Chinese University of Hong Kong. His research
interests include generative models, large language
models, 3D computer vision, and AI for science. He
is also an IEEE Young professional.

Weidong Yang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in software engineering from Xidian University, in 1999. From 1999 to 2001, he was a postdoctoral researcher with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University. He is currently a professor
with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include
Big Data, knowledge engineering, database and data
mining, and software engineering.

Shuhao Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the master’s degree in computer technology
from Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China, in
2023. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include
spatio-temporal data mining, anomaly detection, and
large language models.

Mingjie Zhou is currently working toward the PhD
degree with Fudan University, Shanghai, China. His
work has been authored or coauthored in data mining
and software engineering international conferences.
His research interests include AIOps and knowledge
graph.

Mingyu Zhao received the PhD degree in computer
science from Fudan University, China, in 2024. He
is currently an assistant professor with Northwestern
Polytechnical University, China. His research interests include data mining and machine learning.

Sihang Jiang received the BSc degree in information
security and the PhD degree in software engineering
from Fudan University, in 2017 and 2024, respectively. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher with
Fudan University. His research interests mainly include knowledge graph, large language models, and
AIOps.

Yanghua Xiao received the PhD degree in software
theory from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in
2009. He is currently a professor of computer science
with Fudan University, where he is also the director with Knowledge Works Laboratory. His research
interests include Big Data management and mining,
graph database, knowledge graph. He was a visiting
professor with Human Genome Sequencing Center,
Baylor College Medicine, and visiting researcher
with Microsoft Research Asia.