6344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

MT-KD: Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation for
Privacy-Aware Unlearning in IIoT Intrusion
Detection Systems
Shigen Shen , Senior Member, IEEE, Jiashuo Niu , Yizhou Shen , Jingnan Dong , Member, IEEE,
Wenlong Ke , Tian Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ruidong Li , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The growth of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
systems creates a direct conflict for intrusion detection systems:
while essential for security, their inability to selectively forget
specific attack patterns hinders adaptability and impedes compliance with privacy regulations like General Data Protection
Regulation. To resolve this conflict, we introduce the MultiTeacher Knowledge Distillation (MT-KD) unlearning framework,
designed to erase knowledge of specified attack classes without
the prohibitive cost of full model retraining. Our approach
employs deep convolutional neural networks, multi-teacher guidance, and gradient-based noise injection to train a student model
that forgets targeted attacks while retaining high accuracy on
remaining classes. We validate this by converting network traffic
from the CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 benchmark datasets
into grayscale images for extensive experiments. The results
demonstrate that our MT-KD framework achieves complete
forgetting of targeted classes, verified by Membership Inference
Attack resistance, while maintaining over 95% accuracy on
retained classes. By outperforming existing unlearning baselines
in both effectiveness and efficiency, our work delivers a practical
and scalable solution for privacy-preserving intrusion detection
in real-world IIoT scenarios. The source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/NJS-HZ/MT-KD
Index Terms—Machine unlearning, knowledge distillation,
Industrial Internet of Things, intrusion detection system, privacy.

I

I. I NTRODUCTION
NDUSTRIAL Internet of Things (IIoT) technologies are
changing manufacturing, energy, and critical infrastructure

Received 20 October 2025; revised 8 February 2026; accepted 12 February
2026. Date of publication 18 February 2026; date of current version 27 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the Humanities and Social
Sciences Planning Foundation of Ministry of Education of China under Grant
24YJAZH123, and Huzhou Science and Technology Planning Foundation of
China under Grant 2023GZ04. The associate editor coordinating the review
of this article and approving it for publication was J. Kang. (Corresponding
author: Yizhou Shen.)
Shigen Shen, Jiashuo Niu, Jingnan Dong, and Wenlong Ke are
with the School of Information Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou
313000, China (e-mail: shigens@zjhu.edu.cn; 2024388229@stu.zjhu.edu.cn;
dongjingnan@zjhu.edu.cn; wlke@zjhu.edu.cn).
Yizhou Shen is with the School of Computing, Newcastle University, NE1
7RU Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K. (e-mail: Y.Shen34@newcastle.ac.uk).
Tian Wang is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future
Networks, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, China, also with
the College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou
350108, China, and also with the College of Computer Science and Mathematics, Fujian University of Technology, Fuzhou 350118, China (e-mail:
tianwang@bnu.edu.cn).
Ruidong Li is with the Institute of Science and Engineering,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan (e-mail: lrd@
se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3665917

systems [1]. They do this by making it possible to get data
in real time and use smart automation [2]. But, all these new
connections and complex systems also lead to more advanced
cyber threats that target industrial control systems, edge
devices, and communication protocols [3], [4]. As a result,
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have become indispensable for safeguarding IIoT intrusion detection environments
against diverse and evolving attacks [5], [6]. Nevertheless,
they often retain long-term memory of obsolete or sensitive
threat patterns, which can pose significant risks to both privacy
compliance and the system’s adaptability to emerging attack
vectors. In IIoT settings—where operational continuity, data
protection, and regulatory alignment are paramount—there is
a growing demand for mechanisms that can selectively remove
previously learned information from deployed detection
models [7].
Regulations such as the EU’s General Data Protection
Regulation [8] and California Consumer Privacy Act [9] grant
individuals the right to be forgotten and to request deletion
of personal data [10]. In practice, compliance extends beyond
erasing raw records: if models were trained on those data, their
parameters may encode them, and organizations may need to
remove that influence from deployed models as well [11], [12].
For IIoT-based learning systems in mission-critical and datasensitive settings, it needs a practical requirement to support
privacy-compliant unlearning that selectively remove the effect
of specified samples or classes from a trained model without
retraining from scratch [13].
Machine unlearning has moved beyond computer vision
to natural language processing and recommender systems
[14], with techniques ranging from influence-function–guided
parameter edits and Newton-style update removal to partitioned training schemes with certified deletion guarantees.
By contrast, applications to IIoT cybersecurity remain sparse
[15], [16]. Much of the literature still chases stronger intrusion detection—robustness [17], higher detection accuracy,
or incremental learners under concept drift—while the more
prosaic yet crucial task of systematically scrubbing models of
outdated or sensitive attack patterns is rarely addressed [18].
Given the practical limits of IIoT—such as limited compute at terminals, mixed protocols [19], and tight latency
needs—retraining a model from scratch to forget one or more
attack types is not practical. So recent machine unlearning
work [20] has proposed fast and selective erase methods

2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

that keep compute cost low. These include influence-function
updates, small local weight tweaks, and knowledge distillation
with a teacher model. Even with these advances, balancing
unlearning strength with overall model stability and detection
performance remains a key challenge [21], [22].
To address these challenges, we propose a novel machine
learning forgetting framework specifically designed for IIoT
intrusion detection scenarios. The proposed method—MultiTeacher Knowledge Distillation (MT-KD)—combines the
newly developed UnResNet9 model, tailored for learning elimination tasks, with a multi-teacher selective forgetting strategy.
This framework removes knowledge of specific attack classes
from pretrained detection models while keeping performance
on the remaining categories. Its core is a student model
trained with guidance from multiple teachers, using both noisebased forgetting and distillation with limited data. This design
enables precise, controllable forgetting without retraining the
whole model from scratch.
We present a full unlearning pipeline that identifies the
samples or classes to forget, generates error-maximizing noise
to push the model away from them, and uses a multi-stage
alternating training schedule to erase and then stabilize the
model. We convert raw network traffic into 28 × 28 grayscale
session images with the USTC-TK2016 traffic-to-image toolkit
[23], and evaluate on two public benchmarks: CIC-IDS20171
and USTC-TFC2016.2 CIC-IDS2017 covers enterprise attacks
including DoS, DDoS, brute force, web attacks, and botnets,
while USTC-TFC2016 contains real malicious traffic from
families such as Neris, Virut, and Geodo. Results across
both datasets show good generalization and robustness to
different network settings and attack types: our method reliably
forgets targeted attack categories while keeping high detection
accuracy on benign traffic and retained classes, outperforming
full retraining and prior unlearning baselines.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold:
• We propose a lightweight residual network, UnResNet9,
built for IIoT intrusion detection and aimed at the interclass learning loss issue. Unlike standard ResNet variants,
UnResNet9 adds adaptive feature layers and lightweight
regularization so the model can prune unneeded knowledge while keeping detection performance on the attack
categories that remain.
• Our multi-teacher knowledge distillation (MT-KD) setup
uses two teachers. The forgetting teacher is obtained
by noise training the original pretrained model with
error-maximizing perturbations aimed at the classes to
forget, which yields a strong forgetting signal. The
retention teacher is trained only on the retained dataset
and provides clean guidance for the remaining classes.
The student learns useful knowledge from the retention
teacher and follows the forgetting cues from the forgetting
teacher by adding loss terms on noise-perturbed samples
and suppressing the logits of the target classes during
training. This design enables precise class-level forgetting
without retraining from scratch, reduces compute and
1 Available at: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
2 Available at: https://github.com/yungshenglu/USTC-TFC2016

6345

latency, and keeps detection performance strong on the
retained categories.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on two benchmark datasets: CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016. Both
datasets are preprocessed into grayscale images using the
USTC-TK2016 traffic-to-image conversion toolkit [23],
enabling CNN-based classification. Experimental results
demonstrate that our MT-KD framework achieves complete forgetting of the targeted attack category, which
has been validated as resistance to membership inference
attacks. Simultaneously, it maintains over 95% accuracy
in the retained categories, thereby surpassing existing
forgetting baselines in both effectiveness and efficiency.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related work on machine unlearning, IIoT
intrusion detection, and knowledge distillation. Section III
presents the system model and data configuration. Section IV
details the proposed MT-KD unlearning framework, including data preprocessing, the UnResNet9 architecture, and the
multi-teacher knowledge distillation mechanism. Section V
presents comprehensive experimental results and analysis on
two benchmark datasets. Finally, Section VI concludes the
paper and discusses future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Machine Unlearning
Recent years have witnessed growing interest in machine
unlearning as a critical technique for protecting user privacy
and enforcing the right to be forgotten in machine learning
systems. Hu et al. [24] exposed privacy vulnerabilities
during unlearning by proposing inversion attacks that
exploit both original and unlearned models. Sun et al. [25]
addressed unlearning challenges in GANs through a cascaded
approach preserving latent space continuity. Tarun et al. [26]
developed a fast framework leveraging error-maximizing
noise and weight manipulation for class unlearning
without full data access. Wang et al. [27] proposed Federated
Unlearning (FedU) for federated scenarios, balancing efficacy
and utility through user-side influence approximation.
Chundawat et al. [28] introduced zero-shot unlearning with
error-based noise optimization and the Anamnesis Index
metric for quality evaluation.
Collectively, recent studies have made steady progress on
machine unlearning across model types and setups, mainly
classifiers and generative models, with a focus on speed,
accuracy, and privacy. Yet several open issues remain: cutting the drop in performance during unlearning, making the
unlearning pipeline secure from start to finish, and building
general frameworks that comply with strict regulations [29],
[30]. These gaps show up across datasets and architectures and
call for clearer evaluation and deployment practices.
B. Intrusion Detection in IIoT Environments
IIoT networks face considerable challenges due to heterogeneous and severely imbalanced data collected from
diverse terminal devices, where data distributions are often

6346

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

non-independent and identically distributed with underrepresented attack types. To address these challenges,
Shan et al. [31] proposed Clustered Federated Learning
that leverages dynamic focal loss and model clustering to
enhance robustness against poisoning attacks. Hu et al. [32]
conducted a comprehensive survey on IIoT intelligence,
proposing a five-layer hierarchical architecture and examining
enabling technologies to guide future research. Yu et al. [33]
introduced a deep reinforcement learning-based open-set
IDS that effectively identifies both known and unseen
attack types, addressing zero-day threat detection challenges.
Zhang et al. [34] proposed an unsupervised fault detection
framework for multi-condition industrial signals, supporting
intelligent manufacturing and predictive maintenance in IIoT
systems.
Overall, recent work points to a trend of combining
federated learning, reinforcement learning, and machine
unlearning to build IIoT systems that are scalable and robust
to advanced attacks, and privacy-aware, addressing the diverse
and fast-changing nature of IIoT [35], [36].
C. Knowledge Distillation
In recent years, knowledge distillation has proven effective
for model compression and transfer [37] and is now used in
machine unlearning to selectively remove class- or instancelevel knowledge. Compared with retraining from scratch,
distillation-based methods cut compute and time, making them
a good fit for efficient unlearning in deep models [38]. In
particular, MT-KD improves student robustness and capacity
by using guidance from multiple teachers. Building on this, we
propose MT-KD-Unlearning, which trains the student through
collaborative learning on retained data together with substitute
noise samples. This achieves precise forgetting of malicious
attack categories while maintaining high performance on the
retained classes.
D. Our Method
The above analysis shows that distillation-based forgetting
methods are promising for selective forgetting, but they also
reveal a key drawback: strong reliance on a single teacher
model. This limitation makes it hard to control, in a detailed
way, what to keep and what to remove in complex, multi-class
cybersecurity settings.
To address these limits, we propose MT-KD Forgetting
Learning for IIoT intrusion detection. It uses two teachers
with complementary roles: a forgetting teacher, obtained by
noise training the original model to emphasize what should be
dropped, and a retention teacher trained only on the retained
data to provide clean guidance. The student alternates between
two training phases. In one phase, it distills knowledge from
the retention teacher on retained samples. In the other, it
learns to suppress responses to the target classes using noiseperturbed inputs guided by the forgetting teacher. The noise
strength is kept modest to trigger forgetting without destabilizing training, and the alternation is kept short to maintain
stability. The balance between the two phases can be adjusted
to trade off forgetting strength and retained accuracy. The

approach works with common backbones, leaves the inference
path unchanged, and does not require access to the original
data that must be removed, which suits privacy-sensitive
deployments. In practice, it adds only a small training-time
overhead while keeping test-time cost unchanged, and it preserves detection on retained classes while removing knowledge
of the targets.
The specific design of MT-KD is particularly well-suited for
IIoT intrusion detection environments. First, unlike standard
distillation-based unlearning methods that rely on expensive
parameter modification, our noise tensor optimization significantly reduces computational overhead, enabling practical
deployment on IIoT edge devices. Second, the dual-teacher
architecture with strategic MaxPooling bottlenecks enables
class-specific forgetting boundaries, allowing fine-grained control over which attack classes are forgotten while minimizing
collateral damage to retained threat detection. Standard methods lack this precision and typically resort to coarser global
forgetting strategies unsuitable for multi-class cybersecurity
scenarios. Third, our lightweight UnResNet9 backbone is
optimized for 28 × 28 grayscale network traffic images rather
than arbitrary image sizes, and its design captures the periodic
byte patterns of industrial protocols such as MODBUS and
DNP3. In contrast, directly adapting general-purpose CNNs
to IIoT would ignore these protocol-specific structures. These
design choices collectively address the unique constraints
of IIoT systems—resource limitations, privacy requirements,
and the need for selective, multi-class unlearning—making
MT-KD substantially more practical and effective than direct
adaptations of existing methods.
III. P ROPOSED M ODEL
A. System Model
In the IIoT model, edge devices send their network traffic to
a central server for analysis. This stream contains both normal
communications and malicious traffic injected by attackers.
To enhance security and protect sensitive operational data,
we introduce a noise-based machine forgetting algorithm to
eliminate harmful samples. This mechanism aims to mitigate malware impacts and erase attack traces during the
learning process. Through continuous iterative forgetting until
malicious knowledge is completely purged, we ultimately construct a sophisticated, privacy-focused model resilient against
industrial cyber threats.
In the framework of the unlearning algorithm depicted
in Fig. 1, the data of each user exhibits randomness and
uncertainty, and the attack methods employed by attackers
are also unpredictable. The unlearning algorithm continuously
learns and sifts out malicious data for the purpose of forgetting
it. After being processed by the server side, the relevant data
is uploaded to the final model repository. The model we have
generated is a high-performance one that has screened out
malicious data. In this way, it can protect users’ network
security and privacy, and enhance the overall security level.
At the practical level, forgetting learning lets security models quickly dampen the impact of specific attack cases or
tainted samples and recover detection quality without rebuilding the whole model. Placed on edge intelligence nodes,

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

6347

Similarly, the set of classes that the model is intended to
retain is defined as R = {1, 2, . . . , K} \ F, referred to as the
retain class set. The associated data subset is:
DR = {(xi , yi ) ∈ D | yi ∈ R}.

(2)

where DR denotes the retain data subset, and yi ∈ R indicates
that the label of sample (xi , yi ) belongs to the retain class set.
This partitioning lays the foundation for selective unlearning
algorithms, enabling the model to effectively remove information related to specific classes while preserving knowledge
deemed important. The complete dataset D can be decomposed
into two mutually exclusive subsets:
D = DF ∪ DR ,
Fig. 1. Layered architecture of MT-KD unlearning in IIoT intrusion detection
environments.

an IDS can make small, local parameter updates to forget
harmful signals while still learning normal traffic patterns.
This avoids the delay and bandwidth cost of round-trip cloud
updates and keeps the system capable of self-defense even
when offline or under tight resource limits. When appropriate,
it can also be paired with federated learning so devices
coordinate forgetting steps without sending raw data, helping
protect a shared model with little communication. Overall,
the lightweight forgetting path improves real-time response
in distributed settings, reduces reliance on the cloud, and
strengthens resilience against adversarial interference and
data-protection risks.
We are currently exploring practical ways to remove malicious data from networked systems while keeping retained data
intact, especially when hostile traffic attempts unauthorized
access to network resources and users’ private information.
In real deployments, malware reaches privacy-sensitive nodes
through common paths such as phishing, software flaws, and
lateral movement from compromised hosts; zero-day attacks
are among the most common and hardest to handle. To
deal with these problems, we propose a machine-learning
unlearning framework that supports selective forgetting of
malicious traces while preserving benign knowledge and user
privacy. The aim is a cleaner, safer model that resists malware
and better protects data integrity and privacy.
B. Data Configuration
N
We consider a supervised learning dataset D = {(xi , yi )}i=1
,
where each xi denotes an input sample and yi ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}
represents its corresponding class label, with K denoting the
total number of distinct classes.
We define the subset of classes that the model is intended
to forget F ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , K}, referred to as the forget class set.
The corresponding subset of data is defined as

DF = {(xi , yi ) ∈ D | yi ∈ F}.

(1)

where DF denotes the forget data subset, and yi ∈ F indicates
that the label of sample (xi , yi ) belongs to the forget class set.

DF ∩ DR = ∅.

(3)

To evaluate the effect of unlearning, we construct two models
for comparison: the original model, which is trained on the full
dataset D, and the unlearning model, which is trained solely
on the retained dataset DR , with all forget data DF excluded.
IV. M ULTI -T EACHER K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION
U NLEARNING M ODEL
A. Data Preprocessing
To use deep learning for IIoT intrusion detection, we first
convert raw IIoT traffic into forms that models can learn. We
parse packet captures into flows, extract session-level features,
and pack them into fixed-size tensors suitable for convolutional
models. In this work we use the public CIC-IDS2017 and
USTC-TFC2016 datasets, which cover a wide range of benign
and attack traffic and show clear temporal patterns and diverse
communication behavior. We apply a consistent preprocessing
pipeline across both datasets with flow slicing, per-feature
normalization, and stratified train, validation, and test splits.
This setup makes the inputs stable for training and helps
the models focus on the real differences between benign and
malicious traffic.
Both CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 cover the common
threats and traffic patterns seen in IIoT intrusion detection.
Attacks such as DoS, PortScan, and Botnet target key assets
in industrial control systems and are well represented in these
datasets. The traffic records show typical exchanges between
industrial endpoints and servers, providing useful training
material for IIoT-focused detectors. Using these datasets helps
models adapt to real deployments and remain robust under
practical conditions.
The dataset is originally provided in the form of raw packet
capture (PCAP) files, which record continuous streams of
network packets. Since such raw data is not directly suitable
for deep convolutional models, we begin by segmenting the
continuous traffic trace T into fixed-duration session-based
flow windows using a slicing function as
φ(T ; τ) = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sN },

(4)

where T denotes the continuous traffic trace, τ is the fixed
time duration for session segmentation, si represents the i-th
flow segment, and N is the total number of extracted sessions.
Each flow segment si is a time-aligned session of length τ
between two endpoints, covering the protocol exchanges and

6348

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

basic behavior. We process these segments with the USTCTK2016 toolkit and extract a session feature vector fi ∈ Rd ,
where d is the number of features. The vector records simple
statistics and protocol fields, such as packet inter-arrival times,
byte counts, flow duration, and TCP flag ratios.
To adapt these features for CNNs, each vector is normalized,
reshaped, and mapped into a grayscale image tensor through
a transformation function ψ as
ψ(fi ) ∈ RC×H×W .

(5)

This conversion preserves spatial correlations within the features and allows convolutional filters to detect complex flow
patterns similarly to textures in natural images.
To improve model robustness and enable the detection of
zero-day and previously unseen attacks, we further augment
the dataset with synthetic samples f̃ j generated through three
complementary strategies. First, we apply feature-level synthesis by perturbing and recombining existing attack vectors
to simulate polymorphic behavior, which is represented by

f̃ = f (a) + 
f (b) − f (c) ,  ∼ U(0, 1)d .
(6)
where f (a) , f (b) , f (c) ∈ Rd denote three different known attack
feature vectors,  ∈ Rd is a random vector with each element
independently sampled from the uniform distribution U(0, 1),
and denotes element-wise (Hadamard) product.
Next, we generate adversarial examples by leveraging the
gradients of a pretrained model M to modify known features,
pushing them towards the model’s decision boundaries, which
is represented by
f̃ = f + η · sign (∇f P(M(f), y)) ,

(7)

where f ∈ Rd denotes the original input feature vector, f̃ is the
perturbed adversarial example, η > 0 controls the magnitude
of the perturbation, sign(·) is the element-wise sign function,
∇f P(·) represents the gradient of the loss with respect to the
input, indicating the sensitivity of the model output to changes
in each input dimension, M(f) denotes the model prediction
given f, and y is the true label. This method effectively
enhances the model’s robustness against adversarial evasion
attacks.
Finally, we train generative models G(z), such as GANs [39]
or Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [40], on known attack
samples to learn their underlying distribution pattack (f), and
generate new synthetic samples by sampling latent variables
z from a multivariate standard normal distribution N (0, I),
which is represented by
f̃ = G(z),

z ∼ N (0, I).

(8)

All synthetic features are assigned a unified label yunknown to
indicate their unknown or novel nature, and are transformed
into grayscale images I = ψ(f̃) using the same preprocessing
pipeline. The final augmented training dataset is constructed
as
˚
M
aug
Dtrain = DR ∪ (ψ(f̃ j ), yunknown ) j=1 .
(9)
aug

Here Dtrain denotes the augmented training dataset composed
of the retained data subset DR and M synthetic samples.
Recall that DR is the retained dataset excluding all forget

data DF , as defined in Section III-B. This data augmentation process expands the training distribution and decision
boundaries of retained classes, thereby improving the model’s
generalization ability and enabling more effective detection of
previously unseen and evolving attack variants.
B. Convolutional Model UnResNet9
To handle grayscale traffic images, we use a small, efficient
CNN called UnResNet9, a customized version of ResNet9.
It keeps the key feature layers of ResNet9 and adds a few
simple changes so it works well with multi-teacher knowledge
distillation and selective forgetting. In our MT-KD unlearning framework, UnResNet9 serves as the backbone, learning
useful features from network traffic while enabling fast, classspecific forgetting.
Given an input tensor I ∈ RC×H×W , where C = 1 for
grayscale images, H = W = 28 for our dataset, the model
extracts hierarchical and discriminative feature embeddings
from flow-level image representations through a sequence of
convolution operations, batch normalization, nonlinear activation functions, and residual connections. Specifically, each
convolutional layer consists of a 2D convolution operation
Convk (·) followed by batch normalization BNk (·), formally
expressed as
ConvBNk (U) = BNk (Convk (U)) ,

(10)

where U denotes the input feature tensor, and the subscript k
denotes the layer index. Batch normalization stabilizes training
after the convolution operation.
To facilitate deeper feature learning and mitigate gradient
vanishing issues, we incorporate residual blocks R(·) defined
by
R(U) = σ (ConvBN2 (σ (ConvBN1 (U))) + U) ,

(11)

where σ(·) denotes the ReLU activation function, the
subscripts 1 and 2 denote the two convolutional layers
within the residual block, and the residual connection enables
cross-layer information flow by adding the input U to the
output of two consecutive convolution-batch normalizationactivation operations.
The forward propagation of the network computes intermediate feature maps Z1 through Z10 sequentially as
Z1 = σ(ConvBN1 (I)),
Z2 = σ(ConvBN2 (Z1 )),
Z3 = MaxPool(Z2 ),
Z4 = R(Z3 ),
Z5 = σ(ConvBN3 (Z4 )),
Z6 = MaxPool(Z5 ),
Z7 = σ(ConvBN4 (Z6 )),
Z8 = MaxPool(Z7 ),
Z9 = R(Z8 ),
Z10 = MaxPool(Z9 ),

(12)

where MaxPool(·) denotes the max pooling operation with
kernel size 2 × 2.

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

Finally, the output feature map Z10 is flattened into a feature
vector h ∈ Rdh and passed through a fully connected linear
layer with weight matrix W ∈ RK×dh and bias vector b ∈ RK
to produce the classification logits as
o = Wh + b,

(13)

where h is the flattened feature vector, dh is the dimension of
the flattened features, K is the number of output classes (as
defined in Section III-B), and o ∈ RK is the output logit vector
corresponding to predicted class scores. This architecture balances computational efficiency and expressive power, making
it well-suited for image-based intrusion detection tasks.
UnResNet9 distinguishes itself through strategic design
choices that balance computational efficiency with unlearning effectiveness. We design UnResNet9 as a lightweight
backbone specifically tailored for multi-teacher knowledge
distillation and selective forgetting in IIoT intrusion detection. The architecture employs only two residual blocks at
128 and 256 channels, reducing parameters by approximately
60% compared to ResNet18, enabling efficient deployment on resource-constrained IIoT edge devices. Importantly,
UnResNet9’s architecture is specifically optimized for 28 × 28
grayscale traffic images rather than standard larger input sizes,
avoiding redundant feature extraction layers. Four strategically
placed MaxPool2d operations create information bottlenecks
that serve as isolation boundaries during forgetting, preventing unintended information leakage between forgotten
and retained classes. This lightweight design makes UnResNet9 more sensitive and responsive to noise-based forgetting
strategies, facilitating more effective class-specific unlearning. Additionally, UnResNet9 returns intermediate activations
{Z1 , Z2 , Z5 , Z7 } for multi-level supervision during knowledge
distillation, enabling complementary guidance at different
abstraction levels.
C. Unlearning Model
Our objective in selective forgetting is to eliminate a
model’s predictive capability on a specific subset of data
DF , which contains one or more target classes intended
for removal. Rather than retraining the entire model or
directly modifying model parameters—approaches that are
computationally expensive, risk catastrophic forgetting, and
are impractical in real-world IIoT deployments—we adopt a
more efficient noise-based optimization approach. This method
learns an additive noise tensor N that can be applied to
forget dataset samples without altering the model’s frozen
parameters. This strategy offers significant advantages: it maintains the model’s core architecture and performance on retain
data DR , reduces computational cost by optimizing only a
fixed-size tensor rather than millions of model parameters,
and naturally enables multi-teacher frameworks by generating
diverse noise configurations.
When applied to inputs from the forget dataset DF , this
noise causes the model to misclassify or reduce its confidence
on forgotten classes. Formally, the optimization problem for
learning the optimal noise is defined as


N∗ = arg min −L (M(X + N), y) + λkNk2F ,
(14)
N

6349

where N ∈ RC×H×W is the learnable additive noise tensor
applied to all samples in DF , X ∈ RB×C×H×W is a batch
of input samples from DF with batch size B, y ∈ RB is
the corresponding label vector, M(·) denotes the pretrained
model with frozen weights, L(·, ·) is the cross-entropy loss
function, λ > 0 is the regularization coefficient controlling
noise magnitude, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm. The
negative loss term encourages the model to produce incorrect
predictions on noisy inputs, while the regularization term
prevents excessive perturbation. The resulting model, referred
to as the first teacher model T 1 , has undergone forgetting via
additive noise and exhibits degraded performance on DF while
maintaining general performance on DR .
To refine the unlearning process and reduce collateral damage to DR , we employ a knowledge distillation framework.
A second teacher model T 2 is constructed by fine-tuning the
original model exclusively on the retained dataset DR , defined
as
X
T 2 = arg min
L (M(x), y) ,
(15)
M

(x,y)∈DR

where T 2 denotes the second teacher model obtained by finetuning the original model exclusively on the retained dataset
DR . This produces a clean reference model that retains full
knowledge of DR with no exposure to DF .
Finally, we train a student model S that simultaneously
learns from both teacher models using a multi-teacher knowledge distillation loss. For an input x, the student attempts to
match the softened output distributions of T 1 and T 2 :
Ldistill = α · KL (S(x) k T 1 (x))
+(1−α) · KL (S(x) k T 2 (x)) ,

(16)

where KL(·k·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence computed
on temperature-scaled softmax outputs, α ∈ [0, 1] balances the
influence between forgetting strength (T 1 ) and performance
preservation (T 2 ), and S denotes the student model. The
student S is trained only on DR , ensuring it mimics the
desired behavior: poor performance on DF while maintaining
accuracy on the retained classes.
In summary, our framework provides a flexible and modular
approach to machine unlearning, combining noise injection
with knowledge transfer to selectively erase learned knowledge
while retaining generalization capability. Moreover, it avoids
retraining from scratch and ensures compliance with privacy
or removal requests in practical systems.
D. Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation Model
To effectively integrate complementary knowledge, the student model S is trained under the joint guidance of two distinct
teachers. Teacher T 1 is obtained by applying the learned noise
N∗ to the original model’s predictions on forget data DF ,
thereby achieving degraded performance on forgotten classes.
Teacher T 2 is trained solely on the retained data DR to
preserve important knowledge of retained classes.
(T i )
Let LKD
be the distillation loss for teacher T i , which is
defined as





fTi (x)
fS (x)
(T i )
softmax
, (17)
LKD
= KL softmax
τ
τ

6350

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

where KL(·k·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence measuring
the difference between the student’s and teacher’s output
distributions, fTi (x) and fS (x) are the logits (pre-softmax
outputs) for teacher T i and student S respectively, softmax(·)
is the softmax function, and τ > 0 is the temperature parameter
that controls the smoothness of the output distributions. A
higher temperature creates softer probability distributions,
which facilitates the transfer of dark knowledge from teachers
to student.
Let Lstudent be the overall training objective of the student
model, which integrates a standard supervised cross-entropy
loss on the retained data with a weighted sum of the distillation
losses from both teachers:
i
h
(T 2 )
1)
(18)
Lstudent = LCE ( fS (x), y) + γ αL(T
KD + (1 − α)LKD ,
where LCE (·, ·) is the cross-entropy loss calculated between
the student’s predictions and the ground truth labels y on the
retained dataset DR , γ > 0 is a hyperparameter balancing the
contribution of the distillation losses against the supervised
loss, and α ∈ [0, 1] controls the relative influence of the
forgetting teacher T 1 and the clean teacher T 2 .
This multi-teacher distillation strategy enables the student
model to effectively suppress knowledge of the forgotten
classes by learning from T 1 , while maintaining strong performance on retained classes by learning from T 2 . The rationale
is that T 1 provides explicit forgetting guidance through noise
optimization, while T 2 trained only on retain data ensures
performance preservation. By distilling from both teachers
simultaneously, the student model learns two complementary objectives: active suppression of forget class knowledge
from T 1 and robust retention of performance from T 2 . This
dual-teacher approach transforms unlearning from passive
data-driven forgetting into an actively supervised process with
measurable forgetting signals. The following experiments sufficiently demonstrate that dual-teacher distillation is necessary
for achieving both effective unlearning and strong retention
performance.
To show our MT-KD framework balancing machine
unlearning and performance preservation, we present Algorithm 1 including three phases: Data preprocessing, unlearning
model construction, and student model generation and training.
V. E XPERIMENT
We assess the proposed approach in a multi-teacher unlearning setting across several neural architectures, with emphasis
on single- and multi-class forgetting for IIoT intrusion detection. Experiments are conducted on the CIC-IDS2017 and
USTC-TFC2016 dataset configured for IIoT scenarios, using
three representative backbones: AllCNN [41], UnResNet9, and
LeNet-32 [42].
A. Experimental Settings
All experiments were run on a single NVIDIA RTX 4060
GPU (8 GB). The base model was trained for 25 epochs with
a batch size of 256. We evaluate two setups: Y1 forgets
a single class (unknown), and Y2 forgets multiple classes
(unknown, class 4, and class 5). These two configurations span

Algorithm 1 Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation for
Machine Unlearning
1: Input: Base model M, retain data DR , forget data DF ,
zero-day generator G(z);
2: Output: Unlearned student model S;
3: Phase 1: Data Preprocessing
4: for j ← 1 to M do
5:
Sample z ∼ N (0, I) or select strategy s ∈
{Mutation, Adversarial};
6:
Generate f̃ j via Eq. (5), (6), or (7) with label yunknown ;
7:
Add (f̃ j , yunknown ) to dataset Daug via Eq. (9);
8: end for
9: Phase 2: Unlearning Model Construction
10: Initialize T 1 and T 2 with M;
11: Optimize noise tensor N∗ on DF via Eq. (14);
12: Update T 1 using DR ∪ (DF + N∗ );
13: Update T 2 on DR via Eq. (15);
14: Phase 3: Student Model Generation and Training
15: Initialize Student S;
16: for batch (x, y) in DR do
17:
Calculate logits fS (x), fT1 (x), fT2 (x);
(T 1 )
2)
18:
Compute KL divergence losses LKD
and L(T
KD via Eq.
(17) with temperature τ;
19:
Compute combined student loss Lstudent via Eq. (18);
20:
Update S by minimizing Lstudent ;
21: end for
22: return S;

single-class to multi-class forgetting regimes, thereby providing comprehensive coverage of realistic partial unlearning
scenarios. Specifically, Y1 validates the framework’s capability to precisely forget a single attack class while preserving
detection performance on all retained classes, representing a
fundamental unlearning requirement. Y2 extends this to multiclass unlearning, requiring the model to simultaneously forget
knowledge of multiple classes while maintaining robust performance on the remaining attack categories, thereby reflecting
more complex real-world scenarios where multiple threats
must be collectively removed. Together, these complementary
settings enable thorough evaluation of the MT-KD framework
across different forgetting scales and validate its effectiveness
in both single-threat and multi-threat unlearning scenarios
commonly encountered in practical IIoT systems.
To better reflect real IIoT conditions where attack patterns
can shift and unknown threats appear, and to test robustness
to zero-day and unseen attacks, we synthesize three types of
random attacks: mutations of known attacks, GAN-based samples, and randomly generated abnormal feature vectors. The
perturbation magnitude η is set to 0.1–0.3 to keep variability
within a realistic range.
To ensure fair comparison and facilitate reproducibility, we
specify the key simulation parameters as follows: all three
models are trained for 40 epochs using the Adam optimizer
with learning rates of 0.01 for UnResNet9 and 0.1 for LeNet32
and AllCNN. Knowledge distillation parameters include temperature parameter τ = 4.0, balance weight α = 0.7, and noise
regularization coefficient λ = 0.1.

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

During the training of the original model, we used the Adam
optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01. When validation
performance plateaued, the learning rate was reduced to help
convergence. For the noise-based forgetting model, we kept
the perturbation size moderate: the noise tensor N was clipped
to [0.1, 0.3]. This choice kept the retained set DR largely
unchanged while reliably disturbing the forget set DF .

6351

TABLE I
U NLEARNING R ESULTS ON CIC-IDS2017 DATASET

B. Evaluation Metrics
In prior studies, many metrics have been used to judge
the effectiveness of machine unlearning. A single overall
classification accuracy, however, is not suitable here because it
does not match the goal of forgetting. During unlearning, the
model is expected to lose the ability to recognize the forgotten
classes, so their accuracy will drop by design. If we only look
at overall accuracy, this drop can be hidden, and the real effect
of unlearning may be obscured.
To address this, we use two metrics: Dr and Df. Dr is the
accuracy on the retained classes. These are the classes the
model should remember. Df is the accuracy on the forgotten
classes. These are the classes the model should not recognize.
An ideal unlearning process drives the Df accuracy toward
zero, meaning the model no longer recognizes the forgotten
classes and instead misclassifies them. At the same time, the
Dr accuracy should stay close to that of the original model,
so performance on the retained classes is not harmed. This
balance between forgetting and retention is key to judging the
effectiveness and safety of unlearning methods.
Additionally, to evaluate the privacy protection capability of
our unlearning approach, we employ Membership Inference
Attack (MIA) as a privacy-oriented metric. MIA attempts to
determine whether specific data samples were used in the
model’s training process. In the context of machine unlearning,
a successful unlearning method should make it difficult for
an attacker to infer the participation of forgotten data in
the original training. We measure the attack success rate of
MIA on both the original model and the unlearned model.
A significant reduction in attack precision after unlearning
indicates that the influence of the target data has been effectively removed, thereby enhancing privacy protection. Lower
MIA success rates on the unlearned model demonstrate more
complete erasure of the forgotten data’s traces.
C. Data Processing
In this work, we use CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 as
the main source of raw network traffic and process it with the
USTC-TK2016 toolkit. We build a preprocessing pipeline to
align the outputs with the CIC-IDS2017 classification scheme.
First, we split the original PCAP files into flows using a slicing
tool, turning long traces into small, manageable segments to
ease feature extraction and later transformation. Then, we
remap and standardize the flow labels to the ten classes defined
by CIC-IDS2017, ensuring label consistency and compatibility
across datasets.
To use image-based deep learning for IIoT intrusion detection, we convert each flow segment into a 28 × 28 grayscale
image through a mapping that encodes byte sequences and

TABLE II
U NLEARNING R ESULTS ON USTC-TFC2016 DATASET

packet-level attributes such as payload bytes, packet sizes, and
inter-arrival times. This image representation is particularly
suitable for IIoT environments where industrial protocols
exhibit periodic communication patterns and structured byte
sequences. Normal IIoT traffic manifests as recognizable
visual patterns and textures in images, while attacks that
disrupt protocol structure appear as irregular pixel distributions
and visual anomalies. This encoding allows CNNs to effectively learn and distinguish IIoT-specific normal and malicious
communication patterns.
Further, we pad or crop each sample to a fixed 28 × 28
shape and apply per-image normalization to stabilize training.
To improve generalization, we apply standard augmentations
such as random rotation, horizontal flip, light random crops,
and brightness and contrast jitter. Finally, we create stratified
train, validation, and test splits that preserve class ratios and
reduce leakage by keeping flows from the same session in the
same partition.
D. Unlearning Performance Evaluation
We conducted comprehensive experiments to test the multiteacher knowledge distillation unlearning method on multiple
datasets, backbones, and forgetting settings. Tables I and II
report results on CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 for
single-class (Y1) and multi-class (Y2) forgetting.
From Tables I and II, the baseline models perform
well, with CIC-IDS2017 reaching 0.94–0.99 accuracy and
USTC-TFC2016 reaching 0.87–0.94. Under the T 1 setting,
Dr usually changes by only 3–5% while Df reaches 0. For

6352

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 2. Detailed architecture of the MT-KD unlearning framework for IIoT intrusion detection scenarios.

example, in CIC-IDS2017 with Y1 on UnResNet9, Dr drops
by just 0.03.
Although the T 1 model keeps accuracy above 87% in all
settings, noise-only forgetting cannot fully remove the effect
of the forgotten data. To address this, we use a multi-teacher
distillation setup that pairs T 1 with T 2 , where T 2 is trained
only on the retained set. This yields consistent accuracy
gains on both datasets. On CIC-IDS2017 (Y2–ALLCNN),
the student reaches 0.97, up from 0.96 for the original. On
USTC-TFC2016, Y2–UnResNet9 reaches 0.96, up from 0.94.
These results show that multi-teacher distillation reduces side
effects from noise-based training and keeps performance on
the retained classes high during forgetting.
Compared with error-maximizing noise (EMN) [26], our
method delivers consistently better results across all tested
settings. On both CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016, the
student improves by roughly a few percentage points, with
the most noticeable gains in the single-class forgetting setup
and clear advantages preserved in multi-class cases. This trend
is stable across the different backbones we evaluated.
Compared with EMN unlearning, our method needs slightly
more training time—about 10–15% extra in our runs—but it
consistently delivers higher accuracy on the retained classes.
This small compute premium is offset by better detection,
in particular by preserving key decision boundaries after
forgetting. Across both datasets, the evidence shows that
the time–accuracy trade-off clearly favors our approach. In
practical IIoT deployments, where accuracy and robustness
are critical to defend against evolving threats, this trade-off
is reasonable and beneficial.
Fig. 4 illustrates the performance of the ALLCNN model
under our proposed unlearning method. The original model,
trained without any unlearning, already achieves excellent
performance with an accuracy of 90%. After 20 epochs of
training, both the T 1 and T 2 models show performance trends
converging toward that of the original model. Furthermore,
after 40 epochs of training, the student model achieves performance that is nearly identical to the original model.
Fig. 5 illustrates the trend of the Dr of the LeNet32 model
over training epochs following the application of our proposed

Fig. 3. (a) Images generated by preprocessing CIC-IDS2017; (b) fake samples
generated by randomly attacking original samples to simulate zero-day attacks.

Fig. 4. The Dr performance of the ALLCNN model is evaluated under
different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right),
respectively.

Fig. 5. The Dr performance of the LeNet32 model is evaluated under
different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right),
respectively.

unlearning method. It is observed that the original model,
without any unlearning intervention, consistently maintains a
high and stable Dr, with accuracy close to 0.9; however, it

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

6353

TABLE III
ATTACK P RECISION OF MIA ON U NLEARNED M ODELS

Fig. 6. The Dr performance of the UnResNet9 model is evaluated under
different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right),
respectively.

performs approximately 9% worse in accuracy compared to
the ALLCNN model. During training, the performances of the
T 1 and T 2 models gradually improve, approaching that of the
original model after around 20 epochs. By about 40 epochs,
the student’s Dr is close to that of the original model. At a
higher attack level of 0.3, performance dips early but recovers
over training and ends near the baseline. In our runs, the curves
stay stable across the tested intensities.
Fig. 6 plots the Dr trajectory for UnResNet9. Compared
with the other two backbones, its curve is smoother and
more stable, indicating a steadier optimization process and
better convergence. During the base training phase, UnResNet9 improves faster and reaches high accuracy in fewer
epochs, which points to strong capacity and good generalization. It also achieves the best accuracy overall, yielding
more reliable detection. Taken together—higher accuracy and
quicker convergence—UnResNet9 is a strong choice for our
unlearning framework. It adapts well to the forgetting steps
and remains robust under different attack intensities, consistent
with our objectives.
While the original models scored above 90% on Df, our
unlearning reduces this metric to 0. Across all three backbones,
the student models consistently forget the target classes. This
consistent drop of Df to zero supports the method’s effectiveness and its ability to generalize across architectures.
E. Prediction Distribution for the Forgotten Class
Fig. 7 compares predictions before and after applying
our unlearning framework. In Fig. 7a, the original AllCNN
predicts all classes well, including the class to be forgotten.
After Y1 unlearning, the student in Fig. 7c assigns almost
no confidence to the forgotten class, and we do not observe
confusion with other labels, which shows clean class-level
forgetting. Fig. 7d reports results for UnResNet9 under Y2,
which forgets classes 4, 5, and unknown; the student no longer
maps any samples from these classes to retained labels. This
pattern indicates that the model has removed not only the
output responses but also the internal feature representations
linked to the forgotten classes.
In conclusion, the proposed framework reaches a practical
balance between targeted forgetting and preservation of utility. Across datasets and backbones, it consistently removes
class-specific attack knowledge, driving Df to zero, while
maintaining high recognition on benign traffic and retained
attack types. The strength of erasure is controllable through
the forgetting and distillation weights, which allows tuning
the trade-off to deployment needs. These results indicate

robustness and real-world value for IIoT intrusion detection,
where models must adapt to evolving threats without full
retraining.
F. Privacy Protection Evaluation via Membership Inference
Attacks
Table III reports MIA precision [43] before and after
unlearning. The original model is highly exposed, with MIA
precision at 89.3% on CIC-IDS2017 and 88.6% on USTCTFC2016, indicating strong privacy leakage. After applying
our method, the T 1 model reduces attack precision to 52.2%
and 54.5%. Training only on T 2 lowers it further to 48.8% and
50.7%, close to the 50% random-guess level. The final Student
model offers the best protection, reaching 46.9% and 49.4%,
a relative improvement of 47.5% and 44.2% over the original
model. At this near-random level, an adversary cannot reliably
distinguish training records, supporting the privacy gains of
our framework.
To evaluate privacy during forgetting, we use two metrics:
Forgetting AUC and Retention AUC. Both are computed from
the ROC curve of an MIA. Forgetting AUC measures how
well an attacker can identify forgotten samples; when it is
close to 0.5, the attacker is no better than random guessing,
indicating good privacy. Retention AUC measures the privacy
of retained samples; values at 0.5 or below show that the attack
has been disrupted or even misled, offering stronger protection
than simple data deletion.
Figs. 8 and 9 present the comprehensive evaluation of
the proposed unlearning framework across three neural network architectures on CIC–IDS2017 and USTC–TFC2016
datasets, respectively. The experimental results reveal distinct
dataset-dependent characteristics while validating the universal
effectiveness of the unlearning methodology.
Fig. 8 shows that all three backbones push the Forgetting
AUC below 0.5 on CIC-IDS2017, which makes membership
inference close to random. AllCNN reaches about 0.48 within
15–20 epochs (roughly 4% under the 0.5 line) while keeping
85–90% validation accuracy. UnResNet9 is similar, settling
near 0.49 in the same epoch range with comparable accuracy.
The smaller LeNet32 takes a bit longer (20–25 epochs) but
ends at 0.48–0.49 and holds 80–85% accuracy. These curves
show steady unlearning with stable accuracy for all three
models on this dataset.
Fig. 9 show that all three architectures converge to a very
similar forget AUC of about 0.49 on the USTC-TFC2016
dataset. While the final privacy level is comparable, the path to
reach it shows clear trade-offs in speed and retained accuracy.
UnResNet9 in Fig. 9b is the fastest, reaching the target in
15–20 epochs and keeping validation accuracy at 90–95%.
AllCNN in Fig. 9a needs 20–25 epochs and holds 85–90%

6354

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 7. Comparison of the confusion matrices of UnResNet9 and AllCNN after applying the unlearning method.

Fig. 8. AUC comparison on CIC-IDS2017 dataset across three architectures.

Fig. 9.
AUC comparison on USTC-TFC2016 dataset across three
architectures.

accuracy. LeNet32 in Fig. 9c takes 25–30 epochs and reaches
80–85% accuracy. This shared forget AUC suggests the traffic
in USTC-TFC2016 sets a similar privacy floor for all three

models, while stronger backbones like UnResNet9 still offer
faster convergence and higher accuracy. In practice, this means
UnResNet9 is a good choice when time and accuracy matter

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

6355

justified by the significant improvement in model accuracy. In
contrast, the EMN forgetting learning method achieves shorter
training time, but the improvement in prediction performance
is limited. Overall, this method offers an excellent balance
between computational efficiency and accuracy improvement,
and has outstanding practical value for industrial intrusion
detection systems in the Internet of Things, both in terms of
training cost and detection performance.
H. Sensitivity Analysis of Key Parameter α

Fig. 10. Training time comparison.

most, whereas lighter models remain useful when compute or
memory is limited.
Comparing Figs. 8 and 9 shows the same pattern: in all
tested settings, the forget AUC reaches the 0.5 random-guess
level or lower. Hitting this at-random mark means membership
inference attacks no longer work in practice, giving stronger
privacy than simple record deletion. The plots also suggest
a link between model size and unlearning speed: UnResNet9
reaches the target fastest on both datasets, achieving it in just
15 to 20 epochs, followed by AllCNN at 15 to 25 epochs,
with LeNet32 taking the longest at 20 to 30 epochs. This
ordering holds across both Y1 and Y2 and is consistent with
the accuracy trends reported above.
Across both figure sets, the retain AUC stays stable near the
random-guess level of 0.51–0.52 in all settings. This shows
that the unlearning step focuses on the forgotten data without
hurting the privacy of retained samples. At the same time,
model utility remains strong: validation accuracy is high, with
UnResNet9 at 85–95%, AllCNN at 85–90%, and LeNet32 at
80–85%. Keeping retain AUC near random while preserving
accuracy supports the practical value of our framework for
IIoT intrusion detection.
As shown in Figs. 8 and 9, the framework consistently
drives the forget AUC to the random-guess range (about 0.5)
or lower across datasets and architectures. Combined with the
preserved high validation accuracy, this supports its practical
use for privacy-preserving intrusion detection. We also observe
a clear robustness pattern: on USTC-TFC2016, all backbones
converge to a similar forget AUC, while on CIC-IDS2017 the
outcome depends on the architecture (with faster convergence
for UnResNet9), indicating that the method adapts to different
traffic characteristics without sacrificing utility.
G. Training Time Comparison
Fig. 10 presents an overall comparison of the training times
for the different methods. The original model requires a longer
training time because it must be trained from scratch without
any prior knowledge. Compared to the EMN forgetting learning method, the method proposed in this study appropriately
limits the increase in training time. This moderate cost is

To scientifically validate the optimal parameter α, we
conducted a sensitivity analysis on CIC-IDS2017 using
UnResNet9, evaluating the MT-KD framework across four α
values: {0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}. The results reveal that Dr exhibits
a clear optimum at α = 0.7 with 95.50% accuracy, outperforming α = 0.6, α = 0.8, and α = 0.9 with 94.4%,
94.9%, and 93.6%, respectively. This non-monotonic relationship demonstrates that α = 0.7 represents a carefully optimized
choice rather than an arbitrary selection. Critically, all α values
achieve 0.00% accuracy on D f , confirming that the dualteacher distillation mechanism effectively enforces forgetting
regardless of parameter weighting. The superior retention
performance combined with complete forgetting at α = 0.7
validates that our parameter selection is data-driven and
theoretically justified: allocating 70% influence to the forgetfocused teacher T 1 and 30% to the retain-focused teacher T 2
achieves optimal balance between knowledge preservation and
effective unlearning.
I. Discussion
MT-KD framework employs a dual-teacher knowledge distillation architecture. The dual-teacher configuration demonstrates strong effectiveness for multi-class unlearning in IIoT
systems: the T 1 provides explicit forgetting guidance through
noise optimization, while the T 2 ensures robust performance
preservation on retained classes. Experimental results confirm
this effectiveness—the MT-KD framework achieves near-zero
accuracy on forget classes while maintaining high performance on retained classes. The dataset used in the current
experiments is relatively limited in scale, and the dual-teacher
configuration is sufficient to meet experimental requirements.
Extensive evaluations across various neural network architectures demonstrate that the dual-teacher distillation strategy’s
capability to prevent information leakage is robust and
eneralizable.
However, as dataset scales expand and real-world
deployment scenarios become more complex, multi-teacher
frameworks are expected to demonstrate increasingly significant advantages in computational efficiency and unlearning
performance. Additional teachers could provide complementary perspectives on forgetting and retention, potentially
improving unlearning precision. The computational implications are important: while current experiments show efficient
training without operational overhead, increasing the number
of teachers would proportionally increase computational cost,
which must be carefully balanced against benefits, particularly

6356

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

for resource-constrained IIoT edge devices. Therefore, extending the dual-teacher framework to multi-teacher configurations
represents a promising direction for future research, where
increased model complexity and dataset scales may unlock
additional benefits while maintaining alignment with privacy
regulations and the right to be forgotten.
VI. C ONCLUSION
We have proposed an MT-KD framework for privacy-aware
machine unlearning in IIoT intrusion detection systems. By
converting network traffic into grayscale images and providing a theoretical framework aligned with privacy regulations
including the right to be forgotten, our method addresses
critical challenges in stricter IIoT intrusion detection requirements. The dual-teacher architecture achieves complementary
guidance through noise optimization and data preservation,
demonstrating strong effectiveness in multi-class unlearning
tasks specific to IIoT. Training time comparisons confirm
efficient removal of targeted data influence without degrading
operational efficiency, making the method practical for edge
devices. Extensive evaluations across various neural network
architectures demonstrate its capability to prevent information
leakage through rigorous privacy evaluation via membership
inference attacks. This work opens new directions for machine
unlearning in rigorous IIoT intrusion detection scenarios.
Future work will follow a more structured and systematic
approach with concrete objectives. We plan to extend
MT-KD to deeper network architectures including
ResNet50/101, DenseNet121. Beyond empirical evaluation,
we will establish rigorous quantitative metrics to measure
unlearning efficacy and assess potential information leakage
through membership inference attacks and model extraction
attacks. We will also conduct critical analysis of the method’s
limitations, including performance under extreme forgetting
scenarios and computational cost-accuracy trade-offs. These
efforts will provide verifiable guarantees on unlearning
effectiveness and establish theoretical bounds on residual
model information in large-scale IIoT environments.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

J.Sun et al., “Privacy-preserving fine-grained data sharing with dynamic
service for the cloud-edge IoT,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1329–1346, Mar.2025.
S.Shen, L.Xie, Y.Zhang, G.Wu, H.Zhang, and S.Yu, “Joint differential
game and double deep Q-networks for suppressing malware spread
in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 5302–5315, Aug. 2023.
X.Yang, W.Wang, T.Tian, and C.Wang, “Cryptanalysis and improvement
of a blockchain-based certificateless signature for IIoT devices,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1884–1894, Feb.2024.
S.Shen, C.Cai, Y.Shen, X.Wu, W.Ke, and S.Yu, “Joint mean-field
game and multiagent asynchronous advantage actor-critic for edge
intelligence-based IoT malware propagation defense,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 3824–3838, Jul.2025.
Y.Shen, C.Shepherd, C. M.Ahmed, S.Shen, and S.Yu, “SGD3QN: Joint
stochastic games and dueling double deep Q-networks for defending
malware propagation in edge intelligence-enabled Internet of Things,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 6978–6990, Jun. 2024.
L.Cui, Y.Li, Y.Zhou, Y.Qu, and J.Liu, “Accelerating blockchain-enabled
federated learning with clustered clients,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 11,
no. 5, pp. 2148–2161, Oct.2025.

[7]

C.Sheng et al., “Network traffic fingerprinting for IIoT device identification: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 5,
pp. 3541–3554, May2025.
[8] M.Sharma, A.Tomar, and A.Hazra, “Edge computing for industry 5.0:
Fundamental, applications, and research challenges,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19070–19093, Jun.2024.
[9] J.Wang et al., “A zero-shot federated unlearning framework with
stability verification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 12,
pp. 2021–2035, Dec. 2025.
[10] Y.Bao, J.Sun, X.Cheng, W.Qiu, and L.Nie, “Blockchain-based privacypreserving alternative credit data sharing,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social
Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Feb.2026.
[11] Y.Qu, X.Yuan, M.Ding, W.Ni, T.Rakotoarivelo, and D.Smith, “Learn to
unlearn: Insights into machine unlearning,” Computer, vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 79–90, Mar.2024.
[12] J.Sun et al., “A tamper-resistant broadcasting scheme for secure communication in Internet of Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 2837–2846, Mar.2024.
[13] Z.Ran, Y.Yao, W.Li, W.Yang, W.Li, and Y.Wu, “Precise defense
approach against small-scale backdoor attacks in industrial Internet
of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 5742–5754,
Mar.2025.
[14] Y.Lin et al., “Decentralized unlearning for trustworthy AI-generated
content (AIGC) services,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 285–292,
May2025.
[15] H.Kheddar, D. W.Dawoud, A. I.Awad, Y.Himeur, and M. K.Khan,
“Reinforcement-learning-based intrusion detection in communication
networks: A review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 2420–2469, Aug.2025.
[16] M. M.Fouda, Z. M.Fadlullah, M. I.Ibrahem, and N.Kato, “Privacypreserving data-driven learning models for emerging communication
networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 2505–2542, Aug.2025.
[17] L.Porcelli, U.Fiore, and F.Palmieri, “Generative models with helical time
encoding for seasonal time series forecasting,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 162, Dec.2025, Art. no. 112780.
[18] N.Romandini, A.Mora, C.Mazzocca, R.Montanari, and P.Bellavista,
“Federated unlearning: A survey on methods, design guidelines, and
evaluation metrics,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
no. 7, pp. 11697–11717, Jul.2025.
[19] X.Wang, J.Zhang, C.Chen, J.He, Y.Ma, and X.Guan, “Trust-AoI-aware
codesign of scheduling and control for edge-enabled IIoT systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2833–2842, Feb.2024.
[20] X.Li, C.Liu, S.Sun, Z.Zhou, Y.Zhang, and G.Li, “An efficient
two-stage machine unlearning framework for poisoned specific
emitter identification,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 17,
pp. 36662–36673, Sep.2025.
[21] J.Zhang, M.Zhao, Z.Wang, W.Su, and P.Wang, “Model recovery
in federated unlearning with restricted server data resources,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 17920–17935,
Jun.2025.
[22] A.Zhang, P.Zhao, W.Lu, Y.Zhou, W.Zhang, and G.Zhang, “Mitigating
poisoning attacks in federated learning through deep one-class
classification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 12,
pp. 545–558, Dec.2025.
[23] K.Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification based
on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
pp. 17330–17340, May2024.
[24] H.Hu, S.Wang, T.Dong, and M.Xue, “Learn what you want to unlearn:
Unlearning inversion attacks against machine unlearning,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, May 2024,
pp. 3257–3275.
[25] H.Sun, T.Zhu, W.Chang, and W.Zhou, “Generative adversarial networks
unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 5,
pp. 5303–5320, Sep.2025.
[26] A. K.Tarun, V. S.Chundawat, M.Mandal, and M.Kankanhalli, “Fast yet
effective machine unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 13046–13055, Sep.2024.
[27] W.Wang, C.Zhang, Z.Tian, and S.Yu, “FedU: Federated unlearning via
user-side influence approximation forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2550–2562, May2025.
[28] V. S.Chundawat, A. K.Tarun, M.Mandal, and M.Kankanhalli, “Zeroshot machine unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 2345–2354, Apr. 2023.
[29] Y.Li, Z.Guo, N.Yang, H.Chen, D.Yuan, and W.Ding, “Threats and
defenses in the federated learning life cycle: A comprehensive survey

SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING

and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 9,
pp. 15643–15663, Sep.2025.
[30] J.Tang et al., “Toward general industrial intelligence: A survey of large
models as a service in industrial IoT,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 28, pp. 2054–2086, Jun.2026.
[31] Y.Shan, Y.Yao, X.Zhou, T.Zhao, B.Hu, and L.Wang, “CFL-IDS: An
effective clustered federated learning framework for industrial Internet
of Things intrusion detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 10007–10019, Mar.2024.
[32] Y.Hu et al., “Industrial Internet of Things intelligence empowering smart
manufacturing: A literature review,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 11, pp. 19143–19167, Jun.2024.
[33] S.Yu et al., “Deep Q-network-based open-set intrusion detection solution
for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7,
pp. 12536–12550, Apr.2024.
[34] Q.Zhang, L.Tang, T.Chin-Hon, T.Shi, J.Xuan, and C.Yu-Chao, “GCVIF:
Pioneering explainable domain-shared representation learning for fault
signal detection in multiple working states simultaneously,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2775–2789, Feb.2025.
[35] G.Wu et al., “Combining Lyapunov optimization with actor-critic networks for privacy-aware IIoT computation offloading,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 17437–17452, May2024.
[36] F.Zhang, G.Han, L.Liu, Y.Zhang, Y.Peng, and C.Li, “Cooperative partial
task offloading and resource allocation for IIoT based on decentralized
multiagent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 5526–5544, Feb.2024.
[37] L.Wang, X.Zhang, H.Su, and J.Zhu, “A comprehensive survey of continual learning: Theory, method and application,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5362–5383, Aug.2024.
[38] O.Aouedi et al., “A survey on intelligent Internet of Things: Applications, security, privacy, and future directions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1238–1292, Apr.2025.
[39] X.Jiang, F. R.Yu, T.Song, and V. C. M.Leung, “Resource allocation
of video streaming over vehicular networks: A survey, some research
issues and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7,
pp. 5955–5975, Jul.2022.
[40] M.Adil, H.Song, S.Mastorakis, H.Abulkasim, A.Farouk, and Z.Jin,
“UAV-assisted IoT applications, cybersecurity threats, AI-enabled solutions, open challenges with future research directions,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 4583–4605, Apr.2024.
[41] C.Mouand J.Zhang, “TransCL: Transformer makes strong and flexible
compressive learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
no. 4, pp. 5236–5251, Apr.2023.
[42] L.Luo, C.Zhang, H.Yu, G.Sun, S.Luo, and S.Dustdar, “Communicationefficient federated learning with adaptive aggregation for heterogeneous
client-edge-cloud network,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 3241–3255, Nov.2024.
[43] H.Chen et al., “Practical membership inference attack against collaborative inference in industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 477–487, Jan.2022.

Shigen Shen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent
systems from Donghua University, Shanghai, China,
in 2013.
He is a Professor with the School of Information
Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou, China. He
has published more than 100 technical papers. His
current research interests include the Internet of
Things, cyber security, edge computing, and game
theory.

Jiashuo Niu received the B.Eng. degree in the Internet of Things engineering in 2024. He is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree in computer technology
with the School of Information Engineering, Huzhou
University, Huzhou, China. His research interests
include machine unlearning, intrusion detection, and
Industrial Internet of Things security.

6357

Yizhou Shen received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) in
computer science from Cardiff University, Cardiff,
U.K., in 2023. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in computer science with Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
Her research interests include cyber security,
game theory, deep reinforcement learning, edge
intelligence, and the Internet of Things.

Jingnan Dong (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology from
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China, in 2023. He is an
Associate Professor with the School of Information
Engineering, Huzhou University, Zhejiang, China.
His research interests include blockchain technology, applied cryptography, network security, cloud
computing, and federated learning.

Wenlong Ke received the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from Guilin
University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China,
in 2021. He is a Lecturer with the School of Information Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou,
China. His current research interests include datacenter networks, software-defined networks, and
machine learning.

Tian Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the City
University of Hong Kong in 2011. Currently, he is a
Professor with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University. He
has 27 patents and has published more than 200
papers in high-level journals and conferences. He
has more than 14 000 citations, according to Google
Scholar. His H-index is 68. His research interests
include the Internet of Things, edge computing, and
mobile computing.

Ruidong Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer
Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan,
in 2008. His research interests include big data,
quantum networks, metaverse, future networks, and
the IoT.
He was a recipient of the Best Paper Awards for
IEEE ICC 2022 and IWCMC 2022 and the IEEE
Network 2022 Editor Appreciation Award. He serves
as the Vice Chair for the IEEE Internet Technical
Committee (ITC). He served as the Chair for several
conferences, such as the General Chair for MOBILWare 2022, IEEE MSN
2021, and CPSCom 2021; the Area TPC Chair for INFOCOM 2023; and
the TPC Chair for ICNC 2024, IEEE MetaCom 2023, HotICN 2022, IWQoS
2021, and MSN 2020. He also serves on several prestigious editorial boards,
including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS, IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING , IEEE
N ETWORK, and IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.