4766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

MTRF: Multidomain Transformation Representation
for Network Flows in Network Intrusion Detection
Xinlei Wang , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, Xiaojuan Wang , Member, IEEE, and Shize Guo

Abstract—In IoT device applications, due to privacy protection
requirements, it is often impossible to obtain large-scale labeled
datasets for model training. A representation model that effectively extracts flow features with limited labeled samples is therefore critical. To meet this need, we propose a model combining
temporal features (for trend changes/short-term fluctuations) and
frequency-domain features (for periodicity/stability patterns) in
network flows. In order to fully tap the potential of these two
types of features, contrastive learning (CL) technology is used to
model them respectively. For temporal-domain features, we employ
a momentum encoder-based training strategy to learn robust representations adaptable to network-induced noise. For frequency
domain features, we propose a new supervised CL loss function.
It enhances inter-class separability while improving the representation ability (i.e., the model’s capacity to extract discriminative
features) of minority classes. The experimental results demonstrate
the universality of this approach, which is not limited to specific
data sets or attack types. The most representative results were
obtained on the UNSW-NB15 dataset, with an accuracy of 0.9699
for the balanced training sets, surpassing the other best models’
performance(0.6300).
Index Terms—Contrastive learning, frequency domain transformation, intrusion detection, sample representation.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTERNET of Things (IoT) adoption escalates cyberattack
risks in sensitive-data industries, compromising intelligent
analysis and decision-making. While many intrusion detection
models perform well, they are often deployed in the cloud,
leading to detection delays and privacy risks [26]. By deploying

I

Received 12 January 2025; revised 24 July 2025; accepted 24 December
2025. Date of publication 29 December 2025; date of current version 12
May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62402053 and Grant 62227805 and in part
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
2025KYQD17 (BUPT). (Xinlei Wang and Mingshu He contributed equally to
this work.) (Corresponding author: Mingshu He.)
Xinlei Wang is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with the
The First Research Institute of the Ministry of Public Security of P.R.C, Beijing
100741, China (e-mail: ann96125@126.com).
Mingshu He is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with the Key
Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service (BUPT), Ministry of Education, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn).
Xiaojuan Wang and Shize Guo are with the School of Cyberspace Security,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
(e-mail: wj2718@bupt.edu.cn; nsfgsz@126.com).
We have released our source code to facilitate future studies on https://github.
com/Ann96125/MTRF.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3649110

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) closer to IoT devices at the
network edge, fog computing mitigates latency issues inherent
in cloud-centric approaches [25]. However, due to the limited
resources of the fog equipment, a lightweight model with high
detection accuracy is required. In this study, we propose a novel
learning representation method for fog nodes, using a small set
of labeled samples to characterize encrypted network flows. This
representation supports the creation of lightweight IDS models,
including Extra Tree (ET), Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree
(DT), and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), tailored for
IoT devices.
In recent years, significant efforts have been made in IDS,
with most research focusing on framing intrusion detection as a
classification problem and developing end-to-end models. Traditional machine learning (ML) algorithms offer fast inference
speeds but rely on manual feature selection, limiting adaptability to emerging threats [19]. Although end-to-end DL models
are widely studied [1], [3], [11], [12], [14], [16], their joint
learning approach may overfit and capture spurious correlations
from noisy network flow data [5]. Emerging malware targeting
compromised IoT devices demands models that learn broader
data representations. However, data collection and labeling difficulties often yield imbalanced datasets with scarce labeled
examples. This highlights two critical challenges: capturing
subtle behavioral differences in minority classes and improving
generalization from limited data.
Representation learning captures intrinsic features of unlabeled data, improving generalization to new data [20], [21], [22].
Ceschin et al. [23] employed denoising autoencoders for unsupervised pre-training. Optimizing the encoder’s representational
capacity by minimizing the loss function between input samples and predicted outputs. [9] employs supervised contrastive
learning (CL) for a binary representation model, but directly
feeding features into the model without distinction may lead to
overfitting noise. [24] suggests separate representation learning
for categorical and numerical features, using a hard triplet loss
for classes with limited labeled data. Based on this study, we
were inspired to use hard contrastive loss on the labeled dataset
to enhance the representation learning of minority class samples.
However, in our approach, we aim to separately learn different
types of features to mitigate the interference of noisy features
on other types.
Complex network topologies, such as distributed systems,
inevitably lead to network-induced phenomena, causing packet
loss, transmission delays, and other issues [1]. The delay or

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

interruption of network data packet transmission is manifested
in the time domain as a feature with transmission noise. Alternatively, the frequency domain features of network traffic are
less sensitive to interference and can better reflect the inherent
properties of the data, such as periodic components. These stable
features are less influenced by external disturbances, making
them more reliable for analysis [6]. Separately learning both
features ensures that interference in the temporal domain does
not affect the representation learning of the frequency domain.
Under the assumption in [5], data X is generated by the
error variable  and the error-free latent variable X ∗ . Here, as
the error  varies, the latent variable X ∗ remains unchanged.
Thus, learning the representation of X ∗ involves finding stable
associations with the optimal X ∗ across various types of errors.
Along these lines of thought, we propose a model called the
Multi-domain Transformation Representation of Network Flows
(MTRF). MTRF can simulate noise in different network environments and learn invariant representations of useful features.
The dataset was augmented eight times through networkinduced perturbations, increasing the training samples eightfold.
This augmentation with the MTRF method enhanced the stability of network flow representations despite the small sample size.
In the temporal domain, self-supervised CL is used to construct
a feature space. This involves maximizing the feature similarity
of positive samples and minimizing the similarity of negative
samples (i.e., noise interference). The result is disentangled
representations of temporal domain features and noise, thereby
enhancing the robustness of network flows against environmental interference.
Furthermore, using relatively stable frequency-domain features increases the distance between negative samples. Inspired
by [24], we incorporate hard margin penalty into the learning of
frequency domain features. The core of hard margin penalty is to
enforce a strict constraint that mutually negative samples maintain a clear separation in the feature space. In [24], hard margin is
incorporated into the contrastive loss, requiring negative samples
to be at least M (where M is the set threshold) farther away from
the anchor samples than positive samples. The aim is to bring
the original data into a more precise representation space using a
hard margin penalty factor, while introducing relaxation factors
and regularization terms to mitigate the risk of overfitting in the
representation. The contributions of our work are as follows:
1) We deploy the representation model on fog nodes. To
prevent interference, we extracted the temporal-domain
and frequency-domain features of network traffic separately. The represented test data is suitable for customized
lightweight intrusion detection models in IoT devices.
2) MTRF uses original packet headers as input, avoiding
feature selection and plaintext payloads for privacy protection. We apply a hard margin penalty factor for frequencydomain contrastive loss to enhance representations of
minority classes.
3) We devised five tasks varying in sample distribution difficulty, covering balanced and imbalanced datasets of
different sizes. Results showed MTRF excelling in both
multi-class and binary classification, achieving the best F1
score of 0.9802 on the imbalanced MQTT dataset.

4767

Fig. 1. Diagram illustrating fog nodes for data representation combined with
rapid inference models on IoT devices.(The figure only shows the inference
stage.

II. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
In this section, we present our fog based framework for
detecting intrusions in IoT traffic. The process diagram for
intrusion detection using fog and edge computing is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Fog nodes deployed near devices extend IoT capabilities,
supporting low-latency intrusion detection. These nodes can use
encrypted network traffic and perform inference through the
MTRF model, thereby avoiding the privacy leakage that occurs
when IoT devices transmit data to fog nodes. The characterized
flows obtained from the MTRF model are transmitted back to
IoT devices for edge detection. Different IoT devices can flexibly
choose detection models based on storage capacity, supporting
lightweight ML detection models. With reduced sample dimensions after characterization by fog nodes, there are advantages
such as suitability for lightweight device storage and detection,
reduced transmission latency, resistance to reverse engineering,
and enhanced privacy security.
The cloud server conducts training on a small number of
network flows. Due to the small amount of training data required
by MTRF, it avoids the increase in network bandwidth resources
and transmission delay caused by uploading a large number of
samples.
III. RELATED WORK
A. Deep Learning-Based IDS
We summarize the IDS using DL models, categorizing them
broadly into two types: end-to-end models and non-end-to-end
representational models. In end-to-end models, CNNs have long
been considered as good classification models. [3] treats network
flows as images and, using Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for classification, demonstrates that multi-layer bidirectional network protocols are optimal. [16] preprocessed pcap
files with IP masking and other methods before directly using
autoencoders and CNNs for encrypted traffic classification. [14]
used CNNs, transfer learning, ensemble learning, and hyperparameter optimization for complex network flow data, adding
hyperparameter tuning beyond prior research. [11] addressed

4768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

concept drift in evolving malware samples by updating feature
categories. This indicates that different feature representations
of the same dataset can have a significant impact. Therefore, it
is highly necessary to propose a unified representation model
to enhance task adaptability. [12] adopt feature engineering
for network flows and use stacked tree models to train the
meta-learner. Low-confidence samples are input into the biased
classifier for detection. [1] enhance the robustness of network
flows by simulating network-induced phenomena (e.g., packet
loss) via recurrent neural networks. These end-to-end methods
offer quicker detection but demands more feature engineering
for input data.
Non-end-to-end models primarily refer to representing network flows before feeding them into classifiers. We roughly
categorize the representation process into methods based on
graphs, CL, and encoder-decoder approaches. [10] used topological data analysis to extract features before detection with
ML models. [8] created graph representations of network flows
with feature-rich nodes and edges, feeding them into Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) for training. Graph-based approaches
essentially relies on feature engineering. [15] divide the input
data into K groups and construct a topological structure for
each group based on the clustering results. It is demonstrated that
this method is highly effective for imbalanced datasets. [13] utilized a feature extraction encoder with enhanced representation
capability and weighted supervised contrastive loss to address
class-imbalanced learning. [31] developed a supervised variant
of the twin variational autoencoder to enhance class discrimination by transforming latent representations into distinguishable
Gaussians using labels. Compared to graph-based methods, CL
and encoder-decoder approaches do not require predefined graph
structures. Instead, they can automatically learn intrinsic data
representations and capture important features directly from the
raw input.
B. Related Works to CL
CL is a promising approach in unsupervised representation
learning. The core idea of CL is to unearth semantic discriminative features by contrasting similarities and differences between
samples, significantly reducing reliance on manually annotated
labels. However, existing CL-based methods still face critical
challenges. Current methods [27], [33], [29], [34] require largescale datasets or strong distributional assumptions for training,
limiting flexibility in real-world networks with scarce labels and
dynamic distribution shifts. Besides, in some studies, the temporal sensitivity [35] and semantic complexity [28] of network
traffic data are ignored. More critically, the existing multimodal
models [30] often entangle the modal specificity (information
unique to a certain modality) and modal sharing (information
shared by multiple modalities) representations, which limits the
classification performance of the models [36]. Table I summarizes the comparison between the existing CL methods and the
method proposed in this paper.
[27] embeds labels as class prototypes into the same space
as feature embeddings to reduce the number of pairwise
comparisons. However, this method relies on fully labeled

TABLE I
THE KEY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PROPOSED WORK AND EXISTING
APPROACHES

datasets, posing challenges for storage-constrained fog computing nodes. MLCL [33] employs three fusion strategies to
achieve cross-modal semantic alignment between images and
text. However, MLCL is validated only on large-scale datasets
and does not address few-shot scenarios. [29] initializes weights
based on class proportions in the dataset to improve minorityclass performance. However, this requires consistent data distributions between training and testing sets. [34] combines
supervised CL with self-supervision, but its 1,440-batch ImageNet pre-training requires multi-GPU parallelism – infeasible
for resource-constrained scenarios. The USTGCL model [35]
achieves data augmentation at topological and feature levels
but overlooks temporal correlations. However, network traffic
detection relies more on dynamic time-series features. [28]
constructs a CL task by randomly masking network packet
sequences. This method only considers packet loss and fails to
cover more complex network environments (including packet retransmission, out-of-order delivery). [30] proposes a multimodal
learning method based on federated learning. The reconstructed
data of each modality is decoded from the shared representation encoded by the original input data. However, the shared
representation may not fully capture each modality’s specific
information, leading to the loss of some modality-specific details
or information during the decoding process.
In summary, current CL-based research faces three key challenges: existing methods rely on large-scale labeled data or
distributional assumptions, struggling to adapt to real-world
networks with label scarcity and dynamic distribution shifts.
Data augmentation for network flows must address temporal
sensitivity and semantic complexity. Feature entanglement in
cross-domain fusion introduces unpredictable noise. To overcome these, this paper proposes a non-end-to-end framework
requiring minimal labeled data for enhanced transferability.
Inspired by [1], we introduce four environmentally induced
augmentations to learn representations separately in time and
frequency domains.
C. The Principle of MoCo
This subsection will summarize the operation process of
momentum contrast (MoCo) [32]. Given a sample x, generate
two different views of it through data augmentation: the query
view xq and the key view xk . The encoder fq processes xq
to generate query feature q = fq (xq ); the momentum encoder

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 2.

4769

Overall Framework.

fk (whose parameters are the sliding average of fq ) processes
xk to generate key feature k = fk (xk ), and stores k in the
queue. The queue stores a large number of key features from
historical batches as negative samples (i.e., enhanced features of
other samples), with the goal of bringing the distance between q
and its positive sample key feature k closer through contrastive
loss (such as InfoNCE), while pushing the distance between q
and all negative sample key features in the queue farther apart.
This is to update the parameters of fq and improve its feature
quality.
MoCo’s dynamic queue stores historical negative key features
(generated by the momentum encoder fk ). When the parameters
of the query encoder fq are updated rapidly, the output query
feature q may undergo feature space drift. At this point, if the
negative features in the queue are generated by an earlier version
of fk , the similarity discrepancies between q and the negatives
may stem from feature space shifts between the new and old
models, rather than the semantic differences of the samples
themselves, rendering the contrastive loss ineffective. If fk were
updated simultaneously with fq each time, the negative features
in the queue would lack consistency—negatives from different
moments would be generated by highly divergent versions of
fk —also leading to the aforementioned issue.
Thus, MoCo designs two techniques. The first one momentum
update strategy. The parameters of fk are updated via exponential moving average (EMA) toward those of fq , preventing
abrupt feature space shifts. The second one is the queue update
strategy. When new key features (generated by fk ) from each
batch are enqueued, the oldest batch of features is dequeued
following a first-in-first-out (FIFO) policy. This ensures that the
negative samples in the queue are always derived from recent
versions of fk , thus preserving the consistency of the feature
space.
IV. METHODOLOGY
Given a labeled dataset F = {(Fk , yk ), k = 1, . . ., K} consisting of K network flows, each of which undergoes a series of random transformations, including normal transmission,
packet reordering, loss, and retransmission. Subsequently, these
transformed flows are individually inputted into the temporaldomain and frequency-domain networks to extract multi-scale
features. Following that, these features are propagated to two distinct branches, including Temporal Gaussian-aware Contrastive

Network (TGCN) branch and the Global Frequency-based Contrastive Network (GFCN) branch.Two branches train the same
encoder, which is then used for inference representation. For
the TGCN branch, MoCo is applied to compute the contrastive
loss Lt , using a momentum encoder for positive sample representation and a dynamic queue for negative sample learning.
The encoder employs a multi-layer feature extractor to capture
temporal patterns in F. For the GFCN branch, the Fourier transform is used to extract the amplitude-frequency representation
of F, and a contrastive loss Lf with hard boundary parameters
is applied to capture relationships between different classes.
For the sake of clarity, Fig. 2 illustrates the overall architecture
and training process of our proposed method. In summary, the
primary objective of our approach is:
L = Lt + αLf

(1)

where α represents the hyperparameter that regulates the equilibrium between the learnable temporal and frequency components.
Below is a detailed description of the network flow preprocessing
and the two branches.
As there are numerous symbol representations in this paper,
Table II is provided for reference.
A. Packet Segmentation and Enhanced Transformations
The unidirectional flows are extracted by polling all packets
in the packet capture (pcap) file with the same five-tuple. Each
flow Fk consists of N packets, and the first M decimal digits
from the packet headers are extracted. In this way, a single flow
is represented as an N × M matrix. The matrix Fk represents
(k)
the collection of information quantities for each packet Pi =
(k,1) (k,2)
(k,j)
(k,j)
[pi , pi , . . ., pi ](j = 1, 2, . . ., M ), where pi
represents the j-th decimal digit of the i-th packet.
⎡ (k) ⎤ ⎡ (k,1)
(k,2)
(k,M ) ⎤
p1
P1
p1
· · · p1
⎢ (k) ⎥ ⎢ (k,1)
(k,2)
(k,M ) ⎥
p2
· · · p2
⎥
⎢P2 ⎥ ⎢p2
⎢
⎥
⎥ (2)
⎢
Fk = ⎢ . ⎥ = ⎢ .
.
.
.
..
..
.. ⎥
⎦
⎣ .. ⎦ ⎣ ..
(k)
(k,1)
(k,2)
(k,M )
PN
pN
pN
· · · pN
Flatten each network flow Fk into a 1 × (N × M ) vector
Fk,t (t = 1, 2, . . ., N × M ). Construct matrix D ∈ RK×(N ×M )
by stacking the flattened 1 × (N × M ) vectors of all flows, with
each row corresponding to a flow.

4770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE II
MATHEMATICAL SYMBOL TABLE

B. Temporal Gaussian-Aware Contrastive Network

Fig. 3. The representation of the network-induced environment of data flows
using a LSTM network. The gate mechanisms, which are consistent with the
regular LSTM, are simply depicted here.

We utilize the method proposed in [1] to simulate common
network-induced phenomena, including normal transmission,
retransmission, loss, and out-of-order, in order to enhance the
error resilience of network flows and improve the robustness of
the model. Specifically, (1) Normal Transmission indicates that
the network flow is directly processed through the traditional
GRU network. (2) Retransmission represents performing the
same operation again on the currently processed network flow,
i.e., repeating the process through the GRU network. (3) Loss
indicates skipping all network flows, preventing them from
passing through the GRU network. (4) Out-of-order involves
introducing random noise to each network flow before passing
it through the GRU network. This is achieved by randomly
adding noise to the bytes in the network flow (each processed
byte should not exceed 255), approximating the combination of
multiple random noise processes.
At the same time, we encapsulated the entire dataset and randomly selected one transformation method to establish a uniform
network-induced environment for all data instances, enabling
iterative environment transformations to handle small sample
sets. The Fig. 3 illustrates the representations corresponding to
the four states.
After T iterations of data augmentation, Di represents the
transformation of a dataset containing K flows triggered by a
specific network environment. All matrices Di are concatenated
along the first dimension to obtain the final transformation result
DT .
DT = {D1 , D2 , . . ., DT }, DT ∈ RT ×K×(N ×M )

(3)

For the TGCN branch, the positive samples originate from the
predefined tensor DT , while the anchor samples are generated
by replicating matrix D T times along the first dimension.

In CL, the model’s output undergoes loss computation through
an instance discrimination proxy task, followed by backpropagation, making it a self-supervised learning approach. A
MoCo [32] variant is applied to obtain the temporal CL loss.
MoCo consists of a trainable base encoder (θbase ) and a
momentum encoder (θmom ) updated via exponential moving average (EMA). While both encoders share identical architectures,
the momentum encoder maintains slowly-evolving parameters
through:
θmom ← m · θmom + (1 − m) · θbase (m ∈ [0, 1))

(4)

The anchor samples are processed by the base encoder, while
the positive samples are encoded by the momentum encoder.
This asymmetric design builds a dynamic queue through the
stable feature space constructed by the momentum encoder,
where the positive samples of the dictionary remain consistent.
Both encoder consist of a series of fully connected layers and
dilated convolutional operations, where the fully connected layers reduce the dimensionality while retaining important features,
improving efficiency and generalization. Dilated convolutions
expand the receptive field, lowering computational costs without
reducing the feature map size, thus minimizing information loss
from the fully connected layers. After the first step of processing
the network flow data through their respective encoders, the
T
and the positive matrix DPT are obtained, both
anchor matrix DA
with dimensions (T , K, Do ). Here, K represents the number of
network flows, each flow is represented by Do features, and
each flow has undergone T transformations. This is immediately followed by 1D convolutions with varying kernel sizes
to capture multi-granularity features, while achieving feature
compression. The compressed dimension is (T , K, O), where
O =  D2o  + 1. Within each iteration, one sample is randomly
selected from the K samples in the anchor matrix to serve as the
new anchor sample At = [at1 , at2 , . . . , atT ]T ∈ RT ×O , and one
sample is randomly selected from the positive matrix to serve
as the positive sample Pt = [pt1 , pt2 , . . . , ptT ]T ∈ RT ×O . The
contrastive loss is then computed between At and Pt .
The negative sample matrix Nt = [nt1 , nt2 , . . . , ntNneg ] ∈
RDo ×Nneg is initialized with noise vectors drawn from a Gaussian distribution [2], where Nneg is a predefined hyperparameter
denoting the number of negative samples. The noise vector is

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

4771

initialized using a Gaussian distribution and embedded into the
CL framework as a continuous and differentiable representation.
Consider an anchor sample ati , and assume there exists a
single positive sample pti paired with ati . The contrastive loss
function operates on the principle that the loss should be low
when ati is similar to its positive pair pti and dissimilar to all
negative samples. We adopt the InfoNCE loss Lt , defined as:

(7)

Lt = −

T


1
log
T i=1
exp

exp
ati ·pti
τ

+

ati ·pti
τ
Nneg
j=1 exp

ati ·ntj
τ

(5)

where ati · pti and ati · ntj denotes the vector dot product
(equivalent to cosine similarity for normalized vectors), and τ
is the temperature hyperparameter.
C. Global Frequency-Based Contrastive Network
In this branch, supervised CL is performed. First, define the
background matrix B as the matrix containing the representations of all samples in the current batch extracted by the
encoder. This matrix serves as the foundational storage structure
for sample representations, from which anchor samples and
their corresponding positive and negative sample pairs can be
constructed. Following the process described in Section B, we
T
and DPT as the background matrices.
obtain DA
In the subsequent analysis, a discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is performed along the sample dimension
(dim = 1) on the feature matrix B ∈ RT ×K×Do , converting the time-domain distribution of each feature into a
frequency-domain representation. For the sequence BTi ,:,Do,i =
[FTi ,0,Do,i , FTi ,1,Do,i , . . ., FTi ,K−1,Do,i ], Ti ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T −
1}, Do,i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Do − 1} at Ti -th transformation and Do,i th feature across all flows, its DFT is:
FTi ,Do,i [fk ] =

K−1

n=0

BTi ,n,Do,i · e−j

2πfk n
K

,




K
fk ∈ 0, 1, . . .,
+1
2

(6)

FTi ,Do,i [fk ] represents the fk -th frequency component of the
DFT result for the Do,i -th feature in the Ti -th transformation.
Since the Fourier transform of a real-valued signal is conjugate symmetric, only the positive frequency components are
returned. For all T iterations of data augmentation, each iteration
computes the frequency-domain representation of Do features
distributed across all K network flows, with the output result
being B̃ ∈ R(T ×FK ×Do ) , where FK =  K
2  + 1.
To enhance the representation learning in the Fourier layer and
promote interactions among different frequency components,
we introduce an affine transformation composed of a linear
transformation and an offset vector. For each transformation
Ti and frequency component fk ∈ {0, 1, . . . , FK }, multiply the
Do -dimensional feature vector at that frequency by weight matrix Wfk ,Do,i ,Oi (Oi ∈ {1, 2, . . . , O − 1}), then add bias term
Bfk ,Oi to obtain BL ∈ RT ×FK ×O . The subscript of each matrix

in the following formula indicates the dimension.

BL =

D
o −1


B̃Ti ,fk ,Do,i · Wfk ,Do,i ,Oi + Bfk ,Oi

Do,i =0

The DFT decomposes network traffic features into distinct
frequency components, where each frequency corresponds to
a specific periodicity. An affine transformation assigns weights
and biases to each frequency component fk , automatically amplifying or diminishing the influence of current features.
Next, reconstruct the time-domain network flow sequence
from BL by performing the inverse DFT (IDFT) along dim=1,
obtaining the reconstructed sequence. Previously, we extracted
inter-flow periodic patterns by applying the DFT along dim=1
(across different flows). Now, to capture intra-flow periodicity
within individual flows, we will similarly transform the reconstructed sequences into the frequency domain by performing
DFT along dim=2. The resulting frequency-domain representation B˜L ∈ RT ×K×O will enable multi-scale frequency feature
extraction, where each element BTi ,Ki ,Oi (Ki ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K −
1} is a complex number, denoted as BTi ,Ki ,Oi = ReTi ,Ki ,Oi +
j · ImTi ,Ki ,Oi . In the following work, we will only consider the
amplitude and obtain:
BA (Ti , Ki , Oi ) =



(ReTi ,Ki ,Oi )2 + (ImTi ,Ki ,Oi )2

(8)

Consequently, the amplitude matrix is obtained by computing
the complex modulus of all elements in matrix B˜L . We randomly
select a complete data set from the T transformations of the
amplitude matrix to construct BA ∈ RK×O . The contrastive loss
is calculated by measuring feature similarity between positive
and negative sample pairs within BA . Positive samples refer to
sample pairs belonging to the same class, while negative samples
represent pairs from different classes. Similarity is measured by
the dot product between samples, where higher values indicate
greater similarity.
Experimental observations show that most similarity values
exceed 0.5, suggesting that instances classified as negative
samples exhibit high similarity. This implies that the boundary
between different classes is relatively ambiguous. The similarity
matrices for negative pairs are denoted as Nf . Therefore, a
stronger penalty is applied only to negative sample pairs. The
new loss function with a relaxation factor is formulated as
follows:
⎛

Nneg

Lf = log ⎝



⎞
eg(Nf )λγ ⎠

(9)

i=1

where Nneg represents the number of pairs of negative samples
in a certain dataset. We determine the value of the hyperparameter γ by experiments. g(Nf )γ achieves a stricter data separation
through the hard margin, providing a closer approximation to

4772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE III
DATASET DETAILS

representing the data. g(·) represents the relaxation function as:
λ = Nf + m
g(Nf ) = max{0, Nf − m}
m ≤ 0.5

(10)

It is worth mentioning that, we did not strictly differentiate
the inner product similarity between (non-)similar data as 0 or
1. Instead, we used m, which is a relaxation boundary between
samples of different classes. The adoption of relaxation factors
allows the model to pay more attention to challenging samples
during learning, thereby avoiding overfitting on the negative
samples with low similarity itself.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted within the Ubuntu 20.04
operating system, employing an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080
Ti, accompanied by six Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4216 CPU @
2.10 GHz processors, and a total of 251 gigabytes of memory.
The experimentation environment was configured with Python
3.8.16, CUDA 12.2, and PyTorch 1.9.0+cu102.
Datasets and Settings: We evaluate the proposed method
on five publicly available datasets, and more details about the
dataset will be presented in Table III. The datasets used for
comparison include MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 [4], UNSW-NB15 [7],
USTC-TFC2016 [3], CIC-DDoS2019 [17], and TON-IoT [18].
They offer diverse scenarios, from simulated IoT networks to
real network testing platforms, covering various attack types
such as DDoS attacks and content-based attacks like injection
and XSS.
We utilized pcap-formatted data for each dataset and applied the USTC-TK20161 tool uniformly. The process involved
converting pcap data into decimal format. Each network flow
consisted of 28 data packets, each capturing the first 28 B,
resulting in a 28∗28 decimal array for each flow. Additionally,
we designed five distinct tasks, denoted as T1 , T2 , T3 , T4 and T5 .
1 https://github.com/yungshenglu/USTC-TK2016

Fig. 4.

Data distribution for five tasks (T1 , T2 , T3 , T4 and T5 ).

Each task exhibits increasing levels of difficulty. T1 represents
a multiclass task with a balanced dataset. T2 represents an
imbalanced training dataset, where the normal class accounts for
0.6 of the total instances in the normal class, and each category
of malware accounts for 0.1 of its respective category’s total
instances. T3 has led to an increase in the complexity of the T2 ,
which in turn resulted in a reduction in the size of the training
set and an increase in the proportion of the test set. T4 is devised
as a binary classification task with an imbalanced dataset. In T5 ,
switched to a larger dataset, with 5000 instances each for benign
data and attack behaviors. For specific partitioning details, please
refer to Fig. 4.
To clarify, we’ll use task T2 as an illustrative example in Fig. 4.
When C = 400, the number of normal samples in the training
set is 0.6 ∗ C = 240. This sample size is not considered large
for easily obtainable normal traffic. The number of samples for
other malware categories is 0.1 ∗ C = 40 each.

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 5.

4773

Validation of the selection of network induction environment.
Fig. 6.

To mitigate the effects of randomness, we averaged the results of each experiment over ten different random seeds. The
main hyperparameters that affect the computation of Lf are
the initialization of γ, as well as the adjustment process during
backpropagation. We directly set γ to 6.4 ∗ 106 . The reason for
this configuration was determined through experimentation, as
detailed in the second part of trial D.
For the parameters of the detection head, the settings are as
follows. In the XGBoost model, the number of trees is 10, the
step size is 0.1, and the maximum depth of each tree is 6; in
the RF and ET, the values of the important parameters are the
same, the number of trees is 100, and the splitting criterion is
based on the Gini coefficient. The minimum number of samples
that a node can split is 2, and the minimum number of samples
required for a leaf node is 1.
B. Preliminary Parameters
Before initiating the experiments, we posed three questions to
address uncertainties regarding the creation and preprocessing
of input network flows:
Q1: Which network induction environment yields better detection results?
Q2: How effective is single-packet detection?
Q3:Is the detection effective for content-based attack behaviors?
1) Solution of Q1: The network flows are primarily enhanced
by simulating common network-induced phenomena, including
normal transmission, retransmission, loss, and out-of-order, to
improve the robustness of the model. This trial will verify which
induced phenomenon yields the best detection results. For this
purpose, we use the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset under the data
distribution of T2 , and detailed results are shown in Fig. 5.
The results indicate that the detection outcomes for normal
transmission, retransmission, and loss inductions are similar,
while the results for out-of-order are slightly higher than the
others. This phenomenon can be approximated as a combination
of multiple random noise processes designed to confuse the
original sequence, enhancing the model’s robustness. Therefore,
in the subsequent experiments, we will use out-of-order as the
pre-processing method for the network traffic.

Validation of the impact of packet quantity on detection results.

2) Solution of Q2: We set the number of packets in a network
flow to be 28. However, with a larger number of packets, it
implies that a certain amount of packets needs to be accumulated
in advance for detection, inevitably causing significant delays
in real-time packet detection. Therefore, the first step is to
validate to what extent the number of packets can impact the
detection results. To address this question, we partitioned the
training and test sets on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset according
to the distribution of T2 . Starting with one data packet, we
incrementally added one data packet at a time, checking the
test results after each length change. The experimental results
are shown in Fig. 6.
Observing the results depicted in Fig. 6, an interesting finding
emerged. Surprisingly, the detection performance was notably
effective when considering only a single packet. However, as the
number of packets increased, especially beyond the 21th packet,
the test results started to decline. This decline might be attributed
to subsequent packets being empty, and for network flows with
fewer than 28 packets, padding with zeros led to meaningless
data in the latter part of the sequence.
Consequently, MTRF demonstrates the capability to effectively detect malicious behavior even with a limited number of
packets, potentially as few as one. The choice of 28 packets was
made to accommodate the general scenarios present in most
datasets.
To conduct an in-depth analysis of the information captured
by individual data packets, the mutual information (Mutual Information, MI) was calculated between each data packet feature
value and the label. MI quantifies the statistical dependence
relationship between the feature and the label, and the higher
the value, the more effective the feature is for classification.For
the core fields of the IP layer(MI=0.4111), such as TOS, protocol field, and flags are universal features for traffic classification. Link-layer fields, including Ethernet type(MI=0.4081) and
MAC address(MI=0.4085), are also of secondary importance.
Since the USTC-TFC2016 dataset was collected using different virtual machine simulations to generate traffic, the MAC
addresses also play a certain role in classification.

4774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

TABLE IV
RESULTS OF ANOMALY DETECTION ON PACKET PAYLOADS

TABLE V
COMPARE THE PERFORMANCE METRICS OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET FOR THE T1

3) Solution of Q3: The question stems from extracting the
initial 28 bytes of each packet, which includes a substantial
portion of packet header information. We need to verify the
effectiveness of detecting payload-based malware implantation.
Injection attacks like SQL injection and XSS achieve their goals
by injecting malicious code into an application’s content. Hence,
we conduct experiments using the TON-IoT dataset (including
injection attacks, as shown in Table III). Additionally, we extract bytes 28-100 of each packet to include maximum payload
information while excluding headers. Following the setup of
T5 , we allocate 100 samples for the training set and 9,900
samples for the test set. The experimental results are presented in
Table IV.
Compared to extracting payload information (with an accuracy rate of 0.9994), using packet header extraction does not
perform well in detecting injection attacks and XSS attacks
(with an accuracy rate of 0.9734). However, when more attack
behaviors are mixed in, the opposite is true. The detection
of extracting the header information becomes more effective
(0.9953 vs. 0.9210). This suggests that our model is effective
in handling both headers and payloads. The key lies in understanding the general categories of such attack behaviors before
segmenting and extracting packet data, significantly enhancing
detection accuracy.

C. Experimental Results
1) Following the Settings of Task T1 : We conducted experiments on the UNSW-NB15 dataset and combined the data
distribution from T1 to verify the intrusion detection capability
of our MTRF model. Various competition models are compared.
We selected (non-)end-to-end models from related works for
competitive analysis. Here, we process each model according to
its original form of input samples. For instance, [8] utilizes IP
addresses and ports to represent nodes, so we extracted these two
features to represent nodes in the graph. However, the sample
sizes of the training and testing sets used are consistent with
those we set. For the four ML models, including ET, RF, DT,
and XGBoost, the input data is identical to that of the MTRF
model. The purpose is to compare the representational capability
of MTRF to what extent it improves over directly inputting raw
data, while keeping the detection models consistent.
In Table V, the data in the last four rows were represented
using the proposed models, followed by the application of four
different classifiers for detection. While both RF and ET models
performed similarly, ET exhibited the best performance with an
F1-score of 0.9699. Table V also lists the training convergence
time and average inference time per sample for each model.
MTRF represents each test sample (took about 23.90 ms) before
feeding it into the ML model for testing (took about 0.04 ms),

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

4775

TABLE VI
COMPARE THE PERFORMANCE METRICS OF VARIOUS METHODS ON THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET FOR TASKS T2 AND T3 , AND ON THE MQTT DATASET FOR TASK
T4

Fig. 7. The heat map for intrusion detection with (a) the ET model and (b) the
MTRF-ET model under the task T1 .

resulting in a total inference time of 23.94 ms per sample. It is
observed that MTRF achieves the best detection performance,
although its training and testing times are at a moderate level.
To provide a more detailed representation of the improvement
achieved by MTRF-ET over the ET model, we visualize the
performance results using heat map. As shown in Fig. 7, each
element represents the number of samples that match the actual
and predicted class. Among them, (a) is the prediction result of
the ET model, and (b) is the prediction result of the MTRF-ET
model. From Fig. 7, we observe that in (b), the poorest classification performance is for DoS attacks, with only three samples
being misclassified. In (a), the worst-performing class is also
DoS, with its misclassified instances spread across the other
eight classes.
All competing models adhere to their original input requirements. With T1 ’s distribution containing 80 samples per category, the training and test sets are divided equally. This results
in the training set having only 400 samples that come from
the UNSW-NB15 dataset. In contrast, E-GraphSAGE requires
datasets in the tens of millions for multi-class detection. The
limited dataset size is the primary reason why most competing
models struggle to accurately classify the 10 categories. Unlike
other methods that rely on large-scale datasets for training,
MTRF offers an effective data representation approach without
imposing specific requirements on the classification network.
Furthermore, our approach requires extracting only a few packets from each flow, eliminating the need for additional feature
extraction.

2) Following the Settings of T2 and T3 : In this experiment,
we will continue conducting imbalanced 10-class classification
tests using the UNSW-NB15 dataset. Based on our findings in
the T1 task, we observed that the ET classifier yielded the best
detection performance. Therefore, we will continue to apply this
technique in the T2 and T3 tasks. Based on the observations from
Table VI, it can be observed that the performance of all models
has declined to varying degrees compared to T1 . However, in
these two tasks, MTRF consistently maintains a significant lead.
Competitors evidently struggle to adapt to the challenges of
multi-class classification. Because the highest F1 score in both
tasks is nearly twice as high as the competitors’highest score.
3) Following the Settings of T4 : In the upcoming experiments, we will conduct the T4 task on the MQTT dataset, which
has fewer categories. The experimental results are as shown in
Table VI. In this task, MTRF’s performance closely matches
that in the T2 task. Other competitors have shown significant
improvements, with a preference for binary classification scenarios. Surprisingly, DT performs unexpectedly poorly, exhibiting
minimal effectiveness in this context.
Taking into account the experimental results of T2 , T3 and
T4 , it can be concluded that MTRF is suitable for imbalanced
datasets in both multi-class and binary classification scenarios.
4) Following the Settings of T5 : In all previous experiments,
only a small number of samples were used for training. Therefore, this trial will increase the data volume to further validate
the effectiveness of MTRF on a larger training set. In this trial,
we employed a balanced binary detection. There were 5000
samples for both benign and malicious flows, while all malicious
behaviors are assigned one label.
We conducted experiments on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset,
and the results are shown in Fig. 8. The numbers below each
subplot indicate the actual ratio of samples in the training set
to the test set. This series of results indicate that as the ratio of
the training set to the test set changes, the inference results vary
minimally, remaining within the range of 0.980 to 0.985. This
suggests that MTRF exhibits good stability in balanced binary
classification.
D. Further Analysis
1) Analysis on Domain Transformation: This trial aims to
investigate the influence of temporal-domain and frequencydomain transformations on the contrastive loss. We conducted

4776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 9. Compare the classification results by varying the hard margin following
the distribution of the training data in T3 on the MQTT dataset.
Fig. 8. The total number of samples for both the training and testing sets was
expanded to 10,000 in a binary classification conducted on the USTC-TFC2016
dataset.

TABLE VII
ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON DOMAIN TRANSFORMATIONS CONDUCTED ON
THE MQTT DATASET FOR T1 AND T2 TASKS

Fig. 10. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset with T2 distribution, we gradually
increased the size of the test set to obtain intrusion detection performance.

ablation experiments to investigate their impact on MTRF. This
trial used the MQTT dataset following the data distribution of
T1 and T2 . The results are presented in Table VII.
Our experiments show that solely using temporal-domain
features (Lt) or frequency-domain features (Lf ) exhibits detection capabilities for different-distribution datasets. However, the
fusion of data after undergoing multiple domain transformations
yields superior results.
2) Analysis on Hard Margin: We also investigated the impact of the hard margin parameter γ within the frequency
domain loss function (9) on intrusion detection. The results
are shown in Fig. 9, where the horizontal axis represents the
numerical variations of the parameter γ ranging from 6.4 ∗ 102
to 6.4 ∗ 107 , increasing by a factor of 10.As γ increases, all
performance metrics improve, especially rapidly initially. This
indicates a stronger demand for γ growth in intrusion detection
performance. However, it is worth noting that a larger γ is
not necessarily better. Once the parameter exceeds 6.4 × 106 ,
further increases lead to performance degradation.
3) Analysis on Representation: As a representation model,
MTRF should generalize learned data representations to unseen
test data. To clarify the meaning of the unknown test dataset, we
define the following symbols. The network flow categories are
denoted by F . Ftr and Fte respectively signify the categories
present in the training and testing sets. The sets of samples within

the training and testing datasets are succinctly represented as
Xtr and Xte . Definition 1: The presence of unknown samples in
the test set, symbolically expressed as Ftr = Fte , Xtr = Xte .
Definition 2: The occurrence of unknown categories in the test
set, symbolically expressed as Ftr = Fte , Xtr = Xte . Therefore, we designed two experiments, namely data augmentation
and dataset transfer, from these two perspectives to demonstrate
the representation capabilities of MTRF.
Data Augmentation: To verify MTRF’s generalizability to unseen data, we progressively expanded the test set while preserving the training data distribution of T2 in the USTC-TFC2016
dataset. In accordance with Definition 1, only unknown samples
are added to the test set. The ultimate exploration yields the
classification results for 11 types of network behaviors on this
dataset.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 10, where the
horizontal axis represents the size of the test data, growing
as a multiple. From the Fig. 10, it can be observed that the
performance of intrusion detection does not exhibit a significant
decline as the size of the test set increases. This shows MTRF’s
strong representation ability, effectively learning general patterns from training data and generalizing well to unseen datasets.
Dataset Transferability: To assess the generalization ability of the MTRF model, we aim to determine its capacity to
represent previously unseen datasets aligning with Definition
2. Specifically, MTRF learns parameters from known datasets,
then directly applies them to represent and detect intrusions in

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

4777

Fig. 11. The ROC curve obtained by directly representing the data from the
USTC-TK2016 dataset using the MTRF model trained on the MQTT dataset
with data distribution task T4 .

Fig. 12. The model trained on the CICDDoS-2019 dataset is transferred for
validation on the USTC-TK2016 dataset.

unseen data. Check whether its performance is comparable to
that achieved by training solely based on unseen data.
To achieve this, we initially train the MTRF model on the
MQTT dataset and saved the model parameters. Then, these
parameters were loaded to represent the previously unseen
USTC-TK2016 dataset. We utilize ROC curves to observe intrusion detection performance, helping us ascertain whether such
representations remain effective.
The specific results are shown in Fig. 11. We conducted
binary classification using the T4 data distribution. We tested
the intrusion detection results of the malware Cridex and Geodo
in the USTC-TK2016 dataset, denoted as Origin_Cridex and
Origi_Geodo, respectively. After reloading the model, we tested
the classification results for the same two types of malware,
denoted as Transfer_Cridex and Transfer_Geodo. From Fig. 11,
it can be observed that the results after model loading are 0.90
and 0.94, slightly lower compared to 0.92 and 0.96. This suggests
that MTRF exhibits a certain degree of generalization capability
in terms of representation.
In-depth Analysis of Dataset Transferability: In MQTT data,
the observed attack behaviors primarily involve brute-force attacks or scanning attacks utilizing Geodo (a botnet). These attack
behaviors bear resemblance to trojans and worm viruses found
in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. Therefore, we need to conduct
more comprehensive experiments to thoroughly validate the
transferability of the dataset.
Following T4 data distribution, we trained a model on the
CICDDoS-2019 dataset for malicious traffic detection. The
model was then directly applied to the USTC-TK2016 dataset,
evaluating its performance on each category using AUC as
the detection metric. The experimental results are illustrated in
Fig. 12.
The CICDDoS-2019 dataset primarily focuses on protocolspecific attacks, while the USTC-TK2016 dataset concentrates
on trojans and worm viruses. Therefore, the similarity between
the attack types of the two datasets is relatively low. However, observing the AUC in the graph, there is only a minor
decrease of around 2%. In fact, under the T4 data distribution, the training of the transferable model only utilized two
attack samples. We speculate that this might be due to the
strong representation capabilities for benign samples. Therefore,

visualizations were conducted on the samples before and after
representation.
Our specific approach is as follows: T4 proportions were used
to mix DNS attack behavior and benign traffic from the CICDDoS2019 dataset. The trained model was then directly applied
to the MQTT dataset and the USTC-TK2016 dataset, obtaining characterized samples. The x-axis represents the flattened
one-dimensional representation of each sample. For instance,
in (a), after characterization, each sample is represented as a
(1,320)-dimensional vector, resulting in 320 values along the
x-axis.The results are illustrated in Fig. 13.
Initially chaotic data distributions (Fig. 13(b)(c)) become
clearly separable between benign and malicious flows after
representation, demonstrating MTRF’s effectiveness. Additionally, the data distribution of benign flows after representation
becomes more structured.
4) Large-Scale Imbalanced Dataset: The false positive (FP)
and false negative (FN) are crucial assessment metrics for reliable intrusion detection. A high FP trigger unnecessary false
alarms, while a high FN leaves threats undetected. We conducted
binary classification experiments on the TON-IoT dataset, comprising 9500 benign samples and 500 attack samples (featuring
various attack behaviors). The training and testing sets were
sized at 100 and 9900, respectively, and the experimental results
are depicted in Fig. 14.
According to Fig. 14, it can be observed that the MTRF-ET
model yields FP = 0 and FN = 74 in its detections, while
using only the ET model results in FP = 63 and FN = 404.
This indicates that the MTRF demonstrates effective detection
performance on imbalanced datasets. The low FP rate helps
reduce false alarms, providing benefits for maintaining system
stability and reducing business interruptions.
Statistical Significance Tests: We selected the dataset CICDDoS2019 which has 13 categories, and for each category, we
chose 100 samples. By applying the DFT to each sample’s
feature dimensions, the amplitude spectra are obtained. The
frequency domain feature changes before and after the MTRF
model representation are compared in detail. The study visually
presents the differences in the amplitude spectrum distribution before and after the representation. Mltivariate analysis
of variance (MANOVA) was further employed to evaluate the

4778

Fig. 13.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Visualization of network flow samples before and after representation.

TABLE VIII
THE RESULTS OF MANOVA

Fig. 14.

The impact of MTRF on FP and FN in imbalanced datasets.

value is smaller (0.0415 vs 0.0754), and the Hotelling-Lawley
trace value is larger (23.12 vs 12.27). Moreover, the number
of characteristic features of the characterized network flow is
half of the original. This result proves that the feature set of
MTRF has better discrimination efficiency and stronger class
discrimination ability.
VI. RESOURCE CONSUMPTION
Fig. 15. Compare the amplitude spectra before and after using MTRF for
representation.

multi-class discrimination enhancement of post-representation
amplitude spectra. Fig. 15. shows the amplitude spectrum, with
the horizontal axis representing the normalized frequency ranging from 0 to 0.5. It can be seen that the 13 types of network
flows can be clearly distinguished in the amplitude spectra after
the representation.
Table VIII shows the results of MANOVA. It can be seen
that the network flow characterized by MTRF has an F value as
high as 163.6 (5.7 times that of the original), the Wilks’ lambda

During the training phase, the resident set size (RES) of the
MTRF model was approximately 3.038 GB, the shared memory
size (SHR) was about 573.67 MB, the CPU requirement was
approximately 13 cores, and the memory occupancy rate (%)
was 1.2%. Therefore, the training task is suitable for being
carried out on a cloud platform. After the training is completed,
the model can be saved, and its size is only 150 MB.
When performing inference on the fog node device, while the
occupation of other resources remains basically unchanged, the
CPU usage approaches 2 cores. To prevent overloading, the fog
node requires over 2 CPU cores and 4 GB of combined physical
and shared memory. The disk space only needs to be sufficient
for more than 150 MB.

WANG et al.: MTRF: MULTIDOMAIN TRANSFORMATION REPRESENTATION FOR NETWORK FLOWS IN NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

In terms of real-time performance, the single inference time of
the model is approximately 24 ms (refer to Table V). Moreover,
since the fog nodes are close to the IoT devices and the communication delay is low, the overall system can meet the response
requirements of most IoT real-time monitoring scenarios.
The scalability of the model mainly depends on the resource
redundancy of the fog nodes. A single MTRF instance only
requires approximately 2 CPU cores and 3.5 GB of memory.
For fog node devices with multiple cores and large memory,
multiple MTRF model instances can be deployed in parallel
to enhance processing speed. Additionally, the model size is
relatively small (150 MB), and it does not impose significant
pressure on the storage resources of the fog nodes. If a fog node
cluster is adopted for deployment, the detection tasks can be
distributed to multiple nodes, thereby achieving good overall
scalability.
VII. CONCLUSION
In our work, we separate the network flow representation
learning from downstream classification tasks, avoiding the
direct end-to-end learning and detection dependence on largescale labeled samples. This has also been confirmed by comparing with previous state-of-the-art end-to-end anomaly detection methods. MTRF employs a hard margin strategy to
represent packet data in the frequency domain, and it has been
demonstrated that a larger parameter γ within a certain range
can achieve better intrusion detection results. A large number of experiments have shown that our method outperforms
fourteen other models in multi-class tasks, achieving the best
performance. Furthermore, as a representation model, good
generalization capability is crucial for MTRF. This is because it
means that the model can be applied to unseen datasets. Further
still, even if trained solely based on the existing dataset, it
can still achieve outstanding detection performance. Even when
training on completely unknown data using pre-loaded model
parameters, MTRF can achieves AUC scores of 0.90 and 0.92.
This is only 0.02 lower than the AUC obtained by training on
the unknown data from scratch.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detection
towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput.vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 493–510, Jan.-Feb. 2025.
[2] K. Ethayarajh, “How contextual are contextualized word representations?
Comparing the geometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings.,” in
Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.-Int. Joint Conf.
Natural Lang. Process., 2019,pp. 55–65.
[3] W. W. Zhu et al., “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural
network for representation learning,” Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017,
pp. 712–717.
[4] H. Hindy et al., “Machine learning based IoT intrusion detection system:
An MQTT case study (MQTT-IoT-IDS2020 dataset,” in Proc. Int. Netw.
Conf., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 73–84.
[5] G. Woo et al., “CoST: Contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend
representations for time series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, Virtual Event, 2022, pp. 1–18.
[6] J. A. Barnes et al., “Characterization of frequency stability,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. IM-20, no. 2, pp. 105–120, May 1971, doi:
10.1109/TIM.1971.5570702.

4779

[7] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., Canberra, ACT, Australia, 2015,
pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/MilCIS.2015.7348942.
[8] W. W. Lo et al., “E-graphsage: A graph neural network based intrusion
detection system for IoT,” in Proc. NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Netw.
Oper. Manage. Symp. IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–9.
[9] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting
intrusion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2022 - IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.,
London, United Kingdom, 2022, pp. 1409–1418, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM48880.2022.9796926.
[10] L. N. Tidjon and F. Khomh, “Reliable malware analysis and detection
using topology data analysis–.,” 2022, arXiv:2211.01535.
[11] F. Ceschin et al., “Fast & Furious–: On the modelling of malware detection
as an evolving data stream,” Expert Syst. with Appl., vol. 212, 2023, Art.
no. 118590.
[12] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multi-tiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3084796.
[13] L. Liu et al., “ConFlow: Contrast network flow improving classimbalanced learning in network intrusion detection,” in Proc. SPNCE 2023,
Cham, Switzerland, 2025, pp. 120–136.
[14] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A Transfer learning and optimized cnn based
intrusion detection system for internet of vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE ICC,
Seoul, South Korea, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[15] M. Zhong, M. Lin, and Z. He, “Dynamic multi-scale topological representation for enhancing network intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol.
135, 2023, Art. no. 103516.
[16] M. Lotfollahi et al., “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 1999–2012, 2020.
[17] I. Sharafaldin, A.H. Lashkari, and A.A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
Proc. ICISSP, 2018, vol. 1, pp. 108–116.
[18] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
security systems at the edge: Network TON_IoT datasets,” Sustain. Cities
Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994.
[19] S. Tsimenidis, T. Lagkas, and K. Rantos, “Deep learning in IoT intrusion detection,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1–40,
2022.
[20] D. Kim et al., “SelfReg: Self-supervised contrastive regularization for
domain generalization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
9619–9628.
[21] W. Huang et al., “Towards the generalization of contrastive self-supervised
learning.,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Kigali, Rwanda,
2023.
[22] L. Le, A. Patterson, and M. White “Supervised autoencoders: Improving
generalization performance with unsupervised regularizers,” in Proc. Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 107–117.
[23] I. O. Lopes et al., “Effective network intrusion detection via representation
learning: A denoising AutoEncoder approach,” Comput. Commun., vol.
194, pp. 55–65, 2022.
[24] X. Liang, Y. Ji, W. -S. Zheng, W. Zuo, and X. Zhu, “SV-Learner:
Support-vector contrastive learning for robust learning with noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5409–5422,
Oct. 2024.
[25] N. F. Syed, M. Ge, and Z. Baig, “Fog-cloud based intrusion detection
system using recurrent neural networks and feature selection for IoT
networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225, 2023, Art. no. 109662 .
[26] L. Lyu et al., “Fog-embedded deep learning for the Internet of
Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4206–4215, Jul.
2019.
[27] M. Lopez-Martin et al., “Supervised contrastive learning over prototypelabel embeddings for network intrusion detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 79,
pp. 200–228, 2022.
[28] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning
enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol.
19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3218843.
[29] H. Dong and I. Kotenko, “An autoencoder-based multi-task learning
for intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Ural-Siberian
Conf. Biomed. Eng., Radioelectronics Inf. Techn., Yekaterinburg, Russian
Federation, 2023, pp. 1–4.

4780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

[30] H. Q. Le, Y. Qiao, L. X. Nguyen, L. Zou, and C. S. Hong, “Federated multimodal learning for IOT applications: A contrastive learning approach,”
in Proc. 24th Asia-Pacific Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., sejong, korea,
republic, 2023, pp. 201–206.
[31] P. V. Dinh, Q. U. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, S. P. Bao,
and E. Dutkiewicz, “Constrained twin variational auto-encoder for intrusion detection in IoT systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 14789–14803, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3344842.
[32] K. He et al., “Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020„
pp. 9729–9738, doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00975.
[33] Y. Zhao, H. Lu, S. Zhao, H. Wu, and Z. Lu, “Multi-level contrastive
learning for hybrid cross-modal retrieval,” in Proc. ICASSP 2024-2024
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Seoul, Korea, Republic,
2024,pp. 6390–6394.
[34] H. Deng and Y. Yang, “Context-enriched contrastive loss: Enhancing
presentation of inherent sample connections in contrastive learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 27, pp. 429–441, 2025.
[35] L. Pan and Q. Ren, “Urban traffic flow forecasting based on spatialtemporal graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech and Signal Process., Seoul, Korea, Republic,
2024, pp. 5560–5564.
[36] A. Eijpe et al., “Disentangled and interpretable multimodal attention fusion
for cancer survival prediction,” in Proc. MICCAI, 2025, pp. 117–127.

Xinlei Wang received the PhD degree in electronic
science and technology from the Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in
2025. Her current research interests include machine
learning and network security.

Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree in electronic science and technology from the
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently doing research with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
research interests include network security, anomaly
detection, and machine learning.

Xiaojuan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in electronic science and technology from
the University of Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2015. She is
currently an associate professor with the School of
Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications. Her research interests include deep learning, complex networks, and human
gesture recognition.

Shize Guo was born in 1969. He received the MS
and BS degrees from Ordnance Engineering College,
China, in 1991 and 1988, respectively, and the PhD
degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology, in
1989. He is currently a researcher with the Institute of
North Electronic Equipment and also a professor with
the Beijing University of Post and Telecommunications. His main research interests include information
technology and information security.