3988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

Multi-Agent Federated Edge Learning for UAV-IDS
in Smart City IoT Environment
Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah , Senior Member, IEEE, Shakila Basheer , Muhammad Ehsan ,
and Ala Saleh Alluhaidan
Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become integral to modern consumer electronics (CE) ecosystem-based smart
city infrastructures, providing dynamic connectivity, environmental monitoring, and situational awareness through distributed
consumer Internet of Things (IoT) networks. However, their
reliance on wireless communication links exposes them to a
wide range of cyber and physical-layer attacks, demanding
intelligent yet lightweight defense mechanisms. This paper
presents a Multi-Agent Federated Edge Intrusion Detection System
(UAV-IDS) designed to ensure privacy-preserving, real-time protection for UAV-enabled smart city IoT environments. The
proposed framework integrates a hybrid Autoencoder–LSTM
architecture deployed across edge nodes, where multiple intelligent agents collaboratively perform feature extraction, anomaly
detection, and policy adaptation. A UAV-based coordinator manages federated learning rounds, aggregating model updates from
distributed edge nodes without sharing raw data. Extensive
experiments conducted on the T-ITS dataset demonstrate that
the proposed system achieves 99.44% accuracy, 99.31% precision, and a 46.8 ms average detection latency, outperforming
existing deep and federated IDS frameworks. Moreover, the
lightweight deployment (8.42 MB) and low communication cost
confirm the feasibility of the proposed design for embedded UAV
operations. The results validate the framework’s potential as
an adaptive, scalable, and privacy-conscious solution for nextgeneration smart city security infrastructures.
Index Terms—IDS, UAV, agentic AI, federated learning, cyberphysical security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE intensive use of interconnected consumer IoT
devices, intelligent sensing infrastructures, and datadriven decision systems enables the rapid development of
smart cities when applied to traffic monitoring, environmental
quality evaluation, and emergency response and the
management of public safety. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) have emerged as one of the enabling technologies

T

Received 15 December 2025; revised 19 January 2026; accepted
19 February 2026. Date of publication 23 February 2026; date of current version 2 June 2026. This work was supported by the Deanship of
Scientific Research and Libraries in Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University through the Supporting Publication in Top-Impact Journals Initiative
(SPTIF–2026). (Corresponding author: Shakila Basheer.)
Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah is with the Faculty of Computing and
Informatics, Multimedia University, Cyberjaya 63100, Malaysia (e-mail:
attaullah@ieee.org).
Shakila Basheer and Ala Saleh Alluhaidan are with the Department of
Information Systems, College of Computer and Information Science, Princess
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. BOX 84428, Riyadh 11671,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: sbbasheer@pnu.edu.sa; ASALiuhaidan@pnu.edu.sa).
Muhammad Ehsan is with the Centre of AI and Cyber Security, ICT Global,
Cyberjaya 63000, Malaysia (e-mail: m.ehsanbhutto@gmail.com).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCE.2026.3667039, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2026.3667039

because of their mobility, the ability to deploy flexibly, and
cover a wide area [1].
In the context of this study’s scenario as illustrated in
Fig. 1, the UAV-assisted smart city network comprises
UAVs equipped with cameras and environmental sensors
that communicate with CE edge nodes, such as wearable
health monitors, smartwatches, and residential gateways,
via secure wireless links. The collected data are relayed to
the smart city control center through a direct data channel,
while anomalous events trigger immediate alerts for mission
adaptation and intrusion analysis. This makes UAV-assisted
systems increasingly integral to next generation Smart City
IoT ecosystems [2].
However, the adoption of UAVs introduces significant security challenges, especially at the wireless physical and network
communication layers. Communication links between UAVs,
IoT devices, and ground infrastructure are vulnerable to jamming, spoofing, replay manipulation, route hijacking, botnet
infiltration, and malicious telemetry modification attacks [3].
When compromised, the adversaries can manipulate sensor
readings, confuse navigation paths, or intercept surveillance
streams, which can directly compromise the safety of people
and essential city functions. Thus, it is necessary to design
a powerful and smart Intrusion Detection System (IDS) that
will be able to detect cyber-physical anomalies in UAV-IoT
networks.
Conventional IDS systems do not work well in UAV-based
smart cities due to a number of reasons. The network topology
is very dynamic because the UAV mobility and heterogeneous
IoT connectivity complicates the modeling of traffic patterns
with the help of the fixed detection schemes. In addition, UAVs
and edge nodes possess limited processing and energy capabilities, which limit the use of computationally expensive IDS
models. Lastly, centralized data collection is a privacy threat
and a heavy communication overhead in case of aggregating
data across city zones. These limitations render traditional IDS
solutions inadequate to real-time, scalable UAV-IoT security.
To overcome these issues, this paper suggests a MultiAgent Federated Edge UAV-IDS, in which several autonomous
detection agents are deployed at distributed edge nodes as
part of a broader consumer electronics, and UAVs coordinate
the model aggregation across regions without exchanging raw
data. Federated learning provides privacy of the data, edge
computing reduces latency, and the multi-agent paradigm facilitates dedicated detection roles, enhancing detection accuracy
and flexibility to changing threats in real-time smart city
tasks.

1558-4127 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS

Fig. 1. System architecture of UAV-assisted multi-agent Fed-Edge IDS in
Smart City Consumer IoT environment.

The major contributions of the work are as follows:
• A multi-agent IDS is designed for UAV-enabled Smart
City IoT networks to perform traffic analysis and attack
detection at the edge.
• A federated edge learning approach is used to train
IDS models across regions without sharing raw data,
preserving privacy.
• UAVs act as model aggregators, collecting and distributing model updates efficiently among edge nodes.
• A low-latency intrusion response mechanism enables
quick threat isolation and alerting in real-time.
• Evaluation results show improved detection accuracy,
reduced communication overhead, and better adaptability
to new attacks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II reviews related work in UAV security, federated
learning, and intelligent IDS systems. Section III presents the
proposed Multi-Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS architecture
and operational workflow. Section IV describes the dataset,
preprocessing, model training process, and evaluation metrics.
Section V provides experimental results and performance
analysis. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and outlines
future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The recent developments on the Smart City infrastructures
have increasingly incorporated the UAV-assisted communication and sensing systems to aid applications. UAVs have very
high mobility, line of sight and can be easily deployed, which
makes its presence valuable in large scale IoT. The benefits,
however, come with a number of security threats on the layers
of wireless communication channels and network operations
that would demand effective lightweight defense mechanisms.
UAVs are based on wireless communication as a means
of telemetry, control indication, and payload exchange
with ground IoT networks and edge controllers. These
wireless networks are susceptible to jamming, spoofing,
signal manipulation, channel interference and routing, which

3989

may hamper the execution of the missions and interfere
with safety. The available studies have been on how to
enhance the reliability of communication, trajectory as well
as coverage optimization such as MILP-based multi-mission
UAV coordination [4], genetic optimization models of stable
UAV navigation in urban airflows [6] as well as edge-driven
perception frameworks of UAV surveillance imagery [6].
Although these approaches increase the quality of the work
of UAVs, they are mainly aimed at efficiency and control, not
security and threat resistance.
IDS are still a critical part of protecting the UAV networks
against network-layer threats, including DoS, botnet traffic,
spoofing, and manipulation of adversarial routing. Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM)-driven anomaly detector (IDS) based
on deep learning [10], intrusion detectors using GNNS in case
of IoT clusters [11], and distributed cooperative CNN-based
UAV-IDS [14] have promising detection rates. Nonetheless,
such IDS models usually presuppose centralized availability
of data, can be computationally intensive due to the nature
of the UAV hardware, or cannot be adjusted to changing
threats. Federated learning has become a high contender to
UAV security since it does not presuppose the exchange of raw
data between the urban zones. Distributed model refinement
is made possible by Federated Resource Management of
UAV-enabled agriculture [12], gradient-clipped UAV-IDS
through weighted aggregation [13], and federated GNN optimization of IoT monitoring. Nevertheless, these architectures
typically make use of single-agent learning models, which
result in slow contextual reasoning, slow adaptation, and poor
responses in dynamic threat environments.
Recent UAV-based intrusion detection advancements have
explored diverse deep learning and optimization strategies
to enhance detection accuracy and adaptability. DRL-BWO
[17] demonstrated by reinforcement learning techniques like
DRL-BWO is shown to be highly efficient in detecting
attacks based on behavior-weighted optimization of traffic
flows on UAV, whereas multi-channel deep neural models like
MC-DNN [18] can be used to extract RF-signal features
that can detect the UAV. Cooperative IDS frameworks based
on CNN, like FFCNN [14] enhance the security of swarm
communication of UAVs by detecting cooperatively. On the
same note, AMOA-DLID [19] uses adaptive metaheuristic
tuning in UAV based IoT settings to optimize accuracy and
recall.
Classical monitored schemes, like the SVM-based hierarchical IDS schemes [20], offer baseline anomaly detection but
are not scalable or distributed intelligence to large-scale smart
city UAV networks.
In summary of the results in Table I, the literature provides
useful contributions to UAV communication, authentication,
and intrusion detection in smart city settings. Nevertheless,
there are three major limitations:
• Most solutions rely on centralized or single-agent learning, which limits adaptability under dynamic UAV
mobility and heterogeneous IoT connectivity.
• Federated UAV security schemes often incur high communication latency and depend on dense edge node
availability for effective collaboration.

3990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF UAV-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION W ITH C OMMUNICATION O PTIMIZATION S TUDIES FOR S MART C ITY I OT

• Existing UAV-IDS approaches generally lack collaborative, context-aware multi-agent intelligence, which is
essential for real-time threat interpretation and rapid intrusion response.
Unlike single-agent FL-IDS approaches that process data
monolithically, the proposed multi-agent pipeline enables parallel extraction of PHY-level and temporal features, reducing
decision latency and improving class-level separability. These
limitations motivate the development of the proposed MultiAgent Federated Edge UAV-IDS framework, which enables
distributed intelligence, privacy-preserving model training, and
low-latency anomaly response for large-scale Smart City consumer IoT networks.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
The proposed Multi-Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS framework aims to provide intelligent, distributed, and privacypreserving intrusion detection across UAV-assisted smart city
IoT environments. The complete system workflow is illustrated
in Fig. 2, and comprises five core phases, ranging from data
preprocessing and hybrid model construction to federated
aggregation and intrusion response. This section details each
phase along with its mathematical formulation.
Firstly, the smart city IoT environment is partitioned into
N regional clusters, each containing a set of CE-driven IoT
devices (e.g., personal wearables and smart home sensors)
Di = {di1 , di2 , . . . , din } connected to an edge node Ei . Each edge
node hosts a multi-agent IDS comprising four autonomous
agents: traffic analysis, anomaly detection, threat classification, and policy adaptation. These agents follow a sequential
workflow: the Traffic Agent filters inputs, the Detection Agent
performs inference, and the Policy Agent adjusts sensitivity

before forwarding outputs to the UAV aggregator. UAVs serve
as mobile aggregators that periodically collect local model
weights from these edges and perform global model fusion.
Let Xi ∈ Rm× f represent the local dataset of node Ei , where
m denotes the number of samples and f the feature dimension.
The local feature matrix after normalization is expressed as
X̃i =

Xi − µi
,
σi

(1)

Each edge node trains its local intrusion detection model
fi (·; Wi ) on X̂i with parameters Wi , minimizing the local loss
Li (Wi ) defined as
1 X
Li (Wi ) =
L( fi (x; Wi ), y),
(2)
|Bi |
(x,y)∈Bi

where L(·) denotes the cross-entropy loss and Bi represents a
mini-batch of training samples.
At each edge node, multiple agents operate collaboratively,
forming a cooperative intelligence layer. These components
exhibit agentic AI capabilities by autonomously adapting
detection thresholds locally based on environmental feedback. The traffic analysis agent extracts key raw telemetry,
specifically Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) and
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), from incoming flows:
φt = {prate , RS S I, S NR, ttl, len, f lag}.
These 6 primary streams are expanded via statistical windowing (calculating mean, variance, and jitter) into a comprehensive 53-dimensional feature vector to capture temporal flow
dynamics. These features are fed into the anomaly detection
agent built upon a hybrid CNN–GRU encoder Fθ that captures
both spatial and temporal dependencies. The encoded latent

ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS

3991

Fig. 2. Overall workflow of the proposed framework.

representation zt is computed via the GRU encoder, utilizing
Tanh activations for temporal state regulation.
The anomaly score for a sample xt is derived using a
reconstruction-based error function
A(xt ) = kxt − x̂t k22 ,

(3)

where x̂t is the reconstructed input from the decoder. A
detection threshold τ dynamically updates through the policy
adaptation agent as
τt+1 = ατt + (1 − α) A(xt ),

(4)

with α being the smoothing factor (0 < α < 1). Any A(xt ) >
τt+1 is flagged as an intrusion.
Crucially, this threshold adapts independently for each client
using local reliability weights (wi ). This allows heterogeneous
nodes with varying link qualities to contribute proportionally
without destabilizing the global model.
After local training, the UAV coordinates the federated
update among N edge nodes. Each node transmits only its
model weights Wi to the UAV aggregator, preserving data
privacy. The global weight update WG(r+1) at round r+1 follows
the standard Federated Averaging rule:

Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Federated Edge IDS Training
Require: Dataset partitions {D1 , . . . , DN }, UAV aggregator A,
learning rate η, rounds R
(0)
(0)
0: Initialize local weights Wi and global weights WG
0: for r = 1 to R do
0:
for each edge node Ei in parallel do
0:
Train local IDS agents on Di
0:
Update weights: Wi(r) = Wi(r−1) − η∇Li (Wi(r−1) )
0:
end for
P
i|
0:
UAV aggregates: WG(r) = i P|D|D
Wi(r)
j|
j

0:
0:
0:

UAV broadcasts global weights WG(r) to all Ei
end for
return Final optimized global model WG(R)

The UAV then disseminates WG(r+1) back to all edge nodes
for the next training iteration. The convergence of the global
model is defined when

control agent, ensuring secure parameter transfer and adaptive
synchronization between distributed IDS agents.
Once an intrusion is detected, the UAV triggers an alert to
the GCS through a secure control link. The GCS coordinates
with the Smart City Control Center to isolate compromised IoT
clusters and initiate countermeasures such as route reconfiguration, traffic rerouting, or UAV redeployment for localized
verification. The adaptive feedback loop ensures continuous
learning and improvement across future federated training
rounds.
The communication overhead per federated round is proportional to the aggregated model size S and number of
participating nodes N. The total UAV bandwidth consumption
B can be approximated as

kWG(r+1) − WG(r) k2 < ,

B = 2S Nr ,

WG(r+1) =

N
X

|Di |
Wi(r) .
PN
|D
|
j
j=1
i=1

(5)

(6)

where  is a small threshold denoting stable convergence.
The complete training objective combines the local anomaly
loss, global federated aggregation consistency, and an adversarial regularization term Radv to enhance model robustness:
J =

N
X

ωi Li (Wi ) + λ1 kWi − WG k22 + λ2 Radv ,

(7)

i=1

where ωi is the weighting coefficient proportional to dataset
size, and λ1 , λ2 are regularization constants.
The overall UAV-coordinated federated edge learning workflow is summarized in Algorithm 1. The UAV serves as a

(8)

where the factor of 2 accounts for both upload and download
transmissions and Nr denotes the average active edge nodes per
round. The computational complexity for each edge training
cycle is O(m f h), where h is the number of hidden units in the
encoder–decoder layers. The proposed design thus balances
detection performance with lightweight deployability across
UAV-assisted edge infrastructures.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
All experiments were conducted using a hybrid simulationemulation setup representing a smart city UAV network under

3992

realistic network variability (see Fig. S2 in Supplementary
Material). The environment includes multiple edge nodes
connected to UAVs acting as federated aggregators and a
virtual GCS managing telemetry and coordination. The software implementation was developed in Python 3.11 using
PyTorch 2.2 and Scikit-learn libraries. For a detailed
breakdown of the federated execution metrics, including global
versus local accuracy gains and operational efficiency parameters, please refer to Table S1 in the Supplementary Material.
The local training of multi-agent IDS models was executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core
i7-12700K (3.6 GHz), 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA
RTX 3080 GPU (4 GB VRAM).
Federated rounds were coordinated by an asynchronous
UAV coordinator that operated at every communication cycle
of 5 s/edge node, which simulates real-time coordination
between distributed clusters of IoT. Each client trained on a
non-IID local data partition, and the global model was updated
over twelve communication rounds using the weighted FedAvg
routine. The global model aggregation and synchronization
was implemented through the FedAvg procedure as outlined
in Section III.
The proposed UAV-IDS was tested on the publicly available
UAV-IDS dataset (commonly cited as T-ITS [21]), which is a
collection of cyber and physical telemetry of unmanned aerial
vehicles in benign and adversarial conditions. The dataset
includes four large categories of cyber-attacks, such as Deauthentication DoS, Replay, False Data Injection (FDI), and
Evil-Twin, and normal flight traces. Every sample is a combination of network-level characteristics (e.g., packet length,
inter-arrival time, TCP flags) and physical-layer characteristics
(e.g., altitude, velocity, roll, and pitch).
To train, the dataset was preprocessed with the removal of
missing values, z-score scaling of continuous variables, and
minority attack classes balanced with the SMOTE algorithm.
The feature set is combined with a set of attributes that have
been selected using correlation-based selection and has a total
of 53 attributes. Stratified 5-fold cross-validation was used to
ensure robustness. Within each fold, the data was partitioned
into a 70% training, 15% validation, and 15% testing ratio to
provide a fair comparison and resistance to overfitting. The
cities were partitioned independently (edge node) to simulate
non-IID data distribution in federated environments.
The effectiveness of the proposed model was assessed using
standard classification metrics derived from the confusion
matrix, including Accuracy (ACC), Precision (PR), Recall
(RE), and the F1-score (F1) along with true positives, true
negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively.
Additionally, the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC) and Matthews Correlation Coefficient
(MCC) were computed to measure robustness under class
imbalance.
The overall model performance was compared against baseline IDS methods that discussed in the literature to demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed multi-agent federated approach
in terms of accuracy, latency, and communication cost.
Further, the proposed model was fine-tuned through extensive parameter exploration to achieve an optimal balance

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

TABLE II
H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION FOR P ROPOSED M ODEL

between detection accuracy, convergence stability, and computational cost. Table II summarizes the selected hyperparameters and federated training setup used during experimentation.
The model integrates a 4-layer autoencoder for feature
reconstruction and compression, followed by an LSTM
module with 128 recurrent units for temporal feature learning. A dense fusion layer with 256 neurons combines the
autoencoder’s latent representation and the temporal states,
producing a unified embedding for anomaly detection. ReLU
and Tanh activations were adopted to ensure stable gradient
propagation. Specifically, ReLU is used for sparse encoding to
mitigate vanishing gradients, while Tanh is employed in LSTM
cells to regulate information flow within the [−1, 1] range. To
prevent overfitting, a dropout rate of 0.2 and L2 regularization
(1 × 10−5 ) were applied.
The local model training was conducted on each edge
node with AdamW optimizer and learning rate of 1.5 × 10−4
and the UAV aggregator updated the global model with the
weighted FedAvg rule with a federated rate of 1.0 × 10−4 .
The local clients were trained on 50 epochs per round, and
12 aggregation cycles. The batch size was set to 64 samples,
and sequences were cut to 10 timesteps per feature stream to
obtain short-term traffic dynamics.
The federated learning system consisted of five edge clients
and a UAV aggregator. Edge nodes were proportionally
updated based on their dataset size and link reliability (wi ).
Privacy was ensured through encrypted gradient exchange
with masking. In the inference phase, the IDS sensitivity was
controlled by adaptive thresholding on a 50-sample sliding
window, and a dynamic coefficient, k = 1.4, was used to
balance the recall of detections. The SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) analysis and reconstruction-error attribution

ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE VALIDATION OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL

3993

TABLE IV
P REDICTED V S . ACTUAL M ATRIX FOR AE–LSTM
F EDERATED UAV-IDS

were used to explain the model, and the final student model
was exported to TensorFlow Lite.
V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
This section presents the evaluation of the proposed
UAV-IDS framework. The results are compared based on
intrusion detection performance, computational efficiency,
communication overhead, and model interpretability.
Table III summarizes the overall performance of the proposed hybrid AE-LSTM model. The model demonstrated an
extremely high accuracy of 99.44 percent, which proves that
the learned federated representations are effective in capturing both cyber and physical-layer attack characteristics in
UAV-IoT traffic. The accuracy of 99.31 percent means that
the model generates minimal false alarms, which is essential
in UAV settings where unjustified countermeasures can cause
mission disruption or energy wastage. Equally, a recall rate
of 99.27% indicates that the framework has a high capability
of detecting various attack events accurately, and thus, very
few intrusions are not detected. Moreover, The corresponding
F1-score of 99.28 percent indicates a balanced trade-off
between sensitivity and reliability in all classes. The high
ROC-AUC of 99.71% is also another indicator that the classifier has a high discrimination ability at different decision
thresholds.
The Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC = 0.992) and
Cohen Kappa (0.989) show that there is a strong linear
relationship between predicted and actual labels, and that there
is consistency in performance between heterogeneous UAV
data partitions.
This stability is also supported by error-based metrics. The
model had a very low False Positive Rate (0.34%), and False
Negative Rate (0.21%), which indicates high robustness even
in dynamic network conditions and non-IID distributions. The
mean detection latency of 46.8 ms per sample indicates that the
system can be used in near real-time, which meets the timing
requirements of UAV communication and edge inference.
Regression-based indicators such as the Mean Squared Error
(0.0063) and R2 score (0.992) confirm the high stability of
prediction and low reconstruction loss in the autoencoder part.
Finally, the Prediction Deviation Index (0.015), which is a

Fig. 3. Validation Accuracy and Loss Convergence per Epoch over 50
Training Epochs.

stability measure of the consistency of the temporal prediction
indicates that the model maintains consistent decision confidence over several rounds of federated learning.
Table IV shows the confusion matrix of five traffic classes.
The high diagonal values indicate high classification accuracy
with a low overlap between categories. Benign and DoS
samples were identified with almost perfect accuracy, and there
was a slight confusion between Replay and Evil Twin attacks
because of the similarity in the transmission pattern (see Fig.
S1 in Supplementary Material for detailed class-wise error
analysis). The FDI class was also recognized at more than 99%
indicating that the model is capable of capturing minor datasignal inconsistencies. In general, the suggested framework
is stable and reliable in detecting various types of UAV-IoT
attacks.
Further, Fig. 3 shows the validation accuracy and loss
convergence of the model during 50 training epochs. The accuracy curve indicates a gradual increase in accuracy between
86% and 99.44%, whereas the validation loss reduces rapidly
between 0.48 and 0.03, which indicates rapid and consistent
convergence. Both metrics are level after about 30 epochs,
which means that learning is successful and there is not much
overfitting.
And, Fig. 4 shows the convergence behavior of the federated learning process with the FedAdam optimizer in 12
aggregation rounds. The validation accuracy of all edge nodes
is steadily increasing, reaching about 94% and then above
99%. The global UAV model is always better than single
clients with the highest accuracy of 99.42%, which is the
advantage of aggregating parameters and learning together.
The small distance between client curves implies that there

3994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

TABLE V
M ODEL P ERFORMANCE AND L IGHTWEIGHT C APACITY M ETRICS OF THE
P ROPOSED M ODEL

Fig. 4. FL Convergence under FedAdam Optimization across 12 Federated
Aggregation Rounds.

Fig. 5. Explainable AI (SHAP) Analysis on T-ITS Dataset.
Fig. 6. Comparison of the proposed framework with baseline IDS models
from recent studies across performance metrics.

is a stable synchronization and the non-IID effect is minimal,
which proves that the FedAdam-based aggregation provides
quick and accurate convergence in the framework.
The Explainable AI (SHAP) feature impact analysis of the
proposed model on the T-ITS dataset is shown in Fig. 5.
The top contributing attributes include ip.ttl_x,
tcp.window_size_x, and wlan.fc.subtype_x,
which
strongly
influence
anomaly
classification
decisions. Regarding directionality, high values of
tcp.window_size_x generally correlate with benign
control traffic, whereas sudden drops in Signal Strength (RSSI)
increase the likelihood of physical-layer intrusion predictions.
The increase in SHAP values shows that changes in these
parameters have a significant influence on the output of the
model, especially in the detection of replay and FDI attacks.
Physical-layer features such as udp.length_x and
wlan.duration_x also show notable contribution, which
highlights that network and PHY-level indicators are both
significant in defining UAV intrusion patterns. Overall, the
SHAP analysis proves that the proposed IDS is not only
accurate but also interpretable, providing clear information
about what traffic and signal features contribute to its detection
results.
Table V summarizes the performance and lightweight capacity metrics, the model maintains a compact footprint of
8.42 MB with approximately 1.26 million trainable parameters,
making it suitable for UAV and edge deployment. Each edge
node requires about 37.5 minutes of local training per cycle,
followed by 12 global aggregation rounds, resulting in stable

convergence. During inference, the model achieves a low
latency of 46.8 ms per sample with a throughput of 126.7 samples per second, enabling real-time intrusion detection. The
GPU memory utilization remains modest at 512 MB, and the
energy consumption per inference is only 1.32 J, confirming
its efficiency for embedded platforms. A granular componentwise breakdown of this energy profile, which identifies the
Fusion Layer as the primary consumer, is illustrated in
Fig. S3 of the Supplementary Material.
An edge-deployed ONNX version occupies just 9.1 MB,
with an average CPU load of 73.5% and minimal communication overhead of 214.5 KB per round. This significant
reduction from the full model size (8.42 MB) is achieved by
transmitting only masked, high-magnitude gradient updates
rather than the complete weight matrix, optimizing bandwidth
for constrained UAV links. Consequently, the high Energy
Efficiency Index (0.984) indicates that the framework delivers
a strong balance between performance, power, and resource
utilization, validating its feasibility for continuous UAV-based
smart city operations. These lightweight metrics ensure that
the proposed IDS can run efficiently on consumer electronic
devices such as smart gateways, CE-grade UAV controllers,
and embedded Wi-Fi sensing modules.
And finally Fig. 6 compares the performance of the
proposed UAV-IDS framework with several recent intrusion detection approaches, including SVM, AMOA-DLID,
FFCNN, MC-DNN, and DRL-BWO models. The proposed

ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS

AE-LSTM-based federated IDS is better than the current
baselines in all key evaluation metrics, including accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score, with 99.44% and 99.28%
respectively. Although traditional models like SVM and
AMOA-DLID demonstrate moderate performance, federated
deep architectures (MC-DNN and DRL-BWO) demonstrate
competitive performance, yet they are still inferior in terms
of precision and recall. The high performance of the proposed
model is due to its multi-agent learning approach and adaptive
federated training, which improves the feature representation
and reduces overfitting in non-IID UAV data distributions.
These results indicate that the suggested framework provides
the state-of-the-art detection accuracy at lightweight computation, which makes it very effective in real-time smart city
UAV security.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper presented a Multi-Agent Federated Edge
UAV-IDS tailored for UAV-assisted smart city IoT environment. The framework integrates a hybrid Autoencoder–LSTM
architecture with distributed intelligence, enabling collaborative anomaly detection without sharing raw data. By
employing UAVs as mobile aggregators, the system enhances
learning efficiency while preserving data privacy across heterogeneous edge nodes. Comprehensive experiments on the
T-ITS dataset validated the framework’s capability to achieve
99.44% detection accuracy with minimal false alarms and
a low inference latency of 46.8 ms. The proposed model
also demonstrated strong resource efficiency, maintaining a
lightweight 8.42 MB deployment footprint suitable for realtime UAV operations. These findings confirm that the system
can effectively safeguard large-scale UAV–IoT networks while
maintaining scalability, reliability, and privacy preservation.
In essence, the proposed model contributes directly to the
security of consumer electronics and emerging CE platforms
by enabling robust anomaly detection across many CE-driven
IoT devices deployed in smart city environments.
Future research will focus on extending the framework
toward fully autonomous federated coordination among UAV
swarms, where edge nodes dynamically join and leave learning
sessions, directly addressing the centralized bottleneck of the
current UAV coordinator model detailed in Section III. Incorporating reinforcement-driven policy optimization will further
enable adaptive model aggregation based on communication
reliability and environmental conditions. Moreover, integrating lightweight adversarial defense strategies will strengthen
resilience against model poisoning and spoofing attacks.
Finally, real-world deployment and evaluation on live UAV
testbeds within urban smart infrastructures will be pursued to
assess long-term robustness, energy efficiency, and interoperability with next-generation wireless networks such as 6G. The
proposed work lays the foundation for secure, distributed, and
trustworthy UAV-based intelligence in future cyber–physical
ecosystems.
R EFERENCES
[1]

H. Liao et al., “A survey of deep learning technologies for intrusion
detection in Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 4745–4761,
2024.

3995

[2]

X. Chen et al., “Vehicle as a service (VaaS): Leverage vehicles
to build service networks and capabilities for smart cities,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 2048–2081, 3rd Quart.,
2024.
[3] S. Racherla, P. Sripathi, N. Faruqui, M. Alamgir Kabir, M. Whaiduzzaman, and S. Aziz Shah, “Deep-IDS: A real-time intrusion detector for IoT nodes using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 63584–63597, 2024.
[4] N. R. Zema, E. Natalizio, L. Di Puglia Pugliese, and F. Guerriero,
“3D trajectory optimization for multimission UAVs in smart city
scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–11,
Jan. 2024.
[5] P. Du, Y. Shi, H. Cao, S. Garg, M. Alrashoud, and P. K. Shukla,
“AI-enabled trajectory optimization of logistics UAVs with wind
impacts in smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 3885–3897, Feb. 2024.
[6] Y. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Tan, F. Ma, and J. Liu, “DAE-YOLO: An IoToptimized UAV edge network for real-time small target detection in
smart city surveillance,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 21,
pp. 45453–45464, Aug. 2025.
[7] J. Huang, J. Zeng, R. J. C. Vos, and S. Vos, “A privacy-preserving
cross-domain authentication and key agreement scheme via multiblockchains for smart cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 23,
pp. 49915–49931, Dec. 2025.
[8] R. Abdelfattah, K. Abdelfatah, M. M. Fouda, Z. M. Fadlullah,
M. Abouyoussef, and M. I. Ibrahem, “Bayesian optimization-aided
hybrid deep learning model for lightweight UAV-based smoke
detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 16, pp. 33506–33519,
Aug. 2025.
[9] S. Liu, Z. Wan, Y. Yuan, Q. Dong, B. Yang, and F. Hao, “Efficient
certificateless blind signature scheme with conditional revocation for
mobile crowdsensing within smart city,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 15985–15997, May 2024.
[10] C. Hazman, A. Guezzaz, S. Benkirane, and M. Azrour, “Enhanced IDS
with deep learning for IoT-based smart cities security,” Tsinghua Sci.
Technol., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 929–947, Aug. 2024.
[11] M. M. Aborokbah, “A novel intrusion detection model for enhancing
security in smart city,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 107431–107444, 2024.
[12] N. Alasbali et al., “IoT-UAV-enabled intelligent resource management
in low-carbon smart agriculture using federated reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 6933–6941, May
2025.
[13] M. Fahim-Ul-Islam, A. Chakrabarty, H. S. Hakimi, and S. S. Maidin,
“Fedwgca: A federated learning based uav intrusion detection with
gradient clipping and attention-based neural networks,” IEEE Open
J. Comput. Soc., vol. 6, pp. 1799–1809, 2025.
[14] H. Jalil Hadi, Y. Cao, S. Li, Y. Hu, J. Wang, and S. Wang, “Real-time
collaborative intrusion detection system in UAV networks using deep
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 20, pp. 33371–33391,
Oct. 2024.
[15] N. Sehito et al., “Optimizing user association, power control, and beamforming for 6G multi-IRS multi-UAV NOMA communications in smart
cities,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5702–5710,
Aug. 2024.
[16] X. He et al., “Federated continuous learning based on stacked
broad learning system assisted by digital twin networks: An
incremental learning approach for intrusion detection in UAV
networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 22, pp. 19825–19838,
Nov. 2023.
[17] V. Praveena et al., “Optimal deep reinforcement learning for intrusion detection in UAVs,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 70, no. 2,
pp. 2639–2653, 2022.
[18] S. Yang, Y. Luo, W. Miao, C. Ge, W. Sun, and C. Luo, “RF signal-based
UAV detection and mode classification: A joint feature engineering
generator and multi-channel deep neural network approach,” Entropy,
vol. 23, no. 12, p. 1678, Dec. 2021.
[19] S. S. Alotaibi, A. Sayed, E. Samir Abd Elhameed, O. Alghushairy,
M. Assiri, and S. Saadeldeen Ibrahim, “Enhancing security in IoTassisted UAV networks using adaptive mongoose optimization algorithm
with deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 63768–63776, 2024.
[20] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and N. Ansari, “A hierarchical detection
and response system to enhance security against lethal cyber-attacks in
UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 9,
pp. 1594–1606, Sep. 2018.
[21] S. C. Hassler, U. A. Mughal, and M. Ismail, “Cyber-physical intrusion
detection system for unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 6106–6117, Jun. 2024.