IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

1005

Multiview Spatial–Temporal Interaction AttentionBased Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
for Distributed Industrial Control Networks
Kai Cui , Liangbin Gao , Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Shenghao Liu , Member, IEEE,
Lingzhi Yi , Shibo He , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hongwei Lu

Abstract—Artificial Intelligence-empowered Industrial Control
Networks coordinate massive heterogeneous devices and contain multi-node spatial-temporal information. Multivariate Time
Series Anomaly Detection (MTS-AD) can discover data-fault
behaviors for ensuring the security of distributed networks.
However, existing studies tend to rely heavily on single temporal features or neglect the rich spatial-temporal correlations,
which leads to the serious underutilization of interactive embeddings between the time and space domains. In this article, a
novel Multiview Spatial-Temporal Interaction Attention Network
(MSTIA-Net) scheme is proposed for the unsupervised MTSAD task to better tackle these challenges. MSTIA-Net focuses
on jointly modeling the comprehensive spatial-temporal dependencies by means of incorporating complex interactive contents
and dynamic relations from multiview patterns. To fully leverage
the content-oriented interactions, a spatial-temporal interactions
aggregation module is presented to explicitly learn content-aware
representations with a parallel-attention mechanism and a lowrank bilinear fusion manner. Simultaneously, considering the
potential correlations among different variables as contextual
cues, a spatial-temporal correlations learning module is developed
Received 21 March 2025; revised 17 July 2025 and 3 September 2025;
accepted 11 September 2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor R. Zhang. Date of publication 8 October 2025; date
of current version 5 January 2026. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant 2022YFE0138600; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20153, Grant 62272182, Grant 62472442,
Grant 62202181, and Grant 62202197; in part by Hubei Provincial Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 2023AFB998; in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST) under Grant 2025JYCXJJ060;
and in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant
JCYJ20220530161004009. (Kai Cui and Liangbin Gao are co-first authors.)
(Corresponding author: Xianjun Deng.)
Kai Cui and Liangbin Gao are with Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed
System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: cuikai eric@hust.edu.cn;
lgao24@hust.edu.cn).
Xianjun Deng, Shenghao Liu, and Hongwei Lu are with Hubei Key
Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research
Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China,
and also with Shenzhen Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: dengxj615@hust.edu.cn;
liushenghao@hust.edu.cn; luhw@hust.edu.cn).
Lingzhi Yi is with the School of Information Engineering, Zhongnan
University of Economics and Law, Wuhan 430073, China (e-mail:
lzyi@zuel.edu.cn).
Shibo He is with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: s18he@zju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3614179

to adaptively capture the relevant context for relation-aware
representations. On this basis, both types of aware clues are
further integrated by the dual attention-enhanced contrastive
reconstruction, which can enrich the cross-aware fusion representations and generate the local and global outputs through a
cross-view contrastive learning strategy. Experiments conducted
on six benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
MSTIA-Net over state-of-the-art baselines.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, distributed industrial control networks, multivariate time series, spatial-temporal dependency learning, parallel-attention mechanism.

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

RIVEN by the continuous progress [1], [2], [3] in
intelligent manufacturing systems, the deep integration
of massive terminal devices and the widespread deployment
of diverse industrial applications have facilitated an explosive
growth of multi-source data. Based on a type of distributed
architecture, the Industrial Control Networks [4] can coordinate the sensing data and instructions among multiple nodes.
To achieve device interconnection and data sharing, the Industrial Control Systems (ICS) [5] have gradually evolved into a
core paradigm of distributed networks, which is capable of
monitoring industrial data and managing production equipment in the infrastructure scenarios, such as the smart nuclear
power plants. Typically, the ICS architecture incorporates
enormous amounts of sensory devices from physical, control,
supervisory, and corporate layers, as shown in the upper
part of Fig. 1. However, some anomalous behaviors in the
industrial time-series data may pose the potentially serious
threats to the reliability services and new quality security
of intelligent systems. Towards the heterogeneous multi-node
data generated from ICS operations, Multivariate Time Series
Anomaly Detection (MTS-AD) [6], [7], [8] as an unsupervised
learning task aims to accurately identify abnormal samples
and node malfunctions, which is crucial for maintaining the
application security of distributed networks.
Currently, many pioneering studies have made remarkable
progress in the MTS-AD task based on deep learning methods, and explored the spatial-temporal information from the
following perspectives. 1) Most studies mainly attempted to
model the single-domain temporal or spatial dependencies.
For example, Su et al. [9] proposed a stochastic Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) to learn the robust representations of

2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1006

Fig. 1. Illustration of main challenges of the MTS-AD task towards distributed
industrial control networks.

temporal dependence. Besides, Deng and Hooi [10] adopted a
Graph Neural Network (GNN) to model the spatial relations
among multiple variables. These methods heavily rely on the
single-domain feature and ignore the interactions of spatialtemporal clues to model the complete feature dependencies.
2) A lot of efforts have also been made to initially explore
mining rich spatial-temporal interactions. For instance, Qin
et al. [11] presented a multiview contrastive learning scheme
to model intra-signal and inter-signal relations, but seriously
lacks the exploration of cross-view correlation patterns. Additionally, Ding et al. [12] developed a graph structure learning
mechanism to capture the spatial-temporal correlations, and
Kang and Kang [13] exploited a variable temporal Transformer
to model the spatial-temporal dependencies. However, they
were unable to leverage content-aware and relation-aware
dependencies in a unified model.
Despite the promising previous works [14], [15], [16], there
are still certain limitations that need to be addressed. Existing
studies often ignore the deep mining of multi-node relations, and fail to effectively capture the rich spatial-temporal
dependencies between different sensing nodes. Considering
that massive time-series data are generally obtained from
multiple sensing nodes in the ICS platforms, the heterogeneous
data distribution tends to show a certain degree of spatial
or temporal inconsistency. Due to complex changes in the
external distributed environment, it is a tough challenge to
fully learn the spatial-temporal correlations of multi-node data.
On this basis, we aim to explore an adaptive multi-dependency
inference structure to enhance the interactive perception of
spatial-temporal clues from each node. The lower part of Fig. 1
illustrates our major motivation, which is to design a dualchannel correlations learning strategy for capturing dynamic
dependencies of time-domain and space-domain variables.
In this work, we concentrate on jointly mining the
spatial-temporal dependencies of contents and relations from
multiview feature patterns, which especially considers the
following issues. 1) In general, multivariate local and global
information in different positions of sequences can reflect
diverse abnormal behavior patterns, and it is necessary to
explore uniformly modeling more comprehensive representa-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

tions from multiple perspectives. 2) MTS data concurrently
depend on the inherent characteristics of both the time-domain
and space-domain, so how to fully integrate the spatialtemporal interactive features is critical to better learn the
content-based dependency. 3) Since the potential relationships among different variables are relatively dynamic, it can
be considered as the contextual clues of the relation-based
dependency to adaptively capture spatial-temporal correlations. Accordingly, the core solution for ICS platform is to
simultaneously ensure that the two perceptual embeddings are
aggregated in a parallel learning strategy.
To address these aforementioned challenges, in this article,
we present a MTS-AD approach based on a Multiview SpatialTemporal Interaction Attention Network (MSTIA-Net). As
depicted in Fig. 1, our objective is to model the overall spatialtemporal dependencies of the interactive contents and dynamic
relations from the multiview feature patterns in a collaborative
manner. In particular, multiview feature extraction module is
first utilized to characterize temporal patterns for the local and
global features. To jointly explore the rich spatial-temporal
information, we then introduce a spatial-temporal interactions
aggregation module using a parallel self-attention Transformer
and a low-rank fusion method, and simultaneously exploit
a spatial-temporal correlations learning module by stacking
multilayer Graph Attention Network (GAT). Ultimately, the
obtained content-aware and relation-aware representations are
both further fused through the local-global cross-attention
mechanism, and dual attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction is developed to generate the dual-stream outputs via a
cross-view contrastive learning strategy as an auxiliary means.
In summary, the main contributions can be listed as follows:
• A novel MSTIA-Net scheme is proposed to detect
anomalies of time-series data in the distributed industrial
networks. MSTIA-Net explicitly models the spatialtemporal dependencies of multiview patterns and learns
the interactions between local-global contents and relations.
• To uniformly integrate content-aware representations,
a spatial-temporal interactions aggregation module is
constructed with the parallel-attention mechanism and
low-rank fusion manner. Meanwhile, a spatial-temporal
correlations learning module is designed to adaptively
capture the dynamic relations among time and variable
sequences.
• The dual attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction is
further built to refine cross-aware representation and generate dual-stream outputs through constractive learning.
• Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate MSTIANet model on six real-world datasets, and results
demonstrate that MSTIA-Net achieves significant performance compared to several state-of-the-art methods.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Recently, benefiting from the powerful ability of deep
learning in feature representation and model generalization,
MTS-AD task based on the unsupervised deep learning frameworks have received widespread research attention. Existing
works on deep learning-based MTS-AD models can be broadly

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

categorized into two paradigms: prediction-based methods
[10], [17], [18] and reconstruction-based methods [9], [19],
[20]. The basic idea is how to use the learned normal temporal
features to predict future data or reconstruct the original timeseries, and the deviation of predicted or reconstructed data
from the actual data represents the MTS anomaly degree.
Prediction-based methods predicts future time series data
from past data and identifies anomalies based on the prediction errors. For instance, Hundman et al. [17] presented an
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) based network to forecast
future data of input time series in a non-parametric dynamic
thresholding manner. Besides, Graph Deviation Network [10]
(GDN) designed an attention-based GNN model to learn the
relationships and predict the future behaviors of each variable
for detecting anomalies in MTS data by temporal deviation.
Reconstruction-based methods reconstructs the original
data in a latent space and detects anomalies based on reconstruction errors. For example, Park et al. [21] proposed an
LSTM-based Variational Autoencoder (LSTM-VAE) to project
the temporal dependencies and reconstruct data distributions.
Li et al. [22] combined the Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) and LSTM-RNN models to learn latent interactions.
CAE-AD [23] introduced the multi-grained contrastive AE
scheme to learn dynamic behaviors of time and frequency
domains. Different from the AE-based methods, it can be further divided into the graph-based and attention-based models.
For instance, Shi et al. [24] adopted a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) method to capture the temporal correlations
between different variables by an LSTM-based reconstruction.
In addiction, He et al. [25] presented a variate associated
domain adaptation method based on the GDN model to alleviate the cross-domain distribution shift. As for attention-based
models, Bai et al. [26] designed a dual attention Transformer
scheme to capture the temporal relevancies from global and
local patterns. Ma et al. [27] designed a multi-patch Transformer structure, which can model the contextual patterns of
both inter-patch and intra-patch view via contrastive learning.
Besides, Lin et al. [28] developed a hierarchical context
representation learning method to extract the spatial-temporal
relations and generate robust multi-scale representations. Qiu
et al. [29] presented a unified detection benchmark, which
integrates deep learning models on multiple domains.
However, they ignore the multiview interactions of comprehensive spatial-temporal dependencies. In contrast, we are
committed to fully learn spatial-temporal representations from
interactive contents and dynamic relations in a unified manner.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Problem Formulation and Notations
The MTS data generated from Industrial Control Networks
can be defined as T = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xN }, which is a sequence
of consecutive observations with length N collected at equalspaced time samples. Generally, the ICS platforms involve
multiple sensors, and each time series can contain a variety
of signal features from different devices. Given a set of time
T
series metadata TT = {xt }t=1 ∈ RM ×T , where T is the
sequence length of TT and M is the total number of variables.

1007

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF THE M AIN N OTATIONS


xt = x1t , x2t , · · · , xM
∈ RM is an M -dimensional vector,
t
which indicates the observation with M variable values at time
point t. Considering the dependence of a data point t at a time
sample, we use the sliding windows of set value w to obtain a
fixed-length input, denoted as Xt = {xt−w+1 , · · · , xt−1 , xt }.
For each t < w, we use replication padding manner at the end
of window Xt to ensure that the length of each window is
w. The original long-range sequence TT is transformed into a
sub-sequence set as X = {X1 , X2 , · · · , XNs }, and each slice
is taken as training inputs, where Ns is the number of subsets.
Definition 1 (MTS Anomaly Detection): Given a training
set Xtrain ∈ RM ×T and a testing set Xtest ∈ RM ×T̂ , the goal
of anomaly
 detection is to predict an anomaly outputs vector
ytest = y1 , y2 , · · · , yT̂ ∈ RT̂ , where yt denotes the anomaly
label of each data point t. Here, for an unseen observation xt ,
we can use a binary label yt ∈ {0, 1} to determine whether the
t-th time stamp is anomalous or not, where yt = 1 indicates
the data point is an anomaly, and yt = 0 otherwise. Due to the
scarcity of anomaly labels in ICS data, the MTS-AD is usually
regarded an unsupervised task, and we adopt the training set
without ground-truth labels for unsupervised learning.
Definition 2 (MTS Anomaly Diagnosis): Given the above
training and testing sets, anomaly diagnosis is a qualitative
analysis of each dimension based on the detected results.
To analyze the severity of anomaly in each anomalous time
period,
we need to produce the diagnostic outputs Ytest =

M
y1 , y2 , · · · , yT̂ ∈ RM ×T̂ , where yt ∈ {0, 1} represents
which specific modes of the t-th time stamp are anomalous.
In this work, we aim to tackle unsupervised MTS anomaly
detection with an automatic encoder-decoder model P, which
is capable of fully leveraging the complex spatial-temporal
clues to generate the reconstructed time series as follows:
X̂t = P(Xt |Θ) = φd {φe (Xt ; Θe ) ; Θd } ,

(1)

where X̂t denotes the reconstructed outputs, and Θ refers to
the set of to-be-learned model parameters. Meanwhile, our
unsupervised basic model P combines an encoding network
φe and a decoding network φd parameterized by Θe and Θd .
Table I summarizes the descriptions of the main notations.
B. Time Series Data Preprocessing
In real-world industrial scenarios, the collected data is often
interfered by some noise due to extreme events. Considering

1008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

diverse noise data, we choose a common data preprocessing
process with reference to previous works [7], [30] for fair.
1) Data Normalization: To enable our model against noise
to be robust, we initially normalize the time-series data, both in
the training and testing phases. Formally, the specific process
of data normalization can be formulated as follows:
x̃t ←

xt − min(T )
,
max(T ) − min(T ) + 

(2)

where min(T ) and max(T ) are the minimum and maximum
vectors in the original time series T , respectively. In addition,
 denotes the small constant vector introduced to prevent the
zero-division operation. Notably, we normalize the entire input
data to get it within the range of [0, 1).
2) Handling Noisy Data: Inspired by randomly adding the
Gaussian noise for data augmentation [31], we also use the
same noise, which is conformed to multi-type time-series data.
To simulate the interference effect of actual noisy data on
model generality, we then add the Gaussian white noise with
a Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of 50 dB, which can ensure
the presence of noise and overall signal high quality within
the typical SNR range of [45, 55] dB. Accordingly, to improve
the robustness and generalization of our model, we process the
standardized data with the appropriate noise interference and
convert it into the sliding time-series windows as follows:
PN
(
(x̃t )2
SNR (dB) = 10 log10 Pi=1
N
2 ,
i=1 (t )
(3)
t
xt = x̃t + 100 ,
where x̃t and t denote the signal and noise vectors, respectively. N is the total number of samples in the MTS data.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
To jointly learn the spatial-temporal dependencies of contents and correlations, we aim to develop the spatial-temporal
interactive encoding and local-global contrastive decoding
structure. The architecture of MSTIA-Net scheme is illustrated
in Fig. 2, which involves the following reasoning modules:
• Multiview Feature Extraction: It obtains the local and
global temporal features of time-series data using two
types of independent temporal convolutional structures.
• Spatial-Temporal Interactions Aggregation: It initially
learns the content-oriented relevant interactions between
spatial and temporal dependency embeddings based on a
parallel self-attention Transformer structure, and further
aggregates the spatial-temporal content-aware representations through a low-rank interaction fusion manner.
• Spatial-Temporal Correlations Learning: It leverages
multiple spatial-temporal GAT blocks to adaptively capture dynamic correlations among time and variable series
for the spatial-temporal relation-aware representations.
• Dual Attention-Enhanced Contrastive Reconstruction:
It refines the local-branch and global-branch results via
cross-attention mechanism, and then adds the contrastive
learning strategy as an auxiliary means to generate the
cross-aware fusion embeddings for reconstructed outputs.

B. Multiview Feature Extraction
To characterize multi-scale temporal patterns of time-series
data from diverse perspectives, we exploit the dual structures
of Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) [32] to extract the
local and global temporal features. This module includes two
types of TCNs, i.e., causal convolutions as local extractor and
dilated convolutions as global extractor. Notably, we construct
a skip-layer connection to return the outputs of local branch.
The two main principles of TCN model are to maintain the
length of the outputs generated by network equal to the inputs,
and to prevent information leakage from the past to the future.
To ensure the above two points, the TCN employs the 1D fully
convolutional network with regularization operations and pads
the input tensor with zeros. Specifically, for each input of MST
sub-sequence Xt ∈ RM ×w , the basic function of single-layer
temporal convolution Fkr (t) can be defined as follows:
(
Xrt = Weight-Norm(Conv1Drk,step (Wcr , Xr−1
) + brc ),
t
Fkr (t) = Dropout(LeakyReLU(Xrt )), r ∈ {1, · · · , R},
(4)
where Xrt is the hidden temporal feature of the r-th layer, and
Conv1Drk,step denotes 1-dimensional convolution operation
with the kernel size of k and the convolution step of step = 1.
Wcr and brc are the learnable weight matrix and bias term.
Besides, LeakyReLU (·) denotes the LeakyReLU activation
function, and R is the number of hidden TCN layers.
1) Local Feature Encoder: Benefiting from the potential of
short-term time-series forecast, we adopt causal convolutions
with each hidden layers of the same length and the zero
padding of length (k − 1) to learn the local temporal trends.
Formally, the local temporal feature ZLoc
extracted via the
t
causal convolutional network can be expressed as follows:
FkrC (t) = (xt ∗ f )(t) =

kX
C −1

f (i) · x(t − i),

(5)

i=0

where * stands for the convolution operation, f (i) represents
the i-th filter, and kC is the size of causal convolution kernel.
2) Global Feature Encoder: For high-level temporal feature
of long-range sequence as global detection, we apply dilated
convolutions to expand the receptive field of each layer and
maintain the encoding causality without increasing model
complexity. To enhance global feature integration, we design a
feedback mechanism via skip-layer connections to re-transmit
the local reconstructed outputs predefined as x̂Loc
t , which can
be regarded as implicit clues of inputs xt . Formally, we can
obtain the global temporal feature ZGlob
as follows:
t
FkrD (t) = ((xt ⊕ x̂loc
t ) ∗d f )(t) =

kX
D −1

f (i) · x(t−d · i),

i=0

(6)
where d is the dilation factor, ⊕ denotes the element-wise addition operation, and kD is the filter size of dilated convolutions.
In particular, d determines the previous index, and is equivalent
to the fixed step length for skipping between two adjacent
filter taps. It corresponds to the j-th power of 2, denoted as
d = 1, 2, 4, · · · , 2j . Generally, we set the size of receptive field

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

1009

Fig. 2. Overview of MSTIA-Net contains four key modules: (a) Multiview feature extraction, (b) Spatial-temporal interactions aggregation, (c) Spatial-temporal
correlations learning, and (d) Dual Attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction.

Fig. 3. Illustration of spatial-temporal parallel-attention mechanism, containing (a) Temporal Self-attention transformer and (b) Spatial self-attention
transformer architectures.

p to the input length n and the kernel size to k, and solve the
number of layers r required for its complete coverage. Under
the above conditions, solution process is defined as follows:
p = 1 + r · (k − 1),

r = d(n − 1)/(k − 1)e .

(7)

where d·e refers to the rounding up operation. The width of
receptive field increases by d·(k−1) with each additional layer,
and is based on the b-exponential expansion, where d = br−1 .
For the brevity of this paper, we uniformly use Zft ∈ Rw×M
to represent the multiview temporal features of Xt , where f ∈
{Loc, Glob} denotes the local and global temporal features.
C. Spatial-Temporal Interactions Aggregation
Considering the fact that the MTS data depends on various
relevant characteristics in the time-domain and space-domain,
we present a spatial-temporal interactions aggregation module
to simultaneously learn the time-oriented and space-oriented
dependencies with a parallel-attention mechanism, and further
combine these embeddings in a low-rank fusion manner.
Similar to Transformer [33] model, the structure of spatialtemporal parallel-attention mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Notably, given the temporal feature of inputs Zft ∈ Rw×M , the
corresponding spatial feature in the spatial encoder can be first
converted into its transposed matrix, denoted as Zfs ∈ RM ×w .
To maintain the temporal position order of entire time-series
data and enrich long-term coherent dependencies, we introduce
the positional encoding operation, which is incorporated into
the original sequence as an additional input. Concretely, the
initial temporal embedding is an early combination of input
Zft and positional embedding PE(t) as follows:



pos

PE
=
sin
,

(pos,2i)
2i/dh
10000



pos
(8)
,
PE
=
cos
(pos,2i+1)
2i/d
h
10000



Z̃ft = Zft + PEpos (L{T,S} , dh ),
where Z̃ft is the encoded input matrix, PEpos (·, dh ) ∈ Rw×M
denotes the embedding matrix of position index in time-series,
and L{T,S} corresponds to the input length of the temporal or
spatial features. Besides, i and dh are the dimensions of input
sub-sequences and the hidden layers in the PE encoding.
1) Spatial-Temporal Self-Attention Transformer: The parallel attention mechanism contains two types of forms, and
we take the temporal attention as an example. The Temporal
Self-Attention Transformer is constructed to model the timedomain interactions using the Multi-Head Attention (MHA)
structure, and each self-attention head is obtained as follows:



T
T KT
Self-Attn (Z̃f ) = softmax Q√
VT , h ∈ {1, · · · , H},
h
t
dk

f
Q
f
K
QT = Z̃t WT , KT = Z̃t WT , VT = Z̃ft WTV ,
(9)
where Self-Attnh (Z̃ft ) ∈ Rw×dmodel is the time-oriented dependency embedding of the h-th head, and H is the number of
attention heads. softmax(·) is the Softmax activation function.
WTQ ∈ RM ×dq , WTK ∈ RM ×dk , and WTV ∈ RM ×dv are the
learnable projection matrices of the Queries, Keys, and Values,

1010

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

respectively. In our case, dq , dk and dv denote the dimensions
of corresponding projection, where dq = dk = dv = dmodel .
By integrating multiple attention heads, the spatial-temporal
parallel-attention mechanism can be formulated as follows:
SpatTemp-Attn(Z̃ft ) = Multi-Head-Attn(Z̃ft )
O
= Concat(SA1 , · · · , SAh , · · · , SAH )WSA
,

(10)

O
where WSA
∈ RH∗dmodel ×M is the projection matrix, SAh
denotes the h-th head, and Concat(, ) is concatenation operation. The self-attention outputs are fed into the residual
connection and position-wise Feed-Forward Network (FFN)
as follows:
(
Hft = Layer-Norm(Spat&Temp − Attn(Z̃ft ) + Z̃ft ),
Eft = Layer-Norm(Feed-Forward(Hft ) + Hft ),
(11)

where Eft ∈ Rw×M is the time-oriented dependency embedding, and Hft is the hidden temporal embedding. Furthermore,
Feed-Forward(·) denotes the FFN with two Fully-Connected
(FC) layers, expressed as FFN(x) = ReLU(xW1 + b1 )W2 +
b2 , where ReLU(·) denotes the ReLU activation function.
Layer-Norm(·) is layer normalization operation for outputs.
In the above progress of Temporal Transformer, it targets to
learn the temporal dependencies between multiple variables.
As for the Spatial Transformer, the input feature Zfs ∈ RM ×w
is transformed from a transposed form of Zft ∈ Rw×M , and
we can also derive the space-oriented dependency embedding
Efs ∈ RM ×w in this similar manner as shown in Fig. 3.
2) Intermediary Feature-Level Fusion: Due to the heterogeneous contents of spatial-temporal information, we devote
to exploring an intermediary feature-level aggregation strategy
via uniformly integrating multiple types of the spatial-temporal
cues in a common space. Low-Rank Bilinear Pooling (LRBP)
[34] can explicitly model the higher-order interactions fusion
between features and reduce computational complexity by
means of low-rank constraints. Specifically, time-dependent
embedding Eft and space-dependent embedding Efs are unified
to obtain the dual-fused results, the content-aware process is
implemented through the LRBP fusion manner as follows:
h
i
Rft = PT tanh (UT Eft ) (VT Efs ) + B,
(12)
where Rft ∈ Rw×M is the spatial-temporal content-aware
representation. U ∈ Rw×du and V ∈ RM ×dv are two lowrank matrices used to align the two types of the time-oriented
and space-oriented embeddings. P ∈ Rdu ×w and B ∈ Rw×M
are the learnable parameters of FC network with a hyperbolic
activation function tanh(·). du and dv are the dimensions of
factorized matrices, where du = dv is preset in our condition,
and denotes the element-wise multiplication operation.
D. Spatial-Temporal Correlations Learning
Since there are dynamic associations between various time
series, we coherently explore spatial-temporal correlations as
context cues. Inspired by a GAT [35] structure based on the
MHA mechanism, we construct a spatial-temporal correlations
learning module with multiple stacked GAT blocks to capture
deeper relevant dependencies in both space and time domains.

1) Spatial Graph Attention Layer: In terms of the space
dimension, the given inputs with M variables at time point t
can be formulated as a spatial graph Gxt (Vs , Es ), where the
variable set Vs ∈ RM ×w = {vm |m ∈ [1, M ]} is the node set
and the set of spatial relation edges Es ∈ RM ×M reflects the
interactive relation among different variables. In particular, we
regard the reformulated matrix of spatial feature Zfs ∈ RM ×w
as the initial node feature matrix, and each node is denoted
as vi ∈ Rw in our case. Generally, for spatial GAT layer, the
attention coefficient of each variable node can be produced via
propagating interactive correlations from neighbors as follows:



f
f
f
T

)
,
,
v
=
LeakyReLU
W
·
Concat(v
e

S
j
i
 ij
f
(13)
exp(eij )
f

,

αij = P
f
k∈Ni exp(eik )
f
where αij
is the correlative degree of the node i to j, WS ∈
2w×1
R
is the learnable transformation matrix, and Ni denotes
the set of neighbor nodes for node i in a spatial graph.
Subsequently, to better aggregate the context cues of neighbor nodes through multi-level dynamic relations, we can
adaptively update the outputs of each graph node by continuously stacking multiple spatial GAT layers as follows:



K
X
X
1
k,l,f
Sigmoid 
gil,f =
αij
WSk,l,f vjl−1,f  ,
K
k=1

j∈Ni

(14)
where gil,f ∈ Rw is the hidden contextual embedding of the
l-th GAT layer, l ∈ {1, · · · , L}, and L is the total number of
stacked GAT blocks. WSk,l,f ∈ Rw×w is the learnable weight
matrix, Sigmoid(·) denotes the Sigmoid activation function,
and K is the number of GAT attention heads. Consequently,
we can obtain the space-domain contextual embedding matrix
l,f T
Gl,f
= [g1l,f , · · · , gil,f , · · · , gM
] ∈ RM ×w , which is
s
regarded as the inputs of the next sequential temporal graph
layer in the same spatial-temporal GAT block.
2) Temporal Graph Attention Layer: To adaptively capture
temporal correlations across different time periods, we define a
temporal graph as Gxs (Vt , Et ) with the set of time nodes Vt ∈
Rw×M and the set of temporal relation edges Et ∈ Rw×w ,
where each node {zt−w0 |w0 ∈ [0, w − 1]} corresponds to the
input time sub-sequence Xt and Et represents the connections
between different time nodes at the current moment t and only
the other previous moments. Specifically, similar to the above
update method of spatial graph, the function of temporal GAT
network with multiple stacked GAT layers FTl emp GAT (t) can
be formally performed as follows:
f
l,f
l
l,f T
Gl,f
t = FT emp GAT [αT WT (Gs ) ],

(15)

where Gl,f
∈ Rw×M is the time-domain contextual embedt
ding matrix of the l-th GAT layer. αTf and WTl,f ∈ RM ×M
are the correlative degree and the learnable weight matrix
of temporal GAT layer. To simplify the notation of spatialtemporal relation-aware representation with multi-layer GAT
adaptive updating, we can use Gft ∈ Rw×M to represent the
(L),f
outputs Gt
of the final GAT block.

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

1011

for cross-view contrastive learning Lccl can be defined as
follows:

)
) · vec(FGlob
vec(FLoc

j
i
Loc
Glob


sim(Fi , Fj ) = kvec(FLoc )kkvec(FGlob )k ,
j 
i
(20)
Loc
Glob
exp
sim(F
,
F
)/τ

c
i
j


,
Lccl = − log PNb
Loc , FGlob )/τ
c
j
j=1 exp sim(Fi
where sim(·, ·) is the cosine similarity function, vec(·) denotes
the flattening operation, and τc is the temperature parameter.
F. Training and Inference
Fig. 4. Illustration of local-global cross-attention mechanism.

E. Dual Attention-Enhanced Contrastive Reconstruction
The content-aware and relation-aware information can sufficiently provide high-level spatial-temporal dependency clues,
a dual attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction module
is developed to further ensure the comprehensive fusion representation and dual-stream reconstruction outputs from local
and global perspectives, which is refined via the cross-attention
mechanism and cross-view contrastive learning strategy.
1) Local-Global Attention-Based Reconstruction: To fully
aggregate two types of perceptual representations, we devise a
local-global cross-attention mechanism, which is illustrated in
Fig. 4. The cross-attention block is used to learn cross-aware
interactions, and each co-attention head is obtained as follows:



T
R KG
Cross-Attn (Rf ; Gf ) = softmax Q√
VG ,
h
t
t
dk

Q
K
V
QR = Rft WR
, KG = Gft WG
, VG = Gft WG
,
(16)
where Cross-Attnh (Rft ; Gft ) ∈ Rw×dmodel is the cross-aware
Q
K
∈ RM ×dk ,
embedding of the h-th head. WR
∈ RM ×dq , WG
M ×dv
V
are the learnable projection matrices.
and WG ∈ R

The overall goal is to train our MSTIA-Net model with the
reconstruction error and cross-view contrastive terms, and then
infer anomaly score based on the predicted and actual values.
1) Objective Function: Given the input time series Xt , the
model produces dual reconstructed results X̂Loc
and X̂Loc
t
t . We
introduce the Mean Square Error (MSE) between the predicted
and ground-truth values of two streams in a certain proportion,
and reconstruction loss function Lrec is formulated as follows:
Lrec
=

1 X
2
Glob 2
(λkXt − X̂Loc
kF ),
t kF + (1 − λ)kXt − X̂t
|X |
Xt ∈X

(21)
where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the hyper-parameter to control the weights
of local and global flows, and k · kF indicates Frobenius norm.
Accordingly, to jointly optimize the MSTIA-Net, we can
present the total objective function Ltotal by combining the
Eq. (20), Eq. (21), and regularization terms as follows:
Ltotal = Lrec + µLccl + γkΘk22 ,

(22)

where µ and γ are the trade-off parameters to balance the
contributions of different losses, and k · k2 denotes L2 -norm.
2) Meta Learning: To alleviate the model underfitting on
Consequently, we combine multiple co-attention heads, and
the
limited data of real-world scenarios, we utilize the Modellocal-global attention mechanism is described as follows:
Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) [36] method to perform
LocGlob-Attn(Rft ; Gft ) = Multi-Head-Attn(Rft ; Gft )
data enhancement. In each training phase, for the model P(Θ)
with parameters Θ in each random batch task Ti , the total
= Concat(CA1 , · · · , CAh , · · · , CAH )WO
,
(17)
CA
(
gradient update of multiple tasks can be expressed as follows:
f
f
f
f
Ct = Layer-Norm(Loc&Glob − Attn(Rt ; Gt ) + Rt ),

0

Θi = Θ − α∇Θ LTX
Fft = Layer-Norm(Feed-Forward(Cft ) + Cft ),
i (P(Θ))),
(23)
Θ
=
Θ
−
β∇
LTi (P(Θ0i )),
(18)
Θ


Ti ∼P(T )
where Fft ∈ Rw×M is the cross-aware fusion representation.
Ultimately, for multiview fusion representations, we employ where α is the learning rate, and β is the meta-step size. The
the FFN with two linear layers through a residual connection detailed model training process is summarized in Algorithm 1.
3) Anomaly Scoring: In the anomaly inference phase, each
to generate the reconstructed outputs X̂ft ∈ RM ×w as follows:
sample xt ∈ Xtest is input into a well-trained model. Formally,
X̂ft = Sigmoid(Feed-Forward(Fft ) + Fft ),
(19) anomaly score of the t-th time stamp can be defined as follows:

where Sigmoid activation is utilized to generate outputs within
the range of [0, 1] for matching the normalized input window.
2) Cross-View Contrastive Learning: As an auxiliary
supervised means, our contrastive learning aims to achieve
cross-view alignment between local-global fusion representations, thereby maximizing the consistency of representations
across multiple perspectives.
Specifically, for the batch size of

Nb
Nb local-global pairs (FLoc
, FGlob
) i=1
, the loss function
i
i

M

score(t) = kxt − x̂Glob
k2 =
t

1 Xp m
2
(xt − x̂m
t ) ,
M m=1

(24)

where score(t) is the reconstruction error-based anomaly score
at time point t. Since the local representation is regarded as an
additional clue for the global representation, we only utilize
the global outputs for anomaly scoring. The complete inference process of MSTIA-Net model is shown in Algorithm 2.

1012

Algorithm 1 The Training Procedure of MSTIA-Net

Algorithm 2 The Testing Procedure of MSTIA-Net

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE II
S TATISTICS OF S IX R EAL -W ORLD B ENCHMARK DATASETS

structure to encode the local and global temporal features. For
an input MTS sequence of shape (T, M ), the time complexity
of local-global TCNs is O(T · R · Kmax · M ), where T is the
length of time series, M is the number of variables, R denotes
the number of TCN layers, and Kmax = max{kC , kD } is
the maximum value of convolution kernels. In the interactions
aggregation phase, single-view temporal feature is refined by
spatial-temporal parallel-attention mechanism, resulting in the
complexity of O(H ·(T 2 ·M +T ·M 2 )) per Transformer model,
and the low-rank bilinear pooling strategy adds the complexity
of O(D · (T + M ) + T · D2 ), where H is the number of
attention heads, and D is the dimension of embedding. In the
correlations learning phase, the relation-aware representation
is captured by spatial-temporal GAT with the complexity of
O(L · K · (|Vs | · T 2 + |Es | · T + |Vt | · M 2 + |Et | · M )), where L
denotes the number of stacked GAT blocks, K is the number of
GAT attention heads, |Vs | and |Vt | are the numbers of variables
and time nodes, |Es | and |Et | are the numbers of spatial and
temporal relation edges. In the contrastive reconstruction stage,
the cross-aware representation is fused by dual cross-attention
mechanism with the complexity of O(H · (T 2 · M + T · M 2 )).
Therefore, the overall computational complexity of MSTIANet model is O(T · R · Kmax · M + H · (T 2 · M + T · M 2 ) + D ·
(T +M )+T ·D2 +(L·K·(|Vs |·T 2 +|Es |·T +|Vt |·M 2 +|Et |·M )),
which simplifies to O((L·K ·|Vs |+H ·M )·T 2 +(L·K ·|Vt |+
H ·T )·M 2 +T ·D2 ). This highlights quadratic dependencies on
T , M , and D due to attention mechanism and GAT structure.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets

The inference is to calculate the anomaly score for the inputs
processed by the current sliding window, and identify the time
point as abnormal label if its score exceeds a certain threshold.
We apply the Peak Over Threshold (POT) [37] approach to
automatically select anomaly threshold on the validation set.
G. Computational Complexity Analysis
To clearly assess our algorithm performance, we analyze the
time complexity of MSTIA-Net based on the data flow. In multiview feature extraction stage, we adopt a dual-branch TCN

To evaluate our proposed MSTIA-Net, we adopt six widelyused datasets for anomaly detection. Table II summarizes the
statistics of benchmark datasets. The training set contains only
normal data, and abnormal data are labeled in the testing set.
1) MIT-BIH Supraventricular Arrhythmia Database (MBA)
[38]: It is a popular large-scale dataset for ventricular arrhythmia research, derived from electrical signal recordings in 25
selectively chosen partitions of four patients.
2) Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Dataset [17]: It is a
collection of sensor and actuator data with 55 features using
the Mars rover itself extracted from the abnormal events of
monitoring systems. Notably, we use only the three non-trivial
sequences (A4, C2 and T1) identified in the work [8].
3) Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) Dataset [17]:
It is an expert-labeled database of satellite mission, which
comprises the observation data with 25 dimensions.

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

4) Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) Dataset [39]: It is
obtained from 51 senors in the water treatment plant operating
for 11 consecutive days, including 7 days of normal operations
and 4 days of abnormal conditions under attack scenarios.
5) Water Distribution (WADI) dataset [40]: It is a 123dimensional sensor dataset collected from water distribution
networks. Notably, we assign zero values to the missing values.
6) Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [9]: It is a 5-week
dataset provided by an Internet company, containing resource
utilizations from a compute cluster. We utilize only the four
non-trivial sequences (machine-1-1, 2-1, 3-2 and 3-7).
In our experiments, we divided the training time-series data
into the training set (80%) and validation set (20%). For a fair
comparison, we used the same data preprocessing operations
as described in preliminaries for all baseline methods.
B. Evaluation Metrics
1) Anomaly Detection: To measure the detection performance, we adopted the Precision (Prec), Recall (Rec),
F1-Score (F1) and AUC value (the Area Under the ROC
Curve) as our main evaluation metrics. For clarity, the values
of Prec, Rec, and F1 are calculated as follows:
TP
2 × Prec × Rec
TP
, Rec =
, F1 =
,
Prec =
TP+FP
TP+FN
Prec+Rec
(25)
where TP, FP, and FN are the number of true positive, false
positive, and false negative results, respectively. Besides, we
also employed a common point-adjust [41] method to calculate
evaluation metrics. To further verify model performance under
limited scale dataset, we also measure the AUC and F1 scores
with the same data splitting ratio by training all models with
only 20% of the training data, termed as ACU∗ and F1∗ .
2) Anomaly Diagnosis: To estimate the diagnosis performance, we adopted two main evaluation metrics: HitRate@P%
and NDCG@P% [9]. The former is to determine how many
ground-truth dimensions are hit in the top-ranked candidates
via ranking the anomaly scores predicted by model, and the
latter is to measure the Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (NDCG) considered with the same number of top
predicted candidates. Notably, P% denotes the percentage of
ground-truth dimensions for each timestamp.
C. Implementation Details
For the local feature encoder, we applied a causal convolutional network, where the number of hidden TCN layers is
set as R = 3 and the kernel size is kC = 3. As for the global
feature encoder, we employed a dilated convolutional network
with three hidden layers, dilation factor d ∈ {1, 2, 4} and
convolution kernel kD = 5. We used the grid-search strategy
to determine the optimal values for all hyper-parameters. In the
spatial-temporal self-attention and local-global cross-attention
mechanism, we both adopted the MHA mechanism, where
the number of attention heads is set as H = 3, and the
dimension of projection space is set as dmodel = 64. In
the correlations learning stage, we constructed the multi-level
stacked spatial-temporal GAT blocks, where the numbers of
layers and attention heads are set as L = 4 and K = 4. For all

1013

datasets, we set the size of sliding window as w = 10, and the
dropout operation with a fixed value of 0.2. All experiments
are implemented by PyTorch-1.11.0 framework and performed
on the environment with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.
For the optimization of our proposed MSTIA-Net model,
we employed the AdamW method as training optimizer with
an initial learning rate of 1e−2 for SMAP and SWaT, 1e−3 for
MBA and MSL, 1e−4 for WADI and SMD, the meta learning
rate of α = 2e−2 , and the weight decay of γ = 1e−5 . The stepscheduler strategy is used to adjust the optimizer with step size
of 5 and learning decay rate of 0.9. As for the loss function,
the trade-off parameters of reconstruction loss in Eq. (21) and
total objective function in Eq. (22) are experimentally set as
λ = 0.7 and µ = 1e−3 , and the fixed parameter of cross-view
contrastive learning in Eq. (20) is empirically set as τc = 0.5.
In training process, we use an early-stopping criteria to prevent overfitting and the batch size is 256. For POT parameters,
the coefficient is set as 1e−4 for all datasets, and low quantile
is set as 7e−2 for SMAP, 1e−2 for MSL, and 1e−3 for others.
D. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
To validate the effectiveness of our proposed MSTIA-Net
scheme on the both anomaly detection and diagnosis tasks, we
mainly compared our model with the following state-of-theart baselines, including the prediction-based, reconstructionbased, graph-based, and attention-based methods.
• LSTM-NDT [17]: An LSTM-based network that interprets predictions with a dynamic error threshold strategy.
• DAGMM [42]: An autoencoding method that combines
the Deep AE and Gaussian Mixture Model to estimate the
density of representations in the low-dimensional space.
• OmniAnomaly [9]: A RNN-based model that uses the
VAE and GRU to generate reconstruction probabilities.
• MSCRED [19]: A ConvLSTM-based network that captures the temporal patterns and inter-sensor correlations
from multi-scale signature matrices in different statuses.
• MAD-GAN [22]: An LSTM-based method that integrates
the GAN model to learn the temporal distributions using
the prediction errors and discriminator loss.
• USAD [43]: An autoencoding-based approach that
employs two independent AEs and GAN model to
enhance performance and stable with adversarial training
strategy.
• MTAD-GAT [7]: A graph-based framework that utilizes
two parallel GATs to capture correlations between different timestamps and signals through multi-task learning.
• CAE-M [31]: An autoencoding method that builds
a convolutional AE and memory network with the
attention-based BiLSTM method and an autoregressive
model.
• GDN [10]: A graph-based model that uses a GNN model
to learn pairwise correlations between multiple sensors
by graph attention mechanism and then detects anomalies
according to the predicted deviations from node relations.
• TranAD [44]: An attention-based network that incorporates Transformer with the adversarial training and
self-conditioning process to improve the model stability.

1014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS ON THE S IX C OMPLETE DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS OF
AUC AND F1 S CORE A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD , W HILE S UBOPTIMAL R ESULTS A RE U NDERLINED

• MUTANT [24]: A graph-based model that learns the correlations and each importance between variables via the
temporal GCN and LSTM-based attention reconstruction.
• DCdetector [45]: An attention-based model that designs
dual attention contrastive representation learning scheme.
• DTAAD [30]: An attention-based method that adopts dual
TCN and Transformer models to capture the multi-scale
temporal dependences with a meta-learning strategy.
1) Analysis of Anomaly Detection: Table III shows the
performance comparison of state-of-the-art methods on the
six complete datasets. Notably, all baseline methods use the
same data splits for a fair comparison. From these tables,
we have the following observations: MSTIA-Net outperforms
other baselines on most MTS datasets, which demonstrates
the superiority of our method in effectively leveraging the
spatial-temporal dependencies from multiview feature patterns.
The prediction-based methods, i.e., LSTM-NDT and GDN
obtain relatively poor results, which may be attributed to the
inherent nature of prediction models in dealing with long-term
sequences. Obviously, the reconstruction-based methods, i.e.,
DAGMM, OmniAnomaly, MSCRED, MAD-GAN and USAD
adopt the deep AE models and show a certain degree of
performance gap. MSCRED gets satisfactory results compared
to OmniAnomaly, which indicates the sufficiency of capturing
the spatial-temporal patterns from multi-scale features. MADGAN and USAD achieve more promising results, reflecting the

positive effect of generative adversarial leaning for temporal
distributions. The graph-based methods, i.e., MTAD-GAT and
MUTANT both perform relatively worse than our MSTIA-Net.
One possible explanation is that they only focus on modeling
spatial-temporal dependencies but ignore the potential multicue interactions. The attention-based methods, i.e., CAE-M,
TranAD, DCdetector, and DTAAD gain competitive results,
which confirms the advantage of modeling complete spatialtemporal dependencies through the Transformer structure.
2) Analysis of Anomaly Diagnosis: Table IV provides the
diagnosis performance comparison of other baseline methods
on the SMD for the sake of brevity. As shown in the table,
our MSTIA-Net model remains significantly superior to others,
verifying that our model is highly capable of MTS anomaly
diagnosis and the parallel-attention mechanism enables it more
suitable for the inter-correlated anomalies. Specifically, this
task aims to distinguish the abnormality from each dimension,
and our proposed MSTIA-Net can effectively learn the spatialtemporal dependencies from local-global interactive patterns to
accurately diagnose multi-dimensional anomalies.
3) Analysis of Model Efficiency: We also further compared
the model performance on the scale-restricted training sets and
model computational cost. Table V shows the performance
comparison under the data-constrained conditions, and implies
that our model achieves the excellent results thanks to the
meta-learning strategy. Fig. 5 illustrates the comparison results

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

1015

TABLE IV

TABLE V

D IAGNOSIS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH
BASELINE M ETHODS ON THE SMD

P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH BASELINE
M ETHODS ON 20% OF THE T RAINING S ETS

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of computational complexity and model
convergence on the SMAP and SMD.

• w/o STIA: We eliminated the influence of SpatialTemporal Interactions Aggregation (STIA) module without generating the content-aware representations.
• w/o STCL: We eliminated the influence of SpatialTemporal Correlations Learning (STCL) module without
generating the relation-aware representations.
• w/o DACR: We disabled the impact of Dual Attentionenhanced Contrastive Reconstruction (DACR) without
cross-attention mechanism and contrastive learning.
• w/o Spatial / Temporal MSA: We disabled the influence
of spatial or temporal self-attention Transformer by only
using the single domain dependency embedding.
• w/o LRBP: We eliminated the impact of LRBP fusion
strategy via a direct concatenation manner.
• w/o Spatial / Temporal GAT: We disabled the influence
of spatial or temporal GAT layer by using the single
domain contextual embedding.
• w/o Callback: We removed the effect of local reconstruction outputs without a skip-layer feedback mechanism.

of computational complexity and model convergence, and
demonstrates the efficiency of our method against suboptimal
baseline methods. From the figures, we can find that our
MSTIA-Net gets an acceptable range of training and inference
time consumption and moderate number of model parameters.
Due to the multi-node interactions of graph networks, the
graph-based methods typically have higher time complexity
than the attention-based methods. Notably, our method also
exhibits a faster convergence rate, achieving better performance and model stability in fewer training epochs.
Overall, compared to the graph-based and attention-based
methods, our significant strengths are that the MSTIA-Net can
jointly learn spatial-temporal content-aware and relation-aware
interactions in a multiview parallel-attention manner, thereby
improving detection performance to varying degrees.

E. Ablation Analysis
To verify the contribution of each component in the MSTIANet model, we compared the performance of multiple ablation
schemes by removing the relevant components as follows:
• w/o Local / Global TCN: We removed the effect of local
or global temporal features by using single view feature.

Table VI shows the performance comparison of different
ablation schemes, we can see that all variants consistently
show inferior performance compared to overall MSTIA-Net
model, which illustrates significant effectiveness of each component. In detail, the w/o Local or Global TCN performs
worse than other schemes, demonstrating that modeling the
multi-scale patterns of MTS data from multiview features can

1016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 6. Performance comparison with different values of parameters in our proposed MSTIA-Net on the MBA and SMD.
TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENT
C ONFIGURATIONS ON THE S IX DATASETS

performance. The LRBP enhances interaction in the feature
space to achieve refined encoding. MSTIA-Net achieves the
best results, which can be attributed to the relevance of spatialtemporal patterns.
F. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis

effectively characterize temporal information. w/o STIA and
w/o STCL both obtain unsatisfactory results, which implies the
necessity of learning the content-oriented interactions based
on parallel-attention mechanism and capturing the dynamic
correlations via stacked GAT blocks. Notably, w/o DACR also
gets poor performance due to the insufficient reconstruction
means and missing auxiliary strategies for generating dualstream outputs. Similar to the w/o Spatial or Temporal MSA,
the w/o Spatial or Temporal GAT obviously drops compared to
MSTIA-Net. The main reason is that both temporal and spatial
information have certain content and correlation dependencies,
which are beneficial to jointly construct fusion embedding.
Limited by the capability of early fusion and implicit clues
mining, both w/o LRBP and w/o Callback show poor

To investigate the influence of spatial-temporal and localglobal Transformer, we considered changing the number of
attention heads (i.e., H) by ranging H from 1 to 5. Fig. 6
(a) shows the performance with different numbers of heads in
the Transformer, we can find that the results show significant
fluctuations and the best performance is gained when H = 3.
Possible explanation is that MHA mechanism not only assists
spatial-temporal contents interaction and multi-view patterns
integration, but also causes a certain degree of negative noise.
Furthermore, we explored the impact of spatial-temporal GAT
blocks by varying the number of GAT layers (i.e., L) and MHA
heads (i.e., K), which both range from 1 to 5. Fig. 6 (b) and (c)
show the results with different numbers of layers and heads
in the STCL module. From the figures, our model achieves
the optimal performance when L = 4 and K = 4, while also
exhibits strong volatility. This can be attributed to the fact that
the dynamic correlations of spatial-temporal domains can be
effectively captured as the number of GAT layers increases, but
excessively deep GAT layers lead to certain negative effects.
We also studied the influence of λ and µ in the total objective function Ltotal , which are used to control reconstruction
and cross-view contrastive loss terms. Fig. 6 (d) and (e) show
the results with different values of trade-off parameters λ and
µ, which are selected for the optimal parameters via a heuristic
grid-search strategy with the same interval ranging from
{0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9} and {1er |r ∈ −4, · · · , 0}, respectively.
From the figures, we can find that the best results are obtained
when λ = 0.7 and µ = 1e−3 . Nevertheless, µ exhibits stronger
sensitive properties than λ, indicating the significance of crossview contrastive learning strategy for the fusion embeddings.
Fig. 6 (f) and (g) show the results with different values of
batch size (i.e., B) and feature dimension (i.e., dmodel ) by ranging from {32, 64, 128, 256, 512} and {16, 32, 64, 128}. The
optimal results are obtained when B = 256 and dmodel = 64,
and our model exhibits a certain degree of stability. In addition,

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

1017

Fig. 7. Parameter sensitivity studies of the sliding window size and training
dataset ratio on the six benchmark datasets.

we verify the impact of noise signals at different proportions
on model performance in the simulated industrial scenarios.
Fig. 6 (h) shows the performance with different SN R values
of Gaussian white noise by ranging from {35, 40, 45, 50, 55}
dB, and our model has a certain degree of robustness against
interference from noisy data of varying intensity.
We further explored the impact of sliding window size and
training set ratio. Fig. 7 shows the averaged results with different values of w and Ratio (%), which are selected by varying
from {5, 10, 15, 20, 25} and {20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100%}.
The observations can be made: our model obtains the optimal
results when w = 10, and the size of window has a certain
impact on model performance. It may be that smaller windows
are difficult to learn the global temporal feature, while local
anomalies are hidden in the multiple points for larger windows.
Obviously, under different conditions of limited-scale training
set, our MSTIA-Net demonstrates strong model robustness.

Fig. 8. Diagnosis visualization of anomaly prediction among multiple
dimensions on the SMD testing set using MSTIA-Net and other ablation
strategies. The time series with ground-truth values and reconstruction results
are provided, and anomaly labels marked in purple are also presented for
comparison. The predicted anomalous segments are highlighted in red.

G. Case Study
To intuitively understand the effect of MSTIA-Net model
on anomaly detection, we conduct the following case analysis
of our model and other schemes on the testing set of SMD.
1) Anomaly Diagnosis Study: Fig. 8 illustrates the visualization of anomaly diagnosis on multiple dimensions of testing
samples with the MSTIA-Net and ablation methods, where the
latter two only use single-view temporal feature. As shown in
the Fig. 8, we can find that MSTIA-Net performs well overall
on the MTS-AD task, which is able to diagnose the anomalous
sequences based on the predicted anomaly scores. There are
the associated abnormal points between dimensions #0 and #2
with relevant inter-relations, where anomalous behavior in one
dimension may lead to a chain of events causing abnormalities
in others. Similarly, the ablation schemes based on single-view
features also exhibit specific detection effects in #3 and #4. It
can be seen that the prediction results of local-global features
are broadly consistent with anomaly labels, and discrepancy
can be avoided by the point adjustment strategy. This validates
that our model fully integrates the interactions of local-global
temporal patterns, thus assisting in locating abnormal data.
2) Multiview Interaction Study: We also explored the
impacts of multiview temporal features and dual crossattention mechanism. Fig. 9 shows the T-SNE visualization
of various temporal features. The MSTIA-Net with multiview
feature obviously reduces the overlap between normal and
abnormal sample embeddings. Both global and local temporal
patterns also exhibit specific discriminability with clearer

Fig. 9. T-SNE visualization of different temporal features before reconstruction learned by (a) multiview fusion, (b) only global-patterns, and (c) only
local-patterns on the testing set of SMD. The dots with same color indicate
the same label.

Fig. 10. Cross-Attention visualization of (a) Local-Branch and (b) GlobalBranch attention matrices on the SMD. The coordinate axes represent the size
of sliding window.

boundaries, we can find that multiview fusion features enhance
discriminative representations in complex distributions. Fig. 10
shows the heatmap visualization of cross-attention matrix in
the local and global perspectives, and implies that it has the
ability to capture correlative interactions from different view
features.

1018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this study, we focus on jointly model the spatial-temporal
dependencies of time-series in the distributed ICS, and propose
a novel MTS-AD approach called MSTIA-Net, which consists
of a spatial-temporal interactive encoder and a dual-stream
contrastive decoder. Specifically, the STIA module is presented
to learn spatial-temporal dependencies by a parallel-attention
mechanism and aggregate content-aware representations with
a low-rank fusion manner. In addition, the STCL module is
designed to adaptively capture dynamic correlations by stacked
GAT blocks. Conclusively, the cross-aware fusion embedding
is further enhanced for generating dual-stream outputs through
the DACR module. Extensive experimental results verify the
superiority of our model and the effectiveness of each module.
In future work, we plan to exploit the powerful knowledge
reasoning capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to
further explore more efficient solutions based on MSTIA-Net.
Towards the demands of real industrial scenarios, our MSTIANet still has limitations in terms of high model complexity, so
we will improve and deploy our model in a lightweight manner
on the nuclear power industrial network for data management.
R EFERENCES
[1]

B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain:
A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 2356–2426, 2023.
[2] J. Li, Y.-A. Tan, X. Liu, W. Meng, and Y. Li, “Interpretable adversarial
example detection via high-level concept activation vector,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 150, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 104218.
[3] S. Li, B. Li, B. Sun, and Y. Weng, “Towards visual-prompt temporal
answer grounding in instructional video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 8836–8853, Dec. 2024.
[4] H. Yu, R. Xu, H. Zhang, Z. Yang, and H. Liu, “EV-FL: Efficient
verifiable federated learning with weighted aggregation for industrial
IoT networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1723–1737,
Apr. 2024.
[5] J. Shi, M. Sha, and Z. Yang, “Distributed graph routing and scheduling
for industrial wireless sensor-actuator networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1669–1682, Aug. 2019.
[6] T.-A. Nguyen et al., “Federated PCA on Grassmann manifold for
IoT anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 4456–4471, Oct. 2024.
[7] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
2020, pp. 841–850.
[8] T. Nakamura, M. Imamura, R. Mercer, and E. Keogh, “MERLIN:
Parameter-free discovery of arbitrary length anomalies in massive time
series archives,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
2020, pp. 1190–1195.
[9] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[10] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
[11] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multi-view graph contrastive
learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
[12] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal
spatial–temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly
detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, Jan. 2023.
[13] H. Kang and P. Kang, “Transformer-based multivariate time series
anomaly detection using inter-variable attention mechanism,” Knowl.Based Syst., vol. 290, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 111507.
[14] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 3220–3230.

[15] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global–local association
discrepancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, Apr. 2024.
[16] P. Qi, D. Li, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-SGCN: Multivariate anomaly
detection with self-learning graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Data Eng., Jul. 2022, pp. 1232–1244.
[17] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[18] X. Qiu et al., “TFB: Towards comprehensive and fair benchmarking of
time series forecasting methods,” in Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 17, 2024,
pp. 2363–2377.
[19] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, pp. 1409–1416.
[20] X. Qiu, X. Wu, Y. Lin, C. Guo, J. Hu, and B. Yang, “DUET: Dual
clustering enhanced multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. 31st
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining V.1, Jul. 2025,
pp. 1185–1196.
[21] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[22] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
2019, pp. 703–716.
[23] H. Zhou, K. Yu, X. Zhang, G. Wu, and A. Yazidi, “Contrastive
autoencoder for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 610, pp. 266–280, Sep. 2022.
[24] Y. Shi, B. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Tang, C. Huang, and J. Dong, “Robust
anomaly detection for multivariate time series through temporal GCNs
and attention-based VAE,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 275, Sep. 2023,
Art. no. 110725.
[25] Y. He et al., “Variate associated domain adaptation for unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery
from Data, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1–24, Sep. 2024.
[26] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly
detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025.
[27] S. Ma, J. Nie, S. Guan, Z. He, and M. Gao, “MPFormer: Multipatch transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
with contrastive learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 23,
pp. 38221–38237, Dec. 2024.
[28] C. Lin, B. Du, L. Sun, and L. Li, “Hierarchical context representation
and self-adaptive thresholding for multivariate anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3139–3150, Jul. 2024.
[29] X. Qiu et al., “TAB: Unified benchmarking of time series anomaly detection methods,” in Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 18, 2025, pp. 2775–2789.
[30] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks
for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based
Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.
[31] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[32] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 156–165.
[33] K. Han, A. Xiao, E. Wu, J. Guo, C. Xu, and Y. Wang, “Transformer
in transformer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
pp. 15908–15919.
[34] Z. Yu, J. Yu, J. Fan, and D. Tao, “Multi-modal factorized bilinear pooling
with co-attention learning for visual question answering,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 1839–1848.
[35] X. Wang, X. He, Y. Cao, M. Liu, and T. Chua, “KGAT: Knowledge graph
attention network for recommendation,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD). Anchorage, AK, USA:
ACM, Aug. 2019, pp. 950–958.
[36] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for
fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
vol. 70, Aug. 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
[37] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.

CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD

[38] G. B. Moody and R. G. Mark, “The impact of the MIT-BIH arrhythmia
database,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45–50, Mar.
2001.
[39] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CyberPhys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36.
[40] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water
Netw., Apr. 2017, pp. 25–28.
[41] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[42] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.
[43] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[44] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[45] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
Kai Cui received the B.S. degree from the School
of Electrical Engineering, University of South China,
Hengyang, China, in 2020, and the M.S. degree from
the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2023. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan,
China. His research interests include the industrial
Internet of Things security, data and information
content security, multimodal disinformation analysis,
and social network security.

Liangbin Gao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2021
and 2022, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. His research
interests include the industrial Internet of Things
security, video harmful content detection, multimodal disinformation analysis, and social network
security.

Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. He has published more
than 100 technical papers in international top journals and conferences. His current research interests
include the industrial Internet of Things security
and reliability, data and information content security,
artificial intelligence (AI) security, and social network security. He received
the IEEE TCSC Early Career Award and the IEEE SCSTC Middle Career
Award.

1019

Shenghao Liu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Electronic
Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan,
China, in 2016 and 2021, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, HUST. His research
interests include data and information content security, recommender systems, social network security,
and deep learning and neural networks. He received
the IEEE SCSTC Early Career Award.

Lingzhi Yi received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
civil engineering and the Ph.D. degree in safety science and engineering from the University of South
China, Hengyang, China, in 2005, 2008, and 2018,
respectively. She is currently a Professor with the
School of Information Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, China. Her
research interests include the artificial intelligence of
things (AIoT), data and information content security,
and coverage reliability in the IoT.

Shibo He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, in 2012. From
November 2010 to November 2011, he was a
Visiting Scholar with the University of Waterloo,
Waterloo. He was an Associate Research Scientist
and a Post-Doctoral Scholar with Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA, from March 2014
to May 2014 and from May 2012 to February
2014, respectively. He is currently a Professor with
Zhejiang University. His research interests include
the IoT, crowdsensing, and big data analysis.

Hongwei Lu received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees from Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. He is currently
a Professor with the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology. His research interests include security
and privacy in ubiquitous computing and electronic
commerce, with a focus on security protocol analysis, access control, and trust negotiation.