This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

1

Network Intrusion Detection System Based on
Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
Autoencoders for Internet of Vehicles
Shizhao Tian , Yaowen Zheng , Laile Xi , Shenghao Lin , Yubo Li , and Hongsong Zhu , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is highly vulnerable
to attacks due to its open communication environment, with
new types of attacks continuously emerging. However, existing
Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) often fall short in
accuracy, recall rates, false positive rates, and they frequently
prove ineffective in detecting new attacks. In this paper, we
propose a NIDS for IoV based on Enhanced Dual Gaussian
Mixture Variational Autoencoders (EDGMVAE) to detect various attack behaviors, including new attacks. We employ two
separate Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders (GMVAE)
to conduct unsupervised reconstruction training on normal traffic
and known attack traffic. During detection, we obtain the
tested traffic’s reconstruction probabilities using these GMVAEs
and determine whether an attack has occurred through logical
fusion operation. We use two datasets for evaluation, i.e., the
Car Hacking Dataset (CHD) for in-vehicle communication and
the UNSW-NB15 Dataset (UBD) for external network communication. The results demonstrate that our method achieves
remarkable performance in detecting known attacks, with an
accuracy rate of 98.54% on the CHD and 98.59% on the
UBD. Moreover, it outperforms other state-of-the-art methods
in detecting new attacks. Specifically, on the CHD, the accuracy
of the method is 6.66% to 12.83% higher than other methods,
while on the UBD, the accuracy is 5.13% to 21.91% higher than
other methods.
Index Terms—Internet of vehicles, intrusion detection, new
attack, Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NTERNET of Vehicles (IoV) is an integral component
of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS). Leveraging advanced information and communication technologies,
IoV facilitates comprehensive network connectivity within
vehicles, as well as Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-toInfrastructure (V2I), Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P), and Vehicleto-Service (V2S) communication [1]. This connectivity not
only enhances the overall intelligent driving capabilities of
vehicles but also delivers a safe, comfortable, intelligent, and
efficient driving experience and traffic services to users [2].
Received 27 March 2025; revised 14 August 2025 and 1 December 2025;
accepted 29 January 2026. The Associate Editor for this article was M. Bilal.
(Corresponding author: Yubo Li.)
The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with
the School of Cyberspace Security, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: tianshizhao@iie.ac.cn;
zhengyaowen@iie.ac.cn; xilaile@iie.ac.cn; linshenghao@iie.ac.cn; liyubo@
iie.ac.cn; zhuhongsong@iie.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3660300

However, the open communication environment inherent to
IoV also renders it a prime target for attackers, which can
lead to severe repercussions, as malicious attacks on vehicles
traveling on the road would pose a serious threat to human
life. Threats to IoV are divided into two main categories: (1)
Attacks on vehicle-to-external networks; (2) Attacks on invehicle networks.
When a vehicle connects to external networks, it becomes
vulnerable to various attacks, including Denial of Service
(DoS), Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Spoofing and
Replay. In DoS and DDoS attacks, malicious actors overwhelm
vehicle nodes by sending a massive volume of irrelevant
messages. This deluge of traffic congests the vehicle’s processing capacity, rendering it incapable of handling legitimate
requests. Attackers can also impersonate legitimate users to
transmit fake GPS data to the vehicle, with the intention
of deceiving it. Replay attacks intercept communication to
identify unencrypted data, enabling hackers to conduct Manin-the-Middle (MITM) attacks.
In addition to external attacks, vehicles are also at risk
from internal attacks. The Controller Area Network (CAN) is
the standard communication method for in-vehicle networks,
connecting various Electronic Control Units (ECUs) to support
critical applications such as autonomous driving. However,
the lack of authentication mechanisms makes it easy for
attackers to launch attacks. Common types of attacks include
Fuzzy, DoS and spoofing. Fuzzy attacks cause malfunctions
or abnormalities in the vehicle system by sending a large
amount of random information. DoS attacks overload the
target system, blocking normal services and rendering some
of its functions unusable. Spoofing attacks can deceive vehicle
systems by transmitting false gear or speed data, forcing
incorrect decisions and potentially triggering safety incidents.
With the rapid development of technology, the attack methods
IoV faces are also constantly evolving [3]. In order to protect
the IoV from attacks from both inside and outside, it is
necessary to develop a powerful intrusion detection system
that can not only accurately detect known attack patterns but
also effectively handle emerging attacks.
Currently, Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
methods have become pivotal technologies in the development
of intrusion detection systems due to their advanced learning capabilities [4], [5], [6], [7]. These methods generally
necessitate supervised training of binary or multi-classification

1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

Fig. 1. Challenges faced by ANIDS.

models, utilizing extensive datasets that encompass both normal and attack traffic, in order to attain high detection
performance. However, most existing ML and DL methods
prove ineffective in detecting emerging new attacks due to
the absence of representative features of these attacks in
the training datasets. Thus, Anomaly-based NIDS (ANIDS)
is the most suitable option, which can detect existing and
new attacks as it builds a profile from normal data and any
deviation from that profile is detected as an anomaly [8], [9].
However, ANIDS also confronts several significant challenges,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, it is difficult for normal profile
to fully cover all normal traffic patterns, which will inevitably
lead to a high false positive rate. In addition, as the technical
sophistication of attackers increases, their attack behavior will
become more similar to normal traffic patterns, making it
harder to detect and leading to inevitable false negatives.
To address the above challenges, we propose an ANIDS
based on Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
Autoencoders (EDGMVAE) for IoV. The high-level design
goals of our method are twofold: (1) Our primary goal is
to model normal behavior patterns with the utmost precision and comprehensiveness, which is essential for effectively
reducing false positives. (2) We add the profiling of known
attacks as a reference in the detection process to reduce false
negatives, especially for attacks whose behavioral patterns
closely resemble normal traffic. When building traffic profiles,
we propose using Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder
(GMVAE), which is an improvement upon the traditional
Variational Autoencoder (VAE). Specifically, the GMVAE
replaces the single Gaussian distribution of latent variables
with a mixture of Gaussians, thereby achieving more accurate
and comprehensive modeling capabilities. This improvement
allows for arbitrary precision in approximating any distribution
by simply adding or removing components (i.e., the number
of Gaussian distributions).
Our EDGMVAE approach comprises three phases. In the
first phase, raw traffic data is processed to extract and standardize key features, thereby ensuring data quality. In the second
phase, the processed data is fed into two GMVAE models: the
GMVAE N (trained on normal traffic to build normal profile),
and GMVAE A (trained on known attack traffic to build
attack profile), both of which are used for data reconstruction.
In the third phase, the reconstruction probabilities of the input
data are computed using the two GMVAEs seperately, and the
final detection results are obtained through logical fusion operations. We comprehensively evaluate the proposed EDGMVAE
on two datasets: the Car Hacking Dataset (CHD) [10] for
in-vehicle comminication and the UNSWNB-15 Dataset

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

(UBD) [11] for external network communication. The results
demonstrate that our method achieves high accuracy in detecting known attacks: 98.54% on the CHD and 98.59% on the
UBD. It also outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
detecting new attacks, with accuracy improvements of 6.66%13.61% on the CHD and 5.13%-21.91% on the UBD. These
results further confirm the excellent performance and advantages of EDGMVAE in detecting new attacks. The primary
contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose a network intrusion detection system for IoV
based on EDGMVAE. This method aims to accurately
detect both known and emerging new attack patterns by
utilizing the strengths of GMVAE.
• We implement the EDGMVAE approach with a threephase framework, including data preprocessing, data
reconstruction, and detection.
• We conduct several experiments on the CHD and
UBD to demonstrate that our EDGMVAE approach not
only achieves excellent performance in detecting known
attacks but also outperforms other compelling methods in
detecting new attacks.
The article is organized as follows: in Section I, we provide an introduction, and in Section II, we examine relevant
literature. Section III provides research motivations and model
preliminaries. Our proposed approach is presented in Section IV. We present experimental verification and assessment
in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
With the rapid development of the IoV, ensuring network
security has become increasingly critical, prompting extensive research into IDS. To systematically summarize existing
efforts, Table I provides a comparative overview of representative studies, evaluating them based on detection scope
(in-vehicle vs. external networks), attack types (known vs.
unknown), datasets and technical mechanisms.
A. In-Vehicle Network Intrusion Detection Systems
A significant amount of research has been dedicated to
securing in-vehicle networks, with a particular focus on the
CAN bus. Early efforts in this domain primarily targeted
known attacks, leveraging classical deep learning models to
achieve high detection accuracy. Hossain et al. [12] pioneered
this direction by proposing an LSTM-based NIDS for CAN
bus attacks. They constructed a custom dataset by extracting normal data from a Toyota hybrid vehicle and injecting
DoS, Fuzzing, and Spoofing attacks, achieving an impressive
99.995% accuracy in detecting these known threats.
Wei et al. [13] introduced AMAEID, an intrusion detection
model that combines an attention mechanism with a multilayer denoising autoencoder. Xie et al. [14] proposed an
intrusion detection technique based on an enhanced GAN. It
aims to solve the problems of existing GAN models, such
as the rough construction of CAN message blocks and the
inability to detect data tampering threats, thereby improving
the detection performance against various attacks. Song et al.
[17] proposed an IDS based on a deep convolutional neural

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

3

TABLE I
C OMPARATIVE E VALUATION OF THE E XISTING R ESEARCH R ELATED TO IDS FOR I OV

network (DCNN). Through a frame builder, the 29-bit IDs of
29 consecutive CAN messages are converted into a 29 × 29
two-dimensional grid structure, which serves as input to a
reduced Inception-ResNet model to learn the temporal patterns
of CAN traffic and detect anomalies. Jin et al. [18] proposed an
intrusion detection approach that integrates oversampling, outlier detection, and metric learning techniques. Ullah et al. [19]
proposed a stacking-based hybrid ensemble model employing XGBoost, Random Forest, Decision Tree, and Gradient
Boosting as base learners, integrated with K-means sampling,
Information Gain feature selection, and SMOTE to address
class imbalance, achieving high performance in Internet of
Vehicles intrusion detection.
Recent advancements have expanded capabilities to include
unknown attack detection, driven by innovations in model
architecture and data processing. Song et al. [20] adopted
a self-supervised approach, combining an LSTM generator
(trained on normal traffic to produce noisy pseudo-normal
data) with a Reduced Inception-ResNet detector, allowing the
model to generalize to unseen threats. Luo et al. [15] proposed
a spectral residual-lightweight CNN (SR-LiCNN) model,
which transforms signal sequences into matrix-like images
to frame intrusion detection as an image classification task.
The spectral residual operation eliminates redundancy, while
lightweight convolutions optimize decision-making efficiency,
enabling detection of both known and unknown attacks.
Shi et al. [16] proposed an unsupervised intrusion detection system IDS-DEC for the CAN bus, which is based
on deep embedded clustering and integrates a spatiotemporal autoencoder with an entropy-regularized deep embedding
clustering module. Cao et al. [21] proposed a self-supervised

learning-based anomaly detection method for in-vehicle
networks, which enables message-level anomaly detection
without labeled data through a message prediction model
based on hierarchical Transformers (MPMHit). The method
consists of three modules: masking, predicting, and anomaly
detecting. It uses noisy message sequences to train the model
to learn the distribution of normal messages and combines an
online update mechanism with vehicle-cloud collaboration to
address the problem of concept drift.
B. Vehicle-to-External Network Intrusion Detection Systems
As the IoV becomes increasingly interconnected, vehicle-toexternal network communications have become a key security
focus. The complexity and variety of potential attacks on these
networks promotes the continuous development of intrusion
detection technologies.
Early research on vehicle-to-external network intrusion
detection mainly focused on known attacks. Almutlaq et al.
[23] proposed a two-stage intrusion detection system that
balances detection accuracy, resource efficiency, and interpretability by extracting rules from deep neural networks.
The first stage of the system distinguishes between normal
and attack traffic, while the second stage identifies the type
of attack. It includes three variants based on the DeepRed
and HypInv rule extraction methods. Anbalagan et al. [26]
proposed a CNN-based NIDS. First, the original data captured was processed, and quantile transformation was applied
to obtain uniformly distributed labels. Then, the processed
data was converted into image data for fine-grained pattern
extraction. Subsequently, an improved deep CNN architecture

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

was used to train the converted image data to identify various
attack patterns.
To overcome the limitations of only detecting known
attacks, researchers have conducted extensive exploration and
developed systems that can detect both known and new
attacks by adopting more advanced technologies. Khan et al.
[25] proposed a multi-stage deep learning framework. This
framework’s first stage verified the status of incoming data
using state-based Bloom filter technology, and its second stage
detected threats using a Bi-LSTM classifier. Nissar et al.
[27] proposed a multi-objective intrusion detection framework
that incorporated Variational Autoencoder (VAE) along with
two optimization algorithms: the Adaptive Geometric Estimation Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm (AGE-MOEA)
and the Reference Point-based NSGA-III (R-NSGA-III). This
framework was designed to optimize multiple objectives,
including divergence, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, and
reconstruction error, effectively detecting anomalies based on
reconstruction error.
Yang et al. [22] proposed a multi-tiered hybrid intrusion
detection system (MTH-IDS) for the Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), aiming to detect both known and unknown attacks. The
system includes data preprocessing, feature engineering, and
a four-tier learning model. It detects known attacks through
tree-based algorithms, identifies unknown attacks using cluster
labeling k-means, and combines methods such as Bayesian
optimization to improve performance. Huang et al. [24] proposed an Automatic Incremental Lifetime Learning Intrusion
Detection System (AILL-IDS), which reduces the reliance
on labeled data through incremental semi-supervised learning and triggers model updates by detecting concept drift
with the KSWIN algorithm. The system combines incremental k-means, DBSTREAM clustering algorithms, and a dual
ensemble learning mechanism to achieve anomaly detection,
attack type identification, and continuous detection during
updates, avoiding performance fluctuations. Fu et al. [28]
proposed a BERT-based hybrid network intrusion detection
system for the Internet of Vehicles (IoV-BERT-IDS), which
converts traffic data into contextual byte sentences through
a semantic extractor and combines pre-training (including
MBWM and NBSP tasks) with a fine-tuning mechanism to
achieve attack detection.
III. M OTIVATIONS AND P RELIMINARIES
A. Motivations
Through analysis of existing Anomaly-based NIDS
(ANIDS), we find that they have advantages in detecting
new attacks. However, ANIDS suffer from high false positive
and false negative rates. This is mainly because constructing
a precise and comprehensive normal profile is challenging,
which can lead to false positives, and some attack patterns are
extremely similar to normal patterns, which can lead to false
negatives. If we can construct the normal profile as accurately
and comprehensively as possible, and incorporate the profile
of known attack patterns into the detection process, it will
significantly improve the detection performance. When building profiles, we introduce the Gaussian Mixture Variational

Autoencoder (GMVAE), an enhanced variant of the Variational
Autoencoder (VAE). By replacing VAE’s single Gaussian
latent variable distribution with a mixture of Gaussians, we
can achieve more flexible and accurate performance of profile construction. Based on this improvement, we propose a
NIDS leveraging Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
Autoencoder (EDGMVAE), aiming to significantly enhance
intrusion detection ability.
B. Model Preliminaries
1) Variational Autoencoder (VAE): VAE is a deep generative model widely used for data compression, denoising,
anomaly detection and generation. The core concept of a VAE
involves mapping input data x to a low-dimensional latent
space z via an encoder and then reconstructing the input data
from this space using a decoder. This process enables effective
data representation and facilitates the generation of new data
samples similar to the input data.
VAE is understood through two perspectives: variational
inference and neural network. The core objective is to obtain
the posterior distribution P(z|x), with x as the input data and
z as the latent variable, and P(z|x) can be calculated using
Bayes’s theorem:
P(z|x) =

P(x|z)P(z)
.
P(x)

(1)

However,
R direct computation of the marginal probability
P(x) = P(x|z)P(z) dz is generally intractable. Thus, variational inference addresses this problem by introducing a
tractable distribution Qφ (z|x) (often Gaussian) to approximate
P(z|x). The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between these
distributions must be minimized, as shown below:
DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] = EQφ (z|x) [log Qφ (z|x)
− log P(z|x) − log P(z) + log P(x)].

(2)

log P(x) can be shifted to the left since the expectation is
with regard to z:
DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] − log P(x)
= − EQφ (z|x) [log P(x, z) − log Qφ (z|x)] .
„
ƒ‚
…

(3)

ELBO(φ)

The objective of minimizing the KL divergence is equivalent
to maximizing the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO). The
expression in (3) can be reformulated as:
DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] − log P(x)
= DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z)] − EQφ (z|x)[log P(x|z)] .

(4)

Then the role of neural network becomes evident, as
depicted in Fig. 2a. Qφ (z|x) serves as an encoder, converting
the original data x into the latent variable z. Meanwhile,
Pθ (x|z) functions as a decoder, which decodes z to generate
reconstructed data x0 . The objective of the model is to minimize the right part of (4). KL divergence between Qφ (z|x)
and P(z) is represented by the first component on the right.
The following component measures the degree of similarity
between the original and the reconstructed data.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

5

Fig. 3. Process of GMVAE.
TABLE II
D ISTRIBUTIONS IN GMVAE M ODEL

Fig. 2. Structure of VAE and GMVAE.

2) Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder (GMVAE):
VAEs encounter challenges when processing complex data.
This is due to the fact that the approximate posterior distribution and the prior distribution of the latent variable
z are typically simple Gaussian distributions. These simple
distributions often fail to adequately capture the complex
characteristics of the original data, causing the reconstructed
data to be both unrealistic and incomplete. It is theoretically
possible to represent any complex data distribution using
Gaussian Mixture distribution. Consequently, incorporating
Gaussian Mixtures into VAE to construct Gaussian Mixture
Variational Autoencoder (GMVAE) can significantly enhance
the model’s ability to represent and reconstruct complex data.
Specifically, we set the estimated posterior distribution
Qφ (y, z|x) and the posterior distribution P(z) of the latent variable z as Gaussian Mixture distribution, where the Gaussian
distribution category is represented by the variable y. The
expression for Qφ (y, z|x) is as follows:
Qφ (y, z|x) = Qφ (y|x)Qφ (z|x, y).

(5)

A Gaussian Mixture with k distinct Gaussian distributions
makes up the latent variable. It is assumed that Qφ (z|x, yi ) is a
single Gaussian distribution with i ∈ {0, 1,..., k − 1}. It is worth
noting that an appropriate value of k needs to be selected.
A too small k will result in the Gaussian components being
unable to cover the complex patterns of the data, while a too
large k will increase model redundancy, which not only raises
computational costs but also may lead to overfitting. ELBO is
reformulated as:
ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) [log Pθ (x, y, z) − log Qφ (y, z|x)].

(6)

According to conditional independence hypothesis shown in
Fig. 2b, Pθ (x, y, z) is:
Pθ (x, y, z) = Pθ (x|z)Pθ (z|y)Pθ (y).

(7)

Equation (5) and (7) can be substituted into (6) to reformulate ELBO as:

ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) log P(y) − log Qφ (y | x)

Pθ (z | y)
+ log Pθ (x | z)
(8)
+ log
Qφ (z | x, y)
The third and fourth components in equation (8) represent the regularization and reconstruction, respectively.
EQφ (y,z|x) [log Qφ (y|x)] is a conditional entropy, capturing
the degree to which x influences y. During training, a coefficient α can be added to the entropy term between x and y
to regulate the influence of clustering loss items on other loss
items:

ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) log P(y) − α log Qφ (y | x)

Pθ (z | y)
+ log
+ log Pθ (x | z) .
(9)
Qφ (z | x, y)
A smaller α reduces the impact of the entropy term on the
loss, resulting in less distinct boundaries between Gaussian
components. Conversely, a larger α strengthens this influence,
leading to sharper boundaries, but also increasing the risk of
overfitting.
Table II lists the probability distributions used in the model,
while the detailed process of GMVAE is depicted in Fig. 3.
Initially, x is assigned into k clusters based on the probabilities
provided by NN(Qy ), while Q(y|x) denotes the probabilities of these cluster assignments and follows a multinomial
distribution. NN(Qz ) is used to learn the variance σ and
mean µ of these Gaussians, since each cluster’s latent space is
thought to follow a Gaussian distribution. Then, by collecting
samplesPand calculating their anticipated values, z is derived
as z = k−1
i=0 p(yi |x)zi .
During the decoding process, NN(Pz ) extracts the variance
and mean from the relevant category. After that, reparameterization sampling is used to obtain the latent variable z, where
P(y) has a uniform distribution. The reconstructed data x0 is

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Workflow of proposed EDGMVAE.

then calculated using zi byP
sampling and taking the expected
0
value of xi0 , which is x0 = k−1
i=0 P(yi |x)xi .
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Overview
GMVAE enhances the modeling capabilities of traditional
VAE for complex data by introducing a Gaussian mixture
latent distribution. However, employing a single GMVAE in
NIDS scenarios presents notable shortcomings. Specifically,
when using a single GMVAE, the profile is constructed
exclusively for normal traffic. When attack traffic closely
resembles normal patterns, the single model finds it difficult
to detect subtle differences due to the absence of a reference
attack profile, resulting in a high risk of false negatives.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework called
Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder
(EDGMVAE). This framework builds independent profiles for
normal traffic and known attack traffic using two GMVAEs. By
combining their reconstruction probabilities, it enables more
accurate detection performance.
The proposed EDGMVAE is depicted in Fig. 4 and comprises three primary stages, i.e., data preprocessing, data
reconstruction, and detection. First, we preprocess the network traffic data. Subsequently, the preprocessed data x is
simultaneously fed into two GMVAEs for data reconstruction.
Specifically, GMVAE N is a model that has been trained
on normal traffic data, and GMVAE A has been trained on
known attack traffic data. During the detection stage, the reconstruction probabilities of x by GMVAE N and GMVAE A
are calculated, which reflect the models’ reconstruction effects
on the input data. Then, through logical fusion operation, the
reconstruction probabilities of the input data from the two
models are combined to determine whether an intrusion has
occurred.
B. Stage1-Data Preprocessing
Raw network traffic data has many issues and must be preprocessed before being used as model input. The preprocessing
steps in this paper are as follows:
• Data cleaning. The infinite values are replaced with -1,
and the missing values are filled with the mean value.

• Data conversion. The traffic contains various string-type
features (e.g., “state”,“’proto’, “service”, etc.) that need
to be encoded into numerical format. We use OneHotEncoder from scikit-learn for this conversion.
• Standardization. To address the diverse value ranges of
continuous features and facilitate faster convergence of
the gradient descent algorithm, we standardize the data
using StandardScaler from scikit-learn.
C. Stage2-Data Reconstruction
We employ two GMVAEs to reconstruct traffic data.
GMVAE N is trained solely on normal traffic to construct a
normal profile, while GMVAE A is trained on known attack
traffic to build an attack profile. The preprocessed traffic data x
is simultaneously fed into the two GMVAEs for reconstruction.
By analyzing the reconstruction results from these models,
we can assess whether an attack has occurred. Specifically, if
GMVAE N has good reconstruction result while GMVAE A
has poor result, it indicates that the traffic is more likely to be
normal; on the contrary, it may suggest that the traffic is more
likely to be an attack. The detailed detection method will be
explained in the following content.
D. Stage3-Detection
We use the reconstruction probability as the criterion,
which indicates the likelihood of data being reconstructed by
the model. Unlike reconstruction error, its normalized range
between 0 and 1 allows for direct comparison of reconstruction
quality across different data points or models, eliminating the
impact of data magnitude. The reconstruction probability can
be calculated as follows:
L

Preconstruction =

k−1

1 XX
0
p(yi |x)P(xi l |zli )
L

(10)

l=1 i=0

where L is the number of Monte Carlo simulations, used to
reduce the impact of sampling randomness; k is the number of
Gaussian mixture components; p(yi |x) represents the probability that the input data belongs to the i-th Gaussian component;
0
0
and P(xi l |zli ) is the probability of generating xi l from the latent
variable zli in the l-th Monte Carlo sampling. We calculate the
reconstruction probability pn for the input data x using the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

GMVAE N model, and pa for the same input data x using
GMVAE A model.
Algorithm 1 Logical Fusion
Require: reconstruction probabilities pn and pa , thresholds τn and τa
Ensure: ‘normal’ or ‘attack’
1: if pn ≥ τn andpa ≥ τa then
2:
result ← ‘attack0
.Covert known attack
3: end if
4: if pn ≥ τn andpa < τa then
5:
result ← ‘normal0
.Normal traffic
6: end if
7: if pn < τn andpa ≤ τa then
8:
result ← ‘attack0
.New attack
9: end if
10: if pn < τn andpa > τa then
11:
result ← ‘attack0
.Explicit known attack
12: end if
13: return result
Subsequently, we employ a logical fusion operation to
obtain the detection results, as shown in Algorithm 1. pn
reflects the match degree of the tested traffic with normal
traffic, while pa reflects the match degree of the tested traffic
with known attack traffic. By comparing the two reconstruction
probabilities with their respective thresholds through logical
fusion operations, four scenarios can be formed. i) When pn
exceeds the threshold τn and pa exceeds the threshold τa , it
means that the input data x matches both the characteristics
of normal traffic and the characteristics of known attack traffic
very well. In this case, we classify it as a covert known
attack, i.e. a known attack type whose behaviour is highly
similar to normal traffic and difficult to identify. ii) When pn
exceeds τn while pa falls below τa , it indicates that the input
data x is more consistent with the characteristics of normal
traffic and has a lower match degree with known attack types.
Therefore, we classify it as normal traffic. iii) When pn is
below τn and pa is below τa , it means that the input data
x does not match either the characteristics of normal traffic
or the characteristics of known attack traffic. In this case, we
classify it as a new attack. iv) When pn is below τn while pa
is above τa , it means that the input data x does not match the
characteristics of normal traffic but matches the characteristics
of known attack traffic very well. In this case, we classify it as
an explicit known attack, i.e. a known attack whose features
are obvious and whose behaviour is significantly different from
normal traffic.
V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
1) Indicators: We utilize several metrics to evaluate the
performance of our proposed method, which are calculated
using the True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False
Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN).
• Accuracy. The proportion of total samples that are predicted correctly.
TP + TN
Accuracy =
.
(11)
T P + T N + FP + FN

7

TABLE III
DATA T YPES AND S IZES OF CHD

• Recall. The proportion of actual positive samples that are
correctly predicted as positive.
TP
.
(12)
T P + FN
• Precision. The proportion of samples predicted as positive
that are actually positive.
Recall =

TP
.
(13)
T P + FP
• F1-Score. The harmonic mean of precision and recall.
Precision =

Precision × Recall
.
(14)
Precision + Recall
• False Positive Rate (FPR). The proportion of real negative
samples that are mistakenly predicted to be positive.
F1 − S core = 2 ×

FP
.
(15)
T N + FP
• False Negative Rate (FNR). The proportion of real positive samples that are mistakenly predicted to be negative.
FN
FNR =
.
(16)
FN + T P
2) Description of Datasets: The two datasets used to evaluate the performance of the proposed NIDS are: Car Hacking
Dataset (CHD) [10] for evaluating detection of intrusions in invehicle communication and UNSW-NB15 Dataset (UBD) [11]
for evaluating detection of intrusions generated from external
networks. The description of the two datasets is as follows:
• Car Hacking Dataset. CHD provides authentic, realworld CAN traffic captured from a physical vehicle
during actual message injection attacks, making it
highly relevant for evaluating in-vehicle network intrusion detection. Table III shows the detailed information
of CHD. The attack types include DoS, fuzzy, spoofing the drive gear, and spoofing the RPM gauge. The
important features are extracted for use: CAN ID,
DLC, DATA[0], DATA[1], DATA[2], DATA[3], DATA[4]
DATA[5], DATA[6], DATA[7].
• UNSW-NB15 Dataset. UBD was developed to evaluate
NIDS by constructing a synthetic laboratory environment
using the IXIA PerfectStorm tool to generate a blend
of normal and attack traffic. Given that real-world IoV
attack data is extremely scarce due to privacy constraints
and acquisition challenges, UBD’s synthetic environment
serves as a practical alternative. Although not originating from actual vehicles, its simulated traffic patterns
closely resemble network interactions between vehicles
FPR =

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE IV
DATA T YPES AND S IZES OF UBD

TABLE V
E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT C ONFIGURATION

and external communications. UBD includes network
flow data of nine major families of attacks, which are
also common in external network attacks on IoV. Table IV
shows the details about the dataset used to evaluate the
proposed NIDS. The dataset contains 49 features, such
as source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port,
duration, source bytes, and destination bytes.
3) Implementation Details: Table V displays the simulation
environment. The experimental setup is shown in Table VI.
We design nine scenarios across the two datasets to thoroughly
assess our method’s performance. Scenarios Sce@1 to Sce@5
are designed for the CHD, while Sce@5 to Sce@9 for UBD.
Each scenario involves training two models: GMVAE N,
using only normal data, and GMVAE A, using a subset of
known attack data. During the testing phase, we evaluate the
model’s ability to detect known data types (normal data and
attacks encountered during training) and new attacks (attacks
that were not seen during training). New attacks are defined
as attack types not included in the training dataset. These new
attacks are designed to simulate real-world scenarios in which
attackers may use tactics that have not been seen before. For
example, in Table VI, for Sce@1, the attack types used during
training are DoS, Fuzzy and Spoofing. Therefore, the spoofing
RPM gauge is considered a new attack.
Model details are provided in Table VII. The models
use fully connected layes, with structures specified in the
‘structure’ column. The selection of k is determined through
a grid search method, with k ∈ {3, 4, 5, 6, 7} and ELBO as
the evaluation metric. For Sce@1 to Sce@4, k is set to 5
for GMVAE N based on empirical findings, and to 3 for
GMVAE A, corresponding to the three known attack types
during training. For Sce@5 to Sce@9, k remains at 5 for
GMVAE N, and is adjusted to 4 for GMVAE A, corresponding to four known attack types in training. Additionally, we set
the weighting factor α to 0.5, and use the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.001. Each batch consists of 40 samples,

and the entire training process will go through 500 epochs.
The reconstruction probability is calculated using Monte Carlo
sampling, with the number of samples set to 10. Lastly, we
set two detection thresholds: τn at 0.6 and τa at 0.9.
4) Competitive Baseline Configuration: We select four
competitive baselines for fair and consistent performance
comparison, all aligned with our research context and validated
in state-of-the-art studies: OLGAM [18], BF+Bi-LSTM [25],
PSSAE [29] and EBHM [19]. These methods represent the latest advances in intrusion detection research, and have garnered
widespread attention owing to their superior performance in
addressing complex network traffic patterns. The following is
an overview of these approaches:
• OLGAM. Combines log-ratio oversampling, outlier
detection, and metric learning for IoV intrusion detection, using LightGBM to achieve strong performance on
datasets like UNSW-NB15.
• BF+Bi-LSTM. A multi-stage intrusion detection framework that uses state-based Bloom filters for initial
anomaly screening and Bi-LSTM for temporal feature
learning.
• PSSAE. A pseudo-siamese stacked autoencoder network
that extracts deep semantic features via unsupervised
pre-training and supervised fine-tuning for traffic classification.
• EBHM. A hybrid ensemble intrusion detection model
addresses class imbalance by processing data through kmeans clustering sampling, Z-score normalization, and
SMOTE. It selects high-performance algorithms and fuses
results via a stacking strategy.
All competitive baselines are re-implemented under a unified framework with identical scenario setup (Table VII), metrics (Section V-A1), and experimental environment (Table V),
without specialized augmentation to ensure fairness.
B. Detection Performance
1) Illustration of Detection Process: Fig. 5 illustrates the
detection process of EDGMVAE for various types of traffic
in the Sce@1 scenario, displaying ten records per traffic type
due to space limitations. Fig. 5a shows the detection of normal
traffic, where pn mostly exceeds the threshold τn , and pa falls
below τa , enabling accurate classification of normal traffic.
According to the logical fusion algorithm, the sixth record,
highlighted in green, indicates a false positive. Fig. 5b to
Fig. 5d illustrate the detection process for known attacks,
where it is observed that pn is generally below τn while pa
exceeds τa . Notably, when pn exceeds τn and pa exceeds τa ,
we classify the traffic as an ‘attack’ that is similar to normal
traffic. This ensures not only the detection of known attacks
with obvious patterns but also those with covert patterns that
resemble normal traffic. The records marked by green lines
indicate false negatives. Finally, Fig. 5e illustrates the detection
of new attacks, with both pn and pa notbaly below the
thresholds. This aligns with our expectations and demonstrates
that EDGMVAE effectively identifies most new attacks.
2) Performance on CHD: Table VIII summarizes the performance of the EDGMVAE on CHD. For normal traffic
detection, EDGMVAE achieves an average accuracy rate of

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

9

TABLE VI
E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

TABLE VII
D ETAILS OF P ROPOSED M ODEL

Fig. 5. Illustrating the detection process using Sce@1.

99.04% and an average false positive rate of merely 0.96%,
indicating our method’s high reliability in identifying normal traffic patterns. For known attacks, it attains an average

accuracy of 98.54%, recall of 98.52%, precision of 98.44%,
and f1-score of 98.47%, with false negative rate of just 1.48%.
These metrics highlight its strong performance in identifying

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE ON CHD

known attack patterns. For new attacks, EDGMVAE achieves
an average accuracy of 92.47%, recall of 90.97%, precision
of 92.06%, f1-score of 91.51%, and false negative rate of
9.03%. Despite the greater challenges posed by new attacks,
these results highlight EDGMVAE’s strong adaptability and
potential for detecting new attack patterns.
3) Performance on UBD: Table IX presents the performance of EDGMVAE on UBD. For normal traffic detection,
EDGMVAE achieves an impressive average accuracy of
98.91% and false positive rate of 1.09%. For known attacks,
it attains an average accuracy of 98.59%, recall of 98.43%,
precision of 98.40%, f1-score of 98.41%, and false negative
rate of 1.57%. For new attacks, it achieves an average accuracy
of 89.07%, recall of 89.85%, precision of 89.28%, f1-score of
89.56%, and false negative rate of 10.15%.
C. Ablation Study
We perform an ablation study in which we compare our
method’s performance with four ablative baselines:
• VAE N: VAE trained exclusively on normal data, which
classifies traffic as normal if the reconstruction probability
exceeds the threshold τn , and as attack otherwise.
• VAE A: VAE trained exclusively on known attack data,
which identifies traffic as attack if the reconstruction
probability surpasses the threshold τa , and as normal
otherwise.
• GMVAE N: GMVAE trained exclusively on normal
data, which labels traffic as normal if the reconstruction

probability is above the threshold τn , and as attack if it
is below.
• GMVAE A: GMVAE trained exclusively on known
attack data, which identifies traffic as attack if the reconstruction probability is greater than τa , and as normal
otherwise.
We conduct a comprehensive comparison of our method
with baseline methods across two datasets. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7
illustrate the detection performance of various models for
normal traffic, known attack traffic, and new attack traffic on
the CHD and UBD datasets, respectively.
1) Comparison on the Detection of Normal Traffic:
VAE N and VAE A exhibit relatively lower average accuracy and higher FPR in detecting normal traffic. This is
because VAE models, using a single Gaussian distribution in
the latent space, cannot accurately capture the complex underlying data features. In contrast, GMVAE N and GMVAE A
exhibit a marked improvement in average accuracy. This
enhancement can be credited to the use of Gaussian Mixture
distributions as the latent space, which more effectively learns
and represents the patterns in complex data. Overall, the
results indicate that our EDGMVAE model, which integrates
the strengths of GMVAE N and GMVAE A, achieves the
highest accuracy and the lowest FPR.
2) Comparison on the Detection of Known Attack Traffic: It
is evident that VAE A outperforms VAE N, and GMAVE A
outperforms GMVAE N. This can be attributed to the fact that
VAE A and GMVAE A are specifically trained to learn the
characteristics of known attacks, making them more sensitive

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

11

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE ON UBD

Fig. 6. Comparison of EDGMVAE with other baselines on the CHD.

to such patterns. GMVAE N and GMVAE A further demonstrate improvements over VAE N and VAE A, respectively,
thereby highlighting the advantages of using Gaussian Mixture distribution as the latent space. Ultimately, EDGMVAE

achieves the best performance, confirming its reliability in
detecting known attacks.
3) Comparison on the Detection of New Attack Traffic:
VAE A and GMVAE A perform poorly in detecting new

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 7. Comparison of EDGMVAE with other baselines on the UBD.
TABLE X
C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ON CHD

TABLE XI
C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ON UBD

attacks, nearly failing in this regard. This is because they are
trained only on known attack patterns and tend to misclassify
unseen new attacks as normal traffic. In contrast, VAE N
and GMVAE N show better performance in identifying new
attacks, demonstrating a certain level of ability to recognize
such patterns, although their FPR remains relatively high.
EDGMVAE exhibits the most significant effectiveness in
detecting new attacks. This confirms that our method maintains a high detection accuracy when faced with previously
unseen attack patterns, showcasing its broad applicability and
robustness in practical applications.

D. Computational Efficiency Analysis
To address the practical deployment feasibility of EDGMVAE in resource-constrained IoV environments, we analyze
its computational complexity and time/space overhead, with
comparisons to baseline models.
1) Theoretical Complexity Analysis: In the detection phase
of EDGMVAE, the time complexity is determined by the
key steps involved in computing reconstruction probabilities

using two parallel GMVAEs. Each GMVAE processes input
traffic (with dimension d) through fully connected layers (with
hidden layer size h) to extract latent features, involving matrix
multiplications that contribute a complexity of O(d · h). For
k Gaussian mixture components, the probability of the input
belonging to each component is computed, adding O(k · h). To
calculate the reconstruction probability Preconstruction , L Monte
Carlo samples are drawn, with each sample involving data
reconstruction from latent variables and generation probability
computation, contributing O(L · k · d). Since the two GMVAE
models run in parallel, the total time complexity for EDGMVAE inference remains O(d·h+k·h+L·k·d). Space complexity
is determined by the storage requirements for the parameters
of the two GMVAEs, which is O(2 · (d · h + h2 + k · h)).
2) Practical Overhead Measurements: We measure the
computational overhead using the experimental environment
in Table V, with results in Table XII. We must explicitly acknowledge the gap between simulation and actual
in-vehicle hardware; however, preliminary simulation-based
results remain valuable for feasibility assessment because:
(1) The relative overhead differences between methods

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES

TABLE XII
P RACTICAL OVERHEAD M EASUREMENTS

remain valid; (2) Modern AI-capable vehicular platforms
(e.g., NVIDIA Drive AGX) provide enhanced AI inference
optimization, which theoretically yields lower overhead than
our simulation environment.
EDGMVAE takes 17 hours to train for 500 epochs, which
is approximately twice as long as GMVAE. This training time
is acceptable for IoV scenarios, given that intrusion detection
models are usually trained offline prior to deployment and
updated periodically rather than in real time. In terms of
detection latency, EDGMVAE processes each traffic in 2.7ms,
which is marginally longer than GMVAE (2.2ms) and VAE
(1.8ms). EDGMVAE’s peak memory usage is 11.1 GB, which
is roughly twice that of GMVAE (5.6 GB), due to the
storage of parameters for two GMVAEs. Thus, our method
demonstrates feasibility in the IoV environment based on
preliminary experimental evidence. Direct validation on invehicle hardware remains essential future work that we will
actively pursue.

13

car hacking dataset for in-vehicle communication and the
UNSWNB-15 dataset for external network communication.
We carefully design various scenarios to thoroughly assess
the model’s ability. The evaluation results demonstrate that
our method not only excels in detecting known attacks but
also outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in detecting
new attacks, highlighting its robustness and adaptability.
Despite the promising results achieved, we must acknowledge two main limitations of this study. First, experimental
evaluation uses public datasets CHD and UBD with predefined, static attack patterns, which fail to fully capture
real IoV adaptive attacks, potentially limiting generalization
assessment to complex landscapes. Second, the logical fusion
rules adopt fixed thresholds (τn , τa ), which may compromise
long-term detection stability under dynamic IoV traffic drifts
(e.g., evolving normal behaviors or iterative attack strategies).
Future research will focus on the following directions:
(1) Overcome predefined dataset limitations by extending evaluation to dynamic adaptive attacks, e.g., collecting real-road
attack flow data with automakers or using adversarial generation to build strategy-iterating dynamic samples. (2) Design
an online update mechanism to enable the model to adapt
to the dynamic changes of the IoV environment. (3) Deploy
EDGMVAE in large-scale IoV environments to further verify
its efficiency and practical value. (4) Given that adversarial
samples may bypass NIDS, it is necessary to conduct an indepth evaluation of the robustness of the proposed NIDS when
facing adversarial attacks.

E. Comparison With Other Methods
Tables X and XI present the comparative results on the
CHD and UBD, respectively. In the identification of normal
traffic, compared with other methods, the false positive rate of
EDGMVAE is 0.67% to 4.22% lower on the CHD and 0.54%
to 3.6% lower on the UBD. In the detection of known attacks,
EDGMVAE performs comparably with other methods and is
generally superior to them. In the detection of new attacks,
EDGMVAE shows significant advantages. Specifically, EDGMVAE achieves 6.66% to 12.83% higher accuracy and 5.3%
to 13.61% lower false negative rate than other methods on
the CHD, and achieves 5.13% to 21.91% higher accuracy and
5.28% to 24.37% lower false negative rate than other methods
on the UBD.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We propose the Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder (EDGMVAE) to detect various network
intrusions in the IoV, including new attacks. Our method
consists of three main stages. In the initial stage, we preprocess the traffic data to prepare it for subsequent analysis.
In the second stage, we reconstruct the traffic data using
two distinct GMVAEs: GMVAE N, trained on normal traffic,
and GMVAE A, trained on known attack traffic. We then
obtain the reconstruction probabilities of the traffic data from
both GMVAEs. By integrating these probabilities via a logical fusion procedure, we improve the model’s capability to
identify new attacks. We conduct tests on two benchmark
datasets to evaluate the efficacy of our methodology: the

R EFERENCES
[1]

W. Zhuang, Q. Ye, F. Lyu, N. Cheng, and J. Ren, “SDN/NFV-empowered
future IoV with enhanced communication, computing, and caching,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 274–291, Feb. 2020.
[2] B. Ji et al., “Research on optimal intelligent routing algorithm for
IoV with machine learning and smart contract,” Digit. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 47–55, Feb. 2023.
[3] H. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Chen, and W. Wang, “Evolutionary V2X technologies
toward the Internet of Vehicles: Challenges and opportunities,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 308–323, Feb. 2020.
[4] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11,
pp. 1–40, Nov. 2023.
[5] K. Huang, R. Xian, M. Xian, H. Wang, and L. Ni, “A comprehensive
intrusion detection method for the Internet of Vehicles based on federated learning architecture,” Comput. Secur., vol. 147, Dec. 2024, Art.
no. 104067.
[6] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based
intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547,
pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021.
[7] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain:
A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 2356–2426, 4th Quart., 2023.
[8] M. A. Alsoufi et al., “Anomaly-based intrusion detection systems in IoT
using deep learning: A systematic literature review,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11,
no. 18, p. 8383, Sep. 2021.
[9] T. Saba, A. Rehman, T. Sadad, H. Kolivand, and S. A. Bahaj, “Anomalybased intrusion detection system for IoT networks through deep learning
model,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 99, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 107810.
[10] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[12] M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, H. Ochiai, D. Fall, and Y. Kadobayashi,
“LSTM-based intrusion detection system for in-vehicle can bus
communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 185489–185502, 2020.
[13] P. Wei, B. Wang, X. Dai, L. Li, and F. He, “A novel intrusion detection
model for the CAN bus packet of in-vehicle network based on attention
mechanism and autoencoder,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 14–21, Feb. 2023.
[14] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat
analysis for automotive CAN networks: A GAN model-based intrusion
detection technique,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 4467–4477, Jul. 2021.
[15] F. Luo, J. Wang, Z. Li, and C. Luo, “An anomaly detection model
for in-vehicle networks based on lightweight convolution with spectral
residuals,” Comput. Secur., vol. 151, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 104304.
[16] J. Shi, Z. Xie, L. Dong, X. Jiang, and X. Jin, “IDS-DEC: A novel
intrusion detection for CAN bus traffic based on deep embedded
clustering,” Veh. Commun., vol. 49, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 100830.
[17] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[18] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion detection
on Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling, outlier
detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831, Nov.
2021.
[19] I. Ullah, I. Khalil, X. Bai, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, and M. S. Hossain,
“An ensemble-based hybrid model for the detection of attacks in the
Internet of Vehicular Things,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 17914–17927, Oct. 2025.
[20] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for invehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
[21] J. Cao et al., “Anomaly detection for in-vehicle network using selfsupervised learning with vehicle-cloud collaboration update,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 7454–7466, Jul. 2024.
[22] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[23] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage
intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using
rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[24] Y. Huang and M. Ma, “AILL-IDS: An automatic incremental lifetime
learning intrusion detection system for vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 2669–2678, Feb. 2025.
[25] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An
enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious
activities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022.
[26] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
“IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
[27] N. Nissar, N. Naja, and A. Jamali, “Securing VANETs: Multi-objective
intrusion detection with variational autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3867–3874, Feb. 2024.
[28] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
2025.
[29] S. Tu, M. Waqas, A. Badshah, M. Yin, and G. Abbas, “Network
intrusion detection system (NIDS) based on pseudo-siamese stacked
autoencoders in fog computing,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 4317–4327, Nov. 2023.

Yaowen Zheng is currently a Professor with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He has published more than
30 papers in conferences and journals, including
USENIX Security, ASPLOS, ISSTA, and TOSEM.
His research interests include system security, particularly in vulnerability discovery and security
protection for embedded devices.

Shizhao Tian is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests
include the IoT security, the IoV security, and intrusion detection.

Hongsong Zhu (Member, IEEE) is currently the
Ph.D. Supervisor and a Professor with the Institute
of Information Engineering, CAS, and the University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has published
more than 120 papers in journals and conferences,
such as USENIX, AAAI, TDSC, and ACL. His
research interests include the IoT security, network
attack and defense, and big data security analysis.

Laile Xi received the bachelor’s degree in engineering and the bachelor’s degree in law from Nankai
University and the master’s degree in engineering
from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include the
intersected areas of the IoT security, fuzzing, and
AIGC.

Shenghao Lin received the degree from the School
of Software, Tsinghua University, in 2021. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. His research interests include ADS testing,
fuzzing, and LLM.

Yubo Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He is an Engineer. His current
research interests include large language models,
network attack and defense, and network simulation
and emulation.