4572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Neural Collapse-Based Class-Incremental Learning
for Encrypted Traffic Classification
Qin Zeng , Dan Qu , Hao Zhang , and Yaqi Chen
Abstract—The rapid evolution of internet technologies has
intensified network traffic dynamics due to the emergence of
novel encryption protocols, posing significant challenges to traffic
classification. Incremental learning, which enables continuous
adaptation to emerging tasks, has emerged as a promising
approach to enhance the sustainability of encrypted traffic
classification. However, existing methods fail to address the
substantial feature representation disparities across incremental
tasks, resulting in suboptimal model adaptability. Inspired by
the Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon—which reveals that
deep neural networks’ final-layer features collapse to class-mean
vectors forming a Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF)
with classifier weights, thereby constituting an optimal geometric structure for classification tasks—we propose NCIL-ETC,
a Neural Collapse-based Incremental Learning framework for
Encrypted Traffic Classification. Our approach employs a pretrained Mamba as the feature extraction backbone, leveraging
its linear-complexity computational properties to significantly
reduce resource overhead. Simultaneously, we introduce a preallocated ETF classifier that establishes an optimal classification
structure covering observed classes. Through feature-classifier
alignment constraints during incremental learning, our method
promotes both new and historical class features to converge
toward ETF vertices, thereby preserving globally optimal category relationships. Extensive experimental evaluations on four
public benchmarks demonstrate that NCIL-ETC achieves stateof-the-art performance, surpassing baseline methods in both
classification accuracy and incremental learning capability.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, class incremental learning, neural collapse.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the advancement of information technologies,
encrypted traffic classification has become a critical
component in network management and cybersecurity [1], [2],
[3]. The ultimate objective is to categorize encrypted traffic
from diverse network services and applications, enabling identification of application sources and user behaviors. Existing
traffic classification methodologies primarily fall into three
categories: plaintext-based, machine learning-based [4], [5],
[6], and deep learning-based approaches [7], [8]. Plaintextbased methods have become inefficient due to the opacity of

W

Received 31 August 2025; revised 13 February 2026 and 30 March 2026;
accepted 24 April 2026. Date of publication 29 April 2026; date of current
version 15 May 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.62171470) and Henan Province Major
Industrial “Challenge-Based Innovation” (No.251000210300). The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was R. Zhang. (Corresponding author: Dan Qu.)
Qin Zeng, Hao Zhang, and Yaqi Chen are with Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: zengqin2361@163.com;
haozhang0126@163.com; chyaqi163@163.com).
Dan Qu is with Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001,
China, and also with the Laboratory for Advanced Computing and Intelligence
Engineering, Wuxi 214000, China (e-mail: qudan xd@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3688767

Fig. 1. Neural Collapse-guided Class-Incremental Learning Framework.
(a) Before incremental training, limited feature distribution disparity exists
between new and historical tasks, resulting in ambiguous boundaries that
challenge model discrimination. (b) After incremental training, novel class
feature vectors converge toward a pre-allocated ETF classifier structure. This
alignment induces Neural Collapse, where all categories form an optimal
classification geometry characterized by maximum inter-class separability and
uniform angular spacing.

encrypted traffic. While machine learning approaches rely on
manually engineered features, deep learning models - particularly pre-trained deep learning architectures - demonstrate
superior performance by automatically extracting features
from massive unsupervised data, achieving remarkable classification results.
However, the continuous emergence of new network services and applications necessitates classifiers to adapt to
novel traffic types, requiring retraining on newly collected
extended datasets. Retraining entire models is computationally
expensive and time-consuming, particularly for self-supervised
pre-trained frameworks [9], [10]. Such overhead limits the
scalability of comprehensive network traffic classification.
Recent years have witnessed the application of classincremental learning (CIL) in computer vision and related
domains [11], [12]. Built upon continual learning paradigms,
CIL enables models to incrementally adapt to new classes
while mitigating catastrophic forgetting of historical knowledge. Although CIL has been explored in encrypted traffic
classification with promising results [13], [14], existing
approaches address catastrophic forgetting through diverse
strategies including regularization, replay, and parameter isolation. Regularization methods [15] constrain parameter changes
to preserve old knowledge but hinder new feature learning when inter-class correlations are weak. Replay-based
approaches [16] mix stored or generated samples with incremental data, though they require large memory buffers and
depend heavily on sample selection or generation quality.
Parameter isolation techniques [17] increase model complexity
through task-specific parameters, leading to parameter accumulation with incremental steps. Moreover, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), these methods fail to account for significant feature

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

representation disparities between old and new tasks, thereby
failing to provide a systematic geometric bias for maintaining
consistent inter-task category relationships.
To address this limitation, Neural Collapse [18] reveals
that final-layer features of deep neural networks collapse
to class-mean vectors aligned with classifier prototypes,
forming a ETF structure characterized by maximum and
uniform inter-class separability. Inspired by this geometric
insight, we propose NCIL-ETC —a Neural Collapse-based
Class-Incremental Learning framework for Encrypted Traffic Classification, marking the first application of Neural
Collapse in this domain to our knowledge. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), our approach introduces a pre-allocated ETF classifier that establishes an optimal structure for all observed
classes. Through feature replay strategies during incremental
training, we maintain cross-task optimal category relationships. This method employs an incremental encrypted traffic
classification network architecture. First, a Mamba-based feature extraction module derives generalizable encrypted traffic
features. Then, a feature mapping module projects these
unified features into a ETF classifier, forming the optimal
geometric configuration for classification tasks.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the
first successful integration of Neural Collapse theory into
incremental encrypted traffic classification. By constructing an optimal geometric structure for classification tasks
based on this theory and incorporating a feature replay
strategy, our approach effectively mitigates catastrophic
forgetting and overfitting.
• We propose an innovative incremental encrypted traffic
classification framework, devise a Mamba-based pretrained feature extractor aimed at efficiently extracting
generalized traffic features and introduce a ETF classifier
to build an optimal structural classifier, guaranteeing the
capture of the most favorable category relationships in
every learning process.
• Extensive experimental results on four datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms the baseline in both
basic classification capability and incremental capability,
achieving remarkable performance.
The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II
reviews related work in encrypted traffic classification,
class-incremental learning, and Neural Collapse. Section III
introduces preliminary concepts. The proposed NCIL-ETC
methodology is detailed in Section IV, followed by experimental results. Section VI and VII concludes the paper with
discussion and future research directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
Due to the opaque nature of encrypted traffic, most early
studies employ machine learning (ML) techniques that rely
on manually designed statistical features. Kong et al. [19]
extracted 41 IP traffic-related features for anomaly detection
using support vector machines (SVMs). Moore et al. [20],
[21] developed a comprehensive set of 249 statistical features, achieving robust classification performance via Bayesian
neural networks. Taylor et al. [5] proposed AppScanner, a
random forest-based method for real-time smartphone app
identification from encrypted traffic. However, these featureengineered approaches face generalization challenges in novel

4573

scenarios due to their dependency on predefined feature
sets.
Deep learning methods automate feature extraction from
raw traffic data, eliminating manual feature engineering.
Wang et al. [22] transformed the first 784 bytes of traffic
payloads into 28 × 28 grayscale images, applying 1D-CNNs
for end-to-end classification. Building upon this visual representation paradigm, FlowPic [23] introduced a generic
method for transforming encrypted traffic flows into imagelike representations, enabling the application of powerful
convolutional neural networks for classification. Subsequently,
mini-FlowPic [24] proposed an image-enhanced representation
method, further enhancing the practicality of visual-based
encrypted traffic classification. Liu et al. [25] introduced
FS-Net, leveraging encoder-decoder architectures to capture
latent sequential patterns. Graph-based techniques include DEGNN [26], which models traffic interaction graphs (TIGs),
and TFE-GNN [27], which constructs byte-level graphs for
structural feature learning. While effective, these supervised
methods require extensive labeled data.
Pre-trained models have gained prominence by learning
latent representations from unlabeled traffic data. ET-BERT
[9] employs BERT to pre-train on traffic burst patterns, while
YaTC [10] uses masked autoencoding (MAE) with matrixform representations (MFR). Ginige et al. [28] enhanced
open-set classification via TrafficGPT, a GPT-2-adapted feature extractor. Inspired by large language models, NetGPT [29]
and Lens [30] developed foundational models for both traffic
analysis and generation. However, these Transformer-based
methods suffer from quadratic computational complexity in
self-attention, limiting their efficiency for long sequences or
real-time applications.
The Mamba architecture [31], a hardware-efficient state
space model (SSM), offers linear-time complexity for longsequence modeling. Its success in vision tasks (e.g., Vision
Mamba [32], VMamba [33]) has motivated adaptations
for traffic analysis. NetMamba [34] and ET-Mamba [35]
demonstrate Mamba’s potential for reducing parameters and
computational overhead in traffic pre-training. Building on
these advances, we propose a Mamba-based feature extractor pre-trained with MAE to achieve efficient and scalable
encrypted traffic representation learning.
B. Class-Incremental Learning
Class-incremental learning, a core paradigm of continual
learning, addresses catastrophic forgetting—the tendency of
models to overwrite previously learned knowledge when
trained on new tasks. Existing methods can be categorized into
three groups: regularization, replay, and parameter isolation.
1) Regularization: Regularization-based methods prevent
the overwriting of old knowledge caused by overfitting to
new tasks by constraining the update of model parameters.
Li et al. [36] proposed Learning without Forgetting (LwF),
which uses predictions from the old model on new tasks as soft
labels, preserving old-task discriminability via distillation loss.
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [37] quantifies parameter
importance for old tasks using the Fisher information matrix,
applying stronger regularization to critical parameters. Synaptic Intelligence (SI) [38] and Memory Aware Synapses (MAS)
[39] compute parameter sensitivity through loss gradients and
output variations, respectively, to guide regularization.
2) Replay: Replay-based methods alleviate forgetting by
storing samples from old tasks or generating pseudo-samples

4574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

to simulate joint training. iCaRL [40] combines nearest-mean
classification and knowledge distillation. It employs a memory
buffer to store samples from old classes, thereby balancing
the influence of new and old samples. Building on iCaRL,
Castro et al. [41] proposed the EEIL method, which achieves
end-to-end incremental learning. Chen et al. [42] introduced
a framework called One vs Rest (OvR). This framework
utilizes samples with a herding effect to automatically adjust
the dataset capacity while updating the classifier. Shin et al.
[43] put forward the Deep Generative Replay (DGR) method,
which simulates old data using a generative model. He et al.
[44] combined samples from old tasks with generated pseudosamples and proposed the ESGR method. This method
leverages Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to generate synthetic data and combines it with a small number of
real samples to alleviate catastrophic forgetting.
3) Parameter Isolation: Parameter-isolation-based methods offer dedicated space for acquiring new knowledge by
gradually expanding the network scale or increasing model
parameters, while ensuring that the previously learned information remains undisturbed. Wang et al. [45] proposed a novel
two-stage learning paradigm called FOSTER, which achieves a
balance between knowledge retention and new-class learning
through dynamic module expansion and knowledge distillation. Yan et al. [46] introduced a method named DER, which
enables class-incremental learning by dynamically expanding
feature extraction, combined with weight augmentation and
a memory module. Zhou et al. [47] proposed the SimpleCIL
method, which utilizes frozen pre-trained models, and the Aper
method, which efficiently fine-tunes pre-trained models and
constructs classifier prototypes. Both methods make full use
of the generalization ability of pre-trained models.
In recent years, some researchers have introduced incremental learning techniques into encrypted traffic classification.
Chen et al. [19] prevented catastrophic forgetting by sampling and storing training samples to replay the knowledge
of old classes. Du et al. [17] extended the classifier for
class-incremental learning in network intrusion detection by
designing a parameter-isolation approach with branched classifiers. Cai et al. [48] addressed the issues of traffic ambiguity
and data class imbalance in incremental encrypted classification through pre-allocating vector prototypes and applying
knowledge distillation.
The method proposed in this paper improves upon those
based on replay and parameter isolation. By freezing the
feature extraction module and efficiently generating pseudosamples based on stored class vector prototypes for incremental learning training, it significantly reduces the spatial
complexity associated with storing old samples. Moreover, due
to the introduction of a frozen ETF classifier in this paper,
it aims to maintain the optimal relationships among classes
without increasing model parameters during the incremental
process.
C. Neural Collapse
Neural Collapse [18] refers to the phenomenon where the
features in the last layer of a neural network and the classifier
gradually converge during training, forming an Equiangular
Tight Frame. Practical research has demonstrated that Neural
Collapse can be observed regardless of whether cross-entropy
loss [49], [50], [51], [52] or Mean Squared Error (MSE)
loss [53], [54], [55], [56] is employed. This phenomenon is
prevalent in deep learning training and remains unaffected by

factors such as datasets, network architectures, and optimization algorithms. Consequently, Neural Collapse is applicable
to almost all standard classification tasks.
Recently, some methods have induced Neural Collapse during training by fixing the classifier [57] or designing specific
loss functions [58]. Moreover, the theory of Neural Collapse
has also been applied in fields such as transfer learning [59],
open-set recognition [60], and incremental learning [61], [62],
leading to significant performance improvements.
Inspired by the aforementioned research, to the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to apply the Neural Collapse theory
to the field of encrypted traffic classification. By introducing a
frozen Equiangular Tight Frame classifier, we ensure that the
features satisfy the Neural Collapse theory after each training
iteration, thereby obtaining an optimal classification structure.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Equiangular Tight Frame Classifier
Neural Collapse refers to the phenomenon where, after a
model is trained on balanced data, the features in the model’s
last layer and the classifier form a specific geometric structure.
This structure can be defined as follows:
Definition 1: A ETF refers to a matrix composed of K
vectors in the Rd space that satisfies the following conditions:
r


K
1
T
E=
U IK − 1K 1K
(1)
K −1
K
Let E = [e1 , . . . , eK ] ∈ R(d×K) , and U ∈ Rd×K allows for
rotation and satisfies U T U = IK , where IK is the identity
matrix and 1K is the all-ones vector.
All column vectors in E have the same l2 norm, and the
1
inner product between any pair of vectors is − K−1
, that is:
eTk1 ek2 =

1
K
δk1 k2 −
, ∀k1 , k2 ∈ [1, K]
K −1
K −1

(2)

such that δk1 k2 = 1 when k1 = k2 and δk1 k2 = 0 otherwise.
The phenomenon of Neural Collapse encompasses the following four characteristics:
(NC1): The last-layer features belonging to the same class
P(k)
will converge to the class mean, that is, the covariance W →

P(k)
0, where W = Avgi (µk,i − µk )(µk,i − µk )T , Here, µk,i
represents the feature of sample i in class k, and µk denotes
the intra-class mean feature of class k.
(NC2): After global mean centering, the intra-class means
of each class will converge to the vertices of the simplex
Equiangular Tight Frame described in Definition 1, satisfying
−µG
, where µG
Eq. (2) for 1 ≤ k ≤ K. Here, µ̂k = k µµkk −µ
Gk
represents the global mean.
(NC3): After global mean centering, the intra-class means
of each class will align (become parallel) with their corresponding classifier weights. This implies that the classifier
weights will converge to the same simplex Equiangular Tight
k
Frame, i.e., µ̂k = k ω
ωk k , where 1 ≤ k ≤ K and ωk represents
the weight vector for class k in the classifier.
(NC4): When conditions (NC1)-(NC3) hold, the model’s
predictions based on logit values can be simplified to nearestclass-center classification, that is, argmaxk < µ, ωk >=
argmink k µ − µk k , where < · > denotes the inner product
operator, and µ represents the last-layer feature of a sample
used for prediction.

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4575

Fig. 2. Overview of NCIL-ETC. The model architecture primarily consists of a feature extractor, a feature mapping module, and an ETF classifier. During
the base step, the feature extractor is fine-tuned to adapt to downstream tasks, while it is frozen in each incremental learning step to ensure the generalization
capability of the extracted features. The feature mapping module aligns the features with the optimal structure, satisfying the neural collapse properties. In
the incremental learning step, it is fine-tuned through a feature replay strategy to continuously align with the prototypes of the ETF classifier.

Based on NC2 and NC3, neural collapse has already defined
the optimal geometric structure for the model’s last-layer
features and the classifier. Therefore, we directly fix the
classifier by constructing it with a simplex equiangular tight
frame structure to maintain this optimality. We introduce an
ETF classifier, initialized as a simplex ETF classifier, and
keep it unchanged during training. For newly added classes in
incremental learning scenarios, we assign pre-reserved optimal
classification vectors as guidance to ensure the transfer of an
optimally structured feature representation for each category
throughout the learning process.
IV. M ETHOD
In this section, we first describe the incremental learning problem in Section IV-A. Then, Section IV-B mainly
introduces the representation method for encrypted traffic.
Sections IV-C and IV-D respectively present the model architecture and the training approach. Fig. 2 provides an overview
of the NCIL-ETC method.
A. Problem Description
The objective of class incremental learning in encrypted
traffic classification is to develop a model capable of continuously integrating new traffic categories. We formalize the
incremental learning process as a sequence of T tasks, with
the corresponding datasets denoted as:
D = {D1 , D2 , . . ., DT }

(3)

For each task t ∈ {1, . . ., T }, the dataset D
t
t
t
{Dtrain
, Dvalid
, Dtest
} is structured as follows:
nt

t

=

t
train
• Training Set: Dtrain
= {(xi , yi )}i=1
, where xi
denotes the input traffic representation and yi is the label.

• Label Space: The labels in task t belong to a specific
range:
yi ∈ {Kt−1 , Kt−1 + 1, . . ., Kt − 1}

(4)

where Kt represents the cumulative number of classes
observed up to task t.
• Task Disjointness: The class sets C1 , C2 , . . ., CT are
mutually non-overlapping, such that Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ for any
i 6= j.
The ultimate goal is to maintain high classification accuracy
across all seen classes while mitigating catastrophic forgetting.
Consequently, after the t-th incremental session, the model is
evaluated on the cumulative test set:
(1:t)
Dtest =

t
[

i
Dtest

(5)

i=1

Based on traditional class-incremental learning methods,
we assume that there is a pre-trained model available for
initializing the feature extractor f (·) and represent the linear
classifier as h(·).
B. Encrypted Traffic Representation
In recent years, some studies have transformed raw network
traffic into grayscale or RGB color images as traffic representations, and these works have demonstrated the promising
prospects of encrypted traffic analysis methods that take
images as input. However, most of the existing image representation methods do not take into account the interaction
relationships between packet headers and messages.
In this section, we propose a simple yet effective traffic
representation method that converts raw traffic bytes into
grayscale images while preserving header and interaction

4576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

In the classifier part, we introduce ETF classifier as the
classifier to guide the optimization of feature representations.
The vectors in the classifier are defined by Eq. (1) and are
generated in advance during the base stage and then frozen.

Fig. 3. The process of converting raw traffic into grayscale images.

information. We partition the traffic into bidirectional flows
based on the five-tuple and filter out some network flows that
contain no valid information or are erroneous. The process of
converting raw traffic bytes into grayscale images is illustrated
in Fig. 3. First, we take the first B0 bytes from the first M
packets of each bidirectional flow. If a packet has insufficient
bytes, we pad it with zero bytes; otherwise, we truncate the
excess bytes. Next, we reshape the B0 bytes in each packet
into a matrix ∈ Rh×W . Finally, we concatenate the samples
to form a grayscale image ∈ R1×(M ×h)×W . For ease of
processing, we typically set the image to be square, with
W = H = M × h. Additionally, for security and privacy
considerations, we replace the MAC and IP addresses in the
packets with all zeros.
C. Model Architecture
The model architecture of the proposed method in this paper
consists of three main components: feature extractor, feature
mapping module, and classifier.
The feature extractor is implemented based on the Mamba
model. Mamba is a state space model. Compared to the
quadratic computational complexity of the Transformer’s
attention mechanism, it boasts efficient linear computational
complexity. Moreover, by incorporating a selection mechanism, it can dynamically adjust the current input state
and selectively propagate or ignore information. To process
grayscale images with the Mamba model, we first partition
the image matrix x ∈ RH×W into two-dimensional patches
2
xp ∈ RN ×P . Here, P is the patch size and N = HW/P 2
is the total number of patches. Subsequently, each patch xp is
linearly projected into a d-dimensional vector, and a positional
embedding Epos ∈ RN ×d is added to it, as shown below:
X0 = [x1p E0 ; x2p E0 ; . . . ; xN
p E0 ] + Epos

(6)
2

where, xnp represents the n-th patch of x, and E0 ∈ RP ×d is
a learnable projection matrix.
To make the model conform to the characteristics of neural
collapse, we also need to guide the transformation of feature
representations towards specific classifier weights. Therefore,
we introduce a Feature Mapping module (FM), denoted as
P (·). This module consists of two layers of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) and a batch normalization layer. Positioned
after the feature extractor, the Feature Mapping module is used
to map features to the ETF classifier and align them with the
pre-allocated prototypes in the ETF classifier:
zi = f (xi ), z0i = P (zi )

(7)

where, zi and z0i represent the extracted and mapped features,
respectively.

D. Training Method
During the pre-training step, this paper adopts Masked
Autoencoder pre-training approach from the field of computer
vision for unsupervised pre-training, aiming to obtain generalized traffic feature representations. First, a high percentage
of random masking is applied to the input traffic grayscale
images, with only a very small portion of visible, unmasked
patches being fed into the model. The encoder strives to
learn effective features from the remaining patches, while the
decoder reconstructs the masked parts of the grayscale images
using the encoder’s output and mask information. The pretraining is guided by a reconstruction loss, specifically the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the real pixels yreal and
the predicted pixels yrec :
LP retrain = M SE(yreal , yrec )

(8)

After pre-training, we solely extract the encoder parameters
to serve as the feature extractor for downstream classification
tasks and the incremental learning process. Since the optimization objective of the feature extractor during pre-training
is the grayscale image reconstruction task, which differs from
the downstream encrypted traffic classification task, we finetune the feature extractor in the base stage to adapt it to the
classification task and reduce the domain gap. Meanwhile, we
freeze the feature extractor during the incremental learning
process to preserve its generalized feature representation.
To enable the feature extractor to achieve a better feature
distribution representation, we introduce a contrastive learning
loss to guide the training of the feature extractor in the base
stage:
LCL = −

B X
X
i=1 j6=i

0

esim(zi ,zj )/τ
sim(zi ,zk )/τ 0
k6=i e

βij log P

(9)

where, B represents the batch size, βij is a binary indicator
that denotes whether zi and zj belong to the same class (1 for
the same class and 0 otherwise), sim(·) calculates the cosine
similarity, and τ is the temperature coefficient for contrastive
learning.
To ensure structural alignment of the feature mapping
module and mitigate representation drift, we employ an
Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF) based classifier. The process
is divided into the base stage and the incremental stages:
• Base Stage Allocation: In the initial stage, we preallocate the ETF weights for the base classes as:
E1 = [e1 , e2 , . . ., eC1 ] ∈ Rd×C1

(10)

By fixing these weights as geometric anchors, the model
prevents significant weight fluctuations, thereby guiding
the feature extractor to achieve optimal structural alignment from the outset.
• Incremental Expansion: During the t-th incremental
session, we assign new ETF weights to the emerging
classes while keeping the weights of previously learned
classes strictly fixed. For the second stage, the updated
classifier E2 is constructed as:
E2 = [E1 ; eC1 +1 , . . ., eC1 +C2 ] ∈ Rd×(C1 +C2 )

(11)

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

This incremental assignment strategy ensures that the
newly added classes are integrated into the existing rigid
geometric structure without interfering with the established class boundaries.
Since, in NC4, the logits prediction of a model satisfying
neural collapse is equivalent to the nearest-center prediction,
we employ both the MSE loss and the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss
to guide the optimal structural alignment. Let z0i ∈ Rd be the
feature extracted from the i-th sample, and Wp ∈ Rd×d denote
the weights of the feature mapping module. The mapped
feature is denoted as ẑi = z0i Wp .
The MSE loss aims to minimize the Euclidean distance
between the mapped feature and its corresponding ETF vertex
ek ∈ Rd :
N
1 X
LM SE =
||ẑi − eyi ||22
(12)
N i=1
where yi ∈ {1, . . . , K} is the class label of the i-th sample.
For the classification branch, we use the Fixed ETF matrix
E = [e1 ; . . . ; eK ] ∈ Rd×K as the classifier’s weights. The
logits for the i-th sample are computed as li = zˆi T E ∈ RK .
The multi-class Cross-Entropy loss is then defined as:
!
N
1 X
eli,yi
LCE =
− log PK
(13)
li,j
N i=1
j=1 e
where li,yi is the logit corresponding to the ground-truth class.
No additional non-linear activation (e.g., Sigmoid or ReLU)
is applied to the logits before the Softmax operation.
The final objective function of the model during the base
stage is expressed as:
LBASE = LM SE + LCE + ξLCL

(14)

where, ξ is the hyperparameter for contrastive learning.
Since the feature extractor is frozen during incremental
learning steps, it is necessary to supervise the feature mapping
process in the incremental step to ensure that the feature
transfer aligns with the characteristics of neural collapse.
To address the catastrophic forgetting problem, we adopt a
feature replay strategy, consistent with the approach in [62], by
replaying features from previous tasks during current training.
Specifically, we compute the parameters of the feature
distribution for all existing classes extracted by the feature
extractor for use in replay. The pre-trained model generates
highly generalizable representations. However, a single Gaussian distribution may fail to capture multi-modal structures
or complex intra-class variations, even if NC1 is partially
satisfied. To provide a more flexible and precise density
estimation, we model the feature distribution of each existing
class as a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).
For each class c, the distribution is represented as a weighted
sum of K Gaussian components:
p(f |c) =

K
X

πc,k N (f |µc,k , Σc,k )

(15)

k=1

where πc,k , µc,k , and Σc,k denote the mixing coefficient,
mean vector, and covariance matrix of the k-th component for
class c, respectively. These parameters are optimized using
the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm to maximize
the log-likelihood of the extracted features.
During incremental learning, instead of sampling from a
unimodal distribution, we generate simulated samples by first

4577

selecting a component k according to the mixing weights πc
and then sampling from the corresponding Gaussian component:
K
X
c
Dgen
∼
πc,k N (µc,k , Σc,k )
(16)
k=1

This multi-modal replay strategy allows the model to better
preserve the diversity of previously learned knowledge and
mitigates catastrophic forgetting in complex feature spaces.
Algorithm 1 NCIL-ETC Algorithm Implementation
Input: Dataset D, pre-trained model fθ , randomly initialized feature mapping module W , ETF classifier E
Output: Encrypted traffic classifier
BASE T RAINING(D, fθ , W, E)
for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
for batch b = 1, 2, . . . do
1
Select samples from base session Dtrain
Compute outputs using Eq. (7)
end for
Update fθ and W via LBASE (Eq. (14))
end for
P
Save statistics: µ,
of old classes
Store parameters: fθ0 , W1
I NCREMENTALT RAINING(D, fθ0 , Wi−1 , Ei )
for session i = 2, 3,P
. . . do
Load Ei = E [: Ci , :]
Load parameters: fθ0 , Wi−1
for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
SPi−1 Ci−1 j
i
Select samples from Dtrain
and j=1
Dgen
Compute outputs using Eq. (7)
Update Wi−1 via LCIL (Eq. (17))
end for
P
Update statistics: µ,
of old classes
Store parameters: Wi
end for
During the class-incremental learning step, the traint
ing data consists of the original training set Dtrain
and
t
=
the replayed simulated feature sample set Dreplay
{(zi , yi )|yi ∈ 0, . . . , Kt−1 − 1}. The objective function is
given by:
LCIL = LM SE + LCE
(17)
The incremental learning process described in this paper is
formalized as Alg. 1. During the base session, the ETF classifier is initialized with reserved classification vectors, while
feature extractor and feature mapping modules undergo finetuning. In subsequent sessions, the feature extractor parameters
are frozen, the ETF classifier is expanded, and stored prototype
vectors of old classes are used to generate synthetic oldclass samples. These synthetic samples are combined with
new-session data for mixed-domain training, during which the
feature mapping module parameters are loaded and updated.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Dataset and Experiment Setup
1) Datasets: We utilize the ISCX-VPN [63],USTC-TFC
[22],CIC-IDS2017 [64] and CSTNET-TLS 1.3 [9] datasets as
benchmark datasets. The ISCX-VPN dataset consists of traffic

4578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE I
I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND H YPERPARAMETERS

data collected through a Virtual Private Network (VPN) and
can be categorized into 6 classes based on different communication applications. The USTC-TFC dataset comprises
malware and benign application traffic, including 10 classes
of malicious traffic and 10 classes of benign traffic. The CICIDS2017 dataset collects five days of network traffic, including
benign traffic and 11 types of malicious traffic. The CSTNETTLS 1.3 dataset is collected under CSTNET, encompassing
120 applications based on the new encrypted protocol TLS
1.3. Each dataset provides Pcap files of the original traffic,
which we process using the raw bytes from the Pcap files
as described previously. The processing for each dataset is as
follows:
The ISCX-VPN dataset contains 6 classes in total, with
the base session comprising four classes and the new session
including 2 classes, with 1 class per session.
The USTC-TFC dataset contains a total of 20 classes,
with the base session set to 12 classes and the new session
containing 8 classes, with 4 classes per session.
The CIC-IDS2017 dataset contains a total of 12 classes,
with the base session set to 8 classes and the new session
containing 4 classes, with 2 classes per session.
The CSTNET-TLS 1.3 dataset contains a total of 120
classes, with the base session set to 100 classes and the new
session containing 20 classes, with 10 classes per session.
2) Implementation Details: Each traffic session is represented using a fixed number of packets with a predefined
payload size, and the detailed configuration is summarized
in Table I. For all four benchmark datasets, we adopt a
single unified MAE-pretrained Mamba backbone for downstream classification and incremental learning experiments.
The backbone is pre-trained on the combined training sets
of ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC datasets with the settings in
Table I, which is designed to verify the generalization and
sustainability of our method across different encrypted traffic
scenarios. No additional dataset-specific MAE pre-training is
conducted for CIC-IDS2017 and CSTNET-TLS 1.3, ensuring
the reproducibility of our experiments and the validity of
generalization claims. After pre-training, the encoder is used to
initialize the backbone for contrastive base training. Both base
and incremental training sessions share the same optimizer
and training strategy, and early stopping is not applied to
ensure full convergence of replayed features. All experiments are implemented using PyTorch under a unified Python
environment.

3) Evaluation Metrics: To quantitatively assess the performance and anti-forgetting capabilities of different methods,
following [17], we employ two typical metrics: accuracy (AC)
and F1 score, along with the performance degradation rate
(PD) to evaluate and compare model performance. PD is used
to measure the accuracy drop rate of the sessions, that is,
PD=A-B, where A is the accuracy of the base session, and B is
the accuracy of the last incremental session. Additionally, we
use normalized confusion matrices to specifically analyze the
classification capability of each class during the incremental
process.
B. Classification Capability Analysis
In this section, we will evaluate the classification performance of NCIL-ETC when incremental tasks are not
considered, treating it as an ordinary encrypted traffic classification task to test the fundamental capabilities of the
Mamba-based pre-trained model. To validate the effectiveness
of our approach, we selected the following five encrypted
traffic classification algorithms as baselines for comparison:
AppScanner, BIND, ET-BERT, YaTC, and CLE-TFE. Table II
presents the experimental results on the four datasets. The
results show that NCIL-ETC outperforms existing methods,
achieving a classification accuracy of 99.15% on the ISCXVPN dataset, 99.47% on the USTC-TFC dataset, 99.26%
on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and 94.26%. Compared to the
baseline methods, the main advantage of our approach lies
in the optimal structural alignment based on neural collapse,
which constructs the best category relationships through the
ETF classifier.
C. Incremental Learning Baseline Comparison
We compared our method with nine baseline approaches on
four datasets. The results are illustrated in Fig. 4, with detailed
information presented in Tables III and IV. The comparison
reveals that our method achieves the highest accuracy in each
session round and has the lowest PD value, outperforming the
second-best baseline by 4.96%, 2.82%, 2.5% and 1.02% on
the four datasets, respectively.
The fine-tuning method faces severe catastrophic forgetting
during incremental learning because it only focuses on acquiring knowledge about new classes. EWC and LwF methods can
preserve the model’s class knowledge through regularization,
but they restrict the model’s ability to learn new knowledge.
OvR and iCaRL methods maintain a balance between old
and new class knowledge by retaining some old samples,
yet their effectiveness depends on the quality and quantity
of the retained samples. FOSTER and SimpleCIL methods
keep parameters related to previous classes unchanged while
allocating new parameters in different forms, but they increase
the number of parameters and do not consider the optimal
relationships among classes. Although the NC-FSCIL and
NC-PTM-CIL methods also adopt the incremental learning
framework based on neural collapse, they fail to obtain more
superior feature representations in the base step and employ
a relatively simplistic feature replay process. Compared with
the baseline methods, the advantage of our approach lies
in leveraging the incremental learning framework based on
neural collapse and acquiring a favorable feature distribution
in the base step via contrastive learning. Our method surpasses
the baseline methods on four encrypted traffic classification
datasets, achieving the best performance.

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4579

TABLE II
C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS OF E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION A LGORITHMS . R ESULTS A RE IN THE F ORMAT
avg.(±std.) FOR 10 RUNS . B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

Fig. 4. Comparison of different incremental learning methods on four datasets.

D. Forging Analysis
We employed normalized confusion matrices to conduct
a specific evaluation of NCIL-ETC’s incremental learning
capability. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 present the standardized confusion
matrices for these datasets. In the incremental sessions, bold
blue lines are utilized to distinguish between the regions
of base session classes and incremental classes from new
sessions. In the confusion matrices, the x-axis denotes predicted values, while the y-axis represents true values, with
the diagonal indicating the model’s prediction accuracy. As
illustrated in Fig. 5, by observing the confusion matrices of
the final results for both datasets using the Finetune and iCaRL
methods, it is evident that both methods suffer from significant
class knowledge forgetting, with a substantial number of oldclass samples being misclassified as new classes. In contrast,
as shown in Fig. 6 (the confusion matrix of our proposed
method), our approach substantially alleviates catastrophic forgetting. On the ISCX-VPN dataset, after incremental learning,

the old classes maintain an accuracy of at least 94%, while
the new classes achieve an accuracy of at least 83%. On the
USTC-TFC dataset, apart from the Geodo and Neris classes,
which experience a relatively pronounced decline in accuracy,
all other original classes retain an accuracy of over 98%.
For the new classes, except for the Htbot class, the accuracy
of the remaining classes is above 80%. The relatively rapid
decline in accuracy for some classes may be attributed to
the freezing of the pre-trained model, which results in similar
feature distributions between certain new and old classes. In
summary, our method demonstrates the ability to effectively
classify new categories while preserving knowledge of old
classes after each incremental learning session.
Furthermore, we compare the per-class PD values across the
four benchmark datasets in Fig. 7, where a smaller enclosed
area corresponds to better performance stability of the method.
It can be observed that the NCIL-ETC method achieves stable
and superior performance on all four datasets, with the most

4580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ETHODS ON ISCX-VPN AND USTC-TFC DATASETS . R ESULTS A RE IN THE F ORMAT
avg.(±std.) FOR 10 RUNS . B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ETHODS ON CIC-IDS2017 AND CSTNET-TLS 1.3 DATASETS . R ESULTS A RE IN THE F ORMAT
avg.(±std.) FOR 10 RUNS . B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

compact coverage area in the radar charts (indicated by the
purple solid line with circular markers).
In cybersecurity, False Positives (FPs) and False Negatives (FNs) are critical for intrusion detection systems: high
FNs miss intrusions and risk data theft, while excessive FPs
increase human analysis costs. As shown in Fig. 8, NCIL-ETC
achieves low False Negative Rates (FNRs): 2% (Session 1)
and 4% (Session 2) on CIC-IDS2017, with a maximum of
4%. Benign samples are misclassified as Bot attacks at 6%
(Session 1) and 8% (Session 2). Thus, NCIL-ETC maintains
robust classification after multiple incremental steps.
E. Multi-Step Class-Incremental Learning
To further analyze the incremental learning capability of our
method, we conducted multi-step class incremental learning

experiments. Specifically, we represented the class division
as ‘B-m Inc-n’, where m indicates the number of categories
in the first step and n denotes the number of categories in
each incremental learning step. We set up five incremental
experiments on the USTC-TFC and CIC-IDS2017 datasets,
while conducting experiments with both five and ten steps on
the CSTNET-TLS 1.3 dataset. The results of these experiments
are illustrated in Fig. 9.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method
achieves strong performance even under multiple rounds of
class incremental learning, particularly in the USTC-TFC and
CIC-IDS2017 datasets, where the final accuracies reached
92.37% and 96.44%, respectively. This outcome provides
compelling evidence that the NCIL-ETC method effectively
balances the retention of old class features with the learning
of new class features.

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4581

Fig. 7. PD for each base step category comparison results.
Fig. 5. The standardized confusion matrices of the final results for the
Finetune and iCaRL methods on the two datasets.

Fig. 8. Normalized confusion matrices on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset between
two sessions.
TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDY ON THE P ROPOSED M ODULES . FT: F INE -T UNING
THE F EATURE E XTRACTOR , ETF: ETF C LASSIFIER , FM: F EATURE
√
M APPING M ODULE , OSA: O PTIMAL S TRUCTURE A LIGNMENT. :
M ODULE I S E NABLED , ×: M ODULE I S D ISABLED

Fig. 6. The standardized confusion matrices of the final results for NCIL-ETC
on the ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC datasets.

F. Ablation Analysis
We conducted ablation experiments to analyze the effectiveness of different modules in the model, with the results
presented in Table V. For ease of representation, we define
fine-tuning the feature extractor, ETF classifier, feature mapping module, and optimal structure alignment as FT, ETF, FM,
and OSA, respectively.
By observing Table V, it can be seen that after incorporating
the ETF classifier, the PD value decreases significantly, dropping by 7.59% and 14.57% on the ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC

datasets, respectively. This indicates that the ETF classifier can
substantially enhance the feature alignment between the pretrained model and downstream tasks.
When the feature extractor is frozen and the feature mapping
module is employed, the PD value decreases by 2.63% and
1.91% on the ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC datasets, respectively. This demonstrates that the pre-trained model exhibits
good generalization ability, and freezing the pre-trained model
can mitigate the forgetting of old classes. After introducing
optimal structure alignment, the PD value decreases by 2.16%
and 0.81% on the ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC datasets, respectively. This shows that optimal structure alignment can better

4582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Performance comparison of class incremental learning methods with different incremental configurations.

We attribute this phenomenon to the optimization dynamics
of incremental learning. When the classifier is dynamically
updated, the model is forced to repeatedly search for new
convergence equilibria at each incremental stage, resulting
in increased optimization difficulty. In contrast, a fixed ETF
classifier provides a stable and consistent target for feature
learning, enabling both old and new class features to be aligned
within a unified and stable coordinate space. This design
effectively reduces feature drift and facilitates more stable
optimization, leading to improved performance in incremental
learning scenarios.

Fig. 10. Comparison of fixed vs. random initialization in ETF classifier.

guide the formation of optimal category relationships among
class features.
G. ETF Classifier Re-Normalized Analysis
We conduct an experimental analysis to compare two
strategies for the ETF classifier during incremental learning:
keeping the classifier fixed versus randomly reinitializing it at
each incremental step. The results are illustrated in Fig. 10. It
can be observed that maintaining a fixed ETF classifier consistently outperforms random reinitialization across all datasets.
This performance gap becomes particularly pronounced on the
CSTNET-TLS 1.3 dataset, which involves a larger number of
classes.

H. Comparison of Pre-Trained Models
We conducted a comparative analysis of the performance
of different pretrained models within our incremental learning
framework, as shown in Fig. 11. The experimental results
demonstrate that the Mamba pretrained model performs exceptionally well across most datasets and stages, particularly
on the ISCX-VPN and CSTNET-TLS 1.3 datasets, where
its accuracy consistently leads. Although YaTC shows some
advantage on the USTC-TFC dataset, its overall performance
fluctuates significantly. The line plot allows us to clearly
observe the performance trends of the different methods across
various stages, further supporting the superior performance of
the Mamba model in incremental learning tasks.
I. Complexity Analysis
We compared the floating-point operations (FLOPs) and
the number of model parameters of different method models
under the condition of batch size = 16, with the results shown

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4583

Fig. 11. Pre-trained model comparison for class incremental learning task.

Fig. 12. Comparison of computational costs.

in Fig. 12. By observation, it can be seen that our method,
owing to the use of the Mamba module with linear complexity,
has a lower computational load compared to the ET-BERT
and YaTC models that employ transformers with quadratic
complexity. Moreover, our method has the smallest number of
parameters, demonstrating the high efficiency of our approach.
Regarding storage efficiency, unlike methods such as iCaRL
that rely on storing raw samples, we adopt a generative
replay strategy. By only retaining the statistical parameters
of GMM for old-class features, the storage complexity is
reduced from the sample-level O(N × d) to the class-level
O(C × d), achieving an order-of-magnitude reduction in
memory footprint. Furthermore, by freezing the pre-trained
backbone network, fixing the ETF classifier, and only finetuning a lightweight feature mapping module, NCIL-ETC
does not introduce any new parameter structures during the
incremental learning process.

Fig. 13. t-SNE visualization of the outputs from the feature extractor.

Fig. 14. t-SNE visualization of the outputs from the feature extractor and
feature mapping module on ISCX-VPN dataset.

VI. D ISCUSSION
J. Visualization Analysis
In this section, we perform t-SNE visualization analysis on
the output vectors of the feature extractor for the test sets
of all classes in the final model, with the results shown in
Fig. 13. As shown in the figure, the feature extractor exhibits
a favorable initial feature distribution, which stems from the
Mamba-based pre-trained model. The features of each class
are relatively concentrated, which provides support for our
use of GMM for sample replay. Furthermore, we also conduct
t-SNE visualization analysis on the output vectors of the feature extractor and the feature mapping module for the ISCXVPN test set. As shown in Fig. 14, due to the freezing of the
feature extractor, aliasing occurs among incremental classes,
while the feature mapping module can improve the feature
distribution.

NCIL-ETC achieves excellent performance in encrypted
traffic classification and incremental learning by leveraging the
geometric optimality of Neural Collapse. Mamba backbone
enables efficient feature extraction, while the ETF classifier
and NC-alignment transform incremental learning from weight
optimization to feature-to-geometry alignment, decoupling
new class learning from old class preservation. Nevertheless,
critical limitations remain: (1) the fixed feature dimension d of
the ETF classifier restricts the maximum number of classes to
d+1, failing to maintain optimal geometric structure for ultralarge-scale classification; (2) freezing the Mamba backbone
mitigates catastrophic forgetting but causes feature ambiguity
for new classes with high similarity to historical ones, as the
shallow FM module cannot resolve deep feature aliasing; (3)
validated only on traditional benchmarks, NCIL-ETC lacks

4584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

robustness verification on emerging encrypted protocols (e.g.,
QUIC) and dynamic datasets (e.g., Tor), limiting its generalization to evolving network environments. Future research will
focus on dynamic feature dimension expansion, parameterefficient backbone fine-tuning, parallel FM module design, and
validation on new-generation encryption standards to address
these issues.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we simultaneously consider encrypted traffic
classification and incremental learning, proposing an incremental learning method for encrypted traffic classification
named NCIL-ETC. This method extracts efficient feature representations based on a pre-trained Mamba module. It utilizes
optimal structure alignment to align traffic features with an
ETF classifier, thereby obtaining the optimal class relationships. Building on this, it generates replay samples using the
saved mean and variance of old-class vector prototypes to
alleviate the issue of catastrophic forgetting. Experiments on
four public encrypted traffic classification benchmark datasets
demonstrate that NCIL-ETC exhibits superior traffic classification capability and robust incremental learning performance
compared with state-of-the-art methods.
Notably, this work has not yet verified the robustness of
NCIL-ETC on emerging encrypted protocols (e.g., QUIC) and
dynamic anonymous traffic datasets (e.g., Tor), which are key
challenges for encrypted traffic classification due to the continuous evolution of internet encryption technologies. Future
research will focus on addressing this limitation, along with
optimizing the ETF classifier for ultralarge-scale classification
and resolving deep feature aliasing for similar new traffic
classes, to further enhance the practicality of NCIL-ETC in
real-world network management and cybersecurity scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1]

M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, and A. Taherkordi, “Deep learning for network
traffic monitoring and analysis (NTMA): A survey,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 170, pp. 19–41, Mar. 2021.
[2] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022.
[3] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
2017, pp. 43–48.
[4] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018.
[5] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[6] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[7] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
[8] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
[9] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[10] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
37th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427.
[11] P. Mazumder, P. Singh, and P. Rai, “Few-shot lifelong learning,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2337–2345.

[12] D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, L. Ma, D. Xie, S. Pu, and D.-C. Zhan, “Fewshot class-incremental learning by sampling multi-phase tasks,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 12816–12831,
Nov. 2023.
[13] G. Bovenzi et al., “A first look at class incremental learning in deep
learning mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. 5th Netw. Traffic Meas.
Anal. Conf. (TMA), 2021.
[14] W. Zhu, X. Ma, Y. Jin, and R. Wang, “Iletc: Incremental learning for
encrypted traffic classification using generative replay and exemplar,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 224, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 109602.
[15] Y. Chen, Y. Tong, G. B. Hwee, Q. Cao, S. G. Razul, and Z. Lin,
“Encrypted mobile traffic classification with a few-shot incremental
learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Conf. Ind. Electron. Appl.
(ICIEA), Aug. 2023, pp. 40–45.
[16] G. Sun, T. Chen, Y. Su, and C. Li, “Internet traffic classification based
on incremental support vector machines,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 789–796, 2018.
[17] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot classincremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024.
[18] V. Papyan, X. Y. Han, and D. L. Donoho, “Prevalence of neural
collapse during the terminal phase of deep learning training,” 2020,
arXiv:2008.08186.
[19] L. Kong, G. Huang, and K. Wu, “Identification of abnormal network
traffic using support vector machine,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Parallel
Distrib. Comput., Appl. Technol. (PDCAT), Dec. 2017, pp. 288–292.
[20] A. Moore, D. Zuev, and M. Crogan, “Discriminators for use in flowbased classification,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Queen Mary Univ. London,
London, U.K., Tech. Rep. RR-05-13, 2013.
[21] T. Auld, A. W. Moore, and S. F. Gull, “Bayesian neural networks for
internet traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 223–239, Jan. 2007.
[22] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[23] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[24] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
Meas. Conf., Oct. 2022, pp. 647–654.
[25] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
- IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[26] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for
fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245,
May 2024, Art. no. 110372.
[27] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” 2023,
arXiv:2307.16713.
[28] J. Qu, X. Ma, and J. Li, “TrafficGPT: Breaking the token barrier for
efficient long traffic analysis and generation,” 2024, arXiv:2403.05822.
[29] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative
pretrained transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513.
[30] X. Li et al., “Lens: A knowledge-guided foundation model for network
traffic,” 2024, arXiv:2402.03646.
[31] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
selective state spaces,” 2023, arXiv:2312.00752.
[32] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
space model,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2024,
pp. 62429–62442.
[33] J. Jiao et al., “VMamba: Visual state space model,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 37, 2024, pp. 103031–103063.
[34] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba:
Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
mamba,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP), Oct.
2024, pp. 1–11.
[35] J. Xu, L. Chen, W. Xu, L. Dai, C. Wang, and L. Hu, “Et-mamba: A
mamba model for encrypted traffic classification,” Information, vol. 16,
no. 4, p. 314, 2025.
[36] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” in Proc. 14th Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), vol. 9908, Oct. 2016, pp. 614–629.
[37] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks,” 2016, arXiv:1612.00796.
[38] F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual learning through synaptic
intelligence,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3987–3995.

ZENG et al.: NC-BASED CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

[39] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars,
“Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,” in Proc. 15th
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), vol. 11207, 2018, pp. 144–161.
[40] S.-A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “ICaRL:
Incremental classifier and representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 5533–5542.
[41] F. M. Castro, M. J. Marin-Jimenez, N. Guil, C. Schmid, and K. Alahari,
“End-to-end incremental learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2018, pp. 241–257.
[42] Y. Chen, T. Zang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Ouyang, and P. Yang,
“Incremental learning for mobile encrypted traffic classification,” in
Proc. ICC - IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[43] O. Salman, I. H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab, “A review on
machine learning–based approaches for internet traffic classification,”
Ann. Telecommun., vol. 75, nos. 11–12, pp. 673–710, Dec. 2020.
[44] C. He, R. Wang, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Exemplar-supported generative
reproduction for class incremental learning,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis.
Conf. (BMVC), 2018, p. 98.
[45] F.-Y. Wang, D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, and D.-C. Zhan, “Foster: Feature
boosting and compression for class-incremental learning,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 398–414.
[46] S. Yan, J. Xie, and X. He, “DER: Dynamically expandable representation
for class incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 3013–3022.
[47] D.-W. Zhou, Z.-W. Cai, H.-J. Ye, D.-C. Zhan, and Z. Liu, “Revisiting
class-incremental learning with pre-trained models: Generalizability and
adaptivity are all you need,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 133, no. 3,
pp. 1012–1032, Mar. 2025.
[48] W. Cai, C. Hou, M. Cui, B. Wang, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “Incremental
encrypted traffic classification via contrastive prototype networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 250, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 110591.
[49] E. Weinan and S. Wojtowytsch, “On the emergence of simplex symmetry
in the final and penultimate layers of neural network classifiers,” 2020,
arXiv:2012.05420.
[50] J. Lu and S. Steinerberger, “Neural collapse with cross-entropy loss,”
2020, arXiv:2012.08465.
[51] Z. Zhu et al., “A geometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
2021, pp. 29820–29834.
[52] W. Ji, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, Z. Deng, and W. J. Su, “An unconstrained layerpeeled perspective on neural collapse,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2022.
[53] D. G. Mixon, H. Parshall, and J. Pi, “Neural collapse with unconstrained
features,” 2020, arXiv:2011.11619.
[54] J. Zhou, X. Li, T. Ding, C. You, Q. Qu, and Z. Zhu, “On the optimization
landscape of neural collapse under MSE loss: Global optimality with
unconstrained features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2022,
pp. 27179–27202.
[55] X. Y. Han, V. Papyan, and D. L. Donoho, “Neural collapse under mse
loss: Proximity to and dynamics on the central path,” in Proc. 10th Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022.
[56] T. Tirer and J. Bruna, “Extended unconstrained features model for
exploring deep neural collapse,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(ICML), 2022, pp. 21478–21505.
[57] S. Chen, X. Li, Z. Lin, D. Tao, L. Xie, and Y. Yang, “Inducing neural
collapse in imbalanced learning: Do we really need a learnable classifier
at the end of deep neural network?,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2022, pp. 37991–38002.
[58] L. Xie, Y. Yang, D. Cai, and X. He, “Neural collapse inspired
attraction–repulsion-balanced loss for imbalanced learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 527, pp. 60–70, Mar. 2023.
[59] T. Galanti, A. Gyorgy, and M. Hutter, “Generalization bounds
for few-shot transfer learning with pretrained classifiers,” 2022,
arXiv:2212.12532.
[60] C. Li, E. Zhang, C. Geng, and S. Chen, “Unlocking better closed-set
alignment based on neural collapse for open-set recognition,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 18227–18235.
[61] Y. Yang, H. Yuan, X. Li, Z. Lin, P. H. S. Torr, and D. Tao, “Neural collapse inspired feature-classifier alignment for few-shot class-incremental
learning,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.

4585

[62] K. Wei, Z. Xu, and C. Deng, “Compress to one point: Neural collapse
for pre-trained model-based class-incremental learning,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 21465–21473.
[63] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[64] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[65] H. Zhang, X. Xiao, L. Yu, Q. Li, Z. Ling, and Y. Zhang, “One train for
two tasks: An encrypted traffic classification framework using supervised
contrastive learning,” 2024, arXiv:2402.07501.

Qin Zeng is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in information and communication engineering with
Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou,
China. His current research interests include network
traffic classification and artificial intelligence.

Dan Qu was born in Jilin, China, in 1974. She
received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
information and communication engineering from
Zhengzhou Information Science and Technology
Institute, Zhengzhou, China, in 2004, 2007, and
2013, respectively. From 2016 to 2017, she was a
Visiting Scholar with the Computer Science Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. She is currently a
Professor with the College of Information System
Engineering, Information Engineering University.
Her research interests include speech signal processing, pattern recognition, machine learning, and natural language processing.

Hao Zhang received the B.S. and master’s degrees
in information and communication engineering from
Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou,
China, in 2019 and 2021, respectively, where he
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in speech
translation (information system engineering). His
research interests include automatic speech translation and machine translation.

Yaqi Chen is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in information and communication engineering with
Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou,
China. Her research interests include speech signal processing, continuous speech recognition, and
meta-learning.