5804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

NFTracker: Fine-Grained NFT Behavior Traffic
Identification Over Encrypted Tunnel
Ke Ding , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xiaoyan Hu , Member, IEEE, Zhuozhuo Shu,
Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Ruidong Li , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hua Wu , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) have completely
changed digital ownership and the decentralized economy. However, their anonymity and encrypted communication, conducted
over encrypted tunnels, pose a significant obstacle to regulating
illegal activities. Despite advances in encrypted traffic analysis,
fine-grained identification of NFT behaviors over encrypted
tunnels faces two critical challenges: 1) inexact segmentation of
continuous behavioral traffic, and 2) feature homogeneity due to
encryption-induced pattern obfuscation. In this paper, we propose
NFTracker, a novel framework to identify fine-grained NFT
behavioral traffic over encrypted tunnels. We design a traffic segmentation method to isolate behavioral units by leveraging traffic
bursts and distribution discrepancies. To combat feature homogeneity, we introduce a sliding-window-based spatio-temporal
feature extraction mechanism that captures localized action
fingerprints. Furthermore, we utilize a hybrid CNN-Transformer
model to integrate spatial patterns and temporal dependencies for
robust behavior identification. We evaluate NFTracker on realworld datasets covering five NFT behaviors (browsing, wallet
login, purchasing, selling, and minting). Experimental results
demonstrate that NFTracker achieves an average F1-score of
0.9212 on identifying NFT behavioral traffic, outperforming
state-of-the-art methods in encrypted tunnel scenarios.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic analysis, fingerprinting, nonfungible token, spatio-temporal feature extraction.

I. I NTRODUCTION

N

ON-FUNGIBLE Tokens (NFTs), as an emerging
paradigm of digital assets derived from blockchain

Received 24 July 2025; revised 16 October 2025 and 12 December 2025; accepted 18 January 2026. Date of publication 28 January
2026; date of current version 6 February 2026. This work was supported in part by National Key Research and Development Program of
China under Grant 2023YFB3106801, in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China Project under Grant 62472087, in part by
the Jiangsu Province Natural Science Foundation Project under Grant
BK20231413, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2242025K30025, and in part by Postgraduate
Research&Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province under Grant
KYCX25 0520. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Q. Ye. (Corresponding author:
Xiaoyan Hu.)
Ke Ding, Zhuozhuo Shu, Guang Cheng, and Hua Wu are with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189,
China (e-mail: keding@seu.edu.cn; 220215193@seu.edu.cn; chengguang@
seu.edu.cn; hwu@seu.edu.cn).
Xiaoyan Hu is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering and
the Engineering Research Center of Blockchain Application, Supervision and
Management, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189,
China, also with the Purple Mountain Laboratories for Network and Communication Security, Nanjing 211111, China, and also with Jiangsu Province
Engineering Research Center of Security for Ubiquitous Network, Nanjing
211189, China (e-mail: xyhu@njnet.edu.cn).
Ruidong Li is with the Institute of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa
University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan (e-mail: lrd@se.kanazawa-u.
ac.jp).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3658756

technology, have revolutionized digital ownership certification
mechanisms through their inherent non-fungible and indivisible characteristics. Capable of representing a wide range of
digital and physical assets, NFTs have reshaped markets for
art [1], collectibles [2], and gaming [3]. Serving as a conduit
for value between physical and digital dimensions, NFTs drive
growth in the digital economy through asset digitization and
decentralized value systems.
While NFT technology has demonstrated transformative
potential in many fields [4], its anonymity and decentralized nature have concurrently engendered novel cybercrime
risks [5]. Such crimes often utilize encrypted tunneling technology to conceal physical locations and communication
links, particularly in highly regulated regions. Encrypted
tunneling techniques use encrypted encapsulation mechanisms, such as SSL/TLS protocols, to conceal sensitive
operations as regular HTTPS traffic, thereby establishing highly covert network communication channels [6].
These encrypted tunnels help evade network supervision
systems [7]. Their concealment ability proves particularly
evident in criminal operations involving NFT cross-border
money laundering, contraband trade, and illegal information
dissemination.
Identifying the behaviors of NFT application traffic in
encrypted tunnels is necessary to investigate fine-grained criminal activities involving NFTs. Existing research has employed
traffic analysis techniques to explore Decentralized Application (DApp) fingerprinting [8], [9], but further identification
of specific user operations is still required. For instance,
regulators analyzing traffic patterns might detect that a corruption suspect has conducted many NFT sales activities,
potentially indicating illegal asset transfers. Similarly, frequent
NFT transactions by corporate holders could trigger money
laundering alerts, while repetitive wallet login attempts may
signal phishing attacks by malicious actors. These behavioral patterns require fine-grained traffic analysis to establish
correlations between network activities and on-chain operations, enabling forensic investigations and risk mitigation
within blockchain ecosystems. However, prior behavioral traffic identification research faces the subsequent two critical
challenges when applied to NFT traffic over encrypted
tunnels.
A. Inexact Behavioral Traffic Segmentation
Different behavioral definitions have their corresponding segmentation methods. Protocol-based definitions fail
in encrypted traffic due to data-frame obfuscation. Due
to transactional complexity, user-side operation mappings

2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

often struggle to align with NFT behaviors, introducing
semantic ambiguities in behavior characterization. Current
traffic segmentation methods face limitations. Sliding window
approximation [10] introduces pseudo split points that cannot
segment consecutive similar behaviors. Protocol-dependent
frame alignment [11] lacks generality in encrypted environments. Both fail to precisely isolate continuous or similar
behavioral units in dynamic networks.
B. NFT Traffic Feature Homogeneity
Due to the similar program interfaces of the same NFT
application, its generated traffic is strongly similar. Different
behaviors may also exhibit similar action logic, resulting
in similar traffic patterns. Encrypted tunnels use secondary
encryption and dynamic encapsulation to further homogenize
traffic patterns, amplifying intra-application feature overlap
and degrading fine-grained behavioral discrimination.
We propose NFTracker, a novel framework for fine-grained
NFT behavior identification over encrypted tunnels to address
these challenges. First, NFTracker utilizes burst and Wasserstein Distance (WD) to segment behavioral traffic, addressing inexact segmentation in continuous similar behaviors
encrypted by tunnels. It computes the WD difference between
the left and right windows around these candidates, using each
burst’s starting packet as the initial segmentation point. The
random forest model infers actual segmentation points based
on WD results that encrypted tunnels cannot conceal, filtering
out pseudo points. Second, NFTracker employs a sliding
window spatio-temporal feature extraction approach to capture
unique behavioral patterns from segmented traffic, thereby
solving the issue of feature homogeneity. Traverse sequences
of packet length/direction and time interval through a sliding
window to generate spatial and temporal feature matrices.
Appropriate window size and step size ensure full coverage
of the action segment, reducing noise from redundancy and
thereby improving the representational ability of behavioral
traffic features despite tunnel encryption. Finally, NFTracker
integrates a hybrid CNN-Transformer model to learn spatiotemporal features for accurate traffic classification under
encryption. It inputs spatial features into a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to extract local spatial patterns and uses
a transformer to capture the global dependencies of temporal
features. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose a framework for fine-grained NFT behavioral
traffic identification over encrypted tunnels, including
behavioral traffic segmentation, spatio-temporal feature
extraction, and hybrid model classification.
• We conduct a systematic analysis of the interaction patterns of five types of NFT-related traffic behaviors within
encrypted tunnels, revealing the differences in traffic
characteristics across different behaviors, including NFT
browsing, wallet login, NFT purchasing, NFT selling, and
NFT minting.
• We address inexact segmentation and feature homogeneity, two key technical challenges in behavioral traffic
identification, by designing a burst-WD-based behavioral
traffic segmentation method and a sliding-window-based
spatio-temporal feature extraction approach. We also elab-

5805

orate on their theoretical foundations for overcoming
these challenges.
• We implement a prototype of NFTracker and evaluate
it on two real-world datasets. Experimental results show
that NFTracker achieves higher identification precision
and outperforms baselines in encrypted tunnel scenarios.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
This section provides background on the encrypted tunnel
and related work on NFT behavior analysis, encrypted tunnel
traffic classification, and behavioral traffic identification.
A. Encrypted Tunnel
Regulators filter encrypted tunnel traffic to preliminarily find
illegal activities. An encrypted tunnel establishes an encrypted
communication path between two entities to ensure data transmission security. Compared with ordinary HTTPS, the tunnel
encrypts data content and hides the real destination IP, ports,
and communication purposes. It decouples the observable
endpoint from the actual service. Therefore, the sniffer only
observes the relay address and a long-lived outer flow instead
of per-request transactions. This paper focuses on applicationlevel tunnel V2Ray [12], a mainstream implementation of the
VMess [13] protocol.
When users initiate network requests through V2Ray clients,
the system encrypts them according to the configured settings and forwards them to the target servers. The server
decrypts the data and returns responses, which the V2Ray
client subsequently decrypts and delivers to users. VMess
is a stateless TCP-based encrypted transmission protocol. It
means that each data transmission has no effect on other
data transmissions before and after. VMess does not save
session information and encrypts each packet independently
during transmission, weakening the behavioral correlation
between packets. Each V2Ray instance defines inbound and
outbound protocols, and the protocol used by each is specified in the configuration. Preconfigured encryption keys and
parameters enable direct data transmission between clients
and servers without the handshake, enhancing communication
efficiency. V2Ray encapsulates original application-layer traffic into encrypted and authenticated VMess frames, and then
transports these encrypted VMess frames via transport mechanisms (e.g., TCP, WebSocket) over TLS as ordinary HTTPS
traffic. This reframes packet boundaries and aggregates frames.
Because heterogeneous applications are funneled through the
same encapsulation, the packet-level features become more
homogeneous across services. Essentially, VMess implements
secondary encryption and encapsulation of original TCP-layer
packets, which introduces latency but preserves fundamental
communication patterns.
B. NFT Behavior Analysis
NFTs are blockchain tokens representing unique ownership.
Their verification and transaction records rely on blockchain
smart contracts, ensuring secure trading and transfer. NFTs are
mainly built on Ethereum [14] smart contracts and adhere to
specific standards, such as ERC-721 [15] and ERC-1155 [16].

5806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Current NFT behavioral analysis methods primarily focus
on on-chain data. Wang et al. [17] build temporal transaction
graphs to analyze user behaviors and predict NFT prices. Niu
et al. [18] detect wash trading, which is coordinated selftrading with rapid round-trip trades of the same NFT by a
single trader or colluding wallets to inflate apparent demand
and reported price and volume, using transaction graphs and
strongly connected components. Huang et al. [19] characterize
on-chain behavior and exchange patterns to flag wash trading
and arbitrage. Cao et al. [20] simulate NFT markets with a
minimum substitute model and investigate stakeholder behavior. Che et al. [21] detect malicious cryptocurrency accounts
across platforms via interaction feature learning, highlighting
the value of modeling account interaction patterns for illicit
activity discovery.
The anonymity of blockchain prevents on-chain data from
locating real-world entities. Specifically, public ledgers record
wallet addresses and basic transaction metadata rather than
real-world identifiers. One user can control multiple addresses
or transact through custodial services that aggregate ownership, further hindering real-world entity resolution. Emerging
techniques address this limitation through network traffic
analysis. Shen et al. [8] proposed a DApp fingerprinting
method that builds traffic interaction graphs in which each
node denotes a packet by its length and edges encode intraburst and inter-burst links. They trained a classifier based
on a Graph Neural Network (GNN) to identify the DApp.
Karunanayake et al. [9] model each trace as a flow node and
use GNN-based node classification to fingerprint the DApp.
However, fine-grained behavior identification is beyond the
scope of these methods.
C. Encrypted Tunnel Traffic Classification
Several works have aimed to distinguish encrypted tunneling
traffic accurately. Xue et al. [22] employ the encapsulated
TLS handshake to identify obfuscated proxy traffic reliably.
Moreover, Xue et al. [23] use targeted protocol features
such as byte patterns, packet sizes, and server responses
to identify OpenVPN traffic. Regulators further infer which
websites and applications users have visited through traffic
fingerprinting. Chen et al. [24] leverage the causal relationship
between user requests and website responses to causally link
interaction packets from the same website into causal chains.
They employ contextual learning to capture dependencies
among these causal chains, enabling multi-label fingerprinting attacks over encrypted tunnels. Ma et al. [25] generate
encrypted traffic fingerprints by combining spatial associations through K-nearest neighbor comparisons and temporal
associations via frequent traffic subsequence mining, achieving
website classification under encrypted proxies. Shen et al. [26]
proposed a contrastive-learning-based method for robust malicious encrypted traffic detection, showing improved resilience
to traffic obfuscation. However, website-level inference alone
proves inadequate to resolve the challenges addressed in this
paper.
D. Behavioral Traffic Identification
Fine-grained behavioral traffic identification enables regulators to pinpoint illicit network activities effectively. It

comprises two critical phases: traffic segmentation and traffic
identification. Traffic segmentation encompasses three granularities: 1) Session/flow-based segmentation targeting coarsegrained behaviors (e.g., video, email). Xu et al. [27] perform
explainable encrypted traffic classification through sessionlevel path signature feature extraction. 2) Burst/time windowbased segmentation targeting fine-grained operations (e.g.,
bitcoin transactions, application interactions). Aiolli et al. [28]
defined bursts as consecutive packets within 1-second intervals combined with IP/port-based flow splitting. Ahmed
et al. [29] extract features from a fixed post-invocation
time window to fingerprint fine-grained voice commands.
3) Protocol transmission unit-based segmentation relying
on protocol specifications. Our previous work [11] segments Ethereum node interactions using RLPx frame headers
and ACK patterns. Although the classification is precise,
such protocol-dependent methods lack generalizability. Subsequently, traffic identification involves feature representation
and model classification. Classification approaches dynamically select traditional machine learning [28] or deep learning
[10], combining statistical, sequential, and composite features
according to specific scenario requirements.
Practical solutions require balancing the granularity of
segmentation, efficiency, and generalizability. The identification performance depends on feature engineering and model
adaptation. ActiveTracker [10] employs sliding windows to
create non-overlapping segments, constructs spatio-temporal
traffic matrices with spectral vectors, and applies the CNN
for application behavior identification. Hou et al. [30] utilize
bidirectional flow metrics, cumulative sizes, and length distributions with a random forest classifier. BehavSniffer [31]
integrates statistically screened features with GCN-extracted
traffic burst graph representations, achieving behavior identification via DNN-GNN joint training with linear fusion.
PACKETPRINT [32] employs sequential XGBoost to quantify
packet-application similarity and applies hierarchical clustering for traffic segmentation. It extracts packet structural
patterns via hierarchical bag-of-words and identifies user
actions with random forests.
III. T HREAT M ODEL
This paper considers that regulators obtain network traffic
through Internet service providers, aiming to further infer the
fine-grained behavior of users in NFT exchanges, such as
NFT browsing, wallet login, purchasing, selling, and minting, based on classified specific NFT application traffic over
encrypted tunnels. Regulators train identification models based
on labeled behavioral traffic datasets, then segment captured
application traffic, and extract traffic features to identify finegrained behaviors currently being executed by users. For
example, suppose regulators already have the traffic of users
conducting NFT purchase activities on the OpenSea exchange
through V2Ray. In that case, they can infer whether users
secretly purchase on the OpenSea exchange over V2Ray
through real-time traffic identification.
Specifically, we assume a regulator’s sniffer between
encrypted tunnel clients and servers. Figure 1 shows a typical
NFT fine-grained behavior identification scenario. Original
traffic is generated between NFT application clients and

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

5807

with specific actions [34], preserving the integrity of unique
behavioral signatures and enhancing discriminative feature
representation.
Hybrid Model Classification: NFTracker employs a hybrid
CNN-Transformer model to fuse spatial and temporal features. A CNN processes the spatial feature matrix to capture
local spatial patterns. At the same time, the temporal feature
matrix is fed into a Transformer encoder to model long-range
dependencies through multi-head attention mechanisms. The
outputs are concatenated and fed into fully connected layers
with softmax activation to generate the final behavioral traffic
classification probabilities, achieving robust identification of
five NFT behaviors: browsing, wallet login, purchasing, selling, and minting.
A. Behavioral Traffic Segmentation
Fig. 1. A typical scenario of NFTracker.

blockchain servers equipped with smart contracts. Similar to
prior website fingerprinting works [25], [33], the sniffer cannot
actively modify packets or probe target servers, nor decrypt
the encapsulated application-layer payload within encrypted
tunnels to obtain NFT application addresses, port numbers, or
plaintext payloads. In fact, the regulator is already able to use
website fingerprinting technology [25], [33] to identify specific applications. However, the regulator’s goal is to further
passively infer which specific behavior the NFT traffic in the
tunnel corresponds to.
IV. S YSTEM D ESIGN
This section presents NFTracker, a method for finegrained behavioral traffic identification of NFT transactions
over encrypted tunnels. NFTracker addresses the two core
challenges of inexact segmentation and feature homogeneity by integrating burst-WD segmentation, sliding windows,
and a hybrid CNN-Transformer model. Figure 2 shows
the framework of NFTracker. It comprises behavioral traffic
segmentation, spatio-temporal feature extraction, and hybrid
model classification. It achieves high-precision identification
of NFT fine-grained behaviors even over encrypted tunnels.
Behavioral Traffic Segmentation: NFTracker introduces a
behavioral traffic segmentation algorithm based on bursts and
WD. Initial segmentation points are identified by detecting
burst starts in bidirectional session flows. The WD is then
employed to quantify the distributional differences in packet
lengths and directions between the left and right windows
around each candidate point. A random forest classifier filters
out pseudo-segmentation points, ensuring high segmentation
accuracy. NFTracker’s segmentation mechanism bypasses protocol encryption from encrypted tunnels by exploiting intrinsic
request-response packet sequences.
Spatio-Temporal Feature Extraction: NFTracker extracts
spatio-temporal features using a sliding window approach.
Preprocessed packet length and direction sequences are transformed into spatial feature matrices, while inter-packet time
intervals are converted into temporal vectors. Overlapping
sliding windows capture localized traffic patterns associated

Behavioral traffic segmentation aims to precisely partition
NFT application traffic into packet segments corresponding to
individual user behaviors. Specifically, the process involves
granularly dividing a bidirectional session flow into packet
subsequences. These session flows contain multiple behavioral
activities. It ensures explicit correspondence between each
segment and its specific behavior. We propose a machine
learning-based behavioral traffic segmentation method that
utilizes packet direction and the WD of length distributions
as parameters, with bursts as initial segmentation points.
1) Behavior Definitions: Behavioral definitions dictate the
granularity of traffic segmentation. Based on user interactions
and functional modules within NFT exchanges, mainstream
NFT exchange behaviors are categorized into NFT browsing,
wallet login, NFT purchasing, NFT selling, and NFT minting.
These classifications enable regulators to differentiate benign
activities (e.g., browsing, login) from potentially risky operations (e.g., abnormally high-frequency purchases, unauthorized
minting). Specifically, the following definitions are provided
in this paper.
Definition 1 (Behavior): A behavior is defined as a goaldriven process initiated by a user and composed of a series of
actions.
For example, browsing an NFT collection to view item
metadata and purchasing a selected NFT each qualify as userinitiated behaviors realized through multiple actions.
Definition 2 (Action): An action is a low-level sub-operation
within a behavior, manifested as various functions triggered
during the process.
Within the NFT browsing behavior, the user request to load
a page resource and the exchange response to return item
metadata constitute two actions. In addition to requests and
responses between users and exchanges, the NFT purchasing
behavior consists of the user confirmation and wallet/exchange
verification actions.
Definition 3 (Session Flow): A session flow is a bidirectional sequence of packets exchanged between an encrypted
tunnel client and an encrypted tunnel server.
The segmentation approach builds upon a critical observation that distinct behavioral traffic streams merge into a single
bidirectional session flow after V2Ray processing. Temporally,
we observe alignment between bidirectional session durations

5808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 2. The framework of NFTracker.

Fig. 3. An example of the burst.

and cumulative behavioral durations. For content analysis, we
utilize system variables to log TLS handshake key information
and then decrypt the corresponding traffic using Wireshark.
Decrypted traces reveal operational functions corresponding
to each behavior within unified flows, confirming that heterogeneous behavioral traffic aggregates into single bidirectional
sessions post-V2Ray.
2) Traffic Segmentation: The segmentation of behavioral
traffic involves three steps: calculating initial segmentation
points, computing the WD between left and right windows,
and random forest classification. First, burst start positions
are selected as initial segmentation points. To ensure extracted
features reflect application-layer characteristics, packets with
ACK flags and zero TCP payload lengths are discarded during
preprocessing. As shown in Figure 3, a burst is defined as consecutive packets sharing the same direction within a specific
timeframe, forming a coherent packet sequence. Under VMess
encryption, packet payloads are obscured, yet directional consistency in burst sequences (e.g., client-to-server requests vs.
server-to-client responses) preserves behavioral boundaries.
According to NFT application interaction logic, user-initiated
requests precede application responses. User requests generate
server-bound data bursts, while server responses form clientdirected bursts. Thus, behavioral segments inherently start
with burst initiation. However, complex behaviors like NFT
selling may involve multiple bursts (e.g., NFT listing, wallet
authorization, transaction confirmation).

Fig. 4. Five behavioral patterns within a single session flow.

To filter initial segment points, NFTracker uses the WD
between packet distributions as the classification basis for the
random forest model. Behavioral distinctions manifest as differences in packet length and directional distribution. Figure 4
illustrates five behavioral patterns within a single session flow,
plotting packet directions (positive/negative signs) against
lengths. The packet distribution of NFT purchase behaviors
is mainly concentrated in the negative direction, where the
packets with lengths not reaching the MTU exhibit a relatively
uniform distribution characteristic. Meanwhile, wallet login
exhibits sparse distribution with low MTU-proportion packets.
In contrast, NFT browsing presents a balanced directional distribution with a high proportion of MTU packets. NFT selling
reveals a negative-direction concentration. Additionally, NFT
minting shows packets clustered in the 0–500 range in the
positive direction. We calculate probability distributions of
packet lengths/directions within symmetric windows centered
at segmentation points.
The WD quantifies distribution discrepancies between left
(p) and right (q) windows:
WD(p, q) =

Z
inf

γ∈Π(p,q)

d(x, y)dγ(x, y).
X×Y

(1)

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

WD is a measure of the difference between two probability
distributions, and its core idea is the minimum “transportation
cost” required to transform one distribution into another.
Among them, p and q correspond to two probability distributions, d(x, y) is the distance between any two points x, y in
the space X × Y, γ is the joint distribution, and its marginal
distributions are p and q respectively. Π(p, q) is the set of
all possible joint distributions with marginal distributions p
and q. inf means finding the plan that minimizes the total
“transportation cost” among all possible transportation plans
γ. The WD ranges from 0 to positive infinity. The larger it is,
the greater the difference between the two probability distributions. WD is finite and stable on sparse histograms and remains
insensitive to zeros and support mismatch. It yields smoother
within-behavior distances and sharper boundary changes in
encrypted traffic, improving segment point classification. We
compute the WDs between the left and right windows for the
packet-length and packet-direction sequences at each candidate
segmentation point. These distances are used as features for
a random forest classifier that infers whether the point is an
actual boundary or a pseudo point.
Algorithm 1 Behavioral Traffic Segmentation Point Identification
Input: Original behavioral traffic S , Interval size r, Segmentation point identification model RF model
Output: Actual behavior segmentation point set split set
1: Initialization initial set, split set
2: Set initial set = Extract Burst(S )
3: for each initial point in initial set do
4:
Set right = S [initial point : initial point + r]
5:
Set le f t = S [initial point−r : initial point]
6:
Length seq LR, Direction seq LR =
Extract S equence(Right, Le f t)
7:
for seq in [Length seq LR, Direction seq LR] do
8:
Compute pd le f t, pd right =
Probability Distribution(seq)
9:
Compute wd value =
Wasserstein Distance(pd le f t, pd right)
10:
Add wd value to wd list
11:
end for
12:
Get result = RF model(wd list)
13:
if result == true point then
14:
Add initial point to split set
15:
end if
16: end for
The identification algorithm for behavior flow segmentation
points is shown in Algorithm 1. It first initializes an initial
set of candidate points and a split set of confirmed actual
points. Candidates are seeded by the start positions of bursts
extracted from bidirectional session flows. For each candidate,
the algorithm collects traffic intervals on both sides with a
preset region size and extracts packet length and direction
sequences. These sequences are then utilized to compute
probability distributions for both packet lengths and directions.
It computes WDs between the bilateral distributions for both

5809

modalities and feeds these distances to a classifier. Candidates
predicted as true boundaries are added to the final split set S F .
B. Spatio-Temporal Feature Extraction
NFTracker employs a sliding-window method to capture
traffic patterns corresponding to distinct actions within behavioral traffic. It subsequently extracts spatial features from
packet sequences and augments them with temporal features
derived from the time interval, resulting in comprehensive
spatio-temporal feature representations.
1) Analysis of Behavioral Patterns: We conduct a detailed
analysis of behavioral patterns in NFT exchange platforms
to help identify discriminative features that effectively characterize user behavior. According to our threat model, this
paper focuses exclusively on user-exchange interaction traffic,
excluding modifications to the Ethereum blockchain data via
smart contracts. We classify NFT exchange behaviors into five
categories: NFT browsing, wallet login, NFT purchasing, NFT
selling, and NFT minting, with interactions abstracted across
three core entities: users, wallets, and exchanges.
a) NFT Browsing: It typically involves only two entities
(user and exchange), as shown in Figure 5 (a). The user
initiates resource requests (e.g., images, descriptions) to the
exchange, which responds with the requested content. These
browsing sessions consist of multiple sequential queries. To
visualize traffic dynamics, we convert packet lengths into
graphical representations in Figure 6 (a). During request
phases, user-originated packets exhibit fluctuating variations
in short sequences, while response phases are dominated by
consecutive MTU-sized packets from the exchange, forming
distinct plateau patterns. The request-response cycle is periodic
and separated by idle gaps before the next query.
b) Wallet Login: It engages all three entities, as shown in
Figure 5 (b). The user sends a login request to the exchange,
which initiates verification with the wallet. Upon receiving
verification instructions, users confirm authentication through
the wallet interface, which subsequently returns authorization
tokens to the exchange. After verification, the exchange delivers account resources to the user. As depicted in Figure 6
(b), the traffic follows three phases: initial login requests from
the user, verification confirmation traffic between the wallet
and exchange, and resource-loading plateaus characterized by
sustained MTU-sized packets.
c) NFT Purchasing: It involves all three entities, as
shown in Figure 5 (c). The user requests to purchase the
target NFT from the exchange with transaction parameters,
and the exchange then notifies the wallet. The subsequent
phase involves repeated signature validations between the user,
exchange, and wallet, culminating in on-chain confirmation
of the transaction and the exchange’s final response to the
user. Figure 6 (c) shows that the repetitive validation process
generates complex packet length variations, distinguishing it
from simpler behaviors through multi-stage directional shifts
and intermittent high-volume traffic bursts.
d) NFT Selling: As shown in Figure 5 (d), the NFT selling shares structural similarities with purchasing, but diverges
in action. Key distinctions include metadata during listing
NFTs and reduced wallet interaction frequency. Figure 6 (d)

5810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 5. The workflow of each NFT behavior.

Fig. 6. The packet length distribution of each behavior.

shows that the authorization phase involves fewer iterative
validations, reflected in fewer packet direction changes than
purchasing behavior.
e) NFT Minting: It follows a multi-phase workflow
shown in Figure 5 (e). Users iteratively upload content and
confirm metadata with the exchange, then request wallet
authorization for gas fees. In Ethereum, gas is the unit that
measures computation and storage resources [14]. Users pay
a gas fee to have a transaction executed and included in a
block. The sender can set a fee cap, and the offered fee
affects transaction confirmation time. Figure 6 (e) shows that
the behavior exhibits unique traffic signatures that sustained
MTU-level upload bursts during content submission, followed
by wallet interactions for authorization. The completion phase
shows abrupt directional shifts as the exchange finalizes minting.
While packet lengths and directional sequences provide
initial discriminative features across behaviors, direct input of
full sequences risks feature degradation due to inter-class similarities (e.g., identical wallet verification patterns in purchasing
and selling). To address the limitation, we implement a sliding
window mechanism to generate localized action fingerprints.
2) Sliding Window Based Feature Extraction: We propose
a feature extraction method based on the sliding window to

better capture the effective information in the sequences of
packet lengths and directions. It enhances feature distinctiveness by isolating characteristic segments while preserving spatio-temporal relationships within behavioral traffic.
Notably, it addresses VMess encryption-induced traffic homogeneity by focusing on relative spatial and temporal variations.
The length and direction sequence of n data packets is
expressed as S eq = {p0 , p1 , p2 , . . . , pn−1 }. The value p corresponds to the TCP payload length with its sign indicating the
packet direction, where positive and negative values represent
forward and reverse transmissions, respectively. To construct
the spatial feature matrix F s , the packet length-direction
sequence S eq is first extracted from the behavioral segment
set S F , followed by sliding-window-based feature extraction.
A window of size W iteratively slides over S eq with step-size
s, capturing W-length subsequences {p j , p j+1 , . . . , p j+W−1 },
where j = (i − 1) × s for the i-th row, as row vectors in
F s ∈ RN×W . The window slides N times, incrementing s
steps per iteration until N features populate the matrix rows,
thereby converting the temporal sequence into an N×W spatial
representation through overlapping window sampling.
To augment behavioral characterization, we integrate interpacket arrival intervals as temporal descriptors alongside
spatial features, where the timestamp sequence of n data
packets is {t0 , t1 , t2 , . . . , tn−1 }. Similarly, time-interval subsequences {t j+1 − t j , t j+2 − t j+1 , . . . , t j+W − t j+W−1 } are captured
to construct the temporal feature matrix Ft ∈ RN×W . Next, we
normalize the obtained spatio-temporal features.
A single behavior spans several actions implemented by
the exchange, and the packets for each action often cluster into compact segments, forming distinct traffic patterns.
However, partitioning the entire sequence into fixed-length
non-overlapping segments risks fragmenting these unique patterns across adjacent segments due to their inherent relevance.
Simply increasing the window size does not resolve this issue.
With a fixed sequence length, larger windows produce fewer
segments, which lowers analytical granularity, reduces the
number of detectable actions, and drifts away from actual
traffic characteristics.
To preserve pattern integrity, we employ overlapping windows to extract localized action fingerprints. It ensures that
other windows can probabilistically recover their complete
structure even if one window disrupts a specific pattern. The
sliding window segments long sequences into multiple short
windows, each potentially corresponding to specific operational phases, such as request, verification, and payment in
NFT purchasing. It enables the model to focus on localized
critical information and identify distinct behavioral patterns.
Moreover, features extracted from sequential packet sequences

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

5811

TABLE I
H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS OF NFT RACKER

Fig. 7. Hybrid CNN-transformer network.

rather than fixed-timeframe statistical aggregations effectively
mitigate noise induced by network fluctuations.

Efused = Concat(E s , Et ) ∈ RDs +Dt .

C. Hybrid Model Classification
We propose a hybrid CNN-Transformer architecture to solve
the issue of high intra-class similarity in encrypted NFT
traffic and enhance fine-grained behavioral identification. The
model integrates spatial and temporal feature representations
through parallel branches, leveraging the strengths of CNN
for localized pattern extraction and Transformer for modeling
long-range dependencies.
NFTracker utilizes convolutional layers to identify localized
spatial patterns, followed by pooling layers for dimensionality reduction and hierarchical feature extraction. The CNN
architecture effectively captures row-wise behavioral patterns
within feature matrices, where each row corresponds to specific action characteristics, enabling comprehensive behavioral
representation learning. For the extracted temporal feature
vectors, the Transformer network utilizes its self-attention
mechanism to model the long-range dependencies and temporal correlations across sequential actions. Accordingly,
NFTracker adopts a parallel hybrid model integrating CNN
and Transformer networks as the classification backbone. As
shown in Figure 7, the left branch processes spatial features
through the CNN framework, while the right branch processes
temporal features via the Transformer architecture, enabling
synergistic spatio-temporal behavioral characterization.
The left network consists of three convolutional blocks, a
dropout layer, and a flatten layer. Each convolutional block
is composed of a Conv2D layer, a ReLU activation function,
and a max-Pooling layer. The CNN processes F s . The spatial
embedding E s is obtained as:
E s = Flatten (C(F s )) ∈ RDs ,

where T (·) denotes the Transformer encoder, and Dt is its
output dimension. The design of the multi-head attention
mechanism enables the model to simultaneously learn information from different representation subspaces, enhancing the
model’s representation ability.
The outputs of the two branches are concatenated and
then fed into the fully connected layer to complete the final
classification. The fused representation combines spatial and
temporal embeddings:

(2)

where C(·) represents the CNN operations, and D s is the
flattened dimension.
On the right network, the temporal sequence Ft is encoded
by 6 Transformer encoder layers with multi-head attention
and feed-forward networks. The temporal embedding Et is
computed as:
Et = T (Ft ) ∈ RDt ,
(3)

(4)

It is passed through three linear layers to compute classification scores:
ŷ = Softmax (W3 φ (W2 φ (W1 Efused + b1 ) + b2 ) + b3 ) ,

(5)

where Wi and bi are learnable parameters, and φ denotes
the ReLU activation. Cross-entropy is used as the loss function. Finally, NFTracker utilizes the hybrid CNN-Transformer
model to learn spatio-temporal features, effectively identifying
the traffic of NFT application behaviors over the encrypted
tunnel.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our behavior segmentation and sliding-window-based feature extraction
approach. We also compare our work with state-of-the-art
methods for behavioral traffic identification.
A. Experimental Setup
The NFTracker prototype is implemented based on Python
3.11, primarily using dpkt, PyTorch, and Selenium libraries.
Our device operating system is Ubuntu 20.04 LTS, with an
Intel (R) Core (TM) i9-12900KF CPU, 32GB of memory, and
an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. We select the optimal
hyperparameter combination within the hyperparameter search
space to implement NFTracker. The search space and the
hyperparameter values are shown in Table I.
We first conduct experiments to verify the performance of
the behavioral traffic segmentation approach under different
window radii. Then, we evaluate the spatio-temporal feature
extraction based on the sliding window approach and verify
the optimal sliding window parameters. Finally, we compare
NFTracker with state-of-the-art methods to verify its performance in identifying NFT behavioral traffic over the encrypted
tunnel.
We evaluate our proposed method using the following
T P+T N
TP
indicators: Accuracy = T P+FP+T
N+FN ; Precision = T P+FP ;

5812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

TABLE II
DATASET D ESCRIPTION

TP
Recall = T P+FN
; F1-score = 2 × Precision×Recall
Precision+Recall . Based on the
prediction results, we calculate these indicators by the number
of true positives (TPs), false positives (FPs), true negatives
(TNs), and false negatives (FNs).

B. Dataset
Our dataset includes five fine-grained NFT application
behaviors, namely NFT browsing, wallet login, NFT purchasing, NFT selling, and NFT minting. During traffic collection,
the V2Ray client is configured with TCP as the transport
protocol, encrypted using the VMess protocol, while multiplexing is disabled. The network interface card is configured
with TCP Segmentation Offload disabled. Tshark is used
to capture traffic from the specified network interface with
promiscuous mode deactivated. To mitigate experimental deviations caused by single-device collection, we deploy multiple
geographically distributed servers for cross-regional traffic
acquisition, thereby reducing the impact of network environment heterogeneity. The traffic collection process utilizes the
Selenium library and manual operations to simulate diverse
behaviors. By analyzing page resource loading patterns, we
randomly select corresponding NFT resources to execute
specific fine-grained behaviors. For NFT minting behaviors,
a backup resource library containing images, audio files,
and other media types is established, with random selections
made during minting executions. To ensure precise capture of
fine-grained behavioral traffic, we measure the average time
difference between packet generation and behavioral execution
as the capture latency. Then, we implement delayed Tshark
initialization synchronized with behavioral triggers.
Dataset D1 contains 81 pcap files capturing complex composite behaviors, comprising 2,116 candidate segmentation
point instances. Each candidate is labeled as actual or pseudo
according to the behavior boundaries. D1 is used exclusively
to train and validate the segmentation random forest. Dataset
D2 specifically targets mainstream NFT marketplaces like
OpenSea and LooksRare, collecting 2,000 bidirectional session flows for each of the five fine-grained behaviors. The
dataset structure is detailed in Table II, which is partitioned
into training, validation, and testing subsets in an 8:1:1 ratio.
C. Baselines for Comparison
To the best of our knowledge, NFTracker is the first work
to identify NFT behavioral traffic over the encrypted tunnel.
To make a comprehensive comparison, we select five state-ofthe-art methods described in Section II, namely GraphDApp
[8], ActiveTracker [10], PACKETPRINT [32], Hou et al. [30],

Fig. 8. Segmentation performance of different window radii.

and BehavSniffer [31]. Among them, GraphDApp [8] is a
DApp traffic classification method, and the other four are
behavioral traffic identification methods. Only ActiveTracker
[10] and PACKETPRINT [32] have the ability to segment
behavioral traffic. All baselines are trained and tested in the
same experimental environment as NFTracker. We configured
these methods according to their publicly available parameters.
To ensure a fair comparison, we fine-tuned these baselines to
guarantee the consistency of input data.
D. Evaluation of Behavioral Traffic Segmentation
This section evaluates the effectiveness of the proposed
burst-WD segmentation method, including parameter optimization and comparison with baselines.
1) Segmentation Parameter Selection: We evaluate the
impact of window radius r on segmentation accuracy and
search for the optimal r by training a random forest classifier
across varying r values.
Experimental Setting: The segmentation accuracy of
traffic behavior is significantly affected by the window radius
r (the size of the intervals on both the left and right sides). To
determine the optimal parameter, based on the packet scale of
typical NFT behavioral traffic, we set the search range of r as
[10, 60] with a step size of ∆r = 5. For each r, we extracted
packet length and direction distributions from symmetric leftright windows and trained a random forest classifier.
Result: As shown in Figure 8, the experimental results
demonstrate a clear correlation between window radius and
segmentation performance. When r < 15, limited window
coverage fails to capture sufficient statistical characteristics
of packet distributions, resulting in a lower F1-score. As
r increases to 25, the WD effectively amplifies distribution
discrepancies between adjacent windows, achieving a peak
F1-score with both precision and recall exceeding 0.9. The
optimal balance minimizes segmentation errors while preserving discriminative distribution patterns. Beyond r = 25,
F1-scores exhibit marginal fluctuations due to redundant noise
from oversized windows diluting local feature distinctiveness.
Consequently, r = 25 is selected as the optimal parameter.
2) Comparison With Existing Methods: Accurate segmentation of behavioral traffic is a prerequisite for ensuring accurate
behavior identification. Next, we compare our approach with
existing methods to evaluate the performance of NFTracker’s
behavioral traffic segmentation module.

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

5813

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF B EHAVIORAL T RAFFIC S EGMENTATION M ETHODS

Fig. 10. Accuracy of different parameter combinations.

Fig. 9. The t-SNE visualization of features from different methods.

Experimental Setting: We select ActiveTracker [10] and
PACKETPRINT [32], which can segment behavioral traffic, as
baselines to compare the performance of traffic segmentation
on the D1 . We considered the three packet ranges before and
after the segmentation point to be the correct segmentation.
Result: As shown in Table III, NFTracker outperforms
baseline methods with an F1-score of 0.902. The advantage
stems from two key innovations. The burst-WD segmentation
leverages directional burst boundaries and WD to quantify
distribution shifts, effectively isolating behavioral units in
V2Ray traffic. Further, the random forest classifier filters
pseudo-segmentation points by learning from WD-based distribution discrepancies. In contrast, ActiveTracker’s sliding
window method introduces missing segmentation. Additionally, PACKETPRINT’s hierarchical clustering struggles with
the homogeneity of encrypted NFT traffic. These results
validate the NFTracker’s capability to address inexact segmentation in NFT traffic over the encrypted tunnel.

E. Evaluation of Sliding-Window-Based Feature Extraction
In this experiment, we evaluate the effectiveness of sliding
windows and search for the optimal parameters.
1) Impact of Sliding-Window-Based Feature Extraction on
Feature Representation: NFTracker focuses on the atomic
action features of behavior through sliding windows, resisting
global feature homogenization caused by encrypted tunnels
and similar behavior actions. First, we evaluate the effectiveness of the sliding window approach.
Experimental Setting: To evaluate the effectiveness of
the feature extraction using the sliding window in NFTracker,
we employ t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) to perform dimensionality reduction and visualization
on the original feature sequence and the features extracted by
the sliding window under the same traffic segmentation. For
preliminary evaluation, a moderate value is adopted, with the
window size set as W = 30 and the sliding step size as s = 4.

Result: As shown in Figure 9, the features processed by
the sliding window exhibit significant intra-class aggregation
and inter-class separation in the two-dimensional mapping
space. This distinct clustering pattern contrasts sharply with
the original features, which show substantial overlap across
behavioral classes due to encryption and similar behavior.
However, the windowed features can preserve localized action
fingerprints while filtering out noise from redundant packets. It
indicates that the windowed features can effectively enhance
the model’s representation ability of behavioral traffic, thus
supporting a higher classification accuracy.
2) Sliding Window Parameter Selection: The sliding window parameters directly affect the model’s fine-grained
representation capability by regulating the spatiotemporal
granularity of features. Reasonable selection of the window
size W and the sliding step size s is crucial for balancing
feature integrity, noise suppression, and temporal modeling.
Experimental Setting: In order to verify the optimal combination of window parameters, based on the same traffic
segmentation, the experiment traverses the parameter space
of the sliding window on NFTracker to classify the behavioral
traffic. Among them, the window size W ∈ [10, 50], with a
step size of ∆W = 10, and the sliding step size s ∈ [1, 7], with
a step size of ∆s = 1. By evaluating the classification accuracy
of different combinations of (W, s), the optimal parameters are
screened to balance the requirements of feature coverage and
noise suppression.
Result: Figure 10 shows that the combination of the window
size and the sliding step size significantly impacts the identification accuracy. As W increases from 10 to 50, the accuracy
first improves and then fluctuates, with W = 40 performing
the best. It covers the complete key action segments in NFT
behaviors, such as the uploading stage of NFT minting or
the verification process of wallet login, thereby enhancing the
feature expression ability. A smaller window misses crosspacket dependencies, limiting the integrity of feature capture.
When W = 50, the overall accuracy shows a downward
trend. The reason is that an overly large window may contain
the mixed features of multiple actions, introducing redundant
noise and blurring discriminative patterns. Then, the step s = 5
provides moderate overlap, so transitional edges are observed
by consecutive windows. Smaller step sizes increase overlap
between adjacent windows and inflate feature redundancy,
whereas larger step sizes shrink feature coverage and risk

5814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF NFT RACKER AND BASELINES

missing key temporal patterns such as the periodic responses
observed during NFT browsing. The optimal parameter
combination is W = 40 and s = 5, with an accuracy of over
0.9170. We adopt these parameters for NFTracker.
F. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
In this section, we evaluate the behavior identification ability
of NFTracker in real-world NFT traffic.
Experimental Setting: To evaluate the performance of
NFTracker in identifying NFT fine-grained behavioral traffic over the encrypted tunnel, we compare our proposed
NFTracker with prior DApp traffic classification and behavioral traffic identification methods on the D2 dataset, including
GraphDApp [8], ActiveTracker [10], PACKETPRINT [32],
Hou et al. [30], and BehavSniffer [31], as well as single
CNN (NFTracker-C) or Transformer (NFTracker-T) variants
of NFTracker as baselines.
Result: As shown in Table IV, NFTracker achieves superior performance with an average precision of 0.9245, recall
of 0.9179, and F1-score of 0.9212, outperforming all baseline
methods. The hybrid CNN-Transformer architecture demonstrates significant advantages over its individual components.
PACKETPRINT [32] exhibits the closest performance, while
BehavSniffer [31] lags due to its limited capability in distinguishing behaviors with overlapping traffic patterns.
The confusion matrix analysis in Figure 11 further elucidates class-specific performance. NFT browsing achieves
0.9984 accuracy, attributed to its strong periodicity of user
requests and platform responses, minimal wallet interactions,
and a response phase dominated by continuous MTU size
data packets, which form a more obvious traffic characteristic.
Minting exhibits partial misclassification with selling due to
shared wallet authorization processes. Notably, purchasing and
selling show the highest mutual misclassification rates. It is
caused by their nearly identical interaction logic, including
wallet verification and payment phases.
These results validate NFTracker’s robustness against feature homogeneity and encryption-induced obfuscation. The
spatio-temporal feature extraction effectively isolates localized
action fingerprints, while the hybrid model synergizes spatial
patterns and temporal dependencies. In contrast, methods relying on static statistical features [30] or graph structures [8] fail
to capture dynamic traffic variations, leading to degraded performance. Experimental results demonstrate the NFTracker’s
practical efficacy in encrypted tunnel scenarios.

Fig. 11. Confusion matrices of each method.

VI. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the limitations of our method and
potential directions for future work.
A. Real-World Applicability
Composite user behaviors present challenges for existing
approaches [30], [31], such as browsing and completing
multiple wallet authorizations during NFT minting, or initiating combined transactions after continuous browsing of
multiple collectibles. NFTracker addresses these through burstWD segmentation to isolate behaviors, sliding-window-based
feature extraction to capture action patterns, and a hybrid
architecture for local and global dependencies. For instance, in
sequential “browse-login-minting-sell” workflows, NFTracker
could effectively capture stage-specific features and learn
behavioral logic through these features. Additionally, mainstream Ethereum Layer 2 rollups already support NFTs, and
their off-chain execution with batched settlement to Layer 1
can alter the timing, ordering, and spacing of packets, which
could induce distinct features in encrypted traffic. NFTracker
is layer-agnostic because it operates on packet-level features,
though specific Layer 2 environments may require minor
retraining. In future work, we will further improve accuracy
for practical deployment.

DING et al.: FINE-GRAINED NFT BEHAVIOR TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION OVER ENCRYPTED TUNNEL

B. Defensive Countermeasures Against NFTracker
NFTracker achieves fine-grained identification by leveraging the spatio-temporal features of NFT behavioral traffic in
encrypted tunnels. To counter such mechanisms, defenders
could design traffic obfuscation strategies to interfere with
its critical feature extraction process. A viable solution is for
defenders to first collect behavioral traffic from target NFT
platforms, analyze spatio-temporal distribution patterns, and
employ generative adversarial networks to generate obfuscated
traffic based on real traffic characteristics. They could constrain
the WD between generated and real traffic within local time
windows, while globally disrupting directional correlations in
packet length distributions. It causes NFTracker’s burst segmentation algorithm to produce false boundaries, invalidating
its spatio-temporal feature extraction. The design and effectiveness validation of such adversarial obfuscation mechanisms
represent an interesting future research direction.
C. Multiplexing
It combines multiple logical streams over a single TCP
connection, thereby improving network transmission efficiency. Like V2Ray’s Mux.Cool protocol [35], which embeds
application-layer protocol headers with subflow IDs and length
identifiers within encrypted TLS streams. Its multiplexed
information is encrypted with application data, appearing
as ordinary TLS traffic and difficult to identify by intermediate devices. It results in an IP packet containing
multiple application-layer messages, simultaneously affecting
the packet size and time gap characteristics. However, currently, due to Mux.cool’s inability to significantly optimize
latency, its usage scope is limited. The existing method [32]
uses packet size filtering to alleviate the noise caused by
multiplexing to a certain extent. However, many behavioral
data packets will be lost after screening, resulting in an
insufficient representation of behavioral features. We do not
yet have an effective solution for behavior identification under
multiplexing. We will leave this to our future work.
D. Packet Padding
It is a traffic obfuscation technique designed to conceal
packet length characteristics by appending random padding
data to packets [36], enhancing anti-detection capabilities.
NFTracker relies on timing gaps and packet sequences to
characterize behaviors. While packet padding introduces noise
by invalidating packet length features, it does not affect packet
direction or timing gaps. Consequently, packet padding may
cause minor degradation in NFTracker’s identification performance but would not fundamentally disrupt its functionality.
Additionally, the extra network overhead induced by packet
padding could lead to significant latency, degrading the user
experience.
VII. C ONCLUSION
We present a novel framework named NFTracker for finegrained NFT behavioral traffic identification over encrypted
tunnels. NFTracker addresses the core challenges of inexact

5815

segmentation of continuous behaviors and the homogeneity
of NFT traffic features in encrypted traffic by integrating
burst-WD-based segmentation, sliding window feature extraction, and a hybrid CNN-Transformer model for classification.
Specifically, NFTracker synergistically captures both localized
spatial patterns and global temporal dependencies, achieving precise classification of five NFT behaviors, including
browsing, wallet login, purchasing, selling, and minting.
Our experimental study evaluates the performance of traffic
segmentation and behavior identification of NFTracker. The
results demonstrate that NFTracker provides a practical and
effective solution for identifying fine-grained NFT behavioral
traffic in encrypted tunnel scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1]

S. G. Almeda and B. Hartmann, “NFT art world: The influence of
decentralized systems on the development of novel online creative communities and cooperative practices,” in Proc. ACM Designing Interact.
Syst. Conf., Jul. 2023, pp. 353–370.
[2] H. Chen, Z. Yang, and T. Lyu, “Empirical investigation of digital
collectibles purchase intention: The roles of value, risks, identification, and scarcity,” Int. J. Hum.–Comput. Interact., vol. 41, no. 16,
pp. 9861–9880, Nov. 2024.
[3] Y.-J. Yang and J.-L. Wang, “Non-fungible token (NFT) games: A
literature review,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Manage. Eng. (CyMaEn),
Jan. 2023, pp. 251–254.
[4] Y. An, Y. He, F. R. Yu, J. Li, J. Chen, and V. C. M. Leung, “An HTTP
anomaly detection architecture based on the Internet of Intelligence,”
IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1552–1565, Sep.
2022.
[5] S. S. Roy, D. Das, P. Bose, C. Kruegel, G. Vigna, and S. Nilizadeh,
“Unveiling the risks of NFT promotion scams,” in Proc. Int. AAAI Conf.
Web Soc. Media (ICWSM), 2023, pp. 1367–1380.
[6] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2021.
[7] M. Liu et al., “Enhanced detection of obfuscated HTTPS tunnel traffic
using heterogeneous information network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 257,
Feb. 2025, Art. no. 110975.
[8] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[9] I. Karunanayake, J. Jiang, N. Ahmed, and S. K. Jha, “Exploring
uncharted waters of website fingerprinting,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 19, pp. 1840–1854, 2024.
[10] D. Li, W. Li, X. Wang, C.-T. Nguyen, and S. Lu, “App trajectory recognition over encrypted internet traffic based on deep neural network,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 179, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107372.
[11] X. Hu, Z. Shu, Z. Tong, G. Cheng, R. Li, and H. Wu, “Fine-grained
Ethereum behavior identification via encrypted traffic analysis with
serialized backward inference,” Comput. Netw., vol. 237, Dec. 2023,
Art. no. 110110.
[12] V2ray. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
www.v2ray.com
[13] VMess. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
www.v2fly.org/en US/developer/protocols/vmess.html
[14] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction
ledger,” Ethereum Project Yellow Paper, vol. 151, no. 2014, pp. 1–32,
2014.
[15] W. Entriken, D. Shirley, J. Evans, and N. Sachs. (2018). ERC-721: NonFungible Token Standard. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721
[16] W. Radomski, A. Cooke, P. Castonguay, J. Therien, E. Binet, and
R. Sandford. (2018). ERC-1155: Multi Token Standard. Accessed: Apr.
30, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155
[17] T. Wang et al., “COMET: NFT price prediction with wallet profiling,”
in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, New
York, NY, USA, Aug. 2024, pp. 5893–5904.
[18] Y. Niu, X. Li, H. Peng, and W. Li, “Unveiling wash trading in popular
NFT markets,” in Companion Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY,
USA, May 2024, pp. 730–733.

5816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

[19] J. Huang et al., “Unveiling the paradox of NFT prosperity,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, May 2024, pp. 167–177.
[20] Y. Cao et al., “NFTracer: Tracing NFT impact dynamics in transactionflow substitutive systems with visual analytics,” IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graphics, vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 4369–4386, Aug. 2025.
[21] Z. Che et al., “Across-platform detection of malicious cryptocurrency
accounts via interaction feature learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 20, pp. 4783–4798, 2025.
[22] D. Xue, M. Kallitsis, A. Houmansadr, and R. Ensafi, “Fingerprinting
obfuscated proxy traffic with encapsulated tls handshakes,” in Proc.
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 2689–2706.
[23] D. Xue et al., “OpenVPN is open to VPN fingerprinting,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 79–87, Jan. 2025.
[24] S. Chen, S. Chen, H. He, X. Jiang, J. Yang, and S. Cheng, “Causality
correlation and context learning aided robust lightweight multi-tab
website fingerprinting over encrypted tunnel,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun., May 2024, pp. 761–770.
[25] X. Ma et al., “Website fingerprinting on encrypted proxies: A flowcontext-aware approach and countermeasures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1904–1919, Jun. 2024.
[26] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection
of malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
[27] S.-J. Xu, K.-C. Kong, X.-B. Jin, and G.-G. Geng, “Unveiling traffic paths: Explainable path signature feature-based encrypted traffic
classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 150, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 104283.
[28] F. Aiolli, M. Conti, A. Gangwal, and M. Polato, “Mind your wallet’s
privacy: Identifying Bitcoin wallet apps and user’s actions through
network traffic analysis,” in Proc. 34th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl.
Comput., Apr. 2019, pp. 1484–1491.
[29] D. Ahmed, A. Sabir, and A. Das, “Spying through your voice assistants:
Realistic voice command fingerprinting,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp.,
Aug. 2023, pp. 2419–2436.
[30] C. Hou, J. Shi, C. Kang, Z. Cao, and X. Gang, “Classifying user
activities in the encrypted WeChat traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int.
Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf. (IPCCC), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[31] T. Wu et al., “BehavSniffer: Sniff user behaviors from the encrypted
traffic by traffic burst graphs,” in Proc. 20th Annu. IEEE Int. Conf.
Sens., Commun., Netw. (SECON), Sep. 2023, pp. 456–464.
[32] J. Li et al., “Robust app fingerprinting over the air,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 5065–5080, Dec. 2024.
[33] B. Gao, W. Liu, G. Liu, and F. Nie, “Resource knowledge-driven
heterogeneous graph learning for website fingerprinting,” IEEE Trans.
Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 968–981, Jun. 2024.
[34] F. Wu et al., “Multi-variate time series prediction of traffic and users for
dynamic RRH-BBU mapping in C-RAN,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10557–10572, Oct. 2025.
[35] Mux.Cool Protocol. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://v2ray.com/developer/protocols/muxcool.html
[36] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Subverting website
fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624.

Ke Ding (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
the M.S. degree in software engineering from East
China Normal University in 2023. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research interests include
blockchain security and network security.

Xiaoyan Hu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer architecture from Southeast
University, Nanjing, China, in 2015. She visited
the NetSec Laboratory, Colorado State University,
from 2010 to 2012. She is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Southeast University. Her research
interests include network intrusion detection, network security, and future network architecture.

Zhuozhuo Shu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2021 and
2024, respectively. His research interests include
network traffic analysis.

Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2003. From 2006 to
2007, he held a post-doctoral position with the
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology. He is currently a
Full Professor with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Southeast University. His research
interests include network security, network measurement, and encrypted traffic analysis.

Ruidong Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in engineering from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2001, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from the University of Tsukuba, Japan, in
2005 and 2008, respectively. He was a Researcher
with the Network Architecture Laboratory, National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT). He is currently an Associate
Professor with the Institute of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University. His current research
interests include the Internet of Things, future networks, information-centric networking, security/secure architectures of future
networks, and next-generation wireless networking. He serves on the editorial
board for IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL and KSII Transactions on
Internet and Information Systems.

Hua Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in computer application technology from Southeast
University, Nanjing, China, in 2010. She is currently
an Associate Professor with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Southeast University. Her
research interests include computer network security
and encrypted traffic analysis.