This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

1

NOS-Gate: Queue-Aware Streaming IDS for
Consumer Gateways under Timing-Controlled
Evasion
Muhammad Bilal

, Senior Member, IEEE, Omer Tariq

Hasan Ahmed

benign device rhythms while still pursuing a hidden attack
objective [10], [11]. This raises an operational IDS question
that is not captured well by offline accuracy alone: can a
gateway detect quickly enough to act, at a low false-alarm rate,
using only metadata, against timing-shaped adversaries?
We address this question with NOS-Gate, a streaming IDS for
stand-alone gateways derived from Network-Optimised Spiking
(NOS) dynamics [1], [12]. NOS-Gate instantiates a lightweight
two-state dynamical unit per flow. An excitability-like state
accumulates evidence from normalised metadata deviations,
while a recovery-like state provides short-term memory and
suppresses repeated triggering. The detector emits an event-like
surrogate and applies a persistence rule to stabilise decisions.
This design is deliberately simple: compact state updates
fit gateway budgets while still expressing persistence and
hysteresis, which are hard to add to a simple window-based
score with no memory. [13], [14].
Crucially, we connect detection to a gateway-safe action.
When alarms persist, NOS-Gate temporarily reduces the weight
Index Terms—consumer gateway, metadata-only intrusion of the flagged flow under weighted fair queueing (WFQ). This
detection, timing-controlled evasion, network-optimised spiking
aims to reduce queue-tail harm while limiting collateral impact
(NOS), weighted fair queueing
on benign traffic [15]–[18]. Figure 1 summarises the online
loop (windowing, scoring, persistence, and WFQ gating) and
I. I NTRODUCTION
the offline evaluation harness used to measure queue impact.
Home gateways and consumer hubs sit between consumer
Recent encrypted-traffic security systems have improved
devices and encrypted services (web and cloud). Encryption robustness and deployment realism, but they usually make
limits payload inspection at the edge, but it does not remove different assumptions than a consumer gateway IDS.
traffic side channels such as timing, packet sizes, and burst HyperVision detects unknown encrypted malicious traffic
structure [2], [3]. These signals have been used for device using flow-interaction graphs [19]. RAPIER studies detection
identification and security monitoring [4]–[7], but the gateway under low-quality training data [20]. Wedjat targets evasive
setting imposes two constraints that shape what is practical. behaviour using real-time causal analysis [21]. ET-SSL explores
First, detection must run continuously with low latency and self-supervised contrastive learning for encrypted-traffic
modest CPU, which makes large models and heavy training anomaly detection [22]. These works reinforce that encrypted
difficult to justify [8], [9]. Second, an attacker can often change side channels remain useful, but they typically do not evaluate
packet timing without changing endpoints, ports, or encrypted the full gateway action loop (detection → mitigation → queue
content.
impact) under an explicit timing-control budget, and they do
Timing control is therefore a realistic evasion surface. Prior not standardise a stand-alone label-free calibration protocol.
work shows that timing and burst patterns can still leak structure NOS-Gate is built around those gateway requirements. Table IV
under encryption [3]. The same idea can be used offensively: an provides an explicit mapping from NOS symbols to their IDS
attacker can reshape inter-arrival times and bursts to resemble interpretation in NOS-Gate, so readers can audit what is reused
unchanged and what is reinterpreted for detection and action.
A second contribution is evaluation methodology. Public
Muhammad Bilal and Hasan Ahmed are with the School of Computing and
Communications, Lancaster University, LA1 4WA, Lancaster, U.K. E-mail: IoT corpora and botnet traces are valuable, but they often
m.bilal@ieee.org, h.ahmed@lancaster.ac.uk.
provide limited coverage of timing-controlled evasion and rarely
Omer Tariq is with the School of Computing, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea. E-mail: offer an auditable link from attacker constraints to queue-level
omertariq@kaist.ac.kr
harm at the gateway [23]–[25]. We therefore introduce an
Abstract—Timing and burst patterns can leak through
encryption, and an adaptive adversary can exploit them. This
undermines metadata-only detection in a stand-alone consumer
gateway. Therefore, consumer gateways need streaming intrusion
detection on encrypted traffic using metadata only, under tight
CPU and latency budgets. We present a streaming IDS for
stand-alone gateways that instantiates a lightweight two-state
unit derived from Network-Optimised Spiking (NOS) dynamics
[1] per flow, named NOS-Gate. NOS-Gate scores fixed-length
windows of metadata features and, under a K-of-M persistence
rule, triggers a reversible mitigation that temporarily reduces the
flow’s weight under weighted fair queueing (WFQ). We evaluate
NOS-Gate under timing-controlled evasion using an executable
worlds benchmark that specifies benign device processes, auditable
attacker budgets, contention structure, and packet-level WFQ
replay to quantify queue impact. All methods are calibrated
label-free via burn-in quantile thresholding. Across multiple
reproducible worlds and malicious episodes, at an achieved 0.1%
false-positive operating point, NOS-Gate attains 0.952 incident
recall versus 0.857 for the best baseline in these runs. Under
gating, it reduces p99.9 queueing delay and p99.9 collateral delay
with a mean scoring cost of ≈ 2.09 µs per flow-window on CPU.

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

2

executable worlds benchmark that specifies benign device
processes and contention structure, constrains adversaries by
auditable budgets, and uses packet-level WFQ replay to quantify
user-visible impact. We evaluate all detectors under the same
stand-alone, label-free protocol: an assumed-benign burn-in
segment, per-flow thresholds set by high quantiles of burn-in
scores, and labels used only for reporting on held-out time [8],
[9], [26].
Encrypted-traffic IDS work often improves detection
performance under a dataset protocol, but at least one
gateway-facing element is commonly left implicit: (i) a
stand-alone, label-free protocol that fixes an explicit false-alarm
budget without supervised tuning, (ii) an explicit timing-control
threat model with auditable operational budgets, and (iii) an
action-impact evaluation that measures whether mitigation
improves user-visible queue outcomes rather than only
producing alarms. This paper adds all three in a single
executable loop: NOS-Gate as a compact two-state streaming
detector calibrated without labels, worlds as a reproducible
benchmark with auditable timing and contention budgets
(including feasibility reporting), and packet-level WFQ replay
to quantify queue-tail and collateral impact under reversible
gating.
We make three contributions that together support a practical,
auditable gateway IDS under timing-controlled evasion:
• We propose a two-state detector NOS-Gate, a streaming,
metadata-only gateway IDS with a direct action hook: a
per-flow two-state detector with persistence-based alerting
that drives WFQ deprioritisation.
• We introduce a reproducible worlds benchmark with
published contention structure, auditable attacker budgets,
and packet-level WFQ replay, enabling queue-tail and
collateral evaluation under timing-shaped attacks.
• We standardise a stand-alone operating protocol at explicit
false-alarm budgets using burn-in quantile thresholding
and persistence, and we report achieved false-positive
rates, incident recall, and time-to-detect under the same
calibration rule.
We do not claim payload inspection, DPI deployment in
ISP-grade firmware, or that our synthetic worlds reproduce
any single public dataset. Instead, under the published feature
contract and attacker budgets, NOS-Gate provides a stronger
detection-and-action trade-off than the evaluated label-free
baselines: higher incident detection at the same achieved
false-alarm budget, and improved queue-tail outcomes when
WFQ gating is enabled. This work do not claim payload
inspection, DPI deployment in ISP-grade firmware, or that
synthetic worlds reproduce any single public dataset. We
present the benchmark as a falsifiable protocol: new worlds,
budgets, and contention structures can be added to test
generality and failure modes. Table I groups representative
encrypted-traffic systems by operating model and evaluation
axes that matter for consumer gateway comparability.
II. S YSTEM MODEL ( CONSUMER GATEWAY )
We model a stand-alone consumer gateway that observes
packet metadata behind NAT and produces streaming decisions

at a fixed cadence. Time is divided into non-overlapping
windows of length ∆t = 250 ms (Section III-A). The detector
operates on directed five-tuple flows and is calibrated without
labels using an assumed-benign burn-in segment. Flows may
start and stop during a horizon. For a newly observed flow,
we compute scores immediately, but we enable thresholded
alarming only after the burn-in segment needed for quantile
calibration has accrued; before that, we suppress alarms and
do not allow WFQ gating.
Inputs and operating protocol.: The feature stream is
limited to fields visible at the gateway: packet headers,
timestamps, and sizes, plus DNS and TLS handshake metadata
when present (for example, SNI and certificate validity days).
We do not use payload bytes, deep packet inspection features,
or host logs. If DNS/TLS fields are absent, NOS-Gate falls
back to timing and size features without changing the model.
To avoid mixing feature dimensions within a run, we evaluate a
fixed feature contract per run (for example, timing+contention
only, or timing plus DNS/TLS when uniformly available). The
run manifest records the feature contract used.
For each flow i and window t, the detector outputs a score
si,t and an alarm ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi }.
Thresholds are calibrated label-free from the burn-in segment.
Let the horizon be H windows and let the burn-in length be
Hburn = ⌊0.6H⌋. In our worlds, H = 57,600 and Hburn =
34,560 windows at ∆t = 250 ms (about 2.4 hours). We
 set
ϑi = Quantileq {si,t : t = 0, . . . , Hburn − 1} , (1)
with q ∈ {0.99, 0.999} as the operating knob (we report
both). Before ϑi is available, we compute si,t causally but
suppress alarms (ai,t = 0) and do not trigger gating; after
burn-in, thresholds are frozen and performance is reported on
the held-out segment, including achieved benign false-positive
rate.
To avoid flapping, we apply a K-of-M persistence rule. A
flow becomes actionable only if at least K alarms occur in the
most recent M windows
K = 3, M)= 8):
( (defaults
t
X
zi,t = I
ai,τ ≥ K ,
(2)
τ =t−M +1

where the actionable indicator zi,t is defined by the rolling
K-of-M rule above. WFQ gating is implemented as a reversible
quarantine timer: when zi,t = 1 for a flow, we apply ωi = ω−
for a fixed quarantine duration Tg . If further actionable triggers
occur while a flow is already gated, the quarantine interval
is extended accordingly. If no further triggers occur, the flow
returns automatically to ω0 when the quarantine timer expires.
Queueing model and WFQ action.: We evaluate action
impact through packet-level queue replay at the gateway. Flows
that share the uplink enter a work-conserving weighted fair
queueing (WFQ) scheduler. Let ωi (t) be the weight assigned
to flow i at time t. Under normal operation, ωi (t) = ω0 . Under
gating, a flow that is actionable (zi,t = 1) is deprioritised by
setting ωi (t) = ω− with ω− < ω0 for a quarantine duration Tg
(or until the flag clears, whichever is longer). We report both
detection metrics and queue-tail metrics, including collateral
delay experienced by benign flows. WFQ gating is reversible
and avoids immediate blocking while still limiting queue-tail
harm when alarms persist (Figure 1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

3

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTED -T RAFFIC S ECURITY S YSTEMS FOR S TAND -A LONE G ATEWAY D EPLOYMENT
Group / work

Inputs

Training & calibration Online

Robustness / evasion

Action / impact

Fit
to
assumptions

NOS-Gate

G0. Gateway action loop (detection → mitigation → queue impact)
NOS-Gate (this paper)
Per-flow metadata + Label-free
burn-in; Yes
contention signals
per-flow high-quantile
thresholds;
K-of-M
persistence

Explicit timing-control WFQ weight gating; Direct match: stand-alone
budgets;
feasibility queue-tail & collateral calibration and action-impact
reported
via replay
loop

G1. Interaction-aware encrypted-traffic detection (detection-first)
Yes
HyperVision [19]
Encrypted
traffic Dataset-trained;
features
+ calibration
follows
flow-interaction
paper/dataset protocol
graph

Targets unknown/novel No mitigation or queue Closest on online inference,
threats (not posed as impact
but different calibration and
timing-budget shaping)
threat model

G2. Robust learning under weak supervision / data quality shift
RAPIER [20]
Encrypted
traffic Robust training under Often
detection features
low-quality
data;
typically offline

Robustness to data No action loop
quality shift (rather
than timing budgets)

G3. Evasion emphasis (action-free evaluation)
Encrypted
traffic Dataset-driven learning Yes
Wedjat [21]
signals
+
causal and evaluation protocol
analysis components

Explicit
emphasis;
framing

G4. Self-supervised representation learning (pretrain then downstream scoring)
ET-SSL [22]
Often
Encrypted
traffic Self-supervised
features
pretraining; downstream
calibration varies by use
case

Not formulated as No action loop
timing-budget shaping;
robustness depends on
downstream task

Runtime measurability and clique approximation.: In
worlds, contention cliques and weights W are specified by
construction to make interference and ρ(W ) auditable. In
a consumer gateway, clique membership is not given as an
explicit graph label, but the relevant observables are available
at the scheduler boundary: per-queue backlog/occupancy
(or delay estimates), per-class service counters, and
WFQ configuration/state (weights and per-class rate share).
Operationally, we approximate a “clique” as the set of flows
that share the same constrained scheduling domain, such as
a WAN egress queue and traffic class. Per-flow membership
is obtained from the gateway’s own flow-to-class mapping
(five-tuple classification or policy rules). This is sufficient
for the contention features we use (share, q) and for
implementing reversible weight gating without requiring an
online oracle for W .

Useful robustness angle, but
not an action-coupled gateway
protocol

evasion No mitigation or queue Threat focus is closer, but
real-time impact
lacks stand-alone calibration
and impact loop
Promising feature learning,
but comparability hinges
on calibration and impact
evaluation

TABLE II
S CALE OF THE worlds BENCHMARK USED IN THIS PAPER . O FFERED - LOAD
STATISTICS ARE DERIVED FROM BENIGN GENERATOR PARAMETERS ( MEAN
IAT FAMILY PARAMETERS AND MEAN PACKET SIZES ); REALISED TRACES
VARY STOCHASTICALLY AROUND THESE MEANS .
Quantity

Value (this paper)

Window length ∆t
Horizon H
Devices / directed flows

250 ms
57,600 windows (4 hours)
32 devices; 64 directed flows (2 per
device)
3 malicious flows per world (active at
any given time)
4 cliques, size 16 each
0.25 (world construction setting)
≈ 0.90 per clique (by construction;
narrow band around target)
min
/
median
/
max
≈ 0.16/4.68/14.15
min
/
median
/
max
≈ 0.61/15.32/60.85
≈ 1.59 (sum over 64 flows)

Malicious flows / episodes
Clique structure
Contention density
ρ(W ) band (achieved)
Per-flow rate (pkts/s)
Per-flow offered load (kb/s)
Total offered load (Mb/s)

A. Worlds benchmark: contract and outputs
The primary evidence in this paper is produced by a
reproducible synthetic benchmark called worlds. A world is
a fully specified, executable instance that fixes benign device
processes, malicious episode generators, contention structure,
and an evaluation harness for queue impact. Each world
publishes: (i) benign device classes and traffic generators,
(ii) malicious episode generators, (iii) contention structure
(cliques and weights W , including a target band for ρ(W )),
(iv) a packet trace with flow keys, (v) the derived windowed
feature stream, (vi) labels used only for reporting, and (vii)
WFQ replay configuration and queue summaries. The released
artefacts include world ids, random seeds, configuration hashes,
and manifests linking raw and derived outputs.
Budgets, feasibility, and timeline.: Timing-controlled
evasion is defined by auditable operational budgets (Rimin , ε, δq )
and a feasibility protocol. We define these budgets in the

threat model (Section III-D, Table III) and report feasibility
rates for each budget setting. Within each world, time is
split chronologically into burn-in, validation, and test. During
burn-in we update the online normaliser, train label-free
baselines, and collect burn-in scores to set per-flow thresholds
ϑi . Validation is used only for design-time selection from a
small fixed hyperparameter grid. Test uses frozen detectors and
frozen ϑi to report achieved false-positive rate, recall, detection
delay, and queue-tail outcomes with and without gating.
III. T HREAT MODEL
We consider a stand-alone consumer gateway that observes
packet metadata behind NAT and emits streaming, flow-level
decisions at a fixed window cadence. The attacker can reshape
packet timing and, within bounds, packet sizes. Evasion is

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

4

available at the gateway (Section V). No payload content and
no host logs are used.

Scheduling domain
WFQ scheduler
ω0 → ω −
for Tg

Queue state
backlog, service share
contention
signals

B. Benign traffic and malicious episodes

packets

Within a world, each flow i is generated by either a benign
process or a malicious episode generator. Let Pben
and Pmal
i
i
denote the per-window distributions of xi,t in benign and
malicious modes. Flows that share the same uplink scheduling
domain are grouped into contention cliques. We represent
clique-level interference using a nonnegative weight matrix
W = [wij ], and we report its spectral radius ρ(W ) as a compact
summary of contention intensity.

Gateway runtime
Windowing + features
(metadata-only)

packets

NOS-Gate state update
state (v, u), S = σk (v)

Offline evaluation

timestamps, sizes, headers

Actionable zi,t

Traffic (flows)

Threshold ϑi
burn-in quantile
+ persistence K-of-M

Worlds generator
budgets (Rmin , ε, δq )
Trace-driven
traffic

Packet trace
gating log

WFQ replay

Report
FPR, recall, TTD
p99/p99.9, collateral
(Labels for reporting only)

C. Adversary capabilities and knowledge
We assume a remote adversary that can compromise IoT
devices and generate malicious traffic while remaining behind
NAT. The adversary can: (i) use encrypted channels, (ii)
choose protocols and endpoints consistent with common device
behaviour, and (iii) reshape packet timing and, within bounds,
packet sizes. The adversary knows the feature contract and the
window length ∆t.
The defender calibrates thresholds in a label-free, stand-alone
way during an assumed-benign burn-in segment (Section II).
This reflects a standard operational assumption: burn-in is not
dominated by malicious behaviour.
D. Operational budgets for timing-controlled evasion

Evasion is constrained by three budgets that capture objective,
timing stealth, and contention stealth. For a flow i, the budgets
are (Rimin , ε, δq ) and are enforced by the worlds generator
(Table III).
For timing stealth, each malicious flow i is paired with a
benign IAT reference distribution Piben,iat constructed within
the same world, using the benign process that matches i’s
device class and endpoint template. This makes the timing
constraint auditable per world. For readability, we use Piben,iat
constrained by explicit operational budgets that make attacks to denote the (fixed) benign IAT reference distribution for flow
iat
auditable in our worlds benchmark.
i, and Pbi,t
for the empirical IAT distribution observed within
window t; this notation is used consistently throughout the
threat model and Algorithm 1.
A. Observation model and feature access
IAT-based distortion is undefined when Ni,t < 2. We
Packets are indexed by n, with arrival times tn ∈ R≥0 and therefore apply the timing distortion constraint only on windows
lengths ℓn ∈ [ℓmin , ℓmax ]. A directed flow i is the five-tuple that contain at least two packets:
(srcIP, dstIP, srcPort, dstPort, proto). Time is partitioned
Ti = {t ∈ {0, . . . , H − 1} : Ni,t ≥ 2}.
(5)
into non-overlapping windows of length ∆t, indexed by This does not remove constraints in sparse windows. The
t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1}.
detector still observes packet counts, rates, and size-based
Let Ni,t be the number of packets from flow i in window t, features in every window. The restriction applies only to the
Ni,t = |{n ∈ i : tn ∈ [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)}| .
(3) IAT distortion term because it is undefined otherwise.
When Ni,t ≥ 2, define the inter-arrival-time (IAT) multiset
For contention stealth, let C(i) be the contention clique
within the window as
containing flow i. Under baseline WFQ replay without defensive
Ii,t = {tn+1 − tn : n, n + 1 ∈ i, tn , tn+1 ∈ [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)} .gating, let dn be the queueing delay (enqueue-to-dequeue time)
(4) experienced by packet n in clique C. Define the clique mean
The detector receives a feature vector xi,t ∈ Rd computed delay over the horizon as
1 X
causally from packet timestamps and sizes, optional DNS/TLS
DC =
dn ,
(6)
|PC |
handshake metadata when visible, and contention signals
Fig. 1. Online, the gateway windows metadata-only traffic, updates NOS-Gate
state (v, u), applies burn-in quantile thresholding and a K-of-M persistence
rule to produce an actionable flag zi,t , and temporarily reduces WFQ weight
ω0 → ω− for Tg . Offline, worlds generates trace-driven traffic and labels,
runs the same runtime to log gating decisions, and replays WFQ to report
detection metrics and queue-tail and collateral outcomes; labels are used only
for reporting. Solid arrows: deployed online loop. Dashed arrows: offline
evaluation harness.

n∈PC

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

5

TABLE III
O PERATIONAL BUDGETS DEFINING TIMING - CONTROLLED EVASION IN
worlds.
Budget

Symbol Units

Throughput floor
Timing distortion

Rimin
ε

bytes
s

Definition
P
min
n∈i, tn ∈[0,H∆t) ℓn ≥ Ri
P
1
biat , P ben,iat ) ≤ ε
W
(
P
1
i,t
t∈T
i
|T |

Contention
stealth

δq

s

D C(i) − D C(i) ≤ δq

i
atk

i
ben

where PC is the set of packets belonging to flows in clique C
ben
atk
during [0, H∆t). We write DC and DC for the mean delays
under benign-only and attack-injected traces, respectively.
Some triples (Rimin , ε, δq ) are infeasible for a given world
and clique load, so feasibility is treated as a first-class outcome.
When a requested triple is infeasible, the generator either
declares infeasibility under the requested budgets or attempts
to restore feasibility by reducing offered load while preserving
the throughput floor when possible. If the throughput floor
cannot be met jointly with (ε, δq ), the attempt is declared
infeasible. We report feasibility rates for each budget setting.
E. Defender evaluation under stand-alone thresholding
For flow i and window t, the detector outputs a score si,t
and a binary alarm
ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi },
(7)
where ϑi is set by high-quantile burn-in thresholding (Eq. (1)).
Let A(Rimin , ε, δq ) denote the admissible adversarial policies
that satisfy Table III. For a fixed quantile q, we evaluate
robustness through the achieved detection probability under
admissible attacks,
min
Pr [s(x) ≥ ϑi | mal] ,
(8)
P ∈A(Rimin ,ε,δq ) x∼P

and we report the achieved benign false-positive rate induced
by the same ϑi on the held-out test segment.
F. Evasive policy class: projection-based C2
To avoid cherry-picked evasions, we use a fixed, auditable
policy class that directly enforces the three budgets. The
generator starts from a malicious proposal schedule, then (i)
projects timing within each window to satisfy the Wasserstein
constraint, (ii) repairs sizes to maintain the throughput floor,
and (iii) enforces contention stealth through iterative load
reduction with baseline WFQ replay. To satisfy the three
budgets, we apply the projection-based procedure summarized
in Algorithm 1. The term budget-projection refers to taking
an initial malicious packet schedule and projecting it into the
feasible set defined by (Rimin , ε, δq ) via an order-preserving
time warp (quantile mapping of within-window IATs) plus
local size repair to maintain the throughput floor. Here
“projection” is used in the optimisation sense: starting from
a proposed malicious schedule, we apply an order-preserving
time-warp within each window (implemented as quantile
mapping of sorted IATs with minimal interpolation) to satisfy
the Wasserstein radius constraint, then repair sizes to maintain
the throughput floor and iterate load reduction to satisfy
contention stealth.

Algorithm 1 Budget-projection evasive C2 generator (per flow)
Require: Benign IAT reference Piben,iat , size bounds
[ℓmin , ℓmax ], window size ∆t, horizon H, bytes floor Rimin ,
distortion radius ε, delay tolerance δq , max iters Imax
Ensure: Packet times {tn } and sizes {ℓn } for flow i over
[0, H∆t), or infeasibility flag
1: Initialise a proposal schedule with packet times and sizes
P
satisfying n ℓn ≥ Rimin
2: for t = 0 to H − 1 do
3:
Extract packets in window t and compute Ni,t
4:
if Ni,t ≥ 2 then
iat
iat
5:
Compute Pbi,t
and dt ← W1 (Pbi,t
, Piben,iat )
6:
if dt > ε then
Project timing in window: apply an
7:
order-preserving time-warp on [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)
so the resulting IAT empirical distribution satisfies
W1 ≤ ε
(implementation: quantile mapping on sorted IATs
with minimal interpolation)
8:
end if
9:
end if
10:
Repair throughput locally: adjust packet sizes within
[ℓmin , ℓmax ] to keep cumulative bytes on track for Rimin
11: end for
12: Run baseline WFQ replay (no gating) for clique C(i) to
atk
estimate DC(i)
13: for ℓ = 1 to Imax do
atk
ben
14:
if DC(i) − DC(i) ≤ δq then
15:
return packet times and sizes
16:
end if
17:
Reduce offered load:
P decrease packet emission while
attempting to preserve n ℓn ≥ Rimin
18:
Re-apply the per-window projection and size repair
steps
atk
19:
Re-estimate DC(i) by baseline WFQ replay
20: end for
21: return infeasible under (Rimin , ε, δq )

G. Optional protocol side-channel constraints
When DNS or TLS handshake metadata is available, we
include the DNS/TLS features listed in Table V as part of the
fixed contract for that run. When such metadata is not present
for a particular flow-window, the corresponding DNS/TLS
feature values default to zero under the fixed contract. We
also report results under a timing+contention-only contract
(i.e., without DNS/TLS features) when those fields are not
available in a uniform way. The run manifest records the
feature contract and discrete settings (including B and the
z-score clip magnitude).
IV. NOS-G ATE DETECTOR : MAPPING IDS TO NOS
DYNAMICS

NOS-Gate instantiates the NOS two-state unit as a
streaming intrusion detector at a consumer gateway. The
two-state dynamics, bounded excitability, recovery coupling,
and damping terms are inherited from NOS. The change is

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

6

the meaning of the exogenous drive: in NOS networking
it represents queue and interference forcing, whereas in
NOS-Gate it is a metadata-only evidence signal computed
per flow per window. This retains the NOS structure while
changing what the “input” represents.
Table IV provides an auditable correspondence between the
NOS symbols and their IDS interpretation, and makes clear
what is reused unchanged and what is reinterpreted for detection
and action.
A. Design rationale: why a two-state NOS unit helps under
timing control
NOS-Gate targets the gateway loop in Figure 1: flows must
be scored online at a fixed cadence, thresholds must be set
without labels, and decisions should drive a reversible action
with measurable queue impact. Under the threat model, the
attacker can time-warp within windows and reshape burst
structure subject to a throughput floor and a timing-distortion
budget. This often reduces sharp per-window signatures and
pushes attacks toward smaller deviations that persist over longer
periods.
Stand-alone thresholding makes this harder. Each flow
threshold ϑi is set by a high burn-in quantile (Eq. (1)) and
then frozen. A detector that relies on rare, high-amplitude
score spikes is easier to suppress because the attacker only
needs to keep scores below a tail threshold. A detector that
can accumulate modest deviations over time is more likely to
cross a high quantile without requiring any single window to
look extreme.
With coupling disabled by default (g = 0), NOS-Gate
acts as a per-flow streaming mechanism driven by the scalar
evidence Ei,t in Eq. (10). Around the benign operating band,
the v-update behaves like a leaky evidence accumulator, while
the recovery state u provides slower negative feedback. The
leak terms prevent unbounded accumulation, the bounded
nonlinearity reduces sensitivity to rare transients, and the
explicit −u term suppresses repeated triggering after sustained
elevation. The event surrogate Si,t = σk (vi,t ) converts this
filtered state into a bounded readout that is straightforward to
calibrate using a high-quantile rule.

delay τij ∈ Z≥0 beyond this inevitable pipeline delay and
define Lij = 1 + τij , so τij = 0 corresponds to the minimum
one-window lag.
C. State interpretation for IDS
NOS-Gate reuses the two NOS states with an IDS
interpretation that preserves their mathematical roles:
v 7→ bounded evidence accumulation (suspicion),
u 7→ recovery state (suppression resource).
Operationally, v behaves like a virtual evidence queue that
rises when metadata features deviate from benign patterns and
drains under damping. The recovery state u increases under
sustained elevation and pulls v down via the explicit −u term,
which reduces rapid re-triggering after a burst of alarms. When
we include u in a score readout, we treat it as a persistence
indicator correlated with sustained deviation, not as a direct
alarm trigger by itself.
D. Evidence drive as a magnitude input
For each flow i and window t, we compute a normalised
feature vector x̂i,t ∈ Rd (Section V) and map it to a scalar
evidence drive
Ei,t = ζ ∥x̂i,t ∥p ,
(10)
where p ≥ 1 and ζ > 0 are hyperparameters. We treat
Ei,t as constant over the window [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t). Because
x̂i,t is produced by online z-scoring, the norm aggregates
multi-feature deviations without labels and avoids learning
per-feature weights.

E. NOS dynamics for IDS (windowed discretisation)
NOS-Gate runs once per window, so we discretise the NOS
two-state dynamics with an explicit Euler step of size ∆t. Let
vi,t ≈ vi (t∆t) and ui,t ≈ ui (t∆t).
Event surrogate (readout used for coupling and scoring).
1
.
Si,t = σk (vi,t − θ) =
(11)
1 + exp −k (vi,t − θ)
Neighbour drive (optional). When coupling is enabled,
the NOS graph-local term is Eq. (9). We update all flows
synchronously once per window. Since Sj,t is produced at
window t and is only available when advancing to t+1, the
minimum realised coupling lag is one window. We therefore
parameterise an additional delay τij ∈ Z≥0 and implement
B. From gateway flows to NOS nodes
Lij = 1 + τij , so τij = 0 corresponds to the minimum
We model each active directed flow i as a node in a one-window lag.
contention structure with nonnegative weights W = [wij ]. Two
Bounded excitability. We use the NOS bounded nonlinearity
αv 2
flows are neighbours if they compete for the same gateway
fsat (v) =
,
(12)
scheduling domain (uplink WFQ domain or a contention clique).
1 + κv 2
with
α
>
0
and
κ
>
0.
For
numerical
safety,
the
The NOS graph-local inputX
is retained:
implementation
may
clip
v
to
[0,
v
]
max
Ii,t = g
wij Sj,t−Lij ,
(9)
State update (same NOS core, with IDS-specific drive).
j∈N (i)
where g is a global coupling gain, Lij ∈ Z≥0 is an integer Define the total exogenous drive as the sum of the IDS evidence
delay in windows, and Sj,t is an event surrogate emitted by and (optionally) the neighbour drive: Ai,t = Ei,t + Ii,t (set
flow j (defined below). In the main results we set g = 0 unless Ii,t = 0 when coupling is disabled). The per-window updates
stated otherwise; coupling is evaluated in ablations. We update are

all flows synchronously once per window. Since the neighbour
v
=
v
+
∆t
fsat (vi,t ) + βvi,t + γ − ui,t + Ai,t
i,t+1
i,t
surrogate Sj,t is emitted at window t and is only available
(13)

when advancing to t+1, the smallest realised coupling lag
−λvi,t − χ vi,t − vrest c + ξi,t − r Si,t ,
is one full window. We therefore parameterise an additional
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

7

TABLE IV
AUDITABLE MAPPING FROM NOS ( MAIN MODEL ) TO NOS-G ATE (IDS
INSTANTIATION ).
Symbol

NOS meaning

NOS-Gate (IDS) meaning

vi

Normalised congestion
proxy

ui

βvi + γ

Recovery / slowdown
resource
Bounded
excitability
(finite buffers)
Residual slope and offset

−ui

Post-burst recovery drag

−λvi

Service-like drainage

−χ(vi − vrest )

Small-signal damping

Ii (t)

Graph-local coupling

Si (t)

Presynaptic event train

(a, b, µ)

Recovery sensitivity and
decay
Telemetry forcing

Bounded
evidence
accumulation, optionally
clipped to [0, vmax ]
Suppression state damping
repeated alarms
Bounded evidence growth
under deviation
Bias and linear drift
correction
Refractory
suppression
after alarms
Evidence decay toward
baseline
Stabilisation around benign
baseline
Contention-driven
neighbour
propagation
(ablation)
Event surrogate Si,t =
σk (vi,t − θ)
Suppression build-up and
persistence
Total drive Ai,t = Ei,t +
Ii,t with Ei,t = ζ∥x̂i,t ∥p
Optional continuous reset
−rSi,t
WFQ gating: alarms reduce
weight ωi

fsat (v)

Exogenous drive
Reset pathway
Operational
action

Differentiable
option
Operator control

reset



ui,t+1 = ui,t + ∆t ab vi,t − (a + µ) ui,t .
(14)
Here ξi,t is an optional zero-mean noise term (set to 0 unless
enabled) and vrest is the benign baseline (we use vrest = 0
unless stated). The optional term −rSi,t is a continuous reset
pathway (set r = 0 when not used). This is the only structural
difference from NOS: the “input” is now Ai,t , whose IDS
component is Ei,t from Eq. (10).
F. Score, alarm, and WFQ gating action
NOS-Gate converts state into an anomaly score
si,t = η1 Si,t + η2 ui,t .
(15)
An alarm is ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi }, where ϑi is set per flow by
burn-in quantile thresholding (Eq. (1)). We stabilise alerts with
the K-of-M persistence rule (Section II). When actionable,
WFQ gating assigns ωi = ω− for Tg ; otherwise ωi = ω0 .
In the main results we use η2 = 0, so the operational score
is driven by Si,t . We use η2 > 0 only in ablations, where ui,t
acts as a slow-burn persistence cue. The run manifest records
(η1 , η2 ).
G. Fixed points and stability
For constant drives (that is, Ei,t ≡ Ei⋆ and Ii,t ≡ Ii⋆ ), with
ξi,t = 0 and r = 0, a steady state (vi⋆ , u⋆i ) of the underlying
NOS core satisfies

0 = fsat (vi⋆ ) + βvi⋆ + γ − u⋆i + Ei⋆ + Ii⋆ − λvi⋆ − χ vi⋆ − vrest ,
(16)
together with ab vi⋆ = (a+µ) u⋆i from Eq. (14). (If the optional
reset r > 0 is enabled, it adds an additional negative feedback

term proportional to Si⋆ = σk (vi⋆ − θ) in the discrete-time
update in Eq. (13).)
For conservative calibration checks, we isolate the coupling
gain. Since maxx σk′ (x) = k/4, the linearised coupling path
in the v-update is bounded by ∆t g ρ(W ) k/4. In experiments
we choose (g, k), ∆t, and the world-specific ρ(W ) band so
that this bound remains below the local damping and recovery
margin induced by (λ, χ) and (a, b, µ), and the local slope of
fsat around the operating band. The IDS evidence Ei,t enters
only as exogenous forcing.
We emphasise that the bound ∆t g ρ(W ) k/4 is used as
a conservative heuristic sufficient check for selecting safe
coupling settings in our discrete-time implementation; it is
not a formal stability guarantee for the full nonlinear, driven
system under arbitrary time-varying evidence inputs.
V. M ETHODS
NOS-Gate operates on per-flow packet metadata at a fixed
cadence. We treat each directed five-tuple flow as a stream and
summarise its packets in non-overlapping windows of length
∆t = 250 ms. Each window yields one feature vector xi,t for
flow i at window index t. In synthetic worlds, flow keys and
(when needed) device identifiers are known by construction.
In the optional corpus mode, we extract the same directed
five-tuple flows from PCAP or flow logs. Device identity is
not required for scoring, but when a stable identifier exists
(for example, a MAC address or a DHCP lease), we maintain
separate normalisation statistics per device.
A. Causal windowing and online normalisation
All feature computation is causal. Features for window
t use only packets with timestamps in [t∆t, (t+1)∆t), and
any running statistics depend only on earlier windows. After
computing xi,t , we normalise online to reduce drift and make
thresholds comparable across flows.
Let d(i) be the device identifier for flow i when available
(otherwise a single global bucket). For each feature index k
and device bucket d, we maintain exponential running mean
and variance,
(d,k)
(d,k)
(d,k)
mt+1 = (1 − λm )mt
+ λ m xt ,
(17)

2
(d,k)
(d,k)
(d,k)
(d,k)
qt+1 = (1 − λv )qt
+ λ v xt
− mt
,
(18)
and emit a z-score
(d,k)
(d,k)
x
− mt
(d,k)
x̂t
= tq
.
(19)
(d,k)
qt
+ϵ
Operationally, we compute x̂i,t using (mt , qt ), score window
t, and then update (mt+1 , qt+1 ) using xi,t . We use separate
rates λm and λv so that the variance adapts more cautiously
than the mean under bursty traffic. If a window has no packets,
rate features are set to zero and IAT summaries are marked as
missing (the evidence drive in Eq. (10) remains defined through
other features). We clip z-scores to a fixed magnitude (default
8) to prevent a single spike from dominating. Thresholds are
fixed after burn-in. To limit post burn-in drift, online mean and
variance updates use a small adaptation rate and are clipped to
prevent abrupt shifts. We also evaluated freezing normalisation
after burn-in and observed similar qualitative trends, at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

8

TABLE V
F EATURE CONTRACT USED IN THE MAIN RUNS (d = 14, B = 10).

C. End-to-end loop and replay-based impact evaluation

The online pipeline is identical in synthetic and corpus
modes. The worlds generator emits packet traces with flow
keys, timestamps, and sizes, together with contention structure
Timing/volume
rate, byte_rate, mean_iat, cv_iat
and evasion budgets (Table III). We window packets to produce
Size/burstiness
mean_size, small_frac, duty_cycle
(B = 10)
xi,t , normalise online to obtain x̂i,t , and run NOS-Gate as a
Contention
share, q
per-flow streaming update (Section IV).
DNS
dns_churn, dns_ttl_var, dns_q
TLS
tls_sni_entropy,
All detectors, including baselines, follow the same
tls_cert_valid_days
stand-alone operating protocol. An assumed-benign burn-in
segment is used for training (where applicable) and for
TABLE VI
collecting burn-in scores. Each flow threshold is then set as a
NOS-G ATE PARAMETERS AND DEFAULTS USED IN THE MAIN RUNS ( SEE
high quantile of burn-in scores (Eq. (1)) and frozen for test.
RELEASED CONFIG SNAPSHOT ).
Labels are used only for reporting on held-out time.
Queue impact is evaluated by packet-level WFQ replay
Parameter
Default
Meaning
in two conditions: (i) baseline replay without gating and (ii)
∆t
0.25
window length
replay with gating driven by each method’s actionable flags zi,t .
k
20
sigmoid slope in Si,t = σk (vi,t − θ)
θ
1.0
sigmoid threshold
Replay logs are produced in microseconds; we report queue
2
αv
α
1.0
saturation numerator in fsat (v) = 1+κv
2
metrics in milliseconds for readability. Efficiency is reported as
κ
0.75
saturation denominator scale
microseconds per (flow, window) record, since gateway cost
β
0.10
linear term in v update
scales primarily with active flows and the window cadence.
γ
0.25
offset in v update
λ
0.35
decay in v update
We compare NOS-Gate against three lightweight label-free
χ
0.10
stabilisation around vrest
baselines
trained on the same burn-in segment and calibrated
a, b, µ
1, 1, 0.01 recovery build-up and decay (defaults when not overridden)
with
the
same
high-quantile thresholding protocol. KitNET
p
2
evidence norm ∥x̂i,t ∥p (L2)
ζ
1.0
evidence scale (default feature scaling)
is implemented as an ensemble of single-hidden-layer
√
vmax
3.0
optional clipping bound when enabled
autoencoders over feature groups of size ⌈ d⌉ (default
grouping), with per-group hidden width set to 0.5 of the
group size and an aggregator autoencoder with hidden width
cost of slightly higher false positives; we leave systematic 8 operating on the vector of per-group reconstruction errors.
adversarial drift handling to future work.
Autoencoder is a compact one-hidden-layer MLP autoencoder
Linear(d → 32) + ReLU + Linear(32 → d) trained by
reconstruction loss. TinyGRU is a one-layer GRU forecaster
B. Feature contract
with hidden size 24 and lookback 8 windows, followed by a
The feature stream is deliberately small and restricted
linear head that predicts the next normalised feature vector; its
to fields visible at the gateway: headers, timestamps, and
anomaly score is the one-step prediction error. All learnable
sizes, plus DNS and TLS handshake metadata when present.
baselines minimise mean squared error (reconstruction for
From timing and burstiness we include packet rate, simple
KitNET/autoencoder; one-step prediction for TinyGRU) using
inter-arrival summaries (mean and coefficient of variation when
Adam (learning rates as in the released configuration), with a
at least two packets exist), and a low-frequency pacing indicator
fixed small number of epochs. We do not use early stopping
computed from counts in B fixed micro-bins within the window.
in the reported runs; dropout is disabled and weight decay is
From contention we include (i) clique-level rate share and (ii)
set to zero unless stated otherwise.
an interference index derived from the contention weights W
used by the worlds generator.
VI. R ESULTS
For the main results, we use a fixed d = 14 feature contract
per flow-window; Table V lists the features, and Table VI lists
We report results on reproducible worlds containing
the defaults of NOS used in the main runs. The duty-cycle malicious episodes under the timing-controlled threat model.
feature uses B = 10 micro-bins within each window.
All methods operate in a stand-alone, label-free mode: per-flow
We densify to a full (flow, window) grid. If a flow has no thresholds are set from the burn-in segment using the same
packets in window t, rate and byte-rate are set to zero; IAT high-quantile rule and then frozen for test (Eq. (1)). We report
summaries are set to zero when fewer than two packets are two alert budgets, FPR = 1% and FPR = 0.1%, and we always
present in the window (since IAT is undefined). In runs that show the achieved benign false-alarm rate on the held-out test
include DNS/TLS features (Table V), when DNS/TLS metadata segment under that protocol. We report the achieved benign
is not present for a particular flow-window, the corresponding false-positive rate induced by the frozen per-flow thresholds
DNS/TLS feature values default to zero under the fixed contract. on the held-out test segment. Concretely, for each method
We also report results under a timing+contention-only contract we compute the fraction of benign flow-windows in the test
(i.e., without DNS/TLS features) when those fields are not segment that produce an alarm under ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi },
available in a uniform way. The run manifest records the where ϑi is set from the burn-in segment (Eq. (1)) and then
feature contract and discrete settings (including B and the frozen. Because this estimate aggregates over a very large
z-score clip magnitude).
number of benign flow-windows per world in our evaluation,
Group

Features

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

9

small world-to-world differences can fall below the precision
implied by typical rounded tables. We therefore state operating
points by their target alert budgets and always report the
achieved rate under the same protocol. In our harness, achieved
FPR is estimated on a benign-only episode over the full horizon,
which yields 64 × 57,600 ≈ 3.69 × 106 flow-windows per
world at ∆t = 250 ms. At target FPR = 0.1%, the sampling
variability of an empirical false-positive fraction at this n is
on the order of 10−5 , so values rounded to three decimals
can appear identical across worlds. For this reason we state
operating points in terms of the target budget and clarify the
estimation volume, and we report achieved values at higher
precision in the artefact summaries.

TABLE VII
S CORING COST ON CPU ( MICROSECONDS PER WINDOW- ROW ). T IMINGS
ARE WALL - CLOCK PER ( FLOW , WINDOW ) FEATURE ROW ON I NTEL C ORE
I 7-1355U, USING W INDOWS 11 AND [P YTHON 3.14.2]; MEASUREMENTS
WERE TAKEN IN [ SINGLE - THREAD ] MODE . R EPORTED TIME INCLUDES
ONLINE NORMALISATION AND MODEL UPDATE / SCORING GIVEN
PRECOMPUTED WINDOW FEATURES ; IT EXCLUDES PACKET
CAPTURE / PARSING AND WINDOW FEATURE EXTRACTION .
Method
NOS-Gate
Autoencoder
KitNET
TinyGRU

Mean (µs/row)

p90 (µs/row)

Max (µs/row)

2.09
2.03
11.68
31.10

2.97
2.78
16.72
46.57

2.99
2.80
16.80
49.24

that improves both metrics consistently across the 7 worlds.
Relative to baseline replay without gating, NOS-driven gating
Figure 2 summarises incident recall and time-to-detect (TTD) reduces p99.9 queueing delay by about 3.24 ms on average
at FPR = 0.1%. Time-to-detect (TTD) is measured from across worlds and reduces p99.9 collateral delay by about 3.16
the first malicious-labelled window of an episode to the first ms. In contrast, gating driven by KitNET and the autoencoder
threshold-crossing alarm ai,t = 1 (i.e., the first window where increases mean p99.9 queueing delay in these runs (about
si,t ≥ ϑi on the attacked flow), and is reported separately from +0.30 ms and +0.91 ms, respectively), which is consistent
the persistence-based actionable signal used for WFQ gating. with less targeted gating under the same strict alert budget.
Figure 3(c) summarises the central deployment question:
This operating point is intentionally strict. Because ϑi is a high
burn-in quantile and is then frozen, a detector must exceed a under a strict alert cap, does the detector sit in the favourable
tail threshold on each flow. Under timing-controlled evasion region of higher incident recall and lower tail delay. Under the
(Table III), the attacker can often reduce sharp per-window shared stand-alone protocol, NOS-Gate occupies that region in
anomalies by spreading activity across windows while still these worlds.
meeting the throughput floor. This makes methods that depend
on occasional high-amplitude windows easier to suppress below C. Efficiency on CPU
ϑi , while methods that accumulate modest deviation energy
Table VII reports scoring cost in microseconds per
across time are more likely to trigger without relying on a
window-row. NOS-Gate remains lightweight (mean ≈
single extreme window.
2.09 µs/row), comparable to the compact autoencoder and
At FPR = 0.1%, NOS-Gate misses 1 of 21 incidents
substantially faster than KitNET and TinyGRU in these runs.
(incident recall 0.952). The strongest baseline in these runs,
This matters because gateway cost scales with active flows and
TinyGRU, misses 3 incidents (recall 0.857). The remaining
window cadence. A method that is expensive per window is
baselines miss 5 incidents (recall 0.762).
harder to sustain without adding latency. All methods are timed
Figure 2(a) shows per-world recall and indicates that the gain
under the same measurement protocol; we report per-row cost
is not driven by a single outlier world. Figure 2(b) shows the
because gateway compute scales primarily with active flows
TTD distribution over detected incidents. Several baselines can
and the fixed window cadence.
trigger quickly when they trigger, but under the strict budget
they fail to trigger on more episodes. NOS-Gate trades some
latency on the hardest cases for fewer missed incidents, which D. Summary
is the relevant trade-off when false alarms must remain rare.
Across these runs, NOS-Gate is the only method that meets
Figure 2(c) provides episode-level discordant counts pooled the three constraints that define the gateway setting at once: (i)
across the same 21 episodes. NOS-Gate detects more episodes under a strict false-alarm budget it misses fewer incidents, (ii)
that each baseline misses than vice versa (KitNET: 5 vs 1; its actionable flags drive a reversible WFQ action that reduces
TinyGRU: 3 vs 1; autoencoder: 5 vs 1). The sample is modest, both queue-tail delay and collateral tail delay in replay, and (iii)
so we treat this as supporting evidence rather than a standalone it achieves this with a small, stable per-window compute cost.
statistical claim, but the direction is consistent across baselines. Under looser thresholds, baselines can appear closer. The strict
stand-alone calibration exposes the failure mode that matters
operationally: missed incidents and action-triggered latency
B. Queue impact of WFQ gating
when
alerts must be rare.
Detection is evaluated here through its control effect. We
A. Incident detection under timing-controlled evasion

therefore assess WFQ gating using packet-level replay, driven
by each method’s actionable flags under the strict operating
point (FPR = 0.1%). Queue logs are produced in microseconds
and reported in milliseconds.
Figure 3 reports tail queueing delay and tail collateral
delay under gating (p99.9). NOS-Gate is the only method

VII. C ONCLUSION
Consumer gateways in the networks sit at the point where
encrypted services meet heterogeneous IoT devices, but
encryption leaves timing, size, and burst structure visible.
Those side channels support metadata-based IDS, yet they

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

10

(a) Incident recall per world (FPR = 0.1%).

(b) TTD distribution (FPR = 0.1%).

(c) Discordant episode counts vs baselines
(FPR = 0.1%).

Fig. 2. Detection under the strict false-alarm budget (TTD is defined to the first alarm ai,t = 1, not to the first actionable trigger under K-of-M persistence.).
Panels (a) and (b) show per-world behaviour and latency dispersion, not only pooled totals. Panel (c) summarises episode-level discordants (NOS-Gate only vs
baseline), pooled across worlds.

(a) p99.9 queueing delay under gating.

(b) p99.9 collateral delay under gating.

(c) Incident recall vs ∆p99.9 delay (gated
minus base).

Fig. 3. Action-level evaluation under the strict operating point (FPR = 0.1%). NOS-Gate is the only method that improves both queue-tail delay and collateral
tail delay while maintaining the highest incident recall under the same label-free calibration protocol. Delays are reported in ms (raw logs are in µs).

also create a practical evasion surface: an adaptive adversary every real deployment. Instead, we offer a falsifiable protocol,
can reshape timing while still meeting an attack objective. artefacts, and budgets that make both evasion and queue impact
This paper addressed a deployment-centred question: under measurable. NOS-Gate operates per flow with a persistence rule,
a strict false-alarm cap and without labels, can a gateway which is appropriate when malicious activity is sustained on a
detect quickly enough to act, using only metadata, and small number of flows. An adaptive adversary could attempt
can that action reduce user-visible queue harm rather than to dilute evidence by increasing flow churn (many short-lived
add to it? We introduced NOS-Gate, a streaming IDS flows) or by spreading activity across multiple endpoints so
that instantiates a lightweight two-state unit derived from that no single flow accumulates enough alarms within the
Network-Optimised Spiking (NOS) dynamics per flow. The persistence window to trigger action. We do not evaluate such
model is structurally faithful to NOS and changes only the multi-flow strategies in this paper; addressing them may require
interpretation of the exogenous drive, which becomes a scalar lightweight aggregation above the five-tuple (for example,
evidence signal derived from online normalised metadata per-device or per-destination persistence) or coupling across
features. The resulting state update provides controlled leak, flows sharing a scheduling domain, while preserving the same
bounded growth, and recovery-driven suppression, producing stand-alone calibration and auditable action constraints. Future
a stable score that is calibrated stand-alone by burn-in work should expand the benchmark with additional device
quantile thresholding and stabilised by a K-of-M persistence processes, and explore how learned feature representations can
rule. Crucially, NOS-Gate connects detection to an auditable be introduced without breaking the stand-alone calibration and
mitigation path by temporarily reducing WFQ weights for action-audit requirements.
persistently suspicious flows. To evaluate this action loop under
timing-controlled evasion, we introduced an executable worlds
benchmark with explicit attacker budgets and packet-level
R EFERENCES
WFQ replay. Under the strict operating point (0.1% achieved
benign false-positive rate), NOS-Gate achieved the highest
[1] M. Bilal, “Network-optimised spiking neural network for event-driven
networking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23516, 2025. [Online]. Available:
incident recall among the tested label-free baselines while also
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23516
improving tail queue outcomes under gating, including reduced
[2] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing android
p99.9 queueing delay and reduced collateral tail delay. Its
encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125, 2016.
per-window scoring cost remained small and stable on CPU,
[3] A. Panchenko, F. Lanze, J. Pennekamp, T. Engel, A. Zinnen, M. Henze,
which matches gateway scaling constraints.Finally, we do not
and K. Wehrle, “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Network
claim payload-level coverage or that synthetic worlds capture
and Distributed System Security Symposium, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15302617
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

11

[4] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, F. Loi, A. Radford, C. Wijenayake,
A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman, “Classifying iot devices in smart
environments using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, 2019.
[5] M. Miettinen, S. Marchal, I. Hafeez, N. Asokan, A.-R. Sadeghi, and
S. Tarkoma, “Iot sentinel: Automated device-type identification for
security enforcement in iot,” in 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference
on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2017, pp. 2177–2184.
[6] I. Hafeez, M. Antikainen, A. Y. Ding, and S. Tarkoma, “Iot-keeper:
Detecting malicious iot network activity using online traffic analysis
at the edge,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 45–59, 2020.
[7] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan, and
A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏot: A federated self-learning anomaly detection system
for iot,” in 2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2019, pp. 756–767.
[8] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
vol. 41, no. 3, 2009.
[9] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2018.
[10] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An efficient
defense against statistical traffic analysis,” in Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2009.
[11] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A
systematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
defenses.” New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2014.
[12] M. Bilal and X. Xu, “Network-optimised spiking neural network
(nos) scheduling for 6g o-ran: Spectral margin and delay-tail
control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11291, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.11291
[13] A. Tavanaei, M. Ghodrati, S. R. Kheradpisheh, T. Masquelier, and
A. Maida, “Deep learning in spiking neural networks,” Neural Networks,
vol. 111, pp. 47–63, 2019.
[14] D. Marković, A. Mizrahi, D. Querlioz, and J. Grollier, “Physics for
neuromorphic computing,” Nature Reviews Physics, 2020.
[15] A. Demers, S. Keshav, and S. Shenker, “Analysis and simulation of a fair
queueing algorithm,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 19, no. 4,
p. 1–12, 1989. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/75247.75248
[16] A. Parekh and R. Gallager, “A generalized processor sharing approach
to flow control in integrated services networks: the single-node case,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 344–357,
1993.
[17] A. K. Parekh and R. G. Gallager, “A generalized processor sharing
approach to flow control in integrated services networks: The
multiple-node case,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 2,
no. 2, 1994.
[18] K. Nichols and V. Jacobson, “Controlling queue delay,” Queue, vol. 10,
no. 5, 2012.
[19] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious
traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Network and
Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2023.
[20] Y. Qing, Q. Yin, X. Deng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, K. Sun, K. Xu, J. Zhang, and
Q. Li, “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for detecting
encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium (NDSS), 2024.
[21] L. Gao, C. Fu, X. Deng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Wedjat: Detecting
sophisticated evasion attacks via real-time causal analysis,” in
Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining V.1, ser. KDD ’25. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, p. 342–353. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3690624.3709218
[22] S. Sattar, S. Khan, M. I. Khan, A. Akhmediyarova, O. Mamyrbayev,
D. Kassymova, D. Oralbekova, and J. Alimkulova, “Anomaly
detection in encrypted network traffic using self-supervised learning,”
Scientific Reports, vol. 15, p. 26585, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-08568-0
[23] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, Y. Mathov, Y. Mirsky, A. Shabtai,
D. Breitenbacher, and Y. Elovici, “N-baiot—network-based detection of
iot botnet attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
[24] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security,
privacy and trust in internet of things: The road ahead,” Computer
Networks, vol. 76, pp. 146–164, 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128614003971

[25] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of
traffic classification in iot networks: A survey,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 154, p. 102538, 2020.
[26] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and
machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176,
2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.