4278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

NT-Transformer: A Non-Pretrained Encrypted
Network Traffic Classification Model
Zhenzhen Yan , Member, IEEE, Lizhi Peng , Member, IEEE, Peiqiang Liu, Yingshuo Bao ,
and Bo Yang , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Network traffic classification plays an indispensable
role in network management, Quality of Service (QoS),
and cybersecurity. With the widespread encryption techniques
applied to network traffic, it has become increasingly challenging
to classify network traffic into different management groups
accurately. In recent years, pre-training Transformer-based
models have been successfully applied to Natural Language
Processing (NLP), and researchers have also introduced such
models into encrypted network traffic analysis. However, besides
the similarities of words in NLP and byte codes in network
traffic, there exist essential differences between them, which
may cause inefficacy of the pretrained model when being
applied to new traffic data. In this paper, we propose a nonpretrained encrypted network traffic classification model based
on Transformer called NT-Transformer, which can directly learn
labeled network traffic features at two levels of granularity,
namely, byte level (uni-gram or bi-gram) and flow level
(packet size and packet inter-arrival time), without the relatively
expensive pre-training procedure of unlabeled data. This method
is validated on three public datasets and three sets of recently
collected network traffic data. Experimental results indicate that
in some scenarios, pretrained models offer limited performance
gains when applied to new encrypted network traffic data not
encountered during pre-training, and NT-Transformer with
uni-gram byte representation outperforms the state-of-the-art
models in terms of pushing the F1 score up by 0.25% - 2.24%.
Index Terms—Encrypted network traffic classification, transformers, byte representation, uni-gram, pre-training, deep
learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification, aiming at identifying and
classifying network traffic into different management
groups, plays an essential role in network planning, network
monitoring, Quality of Service (QoS), and intrusion/malware
detection. In recent years, with the increasing requirement

Fig. 1.

Global encrypted traffic protocols and classes.

N

Received 1 July 2025; revised 1 December 2025 and 14 January 2026;
accepted 8 April 2026. Date of publication 13 April 2026; date of current
version 28 April 2026. This work is supported by Shandong Provincial
Natural Science Foundation under Grant No. ZR2022QF151, in part by the
the Opening Fund of Shandong Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Intelligent
Computing, in part by the Jinan Scientific Research Leader Studio, China,
under Grant No.202228114, and in part by the TaiShan Scholars Program
under Grant No. tstp20240828. The associate editor coordinating the review
of this article and approving it for publication was N. Limam. (Corresponding
author: Zhenzhen Yan.)
Zhenzhen Yan and Peiqiang Liu are with Shandong Technology and
Business University, Yantai 264005, China (e-mail: zhengina27@163.com).
Lizhi Peng and Bo Yang are with Shandong Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous
Intelligent Computing, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China, and also
with the Quan Cheng Laboratory, Jinan 250103, China.
Yingshuo Bao is with Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3683410

and demand for data security and user privacy, network
traffic encryption has been widely utilized. According to the
Google Transparency Report, the percentage of data that is
encrypted across Google products and services has grown from
50% to 96% [1] in the last ten years. Fig. 1 illustrates the
contributions to the global encrypted traffic by the top three
encryption protocols and the top four traffic classes. TLS 1.3
and QUIC(which also incorporates elements of the TLS 1.3
standard) account for 65.84% of encrypted traffic [2], [3],
and video streaming is responsible for over 80% of encrypted
traffic volume [4]. The ubiquity of encryption has protected
Internet users and data to a great extent, while at the same
time posing major challenges to network traffic classification.
Cybercriminals and malware can take advantage of advanced
encryption techniques, such as TLS, VPN, etc., to evade the
detection of firewalls, Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), and

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), which makes the work of
accurate network traffic classification indispensable.
There are three main categories of methods for network traffic classification: port-based, Deep Packet Inspection
(DPI)-based, and Machine Learning (ML)-based [5]. The
accuracy of port-based methods is relatively low due to
the commonly used port disguises and dynamic ports. The
DPI-based methods focus on inspecting packet payload to
find keywords or patterns, which can raise privacy concerns
because they need to dig deep into the content of packets.
Besides the privacy issues, DPI-based methods often incur
high computational overhead and are only applicable for
unencrypted network traffic [6]. The ML-based methods can
be further divided into two classes of models [7] based
on whether the input to ML models is raw traffic or not:
1) divide-and-conquer model, where packet and flow features
are manually selected or designed from raw network traffic as
the input to ML models. The performance in terms of accuracy
and computational cost is highly dependent on the quality
and quantity of the hand-selected or hand-designed features;
2) end-to-end model, where raw traffic is fed directly into ML
models without any human expertise, which may be prone to
misinterpretation and overgeneralization. Either one of these
two models may overlook some useful information that the
other model covers, e.g., the divide-and-conquer model ignores
the byte-level details, and the end-to-end model doesn’t take
the flow-level knowledge into consideration.
In recent years, Transformer-based deep learning frameworks have achieved great breakthroughs in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [8], [9], [10], Computer Vision (CV) [11],
speech processing [12], multi-modal [13], and many other
fields [14]. These deep learning frameworks usually consist of
two steps: pre-training and fine-tuning. During pre-training,
the models learn from a tremendous amount of unlabeled
data, which is typically computationally expensive, but compromising on data can lead to performance degradation. For
fine-tuning, the models’ parameters can be initialized with the
pretrained values as a starting point, and further tuned using
labeled data from specific downstream tasks.
The Transformer-based pre-training and fine-tuning models
have been applied to encrypted network traffic classification in the last two years [15], [16], [17], [18], where the
unlabeled traffic payload data are transformed to patternpreserved tokens for pre-training, and a small portion of
these unlabeled data are used in the fine-tuning phase after
adding the labels back. These models have demonstrated
superior performance compared to the classic deep learning
models, such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), with the overhead of a
massive amount of data and computing power required in
the pre-training step. The pretrained models are built with
the intention of “once and for many”, which means that
once a pretrained model is created, it is expected to facilitate
many future downstream tasks. However, there exist significant
differences between words/sentences/paragraphs in a natural
language and bytes/flows/sessions in network traffic. During
the pre-training step of NLP, phrases, grammar rules, idiomatic
expressions, etc., of a language are learned. These learned

4279

language features and rules usually do not change rapidly over
time, which is the key point to the success of pretrained models
in the NLP field because we use languages to communicate
between individuals, interpret each other’s ideas, and make
ourselves understood, and fast-evolving rules contradict these
purposes of languages. Another aspect of natural languages
is that encryption is rarely used, because it contradicts the
purpose of communication. Such characteristics of languages
make the pretrained models advantageous when dealing with
various downstream tasks, in that there is no need to build
models from scratch, and optimization can usually be reached
with a relatively insignificant amount of fine-tuning data and
computational cost.
The story is different when analyzing network traffic.
Besides the application (e.g., Gmail, Youtube, etc.) and service
(e.g., email, video, etc.) fingerprints applied to the data,
the content being transferred is largely dominated by end
users, e.g., in a chat scenario, the end users may send any
combinations of words, pictures, videos, and voice messages,
without following any specific rules about which item should
come after which. For security purposes, encryption has been
widely applied to network traffic. Languages aim to convey
meaning, while network traffic tries to prevent understanding of its content until it is decrypted. These facts indicate
that there are more unpredictable features to learn in the
network traffic classification scenario compared to NLP, and
pretrained models using one pool of datasets may not add the
expected value when applied to another pool of previously
unseen datasets. The instability characteristic of network traffic
undermines the reusability and transferability of pretrained
models, which usually require a significant amount of time
and computational resources to be pretrained.
In this paper, we propose a non-pretrained encrypted
network traffic classification model, called Network TrafficTransformer (NT-Transformer), which can directly learn
labeled network traffic features from both byte level (uni-gram
or bi-gram) and flow level (packet size and inter-packet arrival
time), without the relatively expensive pre-training procedure
of unlabeled data. The main contributions are as follows:
• We validate that when data used for fine-tuning is sampled from the same pool as data used for pre-training,
pretrained models can both improve the success rate
of fine-tuning tasks and expedite the tuning process;
However, pretrained models often provide limited gains
when applied to new, previously unseen datasets.
• We propose a hybrid model, namely NT-Transformer,
combining the divide-and-conquer and end-to-end model,
in which both packet and flow level features are encoded
as the input to the model. The byte-level features enable
the model to learn contextual semantics, while the flowlevel features provide information about the fingerprints
of applications and services, as well as user behaviors,
network conditions, etc.
• NT-Transformer is able to classify network traffic at three
levels of granularities, i.e., application level, flow level,
and content level, and NT-Transformer with uni-gram
encoding plus flow level encoding outperforms the stateof-the-art models on one public dataset and three newly

4280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

collected datasets by 0.25% - 2.24%, which demonstrates
its effectiveness and generalization ability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizes the related work. Section III describes our proposed
model, NT-Transformer, in detail. Experiments and analyses
are presented in Section IV. Finally, we conclude this paper
in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we briefly summarize the methods that
have been applied to the network traffic classification field,
including fingerprint-based methods, feature engineeringbased methods, deep learning methods, and Transformer
models. A comparative overview of these related works is provided in Table I, which details their methodological categories,
classifiers, utilized features, use of multi-granular features,
adoption of two-phase training, and evaluation datasets.
A. Fingerprint-Based Methods
Unlike traditional DPI-based methods that can raise privacy
concerns and fail when being applied to encrypted traffic,
FlowPrint [19] introduces a semi-supervised approach for
constructing mobile app fingerprints by combining temporal,
device, destination, and packet size features, without inspecting packet payload information. However, these fingerprints
have the potential to be tampered under VPN or proxy scenarios, making traffic in these virtual networks evade detection.
B. Feature Engineering-Based Methods
Feature engineering-based methods (or divide-and-conquer
methods [7]) divide the complex network traffic classification
problem into several simpler sub-problems. The workflow
usually includes three sequential steps: 1) Task-specific features are first hand-designed; 2) These features are then
extracted or generated from raw network traffic; 3) Finally, the
feature data is input to classic statistical-based or behavioralbased machine learning approaches [44]. Based on the traffic
discriminators summerized by Moore et al., there can be as
many as 249 features to characterize Internet flows [45], and
feature engineering-based methods generally adopt a subset of
these for their specific research goals, e.g., AppScanner [20]
generates statistical features from flows, BIND [21] adopts
both burst size and burst time as input to ML classifiers,
and Xie et al. propose a new feature: byte code distribution
[22], which is generated from raw traffic bytes. However,
these methods heavily rely on human-engineered task-specific
features, which may limit their generalizability.
C. Deep Learning Methods
Deep learning (DL), the hottest branch of ML that uses
deep neural networks as learning methods, has been widely
applied to network traffic classification with raw traffic as
input to automatically learn discriminative features. In 2017,
Wang et al. firstly tried to use Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) to learn features from raw traffic [7], [44]. Since
then, many researchers have followed this way of applying DL

models. Sirinam et al. apply CNNs to extract representations
from raw packet direction sequences [27]. Shapira and Shavitt
[23], [24] convert packet sizes in consecutive time slices
of flows into FlowPic images which are fed into a CNN.
Based on this approach, Horowicz et al. [25] propose miniFlowPic with augmentation techniques in few-shot learning.
Liu et al. adopt Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [28]
to learn representative features from raw flows. Combination
models of both CNNs and RNNs have been designed to obtain
both packet and flow features [5], [33], [35], [36], [37] or
both spatial and temporal characteristics [32], [46] [30]. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) models [47] are also developed
using raw traffic and packet/flow features [38], [39]. These
DL-based methods have achieved superior performance until
the attempt to apply Transformer-based models to the network
traffic classification field is made.
D. Transformer Models
In recent years, Transformer-based models have pushed the
performance on tasks in many fields to unprecedented levels,
especially the advancements in NLP, CV, speech processing,
etc. [48]. Since natural languages and communication protocols share some common characteristics, researchers have been
inspired to apply Transformer models to the network traffic
classification field. ConViTML [42] applies CNNs to the byte
images created using the first 784 bytes of packets, and then
divides the images into patches, which are then flattened as
the input to Transformer. YaTC [18] processes each flow into
a multi-level flow representation matrix. These works embed
byte/packet/flow level information into fixed-sized images, but
have not considered that some pixels may not enhance the
traffic classification results, e.g., the encrypted packet payload
pixels may not be as informative as packet header pixels. PERT
[40], ET-BERT [15], and TrafficFormer [17] use byte-pair to
encode the hexadecimal raw byte sequences, because with
byte-pair, the range of byte values is comparable to the size
of a common NLP vocabulary. However, these works mainly
focus on how to prepare the network traffic to be as close
as possible to NLP words in order to apply the Transformer
model, and overlook the unique and intrinsic characteristics of
network traffic. PEAN [41] and FlowBERT [16] use both raw
bytes and length sequence as their inputs, which extends the
type of tokens. They lack the analysis of whether their byte
representations are optimal, and the packet inter-arrival time
is also neglected.
To the best of our knowledge, existing Transformer-based
traffic analysis models follow the framework of pre-training
and fine-tuning, in which a model is pretrained on enormous unlabeled data to learn the contextual representations
of network traffic, especially through the “mask” process that
randomly masks a certain percent, e.g., 15%, of the tokens,
to predict the masked token by fusing bidirectional (i.e., both
the left and right) context [9]. When fine-tuning task-specific
models, the downstream tasks can take advantage of the
pretrained model to reduce the demand for labeled input data
and computing power. However, besides the characteristics
in common, one major difference between natural languages
and network traffic is whether the representations learned can

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

TABLE I
R ELATED W ORKS IN N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION TASKS

4281

4282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 2. NT-transformer framework.

represent a considerable amount of future downstream tasks,
which can highly influence the reusability and effectiveness of
the pretrained models.
III. NT-T RANSFORMER
NT-Transformer differs from the related Transformer-based
models in that it learns from labeled input directly, without
the pre-training step. Our hypothesis is: network traffic, in
terms of packets and payload bytes, has the representations
of actual data, user behaviors, application/service signatures,
and network conditions. This combination of representations
can be learned to classify network traffic within the lifespan of
flows/sessions and a longer period if these representations stay
relatively unchanged. Compared with natural languages, which
have grammar rules, idiomatic expressions that are supposed
to be invariable at least for years, network traffic can vary
frequently when end users decide to send/receive something
different, change their sending/receiving behaviors, or there
is an application update, etc. The variability characteristic of
network traffic can compromise the transferability and generalizability of pretrained models. An experimental analysis is
provided in Section IV to discuss the reusability of pretrained
models on previously unseen datasets.
The framework of NT-Transformer is shown in Fig. 2.
We transform a combination of raw traffic bytes, packet
size, and packet inter-arrival time into tokens as the input
to the NT-Transformer model. NT-Transformer adopts a base
Transformer encoder architecture comprising L = 12 layers
(i.e., Transformer blocks), each with A = 12 self-attention
heads. The model uses a hidden size H = 768 (i.e., dimension)
and accepts input sequences of up to N = 512 tokens.
This parameterization aligns with benchmark models including

PERT [40], ET-BERT [15], and TrafficFormer [17], ensuring
equitable comparisons. This base configuration substantially
lowers computational demands, often reducing training time
by more than two-thirds on identical hardware compared to
larger variants [49]. Nonetheless, pre-training with this base
architecture remains resource-intensive, a finding consistent
with existing literature [40] and corroborated in Section IV-E.
A. Raw Traffic to Tokens
Raw network traffic data in.pcap or.pcapng format is first
cleaned and processed to remove noise and anomalies, e.g.,
ARP and DHCP packets are deleted; Ethernet header is
removed, since it does not pertain to the end-to-end traffic
classification task; IP addresses and port numbers are masked
to prevent dependence on easily spoofed fields. The cleaned
traffic is grouped into flows or sessions based on task-specific
requirements. A flow is defined as a sequence of packets
that share the same 5-tuple: (source IP address, destination
IP address, source port, destination port, and the transport
layer protocol identifier), f lowi = {pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pin , i, n ∈
Z+ }. A session is defined as a pair of flows with both
source/destination IP addresses and source/destination port
numbers switched to represent a conversation between two
i
i
endpoints. sessioni = {f low(src−dst)
, f low(dst−src)
, i ∈
Z+ }. A flow is unidirectional, and a session is bidirectional.
After traffic is grouped into sessions, a slicing procedure is
performed to divide the sessions into a series of bursts [15] as
shown in the following equation(1):
(
bursti(src−dst) = {pi(src−dst),1 , . . . , pi(src−dst),k }
i
burst =
bursti(dst−src) = {pi(dst−src),1 , . . . , pi(dst−src),l },
i, k, l ∈ Z+ ,

pi ∈ sessioni ,

bursti ⊆ sessioni

(1)

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

where k and l denote that there are k packets from
f low(src−dst) , and l packets from f low(dst−src) in this burst.
In our model, we try two values for the burst size: k+l = 1000
or 100. For most comparisons, we use 1000 as the burst size;
for some datasets that contain classes with a smaller number
of packets, we choose 100 as the burst size for all classes in
order to have enough samples per class. So, a burst can have
1000 or 100 packets, and a burst is a subset of a session.
For each packet in a burst, we keep the first 40, 60, or
80 bytes of L2 payload for the next encoding step, since
40 bytes contain IP and transport layer headers, 60 bytes
contain extra optional fields and application header, and 80
bytes also contain the first few bytes of the actual payload.
NT-Transformer tries all these options and picks one with the
best performance. A study of these three L2 byte choices is
performed in Section IV-F.
Since encrypted network traffic has no semantic meaning
that can be interpreted by humans, in order to leverage the
Transformer model, traffic bursts are transformed into wordlike tokens similar to natural languages. Specifically, bytes of
packets in a burst are encoded as hexadecimal numbers. We
use two representations: uni-gram and bi-gram, which mean
one byte and two bytes per encoding unit. For the bi-gram
representation, the hexadecimal number of every two adjacent
bytes is encoded, and for two bytes, the decimal value of
each token can range from 0 to 216 − 1 = 65535, and the
encoding dictionary size is 65536 plus the special tokens that
are introduced next. For the uni-gram representation, although
only 28 =256 entries are needed, we still stick with 65536
plus the number of special tokens as our dictionary size to
accommodate the packet size and inter-arrival time features
that are introduced later. A comparison of these two payload
byte representations is conducted in Section IV-G.
Although byte-level feature is the finest granularity of
network traffic representation, which represents the nitty-gritty
details of a burst, there are still more features that a burst can
provide, e.g., if a file is transferred using different applications
or services, the bytes of the file are encapsulated in packets,
and different applications, services can adopt different packet
sizes, and the packet inter-arrival time feature can also reflect
the user-specific behaviors, network-specific conditions, and
OS-specific patterns [6]. Therefore, we further encode a burst
at a coarser level of granularity: flow level. Both packet
size and packet inter-arrival time are encoded as hexadecimal
numbers as well. Packet size fits well with the same encoding
dictionary of size 65536. For packet inter-arrival time, which
is too small to fit the encoding dictionary, we multiply 100,000
to each number to scale it while changing the time unit from
seconds to hundredths of milliseconds. We use two special
tokens, namely byte size separator token [BSS] and size time
separator token [STS], to separate byte stream, packet size,
and packet inter-arrival time token sequences. [BSS] is used
to separate byte stream and packet size, [STS] is used to
separate packet size and packet inter-arrival time. In addition,
at the beginning of each sequence, a special classification
token [CLS] is prepended, and it is used as a sequencelevel representation for classification in the final hidden layer.
The token sequence is illustrated in equation (2). Unlike the

4283

previous works that require fixed-size input from packets/flows
[18], [42] [15], [43], NT-Transformer has the flexibility to
adjust input byte sequence length, append or remove the
packet size or inter-arrival time sequences to achieve the
best performance. At last, labels are attached to the token
sequences, which are then ready to be divided into training
dataset, validation dataset, and testing dataset according to the
ratio of 8:1:1.
i
T okenSequencei = {[CLS], BT1i , BT2i , . . . , BTm
, [BSS],
i
ST1i , ST2i , . . . , STni , [ST S], T T1i , T T2i , . . . , T Tn−1
}

i, m, n ∈ Z+
(BT : ByteT oken, ST : SizeT oken, T T : T imeT oken)
(2)
B. Training NT-Transformer
Both the input tokens and their sequence positions are
embedded into vectors of dimension d=768, the token vectors and position vectors are added together to generate the
final embeddings, so the final embedding of each token in
the input sequences is represented by the sum of its token
embedding and position embedding. The token embeddings
contain features of network traffic byte, packet size, and packet
inter-arrival time, while the position embeddings help to learn
the order and temporal relationships of these features. We use
the same sine and cosine functions of different frequencies for
positional encodings as introduced in the Transformer paper
[8]. The NT-Transformer model is trained on the final labeled
embeddings. The core concept of Transformer self-attention
is to first calculate the scaled dot product attention of Query
(Q), Key (K), and then the scaled attention scores are passed
through a softmax function to obtain attention weights that
sum to 1, finally, the dot product of attention weights and
Value matrix (V ) is calculated as shown in equation(3) to get
the matrix of attention outputs.


QK T
V
Attention(Q, K, V ) = sof tmax √
dk
dk is the dimension of queries and keys
(3)
Q, K, and V are linearly transformed from the same
input matrix X through three learned weight matrices WQ ,
WK , and WV . The output of the 12 transformer layers is
passed to a fully connected layer, and then a softmax function
is applied to get the predicted classification probabilities.
During the training phase, the model parameters are updated
through minimizing the cross-entropy loss function as shown
in equation(4), where y is the true label one-hot encoding
vector, and ŷ is the predicted probability vector. Both vectors
are of length q. The algorithm is summarized in algorithm 1.
l(y, ŷ) = −

q
X

yi log ŷi

(4)

i=1

IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, three tasks (Section IV-B) are conducted
on six sets of encrypted network traffic data (Section IV-A)
to investigate the inefficacy problem of pretrained models on

4284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 NT-Transformer Algorithm
1: procedure NT-T RANSFORMER ALGORITHM
2:
for all f ∈ F do
. F: pcap/pcapng files
. traffic cleaning
3:
cleaned traf f ic ← F
4:
sessions ← cleaned traf f ic . group traffic into
sessions based on 5-tuple
. slice sessions
5:
session bursts ← sessions
into session bursts based on the number of packets
threshold
6:
for all session burst ∈ session bursts do
. extract
7:
byte tokens ← session burst
byte tokens from session burst
. extract
8:
size tokens ← session burst
size tokens from session burst
. extract
9:
time tokens ← session burst
time tokens from session burst
10:
burst tokens ← [CLS] + byte tokens +
[BSS]+size tokens+[ST S]+time tokens+
label
. generate labeled burst tokens
11:
f inal embeddings ← token embeddings +
position embeddings
←
burst tokens
. generate token embeddings and position embeddings, and then final embeddings
12:
hidden state ← f inal embeddings . get the
final hidden state after 12 transformer layers
13:
O ← f ully − connected layer(hidden state)
. get the unnormalized output which is represented as a vector of q elements
14:
ŷ ← sof tmax(O)
. get the normalized
probability distribution vector of size q
ˆl ← argmax(ŷ)
15:
. get the predicted
classification label
16:
end for
17:
end for
18: end procedure

previously unseen datasets, and to prove the effectiveness of
our model by comparing it to the state-of-the-art deep learning
models. The results are presented in Section IV-D. The Time
savings by avoiding pre-training are presented in Section IV-E.
Two ablation studies on byte representation using uni-gram
and bi-gram and three L2 payload byte choices are performed
in Section IV-G and Section IV-F, respectively. A convergence
speed analysis is provided in Section IV-H to demonstrate
that there is negligible overhead for our model when being
applied directly to new datasets without the pre-training step.
We further evaluate the models’ performance in open-world
traffic classification in Section IV-I.
A. Datasets
Table II illustrates the six datasets used in our experiments.
The first three are publicly available, while the remaining three
are our collections. A subset of special protocols is listed in the
fourth column, while the common protocols like TCP, UDP,
and HTTP are not included.
1) Dataset I: ISCX: The first dataset is the publicly available ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [50], which contains

TABLE II
DATASETS

packets from 13 services generated by 16 applications. There
are 6 NonVPN services and 7 VPN services, and its size is
27.7 GB. For some of the services, we further divide the data
based on applications, so that the number of labels = 20.
2) Dataset II: CSTNET-TLS1.3: The second dataset is
the publicly available CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset [15] collected
under CSTNET [51], which contains encrypted traffic using
the new encryption protocol TLS 1.3. This dataset is 9.1 GB,
and has 120 applications, so the number of labels = 120.
3) Dataset III: USTC-TFC: The third publicly available
dataset is USTC-TFC [44]. This dataset is 3.71 GB and
consists of ten types of malware traffic and ten types of normal
traffic, so the number of labels = 20.
4) Dataset IV: Streaming(Application): Since the last
decade, streaming applications have become more and more
popular. Cisco estimated that live video usage accounts for
82% of Internet traffic [52], posing a number of management
challenges for the Internet. To facilitate the stream traffic
analysis studies, we collected a set of Internet streaming traffic
between January and March 2024 as our fourth dataset, which
contains flows from eight popular livestreaming applications
in China, i.e., Bilibili, Douyin, WeChat, Taobao, JD, Meituan,
Weibo, and Zhihu. The size of this dataset is 4.5 GB, and the
number of labels = 8.
5) Dataset V: File Transfer and Streaming: In the fifth
dataset, our goal is to investigate whether network traffic
content has patterns and rules that are analogous to phrases,
grammar, and idioms in natural languages, which stay relatively invariable over time. We initiated three file transfers
of the same file to three different cloud applications: Google
Cloud, Tencent Cloud, and Baidu Cloud, in the same hardware
setting and network environment. The three sets of file transfer
traffic for the first ten minutes were captured. In this dataset,
three sets of streaming traffic from YouTube, WeChat Live,
and Baidu Live were included for comparison purposes, so
we have two services (file transfer and streaming) from three
companies: Google, Tencent, and Baidu, respectively. The size
of the third dataset is: 5.3 GB, the number of labels = 6, and
this dataset was collected in March 2024.
6) Dataset VI: Streaming(Content): The sixth dataset
focuses on the analysis of streaming content, which is used
to classify streaming traffic based on genres. There are very
few studies concerning this problem; most work related to

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

4285

TABLE III
P REVIOUSLY S EEN DATASETS FOR T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ODELS

this topic is to identify whether a network flow is streaming
or not [53], [54], but not the streaming content type [22].
So we collected our sixth dataset containing streaming flows
from Bilibili with three genres, i.e., chat, game, and outdoor,
in April 2023. The size of this dataset is 6.7 GB, and the
number of labels = 3.
B. Tasks
Task 1: Reusability of Pretrained Models on Network
Traffic. The first task aims to investigate whether network
traffic classification tasks on previously seen and unseen
datasets can benefit from pretrained models. Table III summarizes which datasets (out of the six datasets illustrated in
Table II) are previously seen for six state-of-the-art traffic
classification models. Dataset I (Section IV-A.1) was used
to build pretrained models for ET-BERT, TrafficFormer, and
YaTC, Dataset II (Section IV-A.2) was used by ET-BERT,
and Dataset III (Section IV-A.3) was used by YaTC in their
pretrained models, respectively. Dataset IV (Section IV-A.4),
Dataset V (Section IV-A.5), and Dataset VI (Section IV-A.6)
are previously unseen datasets for all models. Our goal is to
verify whether the pretrained models can provide the “once
and for many” benefit as intended.
Task 2: Differences between Network Traffic and Natural Languages. The purpose of the second task is to answer
the question: “Why do pretrained models provide little benefit
when being applied to previously unseen network traffic?”
Differences between network traffic and natural languages
are studied to validate that there exist unique and intrinsic
characteristics in network traffic that differentiate it from
natural languages and result in inefficacy of pretrained models.
Dataset V: File Transfer and Streaming (Section IV-A.5) is
used for this task.
Task 3: Network Traffic Classification Based on Application and Content The third task aims to classify network
traffic from two levels of granularity: application and content,
to verify the transferability and generalizability of our model.
Traffic classification based on application has been widely
studied, while very little research has been performed concerning the content classification, because classifying traffic
purely based on content from the same service and application
without any knowledge of the original videos or any help

from video comments can be challenging [22], [55]. Dataset
IV: Streaming(application) (Section IV-A.4) and Dataset VI:
Streaming(content) (Section IV-A.6) are used for this task.
C. Implementation and Evaluation Details
Our experiments are implemented with PyTorch 2.0.1, UER
[56], and ET-BERT [15]. The jobs are run on NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. The AdamW optimizer is adopted
in the training phase, and the learning rate is set to 2 × 10−5 ,
the batch size is 32, and the dropout rate is 0.5.
Four evaluation metrics are used: accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1 score. Accuracy is calculated as the ratio of correct
predictions to the total number of input samples, which tells
us how well the model is performing in terms of correct
predictions. Precision is calculated as the number of true
positive predictions divided by the number of true positive
and false positive predictions, which tells us the percentage
of positive predictions that are actually positive. Recall is
calculated as the number of true positive predictions divided
by the actual positive samples, which tells us the percentage
of positive samples that are predicted positive. F1 score is
defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall, with a
higher value indicating a better balance between precision and
recall. In our experimental results, micro accuracy is adopted
[57], while macro precision, macro recall, and macro F1 [41]
are calculated as follows: the value per label is computed first,
and then the average value across all the labels is used as the
result presented in the following table. The four evaluation
metrics are illustrated in Equations (5) to (8).
PN
i=1 T Pi
(5)
micro Accuracy =
All predictions
T Pi
P recisioni =
T Pi + F Pi
N
1 X
macro P recision =
P recisioni
(6)
N i=1
T Pi
T Pi + F Ni
N
1 X
macro Recall =
Recalli
N i=1
Recalli =

(7)

4286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON ISCX, CSTNET-TLS1.3, AND USTC-TFC DATASETS

2 × P recisioni × Recalli
P recisioni + Recalli
N
1 X
F 1i
macro F 1 =
N i=1
F 1i =

(8)

According to the recently published network traffic classification results [15], [17], [18], [40] Transformer-based
pre-training models significantly outperform the state-of-theart fingerprint-based, feature engineering-based, and traditional
deep learning methods on multiple public datasets. Therefore, in our experiments, four Transformer-based pre-training
models: PERT, ET-BERT, TrafficFormer, and YaTC are
selected for comparisons, two deep learning models: FlowPic,
GraphDApp, and one deep learning + Transformer model:
ConViTML are also selected to extend the coverage of comparisons. If there is a pretrained model available on GitHub
for a Transformer-based model, it is added during the training
phase of this model. If a pretrained model is not required, we
train the model directly. Each comparison model is trained for
different number of epochs to get its best performance, and
the input data requirements for different models are met with
our best effort, except that some studies only require the MAC
addresses to be wiped off from Ethernet headers [42], in our
comparisons, all the input data is cleaned and processed as
discussed in Section III-A.
D. Comparison Results
1) Reusability of Pretrained Models on Network Traffic: The notations (Byte), (Size), (Time), and (Size and
Time) appended to NT-Transformer indicate the type of input
sequence used: raw byte sequences, packet size sequences,
packet inter-arrival time sequences, or a combination of size
and time sequences, respectively. NT-Transformer (All) takes
the combination of all byte, size and time sequences as
potential input tokens and selects the combination with the best
performance. Uni-gram means the byte feature is represented
using one byte per token, while bi-gram means double adjacent

bytes per token. All the NT-Transformer models do not include
a pre-training phase, whereas PERT, ET-BERT, TrafficFormer,
and YaTC models do.
As shown in Table IV, our analysis reveals two key trends.
First, Transformer-based models generally surpass other
approaches. Second, among input features, the byte-level
feature proves more informative than packet-level features
like packet size or inter-arrival time. This is evidenced by
the superior performance of NT-Transformer(Byte) over
its variants using only size, time, or even their combined
features. Furthermore, a comparison between FlowPic [23] and
NT-Transformer(Size and Time) highlights the advantage of
preserving raw sequential data. Although both utilize packet
size and inter-arrival time, FlowPic transforms this information
into images by summing packet counts within fixed time
bins of fixed time block sizes (e.g., 60 seconds for FlowPic
[23] or 15 seconds for mini-FlowPic [25]). This process
discards the fine-grained, packet-by-packet sequence and
severs correlations at the imposed time boundary. In contrast,
NT-Transformer(Size and Time) processes the original,
unaltered sequences, allowing the self-attention mechanism to
capture the full context and temporal dependencies, leading
to its stronger performance.
On the ISCX dataset, ET-BERT achieves the best
performance, followed by YaTC and TrafficFormer, which
rank second and third, respectively. Note that the full ISCX
dataset is included in the pre-training step of ET-BERT and
YaTC, while only the nonVPN part of this data is included
in TrafficFormer’s pre-training phase, and the downstream
classification task is also on the full ISCX dataset; this
can explain why TrafficFormer’s performance is slightly
lower than the other two models. ET-BERT outperforms
NT-Transformer(Byte), the latter is ET-BERT without the
pre-training model. So the pre-training model pushes the F1
score up by 1.18% when fine-tuning a dataset that has already
been included in the pre-training step. NT-Transformer(All,
bi-gram) increases the F1 score by 0.59% compared with

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

4287

TABLE V
C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON S TREAMING ( APPLICATION ), F ILE T RANSFER AND S TREAMING , AND S TREAMING ( CONTENT ) DATASETS

NT-Transformer(Byte) because the additional flow level features are appended to the input tokens. A similar pattern is also
evident in the results on the USTC-TFC dataset. YaTC yields
the best performance in terms of F1 score, ET-BERT, and TrafficFormer rank second and third, since this dataset is included
in the pre-training phase of YaTC, the F1 scores of ET-BERT,
TrafficFormer, and NT-Transformer are slightly lower than
YaTC, which indicates that for this dataset, pretrained
models gives the performance some but limited boost as
well.
However, pretrained models lose their advantages on the
CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset, NT-Transformer with uni-gram representation outperforms the other models with more than
2.24% increase on F1 score. Specifically, NT-Transformer(unigram) increases the F1 score by 7.64% compared to ET-BERT,
which has this dataset included in its pre-training phase. For
this experiment, NT-Transformer(uni-gram) picks only the first
40 bytes of each packet instead of 60 or 80 bytes, which means
the application header and the first few bytes of payload fail to
provide any useful information for traffic classification because
this dataset is fully encrypted. In models with the pre-training
phase, fixed bytes and byte representations are used to build
the pretrained models, e.g., ET-BERT and TrafficFormer keep
the first 64 bytes of each packet, YaTC picks up to the first 320
bytes, and both ET-BERT and TrafficFormer adopt the bi-gram
representation. These fixed patterns can affect the performance
of pretrained models when dealing with complicated traffic
classification jobs, such as up to 120 labels and encrypted
payload.
Pretrained models fail to provide any benefit when applied
to the three previously unseen datasets, which contain streaming and file transfer traffic. These datasets themselves were
not included in the pre-training step of any models; however,
streaming and file transfer traffic from various applications
were included, which means the patterns and rules of these
traffic types have already been learned by the pretrained
models.

From the F1 scores presented in Table V, we can observe
that NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) outperforms all the models that include the pre-training step, specifically, the F1 score
of NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) is 0.25%, 0.57%, and 0.7%,
higher than other models, respectively, which indicates the
pretrained model is not as effective as intended when being
applied to new datasets that are not included in the pre-training
step, although the service types of the new datasets’ traffic
have been included in the pretrained model. This implies that
besides the service type, there are some particular patterns
or rules specific to the new dataset that are not learned by
the pretrained models, and the learned application-level or
payload-level features may not add value to downstream tasks
with new datasets as input. The intention of the pretrained
model is to improve the performance and speed up the process
of specific downstream tasks, since the pre-training process
is usually expensive and time-consuming, and based on the
results discussed above, this intention is not met.
2) Differences Between Network Traffic and Natural Languages: Based on the findings from the first task discussed
above, we further investigate the differences between network
traffic and natural languages in this second task. We transfer
the same file to three different cloud applications, with three
streaming flows added for comparison purposes, as discussed
in Section IV-A.5.
From the results shown in Table V. NT-Transformer(All,
uni-gram) outperforms all the other models. Although
NT-Transformer(Size) and NT-Transformer(Time) individually
underform NT-Transformer(Byte), they both can give NTTransformer(Byte) a boost when size and time features are
appended to the byte tokens in this experiment. This particular
file being transferred was not used in the pre-training step;
however, extensive file transfer data of diverse services was
included. This indicates there are differences between NLP and
network traffic analysis: for NLP, pretrained models learn from
a big corpus of language, the phrases, grammar, slang, etc, of
which will be conformed or reused in future communications.

4288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

In this experiment, transferring the same file to three
different cloud applications is analogous to reading the
same paragraph to three people individually. In the latter
case, the three people would interpret the same information
from the same paragraph. In network traffic analysis,
NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) is able to identify the
difference of these three transfers and classify the transfer
traffic into three different categories, which means different
applications and cloud environments add their unique
signatures to the data being transferred using them. Every
flow is unique, even though the actual user data is the same.
The accurate identification of added streaming traffic from
applications that are products of the same companies as the
file transfer applications shows that different services (e.g., file
transfer and streaming) have their own special characteristics.
These results prove our hypothesis in Section III is true.
3) Network Traffic Classification Based on Application
and Content: In the third task, besides classifying network
traffic based on application or service, we also focus on
the streaming content classification. As shown in Table V,
NT-Transformer(uni-gram) achieves at least a 0.25% improvement compared to all the other pretrained models on Dataset
IV, and a 0.7% improvement on Dataset VI. For Dataset IV,
the first 80 bytes plus packet size sequences are used, and
for Dataset VI, the first 40 bytes sequences yield the best
performance. These experiments prove that NT-Transformer
has strong generalization ability; it can learn task-specific
network traffic features during the training step for diverse
types of downstream tasks. The pretrained model will help
when the input data to downstream tasks is a subset of the data
used for pre-training; however, under the scenarios of newlycollected datasets, even though with previously learned service
types, pretrained models provide little benefit, which may put
the value of applying pretrained models to the network traffic
classification field into doubt.
Unlike phrases, grammar, and idioms in natural languages
that can be learned once and used many times for languagerelated downstream tasks, network traffic features contain
data-specific patterns, user-specific behaviors, network-specific
conditions, and application-specific signatures. These features
are ever-changing and unpredictable, and the combination of
all these features and encryption techniques undermines the
reusability of pretrained models.
Therefore, we should not expect a pretrained network traffic
model that only needs to be trained once on a tremendous
amount of data, and then it can facilitate our related future
network traffic analysis tasks on any newly-collected dataset,
even if the newly-collected dataset is of previously learned
service types. Also, learned traffic features like application
headers and payload data may affect the performance of
pretrained models, since these fields are encrypted, which does
not convey any useful information in future downstream tasks.
Instead, a network classification model like NT-Transformer
that does not require any pretrained model, and takes both
packet-level and flow-level features that can capture taskspecific network traffic features based on the user’s specific
requirements, is recommended for network traffic analysis
tasks. Because NT-Transformer can capture the details of

Fig. 3. Ablation study on sample size of L2 payload (40 bytes, 60 bytes and
80 bytes).

data, application, user, network, etc., that can influence the
network traffic we are interested in. The ability to successfully
classify network traffic based on traffic content demonstrates
the transferability and generalizability of NT-Transformer.

E. Analysis of the Time Savings Achieved by Avoiding
Pre-Training
It is well-known that the pre-training step is highly timeconsuming, with the required duration depending on the model
architecture, GPU hardware, and the volume of input data.
A key advantage of NT-Transformer is the substantial time
savings it achieves by eliminating this step. To quantify this,
we conducted an analysis using the implementation described
in Section IV-C, comparing our approach against two pretraining-based baselines: ET-BERT and TrafficFormer.
We followed their prescribed pre-training procedure using
the Masked Burst Model (MBM) task. In this task, each
token in the input sequence is randomly masked with a 15%
probability. The chosen token is then replaced with a [MASK]
token 80% of the time, replaced with a random token 10% of
the time, or left unchanged 10% of the time. Our experiments
showed that pre-training on 1 GB and 2 GB of input data
took 2.65 hours and 5.24 hours, respectively, indicating a nearlinear relationship between pre-training time and data size.
Given that the full pre-training datasets for ET-BERT and
TrafficFormer are approximately 30 GB and 18.8 GB, the
estimated total pre-training time for the MBM task alone is
about 79.5 hours and 49.82 hours, respectively. It is important to note that both models require additional pre-training
tasks—ET-BERT uses the Same-origin BURST Prediction
(SBP) task, and TrafficFormer uses the Same Origin-DirectionFlow (SODF) task—which would further increase the total
pre-training time.
The time savings achieved by forgoing pre-training are
tremendous, especially when contrasted with the much shorter
fine-tuning phase. Pre-training occurs on the order of days,
while fine-tuning typically requires only minutes/hours. This
stark difference highlights a major efficiency gain offered by
the NT-Transformer approach.

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

4289

Fig. 4. Ablation study on byte token representation (uni-gram vs. bi-gram).

F. Ablation Study on Sample Size of L2 Payload (40 Bytes,
60 Bytes, and 80 Bytes)
As mentioned in Section III-A, NT-Transformer tries the
first 40, 60, and 80 bytes of L2 payload for encoding and
picks the one that yields the best performance. In this section,
we discuss the performance difference of these three options.
As illustrated in Figure 3, the first 40 bytes achieves the
highest accuracy on four datasets: ISCX, CSTNET-TLS1.3,
USTC-TFC, and Streaming(content). This indicates that the
application header and application payload fail to provide
effective information on traffic classes due to the encryption
techniques applied to them, especially for the CSTNETTLS1.3 dataset, which is fully encrypted using TLS 1.3.
For the ISCX and USTC-TFC datasets, there exists a small
percentage of flows that are unencrypted, e.g., TCP, UDP,
HTTP, and FTP traffic; therefore, the application header and
actual data bytes can convey some information on traffic
classes for the unencrytped flows, so the performance difference among the three byte choices is smaller. The other
two datasets, Streaming (application) and File Transfer and
Streaming, contain a higher proportion of unencrypted traffic,
which explains why 80 bytes slightly outperforms 40 bytes on
these two datasets.
This study proves our flexible choice of L2 bytes is advantageous compared to fixed input, because different datasets may
consist of different amounts of encrypted traffic for which only
IP and transport headers are beneficial in traffic classification.
The application header and user data can be considered as
“garbled text” since they are encrypted.
G. Ablation Study on Byte Token Representation (Uni-Gram
Vs. Bi-Gram)
The related works mainly adopt the bi-gram representation
to represent the network traffic byte token pool, analogous
to the common word pool of a natural language. Due to
the unique characteristics of network traffic, the bi-gram

representation may not be optimal; therefore, an ablation
study is conducted to compare the byte representation using
uni-gram and bi-gram. For this study, we use the six datasets
introduced in Section IV-A.
From the results shown in Figure 4, we can observe that
for all six datasets, the uni-gram representation outperforms
the bi-gram representation, with 0.92%, 14.29%, 1%, 0.08%,
0.77%, and 0.57% improvement of F1 score, respectively. This
may seem counterintuitive, since bi-gram has 65536 encoding
possibilities, while uni-gram only has 256. However, a bi-gram
is two uni-grams plus relative bit position information, and
in NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram), with position embeddings
added to token embeddings, the temporal relations among all
the byte tokens are learned, so no byte or position information
is lost in the uni-gram representation, and what’s more, for the
same amount of dataset, uni-gram representation can actually
provide richer input features, i.e., the occurrences of the 256
possibilities of byte tokens and their temporal positions, since
there is a higher probability for the same uni-gram token
to reappear for the model to learn, while for bi-gram with
65536 possibilities, this reapperance probability is much lower.
Therefore, in order to learn the relations of byte tokens and
temporal positions, more input data is needed for the bi-gram
representation.
H. Convergence Study of the Training Step (With Pretrained
Model Vs. Without Pretrained Model)
Since accuracy and speed are two benefits that pretrained
models are supposed to bring to the downstream tasks, accuracy is discussed in the above sections. In this section, the
convergence speed of the training phase is studied using the
CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset. Experiments on the other datasets
exhibit similar patterns.
From Figure 5, we can tell that the pretrained model gives
the downstream task a good start: after the first epoch, the
highest accuracy is 0.4624, which is achieved by ET-BERT,

4290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE VI
C LASS VS . A LL O PEN - WORLD C OMPARISONS

Fig. 5. Convergence study of the training step on the CSTNET-TLS1.3
Dataset.

because the CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset is included in the pretraining step of ET-BERT. However, the growing speed of
accuracy is faster of NT-Transformer, which gradually catches
up and overtakes ET-BERT within 6 epochs to reach the
highest training accuracy of 0.7736. After this point, NTTransformer’s training accuracy keeps growing until around
0.88, and there is no advantage in terms of training accuracy
that can be observed for the tasks with pretrained models.
I. Open-World Comparisons of the Class Vs. All Problems
and Future Work
Moving beyond traditional closed-world evaluations, we
investigate open-world network traffic classification in this
section. Inspired by FlowPic’s class vs. all approach [24], we
conducted experiments at two levels of granularity.
First, in a coarse-grained class vs. all setting, models were
trained to distinguish a target service (e.g., streaming) from
all others. During testing, the target class was replaced with
an unseen application (e.g., training on YouTube, WeChat
Live, etc., testing on Zhihu Live). Results in Table VI
show that while this is an easier task than fine-grained service+application classification (discussed in Section IV-D),
model performance drops significantly when confronted with
unseen traffic. NT-Transformer excelled in streaming classification, potentially due to its lack of a pre-training phase, while
FlowPic’s strength in capturing flow burstiness made it best
for file transfer classification.

Second, in a more challenging fine-grained setting, we
trained models on ten specific service+application categories
(e.g., Bilibili Live, Douyin, Google File Transfer) and replaced
three with unseen counterparts from the same coarse service
(e.g., testing WeChat Live for Bilibili Live, JD Live for
Douyin, Tencent Cloud for Google Cloud file transfer). In
this scenario, all models failed. For instance, NT-Transformer,
having learned features of a specific service+application, could
not generalize to a different one within the same service.
These findings highlight the significant challenge of openworld classification, especially at finer granularities. The goal
is a model that captures generalizable features common to
different services across diverse applications, while avoiding
overfitting to the specifics of individual service-application
flows. In other words, the model needs to learn features
that are discriminative enough to distinguish between traffic
categories, yet sufficiently abstract to generalize beyond any
single instance. Significant progress on this issue has yet to be
made by the research community, positioning it as a priority
for our future work.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, the reusability and transferability of pretrained
models in the applications of the network traffic classification
field are studied in detail. A Transformer-based encrypted
traffic classification model called NT-Transformer is proposed.
NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) can learn traffic features from
both byte level and flow level, without the relatively expensive pre-training procedure using unlabeled data. Experiment
results show that the uni-gram representation of traffic bytes
achieves the optimal performance, and NT-Transformer can
push the F1 score up by at least 0.25% - 2.24% on one public
dataset and three newly collected datasets. Extending from this
work, we will explore more advanced approaches to tackle the
open-world traffic classification problem.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

(2014). Google Transparancy Report. [Online]. Available: https://
transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview?hl=en
(2024). Year in Review 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
radar.cloudflare.com/year-in-review/2024
(2024). Visualizing 2023 Web Traffic Trends Through ATI’s Lens.
[Online]. Available: https://www.keysight.com/blogs/en/tech/nwvs/2024/
01/24/ati-2023-traffic-analysis

YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL

[4]

(2024). Global Internet Usage Trends in 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://hypestat.com/blog/global-internet-usage-trends-in-2024
[5] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, and Z. Yao, “Encrypted
traffic classification with a convolutional long short-term memory neural
network,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun., IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Smart City, IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Data Sci.
Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Jun. 2018, pp. 329–334.
[6] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification:
An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May
2019.
[7] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
2017, pp. 43–48.
[8] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017,
pp. 6000–6010.
[9] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang.
Technol., vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[10] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut,
“ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of Language
Representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020.
[11] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2021.
[12] A. Gulati et al., “Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for
speech recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, Oct. 2020, pp. 5036–5040.
[13] A. Shin, M. Ishii, and T. Narihira, “Perspectives and prospects on transformer architecture for cross-modal tasks with language and vision,” Int.
J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 2, pp. 435–454, Feb. 2022.
[14] S. Islam et al., “A comprehensive survey on applications of transformers
for deep learning tasks,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 241, May 2024, Art.
no. 122666.
[15] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York,
NY, USA, Apr. 2022, pp. 633–642.
[16] Q. Pan, Y. Yu, H. Yan, M. Wang, and B. Qi, “FlowBERT: An encrypted
traffic classification model based on transformers using flow sequence,”
in Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun.
(TrustCom), Nov. 2023, pp. 133–140.
[17] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860.
[18] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[19] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
Feb. 2020.
[20] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[21] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[22] Y. Xie, H. Deng, L. Peng, and Z. Chen, “Accurate identification of
internet video traffic using byte code distribution features,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Algorithms Archit. Parallel Process., 2018, pp. 46–58.
[23] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr.
2019, pp. 680–687.
[24] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[25] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
[26] N. Malekghaini et al., “AutoML4ETC: Automated neural architecture
search for real-world encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2715–2730, Jun. 2024.
[27] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.

4291

[28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[29] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
(IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[30] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
“Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
2017.
[31] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul.
2020, pp. 424–429.
[32] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no.
107974.
[33] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[34] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” Tech.
Rep., 2019, doi: 10.21227/maj9-vh13.
[35] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
[36] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico,
and A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in multimodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289,
Jun. 2023.
[37] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps during
COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022, Art. no.
109452.
[38] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[39] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
[40] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[41] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[42] L. Yang, S. Guo, D. Liu, Y. Zeng, X. Jiao, and Y. Zhou, “ConViTML:
A convolutional vision transformer-based meta-learning framework for
real-time edge network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3344–3357, Jun. 2024.
[43] J. Dai, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “GLADS: A global–local attention data
selection model for multimodal multitask encrypted traffic classification
of IoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109652.
[44] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware
traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017,
pp. 712–717.
[45] A. W. Moore, D. Zuev, and M. Crogan, “Discriminators for use in flowbased classification,” Queen Mary Univ. London, London, U.K., Tech.
Rep., Aug. 2005.
[46] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
[47] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
2019.
[48] T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, and X. Qiu, “A survey of transformers,” AI
Open, vol. 3, pp. 111–132, Oct. 2022.
[49] J. Kaplan et al., “Scaling laws for neural language models,” 2020,
arXiv:2001.08361.

4292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[50] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[51] CSTNET. Accessed: May 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
www.cstnet.cn/
[52] Visual
Network
Index
(VNI)
Complete
Prediction.
Accessed:
Jul.
12,
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.cisco.com/c/zh cn/solutions/service-provider/visualnetworking-index-vni/index.html
[53] Y.-N. Dong, J.-J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and classification of internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, Jun. 2017.
[54] X. Mu and W. Wu, “A parallelized network traffic classification based
on hidden Markov model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber-Enabled Distrib.
Comput. Knowl. Discovery, Oct. 2011, pp. 107–112.
[55] J. Choi and X. Zhang, “Classifications of restricted web streaming
contents based on convolutional neural network and long short-term
memory (CNN-LSTM),” J. Internet Services Inf. Secur., vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 49–62, 2022.
[56] Z. Zhao et al., “UER: An open-source toolkit for pre-training models,”
in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2019,
pp. 241–246.
[57] N. S. Suhaimi, Z. Othman, and M. R. Yaakub, “Comparative analysis
between macro and micro-accuracy in imbalance dataset for movie
review classification,” in Proc. 7th Int. Congr. Inf. Commun. Technol.,
2022, pp. 83–93.

Peiqiang Liu received the Ph.D. degree from Shandong University, China, in 2013. He is currently
a Professor at the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Shandong Technology and Business
University, China. His research interests include
algorithms and complexity theory and computational
biology.

Yingshuo Bao received the B.S. degree in
computer science and technology from Minnan
Normal University, Zhangzhou, China, in 2020,
and the M.S. degree in computer science and
technology from the University of Jinan, Jinan,
China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in systems analysis and integration with the
Department of Systems Science, Faculty of Arts
and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai,
China. His research interests include network traffic
analysis, causal inference, graph neural networks,
human physiological information monitoring.

Zhenzhen Yan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Virginia in 2013. She
is currently an Assistant Professor at the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong
Technology and Business University, China. Her
research interests include computer networks, traffic
engineering, and network security.

Lizhi Peng (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1998, the
M.Eng. degree from the University of Jinan, Jinan,
China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from Harbin
Institute of Technology in 2015. He was a Visitor
Scholar with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Otago, New Zealand, in 2017. He is
currently a Professor with the School of Information
Science and Engineering, University of Jinan. His
current research interests include machine learning,
evolutionary computing, computer networks, and
parallel computing.

Bo Yang (Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc. degree
from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1989,
and the Ph.D. degree in computational materials science from Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan,
China, in 2006. He is currently a Professor with
the University of Jinan, Jinan, China, where he is
the Director of Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Network-Based Intelligent Computing. He is also
the Deputy Director of the Quan Cheng Laboratory,
Jinan. His main research interests include intelligent
computing, computer networks, machine learning,
knowledge discovery, and intelligent control. He was a member of numerous
program committees of international conferences in the area of intelligent
computing. He is the Chair of Shandong Computer Federation and the ViceChair of the ACM SigCSE China. He is the Chief Editor for Information
Technology and Informatization. He is on the Editorial Board of Journal of
Communications.