2760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

One2: An Intrusion Detection System for Both
Internal and External Vehicular Network
From Weak Labeled Data
He Lu , Yilong Ren , Yue Liu, Yanan Zhao , Kaiwen Guo , Yang Yang, and Haohua Du

Abstract—Network attacks on the Internet of Vehicles (IoV)
can lead to catastrophic consequences such as traffic congestion,
incorrect routing, and even accidents. Existing rule-based countermeasures are effective only in specific scenarios, while machine
learning-based methods suffer from suboptimal performance due
to data quality issues. Furthermore, the isolation between in-vehicle
networks (IVN) and external vehicle networks (EVN) prevents
independent intrusion detection systems (IDS) from detecting continuous attack behaviors. To address these issues, we propose a
mechanism that characterizes attack behaviors solely based on
network connection information. This mechanism downplays the
specifics of the traffic itself, allowing for the integration of IVN
and EVN through structure, thus breaking the internal-external
boundary and providing relatively stable logical structure information. This approach also offers opportunities to address the
scarcity of labeled data. Based on this characterization mechanism, we develop an intrusion detection system – One2 , utilizing
a multi-attribute heterogeneous graph transformer to achieve accurate multi-classification of various types of attacks. To assess the
compatibility of the proposed IDS for IVN and EVN, extensive
experiments were conducted using six real-world datasets that accurately depict IVN and EVN. The results show that One2 improves
average accuracy by 7.14% and F1 score by 6.97% compared to
state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms—Internet of Vehicles (IoV), intrusion detection
system (IDS), weak label.
Received 9 April 2025; revised 22 September 2025; accepted 3 November
2025. Date of publication 6 November 2025; date of current version 12 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of
China under Grant 2022YFB3104403 and in part by Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2025QB43 and Grant ZR2025QC1536.
(Corresponding author: Haohua Du.)
He Lu is with the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 639798, and also with the School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
(e-mail: herlu@buaa.edu.cn).
Yilong Ren is with the School of Transportation Science and Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, also with the Beihang Hangzhou
Innovation Institute, Hangzhou 310023, China, also with Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100083, China, and also with the State Key Lab of Intelligent Transportation System, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: yilongren@buaa.edu.cn).
Yue Liu is with the School of Urban Construction, Beijing University of
Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: yueliu@emails.bjut.edu.cn).
Yanan Zhao and Yang Yang are with the School of Transportation Science
and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: zynbyxz@gmail.com; yang_yang@buaa.edu.cn).
Kaiwen Guo is with the Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
(e-mail: kevinguo@ouc.edu.cn).
Haohua Du is with the School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang
University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: duhaohua@buaa.edu.cn).
The source code of this work is available at: https://github.com/
LouHerGetUp/One2
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3629862

I. INTRODUCTION
HE rapid development of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV)
enables vehicles to communicate with various entities,
including network infrastructure and pedestrians [1]. While this
connectivity brings convenience, it also introduces significant
security risks [2]. For example, renowned white hat hackers
Valasek and Miller exploited a vulnerability in the in-vehicle
infotainment (IVI) system to gain remote control of a Jeep
Cherokee [3]. Similarly, Keen Security Lab of Tencent demonstrated a comprehensive attack chain that successfully infiltrated the in-vehicle network (IVN) system through the wireless
communication module of the external vehicle network (EVN),
enabling remote control attacks on both Tesla Model series and
BMW vehicles [4], [5]. If such incidents were to occur in a real
traffic environment, they would significantly compromise the
vehicle’s communication safety and functional integrity, even
leading to traffic accidents and casualties. Therefore, Intrusion
Detection Systems (IDS) for IoV have become a critical research
issue recently [6].
Currently, intrusion detection systems (IDS) for the Internet
of Vehicles (IoV) can be categorized into two main types:
rule-based and machine learning-based. Rule-based IDS can
only describe known and formalizable attack behaviors, making
them effective only in specific scenarios [7], [8], [9]. In contrast, machine learning-based IDS automatically derive “rules”
from data, allowing them to be applicable in more diverse
scenarios [10], [11], [12]. However, the performance of machine
learning algorithms is highly dependent on data quality, which
limits the effectiveness of these systems [13], [14]. Recent
efforts have utilized self-supervised learning to address the
issue of scarce labeled data in IoV scenarios [15]. However,
these efforts typically focus only on either the IVN or the
EVN. Given that attack chains typically progress from EVN
to IVN, detecting intrusions at each network layer separately
is crucial. Early detection of attacks at the EVN level enables
preemptive warnings and protective measures, thereby preventing attackers from progressing to the IVN and gaining control
of the vehicle. Therefore, it is evident that an IDS system for
IoV needs to have three key capabilities: recognizing attack
types, being compatible with both IVN and EVN, and performing well with limited labeled data. However, achieving
these capabilities is highly challenging due to the following
reasons:

T

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

1) Attack behaviors are often multilayered and hidden within
normal behaviors, leading to similar features among different attack types and diverse features within the same attack type. This makes feature-based recognition extremely
difficult.
2) IVN and EVN use different network protocols, resulting in
distinct network data structures, complicating the design
of an intrusion detection algorithm that works for both.
3) Machine learning-based methods heavily rely on data
quality for performance. IoV data is difficult to obtain due
to its sensitive nature, and the few available datasets often
lack high-quality type annotations.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
behavior representation mechanism based on network structure,
modeling network data as a multi-attribute heterogeneous graph.
In this graph, data flows, IP addresses, and ports are treated
as nodes, and nodes belonging to the same traffic flow form a
fully connected subgraph. This approach weakens the specific
characteristics of the traffic data, allowing the logical integration
of IVN and EVN by breaking the boundaries between them.
Additionally, the stability of the structure serves as implicit information, enabling the clustering of behavior data with similar
structures for self-supervised learning with weak labels [16].
Furthermore, to effectively learn the information from this multiattribute heterogeneous graph, we introduce a corresponding
Multi-attribute Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (MA-HGT).
This model employs multiple attention heads to learn different
attention weight distributions within the graph and capture correlations at various positions [17], thereby enhancing the model’s
representational capability.
In summary, the major contributions of this work are as
follows:
r We designed and implemented an IDS called One2 that is
compatible with both IVN and EVN using limited weakly
labeled data. It can accurately identify attacks, including
cross-network continuous attacks.
r We proposed a network structure-based representation
mechanism, modeling network data as a multi-attribute
heterogeneous graph to extract deep implicit information.
Additionally, we designed a novel deep learning model
structure, MA-HGT, to efficiently learn the information
within this multi-attribute heterogeneous graph.
r To validate the performance of One2 , we conducted experiments on multiple real-world datasets. The results show
that One2 improves average accuracy by 7.14% and F1Score by 6.97% compared to state-of-the-art methods.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Machine Learning-Based IDS
Machine learning [18] algorithms have been widely used in
IDS. Alshammari et al. [19] developed an IDS for IVN using the
two algorithms. Derhab et al. [20] proposed a Histogram-based
Intrusion Detection. However, these IDS exhibit high False
Alarm Rates (FAR) and are exclusively suitable for IVN. To
safeguard IVN and EVN and reduce the FAR, Yang et al. [14]
integrated four distinct ML methods to develop a novel IDS.

2761

In [21], the authors also designed an IDS incorporating three
algorithms. Nevertheless, both IDS heavily rely on feature engineering. Additionally, they require extensive training using a
substantial volume of labeled data.
B. Deep Learning-Based IDS
To avoid the dependence on feature engineering, researchers
employ Deep Learning [22] to build IDS. Seo et al. [23] proposed
a Generative Adversarial Network-based IDS for IVN. Nguyen
et al. [24] proposed a novel approach for developing an IDS
specifically designed for CAN buses. However, these IDS fail
to consider the intricate attributes of the external network. As
a result, their effectiveness is limited to IVN with relatively
simple data structures. For EVN, Han et al. [25] introduced
the Spatial and Time-aware Intrusion Detection Model. Deng
et al. [15] proposed an IDS based on Graph Convolutional
Network with stream topology. To achieve Bot detection in
external networks, Zhao et al. [26] transformed the bot detection
problem into a classification task on a semi-supervised graph.
To detect Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, Cao
et al. [27] designed an IDS based on a spatio-temporal graph
convolutional network. However, these IDS only apply to EVN
and mostly focus on the binary classification problem of network
traffic. To design IDS that can be used in IVN and EVN, Yang and
Shami [28] proposed an IDS system based on transfer learning
and ensemble learning. However, it is important to note that
transforming network data into images for training requires
substantial data. Ashraf et al. [13] developed an IDS utilizing the
LSTM autoencoder architecture. Nevertheless, these two IDS
only address the binary classification problem of IoV traffic data.
III. IOV AND THEIR VULNERABILITIES
A. Preliminary
The IoV enables wireless communication between vehicles
and network infrastructure setups, making it a critical foundation for intelligent transportation systems. According to the
communication range, the IoV can be categorized into IVN and
EVN [29]. The IVN consists of numerous Electronic Control
Unit (ECU) interconnected via controller area network (CAN)
bus [30]. This facilitates the integration of various features in
Connected Vehicles (CV) and Autonomous Vehicles (AV) [31].
The EVN establishes a connection between CV, AV and external
devices via Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) technology, including Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I),
Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P) and Vehicle-to-Sensors (V2S) [2].
B. Vulnerabilities of IVN
In IVN, ECU play a crucial role in facilitating the execution
of diverse functionalities by CV and AV. Consequently, an
increasing number of ECU are being integrated into contemporary vehicles, with many luxury vehicles boasting an excess
of 100 ECU [30]. Typically, These ECU establish communication through the CAN bus. Fig. 1 illustrates the structure
of a CAN packet, which consists of seven distinct fields [32].
Among these fields, the data field holds the information that

2762

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

CAN packet structure [13].

governs the functioning of the node, making it the most crucial
and susceptible component [14]. Message injection attack is a
prominent form of attack in IVN, which is realized by an attacker
intentionally inserting malicious messages into the data field of
CAN packets. This manipulation is aimed at gaining control over
the vehicle. Message injection attacks can be classified into three
main categories: Denial of Service (DoS), fuzzy, and spoofing
attacks [33]. DoS attacks flood the CAN with a substantial
volume of messages, leading to the delay or unavailability of
valid messages. In a similar vein, fuzzy attacks induce the
vehicle to have malfunctions or display unanticipated behavior
by the injection of random packets. Spoofing attacks involve the
deliberate injection of targeted packets with the aim of disguising
them as legitimate signals, hence enabling unauthorized control
over the vehicle.
C. Vulnerabilities of EVN
With the increasing number of entities accessing IoV, EVN are
becoming enormous networks containing diverse networks and
devices [34]. Due to the lack of encryption and authentication
mechanisms, EVN are vulnerable to a variety of traditional cyber
threats, wherein every entity within the network possesses the
potential to be targeted as an attack node. The major types of
attacks in EVN are DoS, infiltration, sniffing, brute force, Web
attacks, and botnet attacks [14], [35]. Among these, DoS attacks
overwhelm the vehicle with a large number of messages, resulting in the vehicle’s inability to handle legitimate requests. Infiltration attacks [35] refer to aiding other assaults by traversing a
compromised protective system. Sniffing attacks collect sensitive information by capturing packets in the EVN. Brute force
attacks are used to obtain malicious vehicle control by breaking
passwords. Web attacks [35] are employed with the intention
of executing detrimental actions by targeting the web interfaces
of entities within the EVN. Botnets infect many vehicles and
equipment with Bot viruses to facilitate assaults such as DoS.
D. Security Model of IVN and EVN
Fig. 2 illustrates the general attack scenarios against the CV or
AV, encompassing both physical and remote attacks. A physical
attack pertains to the act of an assailant utilizing computing
equipment, such as a laptop, to get unauthorized access to the
CAN bus by establishing a connection with the OBD-II port in
IVN. This unauthorized access enables direct control over critical vehicle functions, including steering, braking, and acceleration systems. Remote attacks involve the exploitation of wireless
interfaces in the EVN—such as WiFi, cellular networks, and

Fig. 2.

Attack scenarios and proposed IDS – One2 deployment.

Bluetooth—which attackers leverage to subsequently compromise IVN systems, creating cross-network attacks as discussed
in Section III-C. The objective of these attacks is to compromise
the telematics equipment and CAN bus of the vehicle [14].
Execution scenarios for this type of attack include V2V attacks
and V2I vulnerabilities. (1) V2V attacks: Malicious vehicles
can broadcast falsified safety messages (e.g., fake emergency
braking warnings) or spoofed position information, messages,
potentially causing traffic disruption or collisions. (2) V2I vulnerability: Attackers can compromise existing roadside devices
or deploy malware on them. Through these compromised or
spoofed infrastructure devices, an attacker can launch an attack
directly at passing vehicles. This interconnected threat landscape
demonstrates why unified security approaches spanning both
IVN and EVN domains are essential for comprehensive vehicle
protection. Attackers can exploit the boundaries between these
networks, using compromised telematics equipment as a bridge
to access critical CAN bus functions, or leveraging captured
CAN data to orchestrate more sophisticated external attacks.
Additionally, The declining costs of memory and computing
devices have recently facilitated the widespread adoption of
deep-learning-based IDS in CV and AV [13].
The proposed IDS deployment is shown in Fig. 2 To ensure
the security of the IVN, the proposed IDS will be implemented
directly on the CAN bus. The network sniffer intercepts and
scrutinizes all flow data transmitted on the CAN bus to monitor
and identify suspicious network activities. This capability is
crucial for defending against physical access attacks [13], [36].
The proposed IDS will also be deployed within the gateway to
safeguard the vehicle against remote attacks initiated from the
EVN. The IDS at the gateway will detect all flow data transmitted
to and from the CAN bus originating from the EVN, thereby
establishing a defense against remote access attacks [14]. In
the event that an attacker sending malicious traffic to the car is
detected, the proposed IDS will promptly raise the alarm and
prevent the attacker from gaining access, thereby protecting the
vehicle from potential damage caused by cyber-attacks.
IV. THE IDS: ONE2
A. System Architecture
The One2 framework has three steps, as shown in Fig. 3. First,
network flow data is constructed into the graph construction.
Subsequently, the graph construction is employed as the input

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

2763

TABLE II
SOME ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES OF EVN FLOW DATA

Fig. 3.

Framework of the proposed IDS.

TABLE I
SOME ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES OF IVN FLOW DATA

for MA-HGT to perform graph embedding. Ultimately, the
flow nodes are classified based on the graph embedding.
Additionally, to enhance training efficiency when processing
large-scale intrusion detection data, an effective heterogeneous
graph sampling algorithm is employed to sample the graph
structure during training.
B. Graph Construction
Definition 1. Heterogeneous Graph: A heterogeneous
graph is defined as a graph with multiple types of nodes and/or
edges. We denote a heterogeneous graph as G = (V, E, A, R),
where v ∈ V denotes nodes, e ∈ E denotes edges, A denotes the
union of node type, and R denotes the union of edge type.
Definition 2. Mapping function: The mapping function of
node type and edge type is τ (v) : V → A and φ(e) : E → R,
respectively.
In real life, network flow data contain many attributes that may
indicate potentially malicious activity. Hence, these attributes
can be used to differentiate malicious attacks from benign
behaviors. Tables I and II provide some essential attributes of
IVN and EVN flow data, respectively. Instead of traditional IDS
that directly input attributes into the model, the proposed IDS
adopts a novel approach by constructing a graph representation
of network data before the model learning process. In detail, we
build the One2 of network flow data for the first time. This graph
enables us to describe the network flow more fine-grained and
capture implicit topological features of flow which facilitates
accurate identification of malicious behavior in the network.
The reasons for using graph structures to build an IDS for IoV
are as follows: (1) Unified representation of heterogeneous data:
By modeling network data as a multi-attribute heterogeneous
graph, data streams, IP addresses, and ports are uniformly represented as nodes. This allows IVN and EVN to be logically unified
and processed together, breaking down the boundaries between

them. (2) Adaptability to weakly labeled data: The inherent stability of graph structures provides implicit information, enabling
the clustering of behavioral data exhibiting similar structural
patterns, as shown in the left half of Fig. 4. This supports
self-supervised learning approaches with weakly labeled data,
thereby reducing dependence on extensive labeled datasets. (3)
Effective capture of complex relationships and positional information: Nodes within the same traffic flow form fully connected
subgraphs, enabling comprehensive modeling of inter-node relationships. Through the multi-attention head mechanism of
the MA-HGT model, it learns positional associations within
the graph structure. This enhances the model’s representational
capabilities, enabling it to capture complex patterns that traditional methods struggle to identify. (4) Preservation of structural
features: In contrast to flattening or serialization approaches, the
graph structure preserves the natural topological features of IoV
network traffic. This structured representation maintains greater
fidelity to the inherent characteristics of network data.
Given a IVN flow data I, we construct a multi-network attributes heterogeneous graph GI with two types of nodes (F low
and ID) and one type of edges (F low − ID edge). The identifier
of IVN flow data is represented as a ID node, and the rest of the
attributes of flow are represented as a F low node. Moreover, we
build an undirected edge which is from the F low to the ID.
Given a EVN flow data E, we construct a multi-network
attributes heterogeneous graph GE with five types of nodes
(F low, Srcip, Dstip, Sport and Dport) and four types
of edges (F low − Srcip edge, F low − Dstip edge, F low −
Sport edge, F low − Dport edge). As illustrated in Fig. 3, the
source IP address, destination IP address, source port number
and destination port number of EVN flow data are denoted
as a Srcip node, Dstip node, Srcport node, Dstport node,
respectively. Besides, the rest of the attributes of flow are denoted
as a F low node. After that, we build four undirected edges which
are from the F low to the Srcip, from the F low to the Dstip,
from the F low to the Srcport, from the F low to the Dstport.
For the aforementioned graph construction methods, every
F low node in the graph represents a single piece of network

2764

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Framework of MA-HGT.

flow data and encompasses all its statistical features. Thus,
to acquire the network topological features of each flow data
while preserving its statistical features, we can employ message
passing and aggregation among F low nodes to obtain the graph
embedding for each F low node. Lastly, by classifying all F low
nodes, we can determine the category of each corresponding
network flow data.
C. Heterogeneous Graph Embedding
To mine implicit meta relationships between flows and their
attributes in the graph construction, we use HGT [17] to get
graph embeddings for all nodes, as shown in Fig. 4. The input
for HGT is the heterogeneous graph GI or GE . For the sake
of simplicity in mathematical notation, we will use the symbol
X0 to represent either of these graphs. Moreover, the outputs
of HGT are the graph embeddings representing flows and their
attributes, indicated as H.
Definition 3. Meta relation: We define τ (s), φ(e), τ (t) as
the meta relation for an edge e = (s, t) linked from source node
s to target node t.
There exists a one-to-one link between the F Low node in
the constructed graph structure and the network flow statistics.
Consequently, one can regard the graph embedding of the F low
node as the graph embedding of the network flow data. As a
result, the F Low node is chosen as the target node, denoted as
f , to reduce the computational complexity.
1) Heterogeneous mutual attention: Initially, we use three
linear projection functions to transform node embeddings into
the ith vector. In detail, the function QLineariτ (f ) is used to map
the F low node f into the ith query vector Qi (f ), which has
d
a dimension of Rd → R h . Here, d represents the dimension of
d
X0 [f ], while h denotes the vector dimension per head. Similarly,
the functions KLineariτ (s) and VLineariτ (s) are also used to map
the source node s to the ith key vector Ki (s) and the ith value
vector Vi (s). It is important to highlight that these functions are
indexed based on the node’s type [37]. This implies that each
kind of node has a distinct linear projection that aims to capture

the distribution disparities effectively.
Qi (f ) = QLineariτ (f ) (X0 [f ])

(1)

Ki (s) = KLineariτ (s) (X0 [s])

(2)

Vi (s) = VLineariτ (s) (X0 [s])

(3)

Subsequently, it is necessary to compute the attention heads
for a pair of nodes. In the process of computing the similarity
between the Query vector Qi (f ) and Key vector Ki (s), a unique
d
d
ATT
matrix Wφ(e)
∈ R h × h is utilized for each specific edge type
φ(e). By doing so, the model has the ability to capture various
semantic relations, even when considering node-type pairs that
are identical. Additionally, it is important to note that not all
relationships have an equal impact on the target nodes. To
account for this, we introduce a prior tensor μ ∈ R|A|×|R|×|A|
which represents the overall significance of each meta relation
triplet. This tensor serves as an adaptive scaling factor for the
attention mechanism. Hence, the calculation of headiatt (s, e, f )
for edge e = (s, f ) is performed as follows:
 μ

τ (s),φ(e),τ (f )
att
√
Qi (f )T ·
headiatt (s, e, f ) = Ki (s)Wφ(e)
d
(4)
Ultimately, the attention heads are concatenated, resulting in
the generation of an attention vector for each pair of nodes. Next,
we proceed to collect attention vectors from the neighboring
nodes N (f ) for each target node f and apply the softmax
function. Thus, the computation of the h-head attention for edge
e = (s, f ) is performed as follows:


Attention(s, e, f ) = Softmax i∈[1,h] headiatt (s, e, f )
∀s∈N (f )

(5)
2) Heterogeneous message passing: First, the meassge head
headimsg (s, e, f ) for edge e = (s, f ) is calculated by:
msg
headimsg (s, e, f ) = Vi (s)Wφ(e)

(6)

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

msg
where Wφ(e)
∈ R h × h is utilized to incorporate the edge deATT
. Then, we
pendence, analogous to the utilization of Wφ(e)
concatenate all the message heads to get the Message(s, e, f )
for edge e = (s, f ):
d

d

Message(s, e, f ) = i∈[1,h] headimsg (s, e, f )

⊕

∀s∈N (f )

(Attention(s, e, f ) · Message(s, e, f ))

(8)
Then, the ReLU activation function and linear projection
 ], and this is followed by a
ALinear are applied to the H[f
residual connection as:



 ] + X0 [f ]
(9)
H[f ] = ALinearτ (f ) ReLU H[f
Employing this approach, we obtain the output of a highly
contextualized representation for the F low node f . Subsequently, this representation is utilized as input for a single-layer
fully connected network to perform flow node classification.
D. Attack Classification
In this step, the MA-HGT feeds the graph embedding of
flow nodes H[f ] into a single-layer fully connected network
to generate the system’s output. Specifically, the quantity of
neurons within the fully connected network is contingent upon
the number of classification categories. We use the softmax
activation function, calculated as follows:
Yf = Softmax(W ∗ H[f ] + b)

TABLE III
CLASS LABEL, AND SIZE OF THE CAR-HACKING DATASET

(7)

3) Flow node aggregation: The Attention(s, e, f ) is
regarded as the weight to average the corresponding
Message(s, e, f ). The aforementioned action aggregates information from various source nodes and transfers it to the
 ]
destination node f . As a result of this process, the vector H[f
is updated as:
 ]=
H[f

2765

(10)

where Yf is the predicted label of network flow data, i.e.,
the result of the MA-HGT, W is a weighted matrix and b is
bias vector. We chose a single-layer fully connected network
because it primarily serves as a dimensional transformation
component in our framework, converting high-dimensional feature representations from the HGT into a format suitable for
final classification tasks (binary or multi-class). The proposed
MA-HGT’s representational power allows this simple structure to effectively map graph features to classification space
while minimizing overfitting risk from excessive parameters.
For the output layer, we adopted the standard softmax activation
function as it provides sufficient probabilistic differentiation to
distinguish between benign traffic and various attack types.
E. Training on Subgraphs
To facilitate the training on giant heterogeneous graphs composed of network flows with hundreds of thousands of nodes
and edges, we employ a method called MA-HGSampling. This
method allows for the generation of subgraphs from the original gigantic graph. To begin, we include all direct neighbors
s ∈ N (f ) of the F low nodes in the budget B[f ], resulting in

B[f ][s]. Subsequently, we calculate the sampling probabilities
for these nodes:
P [f ][s] =

B[f ][s]2
,
B[f ]22

(11)

where B[τ ][s] is updated by the normalization degree of the
candidate node concerning the F low node:
B[f ][s] = B[f ][s] +

1
,
len(Adj[f ])

(12)

where len(Adj[f ]) is the length of adjacency matrix for each
τ (s), φ(e), τ (f ) meta relation.
Subsequently, a specific number of nodes were sampled based
on the probability P among all F low nodes and the budget was
allocated for each category of node. This iterative procedure is
executed four times to generate a graph sample with a depth of
four. Finally, the adjacency matrix between the sampled nodes
is reconstructed. The MA-HGSampling technique ensures that
the subgraph generated has a comparable number of nodes for
each type as the original graph. Additionally, the subgraph is
sufficiently dense to facilitate MA-HGT training on large-scale
heterogeneous networks representing network traffic.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
The experiments utilize the PyTorch 2.0 library [38] and the
PyTorch Geometric library [39] for model development. Furthermore, the trials were conducted on a workstation equipped
with Ubuntu 18.04, an Intel Xeon Gold 6230R CPU, and an
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.
B. Data Description
This paper utilizes the following three IVN datasets to evaluate the proposed IDS:
r CAR-HACKING: The dataset was generated by capturing
CAN traffic through the OBD-II port of an actual car during
the execution of CAN attacks [33], [40]. The various attack
types present in the CAR-HACKING dataset are displayed
in Table III. The CAR-HACKING dataset encompasses
several key attributes, namely the timestamp, CAN ID, data
length code (DLC), and the DATA[0]-[7]. These attributes
are derived from the arbitration field, control field, and
data field of the CAN packets which are illustrates in
Fig. 1 and Table I. Additionally, Table III displays the label

2766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

distributions of the original dataset, the training dataset, and
the validation dataset.
r CAN-INTRUSION: This dataset mainly consists of impersonation attacks and injection attacks against the CAN
bus [41]. In particular, impersonation attacks assume that
the attacker is able to make physical modifications and can
control the target node, stop the message transmission, and
have the containing node send a message to replace the
terminating node. On the other hand, there are two main
different types of injection attacks in datasets: DOS and
fuzzing attacks.
r CICIoV2024: This dataset was used by researchers to
conduct five attacks on the complete interior of a 2019
Ford vehicle, including all ECU, over the CAN bus [42].
This dataset focuses on two types of threats against the
CAN bus: DOS attacks and spoofing attacks. For DOS
attacks, a malicious CAN user can change the arbitration
value to initiate an attack. On the other hand, spoofing
attacks include steering wheel spoofing, RPM spoofing,
speed spoofing, and gas control spoofing.
In the process of developing the IDS for the IVN, we have
chosen to incorporate all of the aforementioned properties as
input features for the model. In order to address the memory
constraints of the computer utilized in the experiments and to
assess the efficacy of the model under label-constrained circumstances, we employed random down-sampling techniques
to preprocess the data. This enabled the successful implementation of the proposed model for both training and testing
purposes.
The scarcity of publicly available EVN benchmark datasets
can be attributed to concerns about privacy and commercialisation [14], [43]. In contrast, Wireless Local Area Networks
(WLANs) and cellular networks are frequently employed communication methods for IoV communication. Consequently, the
attack on the conventional computer network can be regarded
as analogous to the intrusion on the EVN [13], [28], [44].
Consequently, numerous research endeavors [13], [45], [46],
[47], [48], [49], [50] have been undertaken to construct external
IDS for vehicle networks. These projects utilize established
intrusion detection datasets, such as ISCXID2012 [51] and
UNSW-NB15 [52], to facilitate their development. Therefore,
this paper utilizes the following three similar datasets to evaluate
the proposed IDS for the performance on the EVN:
r CIC-IDS2017: This dataset is considered to be highly
advanced due to its comprehensive range of features and
inclusion of the up-to-date sorts of attacks [44], [53]. The
datasets have a strong resemblance to authentic real-world
data. The complete set of network traffic analysis results
from the dataset was utilised by our IDS, encompassing
over 80 network traffic attributes such as source and destination IPs, source and destination ports, and protocols.
Table II presents several significant attributes of the dataset.
Furthermore, this study establishes a correlation between
each attack included in the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and the
potential attacks discussed in Section III. The details pertaining to the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and the results of the
correlation analysis are presented in Table IV.

TABLE IV
CLASS LABEL, AND SIZE OF THE CIC-IDS2017 DATASET

r TON-IoT: The TON-IoT dataset consists of the original dataset, the processed dataset, and the training test
dataset [54]. In this paper, we select the training test dataset
from the TON-IoT dataset. This dataset contains a total of
nine attacks, namely Backdoor Attack, DoS Attack, DDoS
Attack, Injection Attack, Password Attack, Ransomware,
Scanning, xss Attack and Man-in-the-Middle Attack. The
training test dataset contains 42 network traffic attributes
such as source and destination IPs, source and destination
ports, and protocols.
r CIC-UNSW-NB15: The CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset uses
the CICFlowMeter network traffic analysis tool to extract
a new set of features from the captured network traffic data
provided by UNSW-NB15, including a total of 83 features
such as source and destination IPs, source and destination
ports, and protocols [55]. This dataset contains a total of
nine types of attacks, Fuzzer, Analytics, Backdoor, DoS,
Vulnerability, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and
Worms.
The aforementioned attributes are utilised as input features
in the proposed model, allowing it to optimise the learning of
characteristics that enhance the performance of the proposed
IDS. Furthermore, the analysis in Tables III and IV demonstrates
that the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets comprehensively encompass the primary threat categories encountered
in IoV environments. These datasets are widely adopted within
the field of connected vehicle security research and possess
high representativeness [13], [14], [28], [35], [45]. Therefore,
a two-tiered experimental approach was adopted: (1) Comprehensive evaluation employs all six datasets for foundational
experiments to demonstrate the proposed model’s generalization capability across diverse network environments and attack
scenarios. (2) Representative evaluation uses CAR-HACKING
and CIC-IDS2017 as representative IVN and EVN datasets for
specialized analyses of specific scenarios or dimensions.

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

2767

C. Comparative Methods

D. Validation Metrics

In this study, we conducted a comparative analysis of the
proposed IDS against eight approaches. The selection of machine learning or deep learning-based IDS baselines follows the
following criteria: (1) Methods employing classical machine
learning or deep learning algorithms that are widely cited in
academia or serve as comparative benchmarks. (2) Whether
the method accounts for the characteristics of IVN or EVN,
or is specifically designed for these environments. (3) Whether
the ACC and FAR meet the fundamental requirements for IoV
security applications.
r Rule-based IDS: This rule-based IDS integrates multiple rule types, including statistical threshold rules [56],
attack pattern rules [57], domain expert rules [32] and
state-related rules [58]. We integrated multiple rules to
balance method generality with detection capability. This
design enables the IDS to adapt to diverse environments
such as IVN and EVN, while delivering robust detection
performance without requiring machine learning models.
r AdaBoost-based IDS [59]: AdaBoost is an iterative ensemble learning technique that constructs a robust classifier
by aggregating multiple weak classifiers to enhance the
accuracy of network traffic classification.
r Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDT)-based IDS
[60]: GBDT involves each iteration’s iterative training of
decision trees to rectify the faults made in the preceding
iteration to classify network traffic effectively.
r Random Forest(RF)-based IDS [35]: RF enhances the performance and stability of intrusion detection models by aggregating the predicted results through voting or averaging.
r Deep Neural Networks(DNN)-based IDS [44]: DNN is a
common variant of feed-forward neural networks with six
hidden layers.
r 1D Convolutional Neural Network(1DCNN)-based
IDS [61]. The 1DCNN extracts network traffic features
through four 1D convolutional layers and 1D max pooling
and classifies them through a single-layer neural network.
r Long Short-Term Memory(LSTM)-based IDS [62]. LSTM
can efficiently capture long-term relationships in network
stream data, making it well-suited for intrusion detection
tasks. LSTM contains two LSTM layers, one 1D adaptive
average pooling layer, one dropout layer and two singlelayer neural networks.
r Gated Recurrent Unit(GRU)-based IDS [63]. GRU incorporates a gating mechanism that allows the GRU to
efficiently capture long-term dependencies in streaming
data and mitigate the issue of gradient vanishing. The architecture comprises two GRU layers followed by a simple
one-layer neural network.
For all of the comparison methods used in the experiments, we
referenced the parameter settings recommended in the original
literature where these methods were proposed and optimally
tuned these parameters to the characteristics of the datasets we
used. Specifically, we tuned the grid search parameters for each
algorithm to ensure that they would perform optimally on the
datasets.

To assess the effectiveness of the proposed model, we employ
several assessment measures to gauge its classification performance. These metrics include Accuracy (ACC), DR, FAR, and
F1-Score. The ACC metric is used to evaluate the overall performance of the proposed model. The DR measures the ability
of the given model to correctly identify instances belonging to
a specific category. The F1-Score is a metric that combines the
precision rate and recall rate into a single value using the harmonic mean. The metrics are defined in the following manner:
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
DR =
TP + FN
FP
FAR =
TN + FP
2 × TP
F1 − Score =
2 × TP + FP + FN
ACC =

where the variables TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the quantities
of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative,
respectively.
E. Performance Results
1) Performance of binary classification: To assess the effectiveness of the proposed IDS for intrusion detection, the MAHGT algorithm and eight state-of-the-art baseline approaches
are developed. These methods are trained and tested on three
IVN and EVN distinct data sets, which accurately represent
internal and external vehicle network traffic data, respectively.
All comparative approaches have demonstrated favourable performance for intrusion detection in IVN or EVN. The results
of the experiment for all methods are shown in Fig. 5. For
accuracy metric, MA-HGT achieves 99.99% , 99.95% and
99.97% on the CAR-HACKING, CAN-INTRUSION and CICIoV2024, respectively. The accuracy of MA-HGT on the IVN
datasets is at least 3.73% , 15.55% , 3.45% higher than the
other eight methods. On the other hand, MA-HGT achieves
99.98% , 99.95% and 99.99% accuracy on the CIC-IDS2017,
TON-IoT and CIC-UNSW-NB15, respectively. The accuracy
of MA-HGT on the EVN datasets is at least 3.51% , 13.96%
, 2.67% higher than the other eight methods. Meanwhile, as
depicted in Fig. 5, the result demonstrates that MA-HGT attains F1-Scores of 99.99% , 99.97% and 99.70% on the CARHACKING, CAN-INTRUSION and CICIoV2024, respectively.
The F1-Score of MA-HGT on the IVN datasets is at least
13.29% , 9.02% , 2.42% higher than those achieved by the other
eight methods. Additionally, MA-HGT achieves F1-Scores of
99.88% , 99.97% and 99.99% F1-Score on the CIC-IDS2017,
TON-IoT and CIC-UNSW-NB15, respectively. The MA-HGT
approach demonstrates a minimum increase in F1-Score of
9.00% , 3.71% and 4.40% compared to the other eight methods,
as observed in the EVN datasets. Besides, upon observing the
additional two indices shown in Tables V and VI, it becomes

2768

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Binary classification performance of all methods on IVN and EVN datasets.

TABLE V
DETECTION RATE AND FALSE ALARM RATE OF ALL METHODS ON THREE IVN
DATASETS

Fig. 6.

ROC curves of all methods on two dataset.

Fig. 7.

PR curves of all methods on two dataset.

TABLE VI
DETECTION RATE AND FALSE ALARM RATE OF ALL METHODS ON THREE EVN
DATASETS

evident that MA-HGT exhibits a noticeable enhancement in
detection performance compared to the baseline technique. This
demonstrates that the proposed IDS effectively acquires a unified
representation encompassing topological and statistical characteristics of network flow data. Furthermore, the MA-HGT
model performs better than deep learning techniques such as
1DCNN and LSTM across all evaluation criteria, particularly
when evaluated on the EVN datasets. One possible explanation
for this phenomenon is the high feature dimensionality of the
EVN datasets; for example, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset contains
more than 80 feature dimensions. Meanwhile, the absence of
a multi-attention mechanism in these approaches hinders their
ability to effectively concentrate on important features, leading
to suboptimal detection results.
Additionally, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
and Area Under the Curve (AUC) findings for all approaches
on CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets are presented
in Fig. 6. It is evident that the AUC scores obtained by the
MA-HGT approach surpass those of the other methods, exceeding 0.9999 on both datasets. Furthermore, Fig. 7 presents the
Precision-Recall (PR) curves and Average Precision (AP) scores

for all methods across the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017
datasets. The MA-HGT method achieved superior AP scores
compared to all baseline approaches, exceeding 0.9999 on both
datasets. The findings of these experiments suggest that the
proposed MA-HGT has superior classification performance for
IVN and EVN flow data compared to alternative approaches.
The MA-HGT framework can transform traffic flows into a
topological structure of heterogeneous graph data, which can
then be effectively utilised for intrusion detection through graph
embedding technology.
2) Performance of multi-classification: To evaluate the multiclassification performance of MA-HGT, we generated confusion
matrices for the test sets of the IVN and EVN datasets, as
depicted in Fig. 8, respectively.
For the CAN-HACKING dataset, MA-HGT can accurately
detect three types of attacks: DoS, RPM spoofing and gear
spoofing. The accuracy rate of MA-HGT was found to be
exceptionally high, reaching 99.98% . This high accuracy can
be attributed to the algorithm’s ability to effectively identify and
classify instances of DoS, RPM spoofing, and gear spoofing
attacks. Moreover, in the case of Fuzzy attacks, which exhibit
attack patterns that closely resemble those of other attacks, MAHGT demonstrated minimal misclassifications. Furthermore,
MA-HGT achieved high accuracy rates of 98.45% and 99.99%
on the CAN-intrusion and CICIoV2024 datasets, respectively.

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

Fig. 8.

2769

Confusion matrix of proposed methods for the test set on IVN and EVN datasets.

Despite the presence of different attack types and complicated
assault patterns within the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, the MA-HGT
model demonstrates a remarkable accuracy rate of 98.38% .
The MA-HGT model achieves an accuracy of 1 in identifying
and classifying four common attack patterns: Bot, Heartbleed,
FTP-Patator, and SSH-Patator attacks. However, the accuracy
for various DoS attacks is slightly lower. This might be attributed
to DoS attack patterns exhibiting a high degree of similarity.
Moreover, the performance of MA-HGT in the context of Infiltration and XSS attacks is suboptimal. One potential explanation
for this outcome is the limited number of samples available for
the two attacks, impeding correct attack identification. Additionally, MA-HGT achieved high accuracy rates of 96.62% on the
TON-IoT dataset and 93.92% on the CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset.
The relatively lower accuracy on the CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset
is attributed to the severe class imbalance in the data.
The factor contributing to the high-performance multiclassification of MA-HGT is the ability of each head within
the HGT to acquire distinct representations concurrently. This
enables the model to selectively attend to various locations or
features concurrently, thereby enhancing the model’s classification performance on intricate data.
3) Ablation study: To comprehensively evaluate the role of
each MA-HGT module in intrusion detection, we conducted
ablation experiments on the proposed system using both IVN and
EVN datasets, with results presented in Fig. 9. The ablation study
focuses on three key modules: the MA-HG construction method,
the HGT module, and the MA-HGSampling method. We
designed the following ablation experiments to systematically
evaluate each module’s contribution: (1) w/o HL: excludes

Fig. 9.

Ablation study of the proposed IDS on IVN and EVN datasets.

the MA-HG Sampling method, utilizing only the ordinary
Dataloader; (2) HAN+HL: replaces the HGT module with
the Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network (HAN) [64]; (3)
HGN+HL: substitutes the HGT module with a Heterogeneous
Graph Convolutional Network (HGCN) [39]; (4) HAN+DL:
combines the HAN with the ordinary Dataloader, omitting
the multi-attribute heterogeneous graph sampling method; (5)
HGN+DL: employs the HGCN with the ordinary Dataloader,
excluding the MA-HG Sampling method; (6) GAT: utilizes
homographys instead of heterogeneous graphs, implementing
the Graph Attention Network (GAT) [65]; (7) GCN: employs
homographys rather than heterogeneous graphs, applying the
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [66].
The results of the ablation experiments revealed performance
variations across different datasets. Overall, MA-HGT achieved
the highest accuracy on each dataset compared to all ablation
methods. These results demonstrate that MA-HGT provides efficient detection Performance, confirming the rational design of
MA-HGT and the indispensable and significant contribution of

2770

Fig. 10.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Loss and accuracy of five methods on two datasets during training.

each module to its detection capability. Furthermore, the relative
importance of each module varies across different datasets. For
example, the MA-HGSampling method plays a more crucial
role on CAR-HACKING, CICIoV2024, and TON-IoT datasets,
whereas the HGT module contributes more significantly to
performance on CIC-IDS2017 and CIC-UNSW-NB15. On the
CAR-INTRUSION dataset, the ablation results indicate that
each module contributes equally to the overall performance.
Notably, the model’s accuracy decreases significantly when the
common homography construction method is used instead of
our proposed heterogeneous graph construction approach.
4) Training efficiency of MA-HGT: In this experiment, we will
validate the training efficiency of MA-HGT at a limited labeling
rate. We conducted training on MA-HGT and four different
deep-learning methods for a total of 20 epochs. The training data
utilised had a labelling rate of 80% . Based on the information
shown in Fig. 10, it is evident that the loss and accuracy of
MA-HGT exhibit stabilisation after a single epoch across both
datasets. This suggests that MA-HGT achieves convergence and
optimal performance after a single training epoch. Furthermore,
the stability of loss and accuracy from epochs 2-20 further
support this conclusion. Regarding the remaining four deep
learning methods, it can be observed that even after 20 epochs
of training, the loss and accuracy exhibit a fluctuating pattern,
indicating a lack of convergence. This observation suggests
that the training efficiency of the proposed MA-HGT model
surpasses that of several existing deep learning methods. One
potential rationale is that the heterogeneous graph representation in MA-HGT enables the effective depiction of both the
topological relationships and statistical characteristics within the
network flow data. Simultaneously, incorporating a multi-head
attention mechanism facilitates the rapid identification of crucial
features pertaining to normal and abnormal network activities
within the heterogeneous graph constructed through this representation. Consequently, MA-HGT exhibits swift convergence
and efficient detection capabilities, requiring only a minimal
number of epochs.
In order to provide additional evidence of the training efficacy
of MA-HGT, the alterations in detection rate and F1 score
over the course of 20 training epochs for both MA-HGT and
the four deep learning techniques on the CAR-HACKING and
CIC-IDS2017 datasets are depicted in Figs. 11 and 12. These
figures illustrate the changes in detection rate, false alarm rate,
and F1-Score throughout the training process of the two datasets.

During the training process using the aforementioned datasets,
it was observed that the curves representing the three metrics
of MA-HGT reached their highest values at the completion of
one epoch. In contrast, compared to MA-HGT, the convergence
speeds of the three metric curves in the remaining four deep
learning methods are comparatively slower, and their convergence effects are less pronounced. It is worth mentioning that
the three metric curves associated with the 1DCNN approach
exhibit persistent oscillations in the 20 epochs. The observed
phenomenon can be attributed to the high sensitivity of 1DCNN
to unbalanced network data, which makes it unable to solve the
classification problem with unbalanced sample categories effectively. Furthermore, experimental results show that MA-HGT
has high performance in classification on both IVN and EVN
flow data. The MA-HGT converges quickly and can effectively
handle datasets with label-limited datasets.
5) Effect of labeling rate: To assess the performance of
MA-HGT under varying labelling rates of the dataset, the accuracy of MA-HGT and seven learning-based methods was
assessed at various labelling rates spanning from 1% to 100% on
the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets. Based on the
analysis of Fig. 13, it is evident that most approaches exhibit a
declining pattern in accuracy as the labelling rate declines. This
observation suggests that the proportion of labelled data in the
training set plays a significant role in influencing the accuracy of
IDS. As depicted in Fig. 13, it is evident that the accuracy rate
of MA-HGT consistently surpasses that of the other baseline
methods. Furthermore, there is minimal variation in the accuracy
rate of MA-HGT as the labelling rate declines from 100% to
1% . The heterogeneous graph construction method’s efficacy
and multi-head attention mechanisms in MA-HGT have been
demonstrated to enhance the model’s ability to concentrate
on critical features, resulting in improved classification performance. Furthermore, the experimental findings also demonstrate
that integrating topological and statistical traffic flow characteristics in MA-HGT enhances its ability to capture the underlying
representations of network traffic flow relationships. As a result, it achieves outstanding classification performance across
various label rates. In addition, the commendable performance
exhibited by MA-HGT serves as evidence that the issue of inadequate learnable information inside the model may be effectively
addressed through the construction of a heterogeneous graph
topology for network flow data, coupled with the utilisation of
HGT for graph embedding, even when faced with limitations in
labelling rate.
6) Real-time performance, model complexity, and computational efficiency: To assess the feasibility of deploying the
proposed IDS in real-world vehicular environments, we conducted five independent experiments to evaluate different aspects of real-time performance, model complexity, and computational efficiency. Each experiment was designed to measure
a specific performance metric: (1) average test time, (2) model
size, (3) total number of parameters, (4) Floating Point Operations Per Second (FLOPs) and (5) average power consumption.
All experiments were conducted using the hardware environment described in Section V-A and the results are presented
in Fig. 14(a). The experimental results demonstrate that the

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

Fig. 11.

Detection rate, false alarm rate, F1-Score of five methods on CAR-HACKING dataset during training.

Fig. 12.

Detection rate, false alarm rate, F1-Score of five methods on CIC-IDS2017 dataset during training.

Fig. 13.

Accuracy of five methods on two datasets with different labeling rates.

Fig. 14. (a) Comparison of real-time performance, model complexity, and
computational efficiency and (b) Cross-dataset intrusion detection experiment
results.

proposed method achieves the shortest average test time, with
its inference speed outperforming all baseline methods across
all six datasets. Additionally, the model size, total number of
parameters, FLOPs and average power consumption of the proposed IDS remain at relatively low to moderate levels compared

2771

to the baseline methods. To further demonstrate the feasibility
of deploying One2 in automotive applications, we conducted
an analysis mapping experimental results from workstation
to real-vehicle environments. According to [67], the latency
for safety services in vehicular environments should be below
100ms. Concurrently, detection latency should be minimized to
prevent interference with normal vehicle operation [68]. The
proposed model achieved a GPU test time of 5.13ms. However,
CPU inference times in practical tests were approximately 2.5x
to 14.9x times longer than GPU times [69]. We employed a
conservative 45x for estimation. Furthermore, the introduction
of INT8 quantization [70] and model pruning techniques [71]
can respectively enhance inference speed by 3.8x to 4.7x and
6.67x (with only a 1% impact on model accuracy). Using a
conservative estimate of 9.11ms for CPU inference time, this
falls below the latency requirement for vehicular network safety
services. Furthermore, our model remains sufficiently compact
at 0.65MB, which is considerably less than the memory capacity
of automotive computing systems, which typically possess over
1GB of RAM [14]. Therefore, experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method exhibits superior feasibility for deployment in real vehicular systems.
7) Cross-domain detection: To demonstrate the robustness
of the proposed method against unseen attack scenarios, we
conducted cross-dataset intrusion detection experiments. We
performed two sets of cross-dataset experiments: training on
CAR-HACKING and testing on CAN-intrusion datasets, and
training on CIC-IDS2017 and testing on CIC-UNSW-NB15
datasets. These dataset pairs were selected because they share
similar network traffic characteristics, making them appropriate
for cross-dataset validation. Fig. 14(b) demonstrates that the

2772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

REFERENCES

Fig. 15. Zero-day attack detection test results of proposed methods on two
datasets.

proposed method achieved consistently high performance across
all four evaluation metrics in both cross-dataset experiments.
These results confirm that the proposed method demonstrates
strong adaptability to unseen scenarios.
8) Zero-day attack detection: To investigate the detection
performance of the proposed IDS against zero-day attacks,
we conducted zero-day attack evaluation experiments using
the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets [53]. In each
experiment, we designated one attack type from the dataset
as the zero-day attack, extracted all corresponding attack instances, and combined them with a proportionate amount of
randomly sampled benign data to form the test set. The training
set consisted of all remaining data from the original dataset.
This approach ensured the complete absence of zero-day attack
patterns in the training data. We conducted these experiments
for each attack type present in both the CAR-HACKING and
CIC-IDS2017 datasets. The results are presented in Fig. 15. The
experimental results indicate that the proposed IDS achieves
accuracy exceeding 90% for most zero-day attack types across
both datasets, confirming its effectiveness in detecting zero-day
attack patterns.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose One2 IDS for label-limited IoV.
Initially, a graph construction is developed to represent the topology of network traffic. Subsequently, the MA-HGT is employed
to obtain graph embeddings. Finally, the node classification is
performed on the graph for intrusion detection. The performance
of the MA-HGT is evaluated using three IVN and EVN datasets,
respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that MAHGT exhibits superior classification performance in binary and
multi-class classification. Moreover, MA-HGT demonstrates
notable convergence speed. Furthermore, despite a limited labeling rate, the MA-HGT model achieves exceptional detection accuracy, surpassing other state-of-the-art methodologies.
A critical direction for future work involves conducting comprehensive on-target evaluations on representative automotive
hardware platforms (such as NVIDIA DRIVE, NXP S32) to
validate real-time performance under authentic IVN and EVN
loads. We will thoroughly analyze the complete pipeline timing,
worst-case execution time bounds, batching/windowing effects
on detection latency, and system coexistence with other safetycritical tasks following ASIL considerations—essential factors
for successful integration into production vehicle environments.

[1] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, I. Hamieh, and A. Shami, “Tree-based intelligent
intrusion detection system in Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE
Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[2] B. Ji et al., “Survey on the Internet of Vehicles: Network architectures and
applications,” IEEE Commun. Standards Mag., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 34–41,
Mar. 2020.
[3] C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Remote exploitation of an unaltered passenger
vehicle,” Black Hat USA, vol. 2015, no. S91, pp. 1–91, 2015.
[4] S. Nie, L. Liu, Y. Du, and W. Zhang, “Over-the-air: How we remotely
compromised the gateway, BCM, and autopilot ECUs of tesla cars,”
Briefing, Black Hat USA, vol. 91, pp. 1–19, 2018.
[5] K. Kim, J. S. Kim, S. Jeong, J.-H. Park, and H. K. Kim, “Cybersecurity
for autonomous vehicles: Review of attacks and defense,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 103, 2021, Art. no. 102150.
[6] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023,
Art. no. 119771.
[7] K. Ilgun, R. A. Kemmerer, and P. A. Porras, “State transition analysis: A
rule-based intrusion detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 181–199, Mar. 1995.
[8] V. Kumar, D. Sinha, A. K. Das, S. C. Pandey, and R. T. Goswami, “An
integrated rule based intrusion detection system: Analysis on UNSWNB15 data set and the real time online dataset,” Cluster Comput., vol. 23,
pp. 1397–1418, 2020.
[9] S. Al-Sarawi, M. Anbar, B. A. Alabsi, M. A. Aladaileh, and S. D. A.
Rihan, “Passive rule-based approach to detect sinkhole attack in RPLbased Internet of Things networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 94081–
94093, 2023.
[10] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed investigation and analysis of using machine learning techniques for intrusion
detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 686–728, First
Quarter 2019.
[11] S. Sharma and A. Kaul, “A survey on intrusion detection systems and
honeypot based proactive security mechanisms in VANETs and VANET
cloud,” Veh. Commun., vol. 12, pp. 138–164, 2018.
[12] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection
system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight bag
servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1164–
1181, May/Jun. 2021.
[13] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A.
Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture
for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518,
Jul. 2021.
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[15] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow topologybased graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in labellimited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
[16] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, Third Quarter
2019.
[17] Z. Hu, Y. Dong, K. Wang, and Y. Sun, “Heterogeneous graph transformer,”
in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 2704–2710.
[18] H. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and S. Yang, “State estimation of lithium-ion
batteries via physics-machine learning combined methods: A methodological review and future perspectives,” eTransportation, vol. 24, 2025,
Art. no. 100420.
[19] A. Alshammari, M. A. Zohdy, D. Debnath, and G. Corser, “Classification approach for intrusion detection in vehicle systems,” Wireless Eng.
Technol., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 79–94, 2018.
[20] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
“Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure
and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022.
[21] L. Yang, A. Shami, G. Stevens, and S. De Rusett, “LCCDE: A
decision-based ensemble framework for intrusion detection in the Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022,
pp. 3545–3550.
[22] H. Yu et al., “State of charge estimation method by using a simplified electrochemical model in deep learning framework for lithium-ion batteries,”
Energy, vol. 278, 2023, Art. no. 127846.

LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK

[23] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy Secur.
Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[24] T. P. Nguyen, H. Nam, and D. Kim, “Transformer-based attention network
for in-vehicle intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 55389–55403,
2023.
[25] X. Han et al., “STIDM: A spatial and temporal aware intrusion detection
model,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun.,
2020, pp. 370–377.
[26] J. Zhao, X. Liu, Q. Yan, B. Li, M. Shao, and H. Peng, “Multi-attributed
heterogeneous graph convolutional network for bot detection,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 537, pp. 380–393, 2020.
[27] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting and
mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial-temporal graph convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 3855–3872, Nov./Dec. 2022.
[28] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779.
[29] H. Liang et al., “Network and system level security in connected vehicle
applications,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided Des., 2018,
pp. 1–7.
[30] W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
[31] J. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Sun, and Y. Shi, “In-vehicle network attacks and
countermeasures: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31,
no. 5, pp. 50–58, 2017.
[32] S.-F. Lokman, A. T. Othman, and M.-H. Abu-Bakar, “Intrusion detection
system for automotive controller area network (CAN) bus system: A
review,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–17, 2019.
[33] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy Secur.
Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[34] H. Jiang, Y. Ren, Y. Zhao, Z. Cui, and H. Yu, “Toward city-scale vehicular
crowd sensing: A decentralized framework for online participant recruitment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 17800–17813,
Oct. 2025.
[35] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[36] B. Groza and P.-S. Murvay, “Efficient intrusion detection with bloom
filtering in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1037–1051, Apr. 2019.
[37] A. Ma et al., “Single-cell biological network inference using a heterogeneous graph transformer,” Nat. Commun., vol. 14, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 964.
[38] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 8026–
8037.
[39] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch geometric,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop Representation Learn. Graphs
Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9.
[40] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
2020, Art. no. 100198.
[41] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc. 15th Annu.
Conf. Privacy Secur. Trust, 2017, pp. 57–5709.
[42] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches
against dos and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, vol. 26,
2024, Art. no. 101209.
[43] O. Y. Al-Jarrah, C. Maple, M. Dianati, D. Oxtoby, and A. Mouzakitis,
“Intrusion detection systems for intra-vehicle networks: A review,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 21266–21289, 2019.
[44] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, and P. Leroux, “Feed-forward neural network for
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 91st Veh. Technol. Conf., 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[45] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage intrusion
detection system in intelligent transportation systems using rule extraction
methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[46] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion detection
on Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling, outlier
detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831, 2021.
[47] X. Li et al., “Sustainable ensemble learning driving intrusion detection
model,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1591–
1604, Jul./Aug. 2021.

2773

[48] Y. Javed, M. A. Khayat, A. A. Elghariani, and A. Ghafoor, “PRISM: A hierarchical intrusion detection architecture for large-scale cyber networks,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5070–5086,
Nov./Dec. 2023.
[49] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, and
O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based smart
transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
[50] A. Oseni et al., “An explainable deep learning framework for resilient intrusion detection in IoT-enabled transportation networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1000–1014,
Jan. 2023.
[51] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for intrusion
detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, 2012.
[52] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
Proc. 2015 Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[53] H. Lu et al., “A transfer learning-based intrusion detection system for
zero-day attack in communication-based train control system,” Cluster
Comput., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 8477–8492, 2024.
[54] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
security systems at the edge: Network ton_IoT datasets,” Sustain. Cities
Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art. no. 102994.
[55] H. Mohammadian, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Poisoning and
evasion: Deep learning-based NIDS under adversarial attacks,” in Proc.
21st Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy Secur. Trust, 2024, pp. 1–9.
[56] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection
method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 14, pp. 52–63, 2018.
[57] S. Tariq, S. Lee, H. K. Kim, and S. S. Woo, “CAN-ADF: The controller
area network attack detection framework,” Comput. Secur., vol. 94, 2020,
Art. no. 101857.
[58] Y. Chae, N. Katenka, and L. DiPippo, “An adaptive threshold method for
anomaly-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Symp.
Netw. Comput. Appl., 2019, pp. 1–4.
[59] A. Yulianto, P. Sukarno, and N. A. Suwastika, “Improving AdaBoost-based
intrusion detection system (IDS) performance on CIC IDS 2017 dataset,”
J. Physics: Conf. Ser., vol. 1192, 2019, Art. no. 012018.
[60] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDS: A bagging-based gradient
boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, 2023, Art. no. 119030.
[61] M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, H. Ochiai, D. Fall, and Y. Kadobayashi, “An
effective in-vehicle CAN bus intrusion detection system using CNN deep
learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[62] F. Laghrissi, S. Douzi, K. Douzi, and B. Hssina, “Intrusion detection
systems using long short-term memory (LSTM),” J. Big Data, vol. 8,
no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 65.
[63] M. K. Putchala, “Deep learning approach for intrusion detection system
(IDS) in the Internet of Things (IoT) network using gated recurrent neural
networks (GRU),” Master’s thesis, Dept. Comput. Sci. Eng., Wright State
Univ., Dayton, Ohio, 2017.
[64] X. Wang et al., “Heterogeneous graph attention network,” in Proc. World
Wide Web Conf., 2019, pp. 2022–2032.
[65] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 1–12.
[66] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2017, pp. 1–14.
[67] K. Zheng, Q. Zheng, P. Chatzimisios, W. Xiang, and Y. Zhou, “Heterogeneous vehicular networking: A survey on architecture, challenges, and
solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2377–2396,
Fourth Quarter 2015.
[68] H. Taslimasa, S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, P. Xiong, S. Ray, and A. A.
Ghorbani, “Security issues in Internet of Vehicles (IoV): A comprehensive
survey,” Internet Things, vol. 22, 2023, Art. no. 100809.
[69] V. W. Lee et al., “Debunking the 100x GPU vs. CPU myth: An evaluation
of throughput computing on CPU and GPU,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int.
Symp. Comput. Archit., 2010, pp. 451–460.
[70] S. A. Tailor, J. Fernandez-Marques, and N. D. Lane, “Degree-quant:
Quantization-aware training for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–22.
[71] H. Zhou, A. Srivastava, H. Zeng, R. Kannan, and V. Prasanna, “Accelerating large scale real-time GNN inference using channel pruning,” Proc.
VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1597–1605, May 2021.