This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

1

Physics-Informed Multi-Scale Adaptive
Graph Learning for Unified Event Detection,
Localization, and Classification in Power System
Wenxia Sima , Member, IEEE, Jingsong Wang , Student Member, IEEE,
Ming Yang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Xiaohan Li, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This article proposes a physics-informed
multi-scale adaptive graph neural network (PI-MSA) for
rapid event detection, localization, and classification (EDL-C) of single and multi-source coupling events in power
systems to prevent large-scale failures. Prior work decomposes ED-L-C tasks into separate classification subtasks.
Instead, this work frames ED-L-C as a unified regression
problem through a spatial-aware and task-coupled threedimensional target formulation, enabling one-shot inference of all abnormal events and their class probabilities
at both node and edge levels. By incorporating physical grid topology and shortest-path admittance encoding
through parallel multi-scale networks, this unified onestage pipeline enables joint optimization and learning of
shared graph features as well as progressive inter-task
dependencies. Experimental validation on five power systems of varying scales and configurations demonstrates
that PI-MSA achieves over 75% mean average precision
and 90% localization accuracy across various scenarios,
outperforming traditional methods by over 40% and exceeding state-of-the-art methods by at least 5%. The model
maintains robust and accurate event analysis under topology changes and reduced observability conditions while
achieving computational efficiency at 225 frames per second, enabling real-time monitoring and analysis for modern
power systems.
Index Terms —Event detection localization and classification, modern power system, multi-source events, multiscale adaptive graph network, physics-informed.

I. INTRODUCTION

introduces emerging operational risks. As a result, power system
events such as temporary faults, line trips, load fluctuations,
and cyber-physical incidents are becoming more frequent and
diverse [1], [2]. These events can propagate rapidly across
interconnected networks, potentially leading to grid failures
and widespread system disruptions [3]. As demonstrated in
Table I, multi-source events worldwide have precipitated significant blackouts and economic losses in recent years. Many
of these major blackouts stem from minor incidents that were
exacerbated by delayed and inaccurate event analysis. To enable
timely intervention, rapid and accurate event detection [4], localization [5], and classification (ED-L-C) [6] capabilities has
become crucial for maintaining system stability and preventing
catastrophic failures in modern power grids [7], [8].
Recent advances in measurement technologies, particularly
the widespread deployment of distribution-level phasor measurement units (D-PMUs), have enhanced system observability
[9], [10], [11]. These devices sample at 30–120 Hz, capturing
system dynamics with high temporal resolution through synchronized measurements. This rich data stream theoretically
enables more accurate ED-L-C analysis [12], [13], [14]. However, extracting actionable insights from these high-dimensional,
heterogeneous data poses significant computational and methodological challenges, necessitating an efficient and unified framework capable of real-time multi-source complex event analysis
in increasingly dynamic power systems [15].

A. Background and Motivation

B. Literature Review and Technical Challenges

ODERN power systems face a structural evolution
driven by the integration of renewable energy sources
(RES), harmonic load, and smart grid technologies, which
heighten operational variability and uncertainty. This increased
complexity renders the grid more vulnerable to disturbances and

To address the analytical challenges, extensive research efforts have been devoted to ED-L-C tasks in recent years [6],
[13], [16]. The methodology for ED-L-C has evolved from
physics-based models to data-driven approaches, and more recently toward physics-informed data-driven frameworks, driven
by the increasing complexity of modern grids and the availability
of high-resolution measurement data from D-PMUs.
Physics-based ED-L-C methods are built upon fundamental
physical laws of power systems and achieve event analysis
through the establishment of mathematical models that describe
electromagnetic transient processes [17]. The modeling process
typically involves system parameter identification, equivalent
circuit modeling, and differential equation solving, followed
by time-frequency domain analysis of electrical quantities to

M

Received 28 January 2026; revised 13 March 2026; accepted 3 April
2026. This work was supported by the Key Program of National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 52337007. Paper no. TII-260914. (Corresponding author: Ming Yang.)
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Power Transmission Equipment Technology, Chongqing University, Chongqing
400044, China (e-mail: cqsmwx@cqu.edu.cn; song@stu.cqu.edu.cn;
cqucee@cqu.edu.cn; lixh@stu.cqu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2026.3682628

1941-0050 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

TABLE I
NOTABLE MAJOR POWER SYSTEM ACCIDENTS TRIGGERED BY MULTI-SOURCE EVENTS (2021–2025) ∗

support ED-L-C tasks. While these methods provide strong
theoretical foundations and interpretability, their dependence
on precise system parameters and simplified assumptions limits
their effectiveness in modern distribution networks with high
renewable penetration and dynamic loads.
To address the limitations of physics-based methods in
complex modern grids, data-driven methods have emerged as
promising alternatives for ED-L-C tasks, with deep learning
techniques showing particular effectiveness in complex pattern
recognition. These methods employ various network architectures such as convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural
networks, or attention-based Transformer networks [18], [19],
combined with supervised [20], [21], weakly-supervised [22],
semi-supervised [23], or unsupervised learning [24] strategies
according to data characteristics and task requirements. By
learning effective feature representations from event data, these
approaches demonstrate superior performance in event analysis.
However, data-driven methods depend on high-quality historical
data and offer limited physical interpretability, raising reliability
concerns in critical decision-making scenarios.
To leverage the complementary strengths of both paradigms
while addressing their respective limitations, physics-informed
data-driven methods have emerged as a promising research
direction that integrates domain knowledge into learning frameworks to ensure both event analysis accuracy and physical
consistency [25]. These approaches primarily operate through
three mechanisms: constraint-based methods that incorporate
physical laws such as Kirchhoff’s laws and power balance equations as regularization terms in loss functions [26], architectureinformed designs that embed topological and physical priors
directly into network structures such as graph neural networks
[27], [28], [29], [30], and knowledge-guided learning frameworks that utilize domain expertise such as impedance characteristics and power equipment parameters to direct feature extraction and model training processes [31]. These hybrid approaches
have demonstrated improved generalization capabilities and reduced data requirements compared to purely data-driven methods. However, they still face significant challenges in balancing
the trade-offs between physical constraints and learning flexibility. Specifically, three open challenges remain: (1) most ED-L-C
frameworks treat subtasks independently, leading to error accumulation in sequential processing or insufficient inter-subtask
dependency modeling, leaving room for unified formulations;

(2) jointly modeling multi-scale spatial dependencies and temporal dynamics under complex scenarios remains non-trivial; (3)
further exploiting the synergy between circuit-theoretic principles and graph-structured learning could enhance interpretability and physical consistency in safety-critical scenarios.
C. Contributions
To address the technical challenges above, this article proposes a physics-informed multi-scale adaptive (PI-MSA) graph
neural network with a novel ED-L-C framework for enhanced
power system event analysis. Rather than treating the three
subtasks independently, the proposed framework unifies EDL-C into a one-stage regression problem via a spatial-aware
three-dimensional (3-D) output tensor, enabling efficient and
accurate multi-source event analysis under complex scenarios.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
1) This study develops a PI-MSA graph neural network for
precise spatial-temporal feature learning from complex
multi-source event patterns. The method employs parallel architectures where physical grid topology captures
local spatial dependencies and shortest-path admittance
encoding extracts global spatial relationships, enabling
adaptive modeling of multi-scale dynamic interactions
between system nodes.
2) This study introduces a spatial-aware and task-coupled
3-D output structure that frames ED-L-C as a unified onestage regression problem, where spatial indices inherently
encode event locations and classification is structurally
conditioned on detection confidence. This formulation
enables one-shot inference for all spatially separated abnormal events and their class probabilities at both node
and edge levels. The framework eliminates the need for
defining new classes for coupled waveform patterns and
avoids error accumulation between subtasks.
3) The proposed model and ED-L-C framework is systematically evaluated on five test systems with varying
scales and voltage levels. Comparative studies demonstrate the effectiveness of PI-MSA in processing complex
multi-source events, while robustness and generalization
analysis validate its adaptability under diverse operating
conditions and grid configurations. Ablation studies further verify the contribution of each designed module to
the overall performance.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SIMA et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED MULTI-SCALE ADAPTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

3

Fig. 1. H-PMU measurements for a C-G fault event at fundamental
phasor versus at third and fifth harmonic phasor measurements.

(a)

The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
presents a description of ED-L-C problems. Section III describes the details of the proposed PI-MSA model. Section IV
outlines the training and inference phase. Section V introduces
the experimental setup. Section VI presents and discusses the
obtained results from different case studies. Finally, Section VII
concludes this article.
II. PRELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
This section presents basic definitions, the challenges posed
by multi-source event scenarios, and the problem formulation
for power system multi-source events spatial-temporal analysis.
A. Basic Definitions and Assumptions
Definition 1 (Power Grid Graph): Let G = (V, E, A) represent the power grid, where V = {v1 , . . . , vn } denotes the set
of nodes and |V| = N . E = {e1 , . . . , em } represents the set of
edges and A ∈ RN ×N is the adjacency matrix.
Definition 2 (Graph Signal Matrix): At each time step t, the
D-PMU measurements across all nodes form a graph signal
Xt = (x1,t , x2,t , . . . , xn,t ) ∈ RN ×C , where C is the number
of feature channels. For all nodes across the full-time window,
X = [X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt ] ∈ RN ×C×T is represented as the graph
signal feature matrix, where T is the time window length. In
this study, features include voltage magnitudes Vφmag , current
magnitudes Iφmag , and power factors P Fφ for each phase φ ∈
{A, B, C}, with 120 Hz reporting rate.
Assumption 1 (Harmonic Phasor Measurement): In this
study, D-PMUs are assumed to be extended to harmonic phasor
measurement units (H-PMUs) [5], which can selectively measure odd harmonics in addition to the fundamental frequency, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. When higher-order harmonics are considered, the measured phasors are concatenated as follows:
Xhar = [Xhar,1  Xhar,3  Xhar,5 ],

(1)

N ×3C×T

where Xhar ∈ R
represents the concatenation matrix
of the odd harmonics, Xhar,1 , Xhar,3 , and Xhar,5 denote the
fundamental, third, and fifth harmonic phasor measurements
captured by the H-PMUs, respectively.
B. Multi-Source Events and Challenges
Fig. 2 presents an example scenario with eight-sources event
captured from nine spatially distributed D-PMUs in the IEEE
34-node system. Fig. 2(a) shows the spatial locations and temporal intervals of each event, with color coding corresponding

(b)
Fig. 2. (a) Spatial locations and temporal intervals of eight event
sources in the IEEE 34-node system. (b) Three-phase voltage and
current waveforms from 9 D-PMUs under an eight-sources event scenario. Background colors indicate event coupling levels: isolated (green),
overlapping (purple), coupled (blue), and highly coupled (orange).

to the waveform segments in Fig. 2(b). For instance, events 1,
2, and 3 (orange) in Fig. 2(a) correspond to the orange-shaded
waveforms segments on the left side of Fig. 2(b). As shown
in Fig. 2(b), the measured waveforms within this observation
window exhibit complex patterns due to multiple event sources.
The key challenges are summarized as follows.
1) Variable Event Sources: The number of event sources
varies across samples and is unknown a priori, requiring the
model to autonomously detect, localize, and classify all events.
2) Temporal Coupling: Events overlap in time (e.g., Events
1–3 occur nearly simultaneously around 0.11–0.18 s), causing
superimposed signatures that evolve dynamically as events start
and end throughout the observation window.
3) Spatial Propagation: Each event propagates beyond its
source location, affecting upstream and downstream buses.
Moreover, events occur at both node level and edge level,
requiring simultaneous ED-L-C at two topological levels.
4) Same-Class Discrimination: This example contains three
C-G faults (Events 1, 5, 6) at different locations, which must be
identified as separate sources rather than a single event.
These challenges, combined with the requirement for realtime situational awareness, necessitate the development of an effective graph feature learning and unified framework that jointly
addresses ED-L-C task for complex multi-source scenarios.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

Overview of the PI-MSA framework and developed multi-source event detection, localization, and classification framework.

C. Problem Statement
For a power grid G with graph signal matrix X, the multisource ED-L-C task can be viewed as a joint learning problem
that integrates graph signal measurements with power system
physical information to analyze anomalous events at both node
and edge levels over graph time series, formulated as:
num
F : (G, X, Z) → (Enum , {(Eidet , Eiloc , Eicls )}E
i=1 ),

(2)

where Z is the physical parameter matrix of power system.
Enum ∈ [0, Emax
num ] denotes the number of detected active events:
normal operation (Enum = 0), single-source event (Enum = 1),
multi-source event (Enum ∈ [2, Emax
num ]) with multiple concurrent
events.Eidet , Eiloc and Eicls indicate the event detection, localization, and classification results for the i-th event source among
the current Enum events, respectively.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Overview of Proposed PI-MSA Framework
As illustrated in Fig. 3, PI-MSA is built on a spatial-temporal
multi-scale learning block (STMS-Block) with a temporalspatial-temporal architecture, processing input features through
three stages: (1) a shared temporal layer captures evolving
dynamics across all nodes; (2) three parallel graph convolution
pathways extract spatial dependencies using physical grid topology, adaptive adjacency, and a physics-informed shortest-path
admittance matrix; (3) each pathway applies independent temporal learning, followed by multi-head attention for multi-scale
feature aggregation and an ED-L-C prediction head. Multiple STMS-Blocks are stacked to enable hierarchical extraction
of both fine-grained local event signatures and coarse-grained
global system patterns.

(TGC) networks, which combine causal convolution with gated
linear units to model the complex temporal patterns inherent
(,l)
in multi-source scenarios. Given the temporal features xi ∈
T ×C
of node i at the l-th TGC layer in the -th STMS-Block,
R
the causal convolution can be expressed as:
Tconv,(,l)

xi,1

(,l)

= T1 (Γ1 ∗ xi

Tconv,(,l)

), xi,2

(,l)

= T2 (Γ2 ∗ xi

),
(3)
where Γ1 , Γ2 ∈ RK×C ×CT are learnable temporal convolution
kernels, C and CT denotes the input and output feature channels, K is the 1-D causal convolution kernel size, and T1 (·),
T2 (·) are parallel causal convolution operations ensuring no
future information is used. Each convolution reduces the temTconv,(,l)
poral length by K − 1 without padding. The output xi,1/2
∈ R(T −K+1)×CT are then processed through a gating unit:
(,l+1)

xi

Tconv,(,l)

= σsigmoid (xi,1

Tconv,(,l)

)  (xi,2

(,l)

+ xi

),

(4)

where σsigmoid (·) denotes the sigmoid function,  represents the
Hadamard product. The gating unit controls feature importance,
while the residual connection facilitates training.
C. Spatial Feature Learning in Power Systems
Event propagation in power systems exhibits strong spatial
dependencies governed by physical connectivity and electrical
characteristics between buses. To capture these, we employ
Chebyshev graph convolution on the normalized Laplacian matrix L = IN − D−1/2 AD−1/2 , where D ∈ RN ×N is the degree
matrix with Dii = Σj Aij . Given the spatial input features
()
Xt ∈ RN ×CT at time t after temporal processing, the graph
convolution in the -th STMS-Block can be expressed as:
()

gt

=

K−1


()

θk Pk (L)X
t +b ,
()

()

(5)

k=0

B. Temporal Feature Learning in Power Systems
Temporal feature learning captures the evolving dynamics of
power system events. We employ temporal gated convolution

where θk ∈ RCT ×CS are trainable polynomial coefficients,
b() ∈ RCS is the learnable bias term, and Pk (x) are Chebyshev
polynomials computed recursively as P0 (x) = 1, P1 (x) = x,
()

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SIMA et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED MULTI-SCALE ADAPTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

5

Pk (x) = 2xPk−1 (x) − Pk−2 (x). k is the order of polynomials.
 = (2L/λmax ) − IN scales the Laplacian matrix L to
Here, L
[-1, 1], where λmax is the largest eigenvalue of L.
To reduce computational complexity of the Laplacian matrix
calculation in large-scale systems, we adopt first-order Chebyshev approximation, which localizes the convolution within
immediate node neighborhoods:
()
() ()
()  ()
.
(6)
g ≈ θ X + θ LX

 basic  Dline , where Dline ∈ RN ×N stores the line
 distance = A
A
distances:
 distance ).
(11)
SP = Dijkstra(A
For each node pair (i, j), SPij stores the shortest path and
|SPij | denotes the number of edges along this path. The admittance representation is then encoded as:

t

0

t

1

t

The reparameterization θ 0 = θ0 − θ1 and θ 1 = 2θ1 /λmax ,
combined with the parameter constraint θ 0 = −θ 1 and λmax ≈
2 (λmax typically ranges from 1.94 to 2.00 for power systems),
leads to the simplified graph convolution form:




Gconv,()
()
≈ σReLU θ() IN + D−1/2 AD−1/2 Xt , (7)
Xt
where θ() serves as a single trainable parameter controlling the aggregation weights of neighboring node information.
Gconv,()
∈
σReLU (·) is the rectified linear unit (ReLU) function. Xt
RN ×CS is the output of graph convolution layer.
D. Physics-Informed Multi-Scale Adaptive Graph
Learning
Since a single adjacency relationship in (7) cannot fully
capture power system spatial dependencies, PI-MSA employs
three distinct adjacency pathways from different physical perspectives, as illustrated Fig. 3.
Scale 1. Physical Grid Topology: First, the predefined physi basic ∈ RN ×N constrains information
cal grid topology matrix A
flow strictly to directly connected local neighbors:
Abasic = [aij ]N ×N ,

where aij ∈ {0, 1},

(8)

where aij = 1 if nodes i and j are connected. otherwise aij = 0.
Scale 2. Spatial-Temporal Adaptive Graph Learning: The
system topology can shift due to contingencies, and effective distances between nodes may vary during events. To capture such
time-varying dependencies, an adaptive adjacency relationship
is introduced that learns from node features:
aadapt
ij,t = σLReLU (w · sim(xi,t , xj,t ) + b),
sim(xi,t , xj,t ) =

xi,t · (xj,t )
,
xi,t 2 · xj,t 2

(9)
(10)

where σLReLU (·) denotes the LeakyReLU activation function,
w, b ∈ R are trainable weight and bias, respectively. xi,t , xj,t ∈
RCS and sim(xi,t , xj,t ) computes similarity between nodes i
 adapt =
and j at time t,  · 2 denotes the L2 norm. Thus, A
adapt
[aij,t ]T ×N ×N captures the instantaneous connection strength
that evolve with system dynamics.
Scale 3. Physics-Informed Adaptive Graph Learning: Datadriven correlations of Scale 2 may yield physically inconsistent
relationships, particularly for edge events whose signals attenuate along transmission lines and require consistent multi-sensor
analysis. To address this challenge, a physics-informed adaptive
 physics is constructed by combining shortestadjacency matrix A
 adapt . First,
path admittance encoding with adaptive learning A
the shortest paths between all node pairs are computed using
Dijkstra’s algorithm on the distance-weighted adjacency matrix

|SPij |

1
1
z ij =
zij,n Φ
,
ij,n , pij =
|SPij | n=1
z ij

(12)

where zij = [R1 , X1 , R0 , X0 ] ∈ R4 contains the positive- and
zero-sequence physical resistance R1/0 and reactance X1/0
4×CS
of the n-th edge, and Φ
is a learnable projecij,n ∈ R
tion matrix. The final shortest path admittance representation
pij ∈ RCS between nodes i and j is obtained by taking the
reciprocal of encoded impedance representation z ij ∈ RCS .
Finally, this encoded admittance vector pij explicitly gates the
adaptive graph:


pij ,
(13)
apij = σReLU (β) + aadapt
ij
dynamically modwhere β is a learnable parameter and aadapt
ij
physics

= [apij ]T ×N ×N ×C . In
ulates the admittance encoding A
S
practice, this formulation ensures strong connections are only
formed between nodes exhibiting both high statistical datacorrelation and tight physical electrical coupling.
E. Multi-Scale Graph Feature Fusion
The STMS-Block computation process can be expressed as:




(,2)
()
(,1)
σReLU Gθ TΓ (X() )
X+1 = TΓ
,
(14)
where X(+1) ∈ R(T −2(K−1))×N ×CT , and TΓ (·) and
(,2)
TΓ (·) denote the first and second temporal feature learning
()
layers in the -th STMS-Block, Gθ (·) represents the multi-scale
spatial graph feature learning layer. Then, the outputs from
three scales are concatenated to form H = [H1 ||H2 ||H3 ] ∈
R(T −2||(K−1))×N ×3CT , and multi-head attention (MHA) is
employed to adaptively fuses the graph features:




(K
)
Q
i
i
√
MHA (H) = n1 σsoftmax
(15)
Vi W O ,
dhead
(,1)

where Qi = HWiQ , Ki = HWiK , Vi = HWiV are query, key
and value matrices, WiQ , WiK , WiV ∈ R3CT ×dhead are learnable
projection matrices, WO ∈ R(n×dhead )×C is the output projection
matrix. ||n1 represents matrix concatenation from head i to n.
F. Computational Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of PI-MSA is analyzed
component-wise. Let N denote the number of nodes, C the
feature dimension, T the temporal length, and |E| the number
of edges. 1. TGC Layer has complexity: OTGC (N C 2 T ); 2. The
three parallel graph convolution layers have: 1) Grid Topology: O(|E|CT + N C 2 T ) ≈ OGrid (N C 2 T ) since |E| ≈ O(N )
for sparse power grids; 2) Adaptive: Oadapt (N C 2 T ) using Ts =
T ) sampled points with top-4 neighbors; 3) Physics6(Ts
informed: OPI (N C 2 T ) by reusing the adaptive adjacency with

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

(a)

TABLE II
TEST SYSTEMS SUMMARY

(c)

(b)

Fig. 4. Spatial-aware and task-coupled 3-D output structure for unified
ED-L-C task.

TABLE III
EVENT CLASS DEFINITIONS

O(N ) additional cost. 3. Multi-scale fusion: MHA on N×3C×d
features has complexity OMHA (N Cd2 ). Therefore, the overall
complexity is OPI− MSA = OSTMS + OMHA ≈ OPI− MSA (N C 2 T )
when C ≈ d
T . The model scales approximately linearly
with N, making it scalable to grids ranging from dozens to
thousands of nodes.

and

IV. TRAINING AND INFERENCE PHASE FOR ED-L-C TASK
A. Multi-Source ED-L-C Task-Aware Loss Design
The model outputs a 3-D tensor of shape [N, N, 1+M] that
extends the adjacency matrix concept, as shown in Fig. 4.
Diagonal elements (i, i) represent node events, off-diagonal
elements (i, j) represent edge events, and only the lower triangular part is computed due to graph symmetry. The first channel [gray, Fig. 4(b)] represents anomaly detection confidence
scores, while subsequent channels [lighter shades, Fig. 4(c)]
indicate event class probabilities. As illustrated in Fig. 4(a),
task dependencies are embedded explicitly in the label design: when event class ω occurs at node i, both Channel
1 (detection) and Channel (1+ω) (classification) at position
(i, i) are labeled as 1, thereby coupling detection confidence
and classification probability within the same structure during
training. This design enables the model to localize events spatially through tensor indices, while the predicted event class is
determined by ranking probabilities across all channels, with
classification conditioned on detection confidence. The loss
function is designed to balance the contributions of positive and
negative examples:
class
+ α2 Lanomaly
+ γ1 Lclass
Ltotal = α1 Lanomaly
pos
neg
pos + γ2 Lneg , (16)

probabilities and ground truth for event class ω between node
i and j. The hyperparameters α1 , α2 , γ1 , and γ2 balance the
contributions of positive and negative examples in both detection
and classification tasks, preventing the loss computation from
being dominated by background negative examples.
B. Reasoning Process for Multi-Source ED-L-C Task
For inference phase, the detection channel serves as a gating
mechanism that filters out locations with low confidence scores,
and classification is performed only on the remaining candidates.
This explicitly models the conditional probability chain in a
single forward pass. The final prediction score for each potential
location (i, j) is computed as:
scorei,j = I (yij > τ ) ×yij × max Pr (clsω |event )i,j ,
ω∈1,...,M 
  


pos/neg

Iij

(19)

ρij,ω

\fontsize{9}{9.5} \fontsize{9}{9.5} where Pr(clsω |event) represents the conditional probability distribution over M event
classes, and I(yij > τ ) denotes locations with confidence scores
below threshold τ are filtered out.

where the anomaly detection loss is computed as:
Lanomaly
pos/neg =

N
−1 
i


V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
pos/neg
Iij
(yij − ŷij )2 ,

(17)

i=0 j=0

and the event classification loss is defined as:
M
N
−1 
i


pos/neg
Lclass
Iij
(ρij,ω − ρ̂ij,ω )2 .
pos/neg =
i=0 j=0
pos/neg

(18)

ω=0

denotes the indicator function for posiHere, Iij
pos
= 1 for nodes/edges with events,
tive/negative examples, Iij
neg
Iij = 1 for nodes/edges without events. yij and ŷij are the
predicted anomaly scores and ground truth between node i and
j, respectively, while ρij,ω and ρ̂ij,ω correspond to the predicted

A. Test Power Systems and Event Scenarios
The proposed framework is evaluated on five IEEE benchmark systems spanning different scales, voltage levels, and
topological characteristics to comprehensively assess its generalization capability. Table II summarizes the test systems and
their corresponding event configurations. The node numbering
and system configurations are consistent with [32].
The event class (E1–E19) included in Table II are defined
in Table III, covering fault events, harmonic load switching
events, RES-related events, and transmission-specific events at
both node and edge levels.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SIMA et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED MULTI-SCALE ADAPTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

B. Monte Carlo Based Multi-Source Events Generation
The multi-source events generation process is demonstrated
using the IEEE 34-node system as an example. The Monte Carlo
method is employed to generate 13 different classes of events.
The detailed generation procedure is presented in Algorithm 1.
All measurements are recorded at 120 Hz with a 1-s sliding
window. As the power system operates, samples are updated
through sliding windows. Each sample represents a graph timeseries data X ∈ RN ×C×T , where unmeasured nodes and phases
are zero-padded to indicate the absence of active electrical
activity. The historical data samples are manually annotated
with labels in the format described in Section IV-A. Unless
otherwise specified, all experiments assume full observability.
Each system supports up to 8 event sources per observation
window, except for the 906-node system which supports up to 16
to further evaluate scalability. Each dataset contains 4000–8000
event samples and 400–1000 normal samples.
C. Implementation Details
The dataset is split chronologically into training (70%), validation (10%), and test (20%) sets to prevent information leakage,
with training samples shuffled before feeding to the model. The
model checkpoint with the best performance on the validation
set is saved for evaluation. The proposed model contains 2
STMS-Block, where spatial and temporal kernel sizes are set
to 3, with 64 temporal convolution kernels and 16 spatial graph
convolution kernels. The final temporal learning layer employs
convolution kernels of length 3, followed by a 3-head MHA
layer with one head per pathway, fusing the features learned
across the three pathways, and a stack of linear layers mapping
the fused representations to the target ED-L-C output tensor.
The model is trained using Adam optimizer (weight decay
1.0e-4) with a MultiStepLR learning rate scheduler. The learning
rate starts at 0.002 and decreases by half at epochs [1, 50, 90].
Gradient clipping (3.0) and dropout regularization (rate 0.5) are
employed to ensure stable training. The loss function α1 , α2 , γ1 ,
and γ2 are set to [1.0, 0.5, 1.0, 0.7]. The model is trained for
100 epochs with a batch size of 64. All hyperparameters were
determined through empirical and experimental tuning.
D. Baseline Methods and Evaluation Metrics
Evaluation Metrics: To comprehensively evaluate the model
performance, this study adopts Correct Localization (CorLoc),
Average Precision (AP) and mean Average Precision (mAP)
metrics. The CorLoc is defined as the percentage of system
events that are correctly localized:
CorLoc =

1

E
num


Enum i=1

I(Loci = gtLoci ),

(20)

where Enum is the total number of detected events, I(·) denotes
the indicator function that equals 1 when predicted localization
Loci matches the ground truth gtLoci , and 0 otherwise. For joint
evaluation of ED-L-C performance, True Positive (TP) is defined

7

Algorithm 1: Monte Carlo Randomized Multi-Source Event
Data Generation.

Input: Stable system operation starting at time tstart
Output: Multi-source event graph time-series dataset
1.
Sample tinterval ∼ Uniform[0.5, 1.0] seconds
2.
Set event generation interval: [tstart , tend ], where
tend = tstart + tinterval
3.
Sample Enum ∼ Uniform{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
4.
Initialize candidate location set Eloc
5.
Sample Enum locations from Eloc without
replacement
6.
For each edge event location do
7.
Sample αline ∼ Uniform(0, 1)
8.
Set position at αline · L (L=line length)
9.
End for
10.
For each selected location E(i) do
11.
Randomly select event class from event set:
Ecls = {E1, . . . , E13}
12.
if E(i) is a fault event then
13.
Sample Rbase ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, 15, 20}Ω,
αfault ∼ Uniform[0.8, 1.2]
14.
Compute Rfault = Rbase × αfault
15.
End if
(i)
16.
Sample ttrigger ∼ Uniform(tstart , tend ) and
αduration ∼ Uniform(−1, 1)
(i)
(i)
17.
Calculate tend = tstart + ttrigger + Δt(i) ,
Δt(i) = (3 + αduration )/fsystem
18.
End for
Return: Randomized graph time-series events data

based on both event classification and topological distance:
TP = {predi |I(clsi = gti ) × I(Dn−hop (Loci , gtLoci ))} .
(21)
When calculating AP, we require exact location matching
where: I(D0−hop (Loci , gtLoci )) → I(Loci = gtLoci ). The AP
of each event class and mAP across all classes are defined as:
M

1 
mAP =
APω , AP =
M ω=1

1

P (R) dR,

(22)

0

where P(R) represents the precision P = TP/(TP+FP) at recall
level R = TP/(TP+FN).
Furthermore, three topology-aware metrics are introduced:
mean Average Precision for node events (mAPN ), mean Average
Precision for edge events (mAPE ), and One-hop mean Average
Precision (mAPOH ). The mAPOH relaxes the exact matching
requirement by accepting predictions within one-hop of the
ground truth I(D1−hop (Loci , gtLoci )), allowing us to assess
ED-L-C performance on approximate event localization.
Baselines Models: For fair comparison, we select a wealth of
baseline models with publicly available official implementations
[33] that have been validated for spatial-temporal modeling, including conventional time series models (LSTM, MLP(Linear),
and NBeats), classic graph-based models (STGCN, DCRNN,
Graph WaveNet, and AGCRN), and recent state-of-the-art time

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON MULTI-SOURCE ED-L-C TASK PERFORMANCE OF 34-NODE AND 123-NODE SYSTEMS

series models (PatchTST, iTransformer, TimesNet, and Crossformer). We only added a uniform ED-L-C prediction head
to each model without any other modifications. It is worth
noting that ED-L-C tasks require end-to-end fast processing
capabilities, as discussed in Section IV. Hence, we focus on
deep learning baselines readily adaptable to our unified ED-L-C
task formulation. All models were developed with Pytorch, PyG,
and EasyTorch, conducting training on an NVIDIA A40 48 GB
GPU for 100 epochs.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section evaluates the proposed PI-MSA framework in
four parts: 1) overall performance evaluation on power grid of
varying scales, 2) robustness analysis under challenging conditions including reduced observability, topology variations, and
imperfect data quality, 3) generalization validation on transmission and RES-integrated systems, and 4) model analysis
including ablation studies and computational efficiency.
A. Overall ED-L-C Performance Evaluation
1) Baseline Comparison: Table IV compares ED-L-C performance on the 34-node and 123-node systems. PI-MSA
achieves 81.21% and 84.62% mAP on the two systems, exceeding the best baselines by 5.02% and 4.4%, respectively.
This consistent improvement is attributed to the physics-aligned
multi-scale architecture of PI-MSA, which facilitates feature
extraction across local-to-global topology.
The comparison also reveals a clear performance hierarchy:
Most graph-based models outperform non-graph-based models
while requiring fewer parameters, as explicit physical topology
provides valuable structural priors for joint node and edge
event analysis. In contrast, Transformer-based models struggle to resolve overlapping waveform patterns from spatially
distributed sources without explicit structural guidance. Basic
models (MLP, LSTM) perform poorly overall, as they lack the
spatial-temporal synergy essential for multi-source ED-L-C.
Notably, most models exhibit lower mAPE than mAPN , with
performance gaps primarily concentrated in edge events. This
is because node events captured by co-located sensors with
higher signal fidelity, and certain harmonic load switching events
exhibit distinctive signatures that facilitate recognition.

2) Performance Under Different Number of Event Sources:

To evaluate PI-MSA under multi-source scenarios, trained models are tested on eight datasets containing 1–8 event sources,
with results presented in Fig. 5. For (1-2)-sources events (Fig.
5(a1)), the model performs better on the 34-node system due to
simpler topology. For 3–8 sources (Fig. 5 (a/b 2-4)), the 123node system yields superior results, as its larger spatial domain
better separates overlapping propagation patterns. Specifically,
the model maintains CorLoc around 92% across all scenarios
with mAP above 79% even under eight concurrent events (Fig.
5(b4)), attributed to multi-scale graph learning with MHA that
effectively discriminates wave propagation nodes from event
source nodes under increased spatial-temporal dependencies.
3) Scalability to Large-Scale Power System: To further validate scalability, we evaluate PI-MSA on the European 906-node
system, increasing the maximum number of event sources from
8 to 16 per observation window, with 16.1% of test events
occurring at previously unseen locations. PI-MSA achieves
96.42% mAP and 98.79% CorLoc overall. As shown in Fig.
6, per-class AP across seen and unseen locations shows a gap
of only 0.23% (96.26% vs. 96.03% mAP), demonstrating effective spatial generalization stemming from the unified ED-L-C
training objective and adaptive graph learning, which guide
the model to learn transferable structural patterns rather than
location-specific mappings.

B. Robustness Analysis of PI-MSA
1) Robustness Under Reduced Observability: Fig. 7 illustrates ED-L-C performance as D-PMU coverage decreases from
100% to 12% on the 34-node system. Baseline methods like
DCRNN and STGCN that rely on static graph structures exhibit degradation exceeding 40%, as sparse sensor deployment
disrupts message passing paths along the physical topology. In
contrast, PI-MSA maintains 54.45% mAP and 73.13% CorLoc
at minimal 12% coverage (adequate for operational monitoring).
This robustness stems from the multi-scale architecture integrating adaptive and shortest-path admittance-based physicsinformed graph learning, which provides alternative message
passing paths based on feature similarity and electrical distance
when observed nodes are physically non-adjacent.
2) Robustness Under Topology Variations: We evaluate robustness under high-frequency network reconfiguration on the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SIMA et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED MULTI-SCALE ADAPTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

9

Fig. 5. AP and confusion matrices of PI-MSA under different number of event source scenarios. (a) IEEE 34-node system. (b) IEEE 123-node
system. In each 2×2 panel, subfigures (1)–(4) correspond to scenarios with 1–2, 3–4, 5–6, and 7–8 event sources, respectively.

Fig. 6.

Per-class AP on seen and unseen locations.
Fig. 9.

Fig. 7. Impact of different number of sensors on ED-L-C task performance across different methods.

Fig. 8.

Robustness to Missing and Delayed D-PMU Measurements.

higher mAP than the best baseline and maintains CorLoc above
91%, attributed to the adaptive graph learning mechanism that
dynamically adjusts inter-node connection strengths regardless
of the pre-defined physical topology.
3) Robustness to Missing and Delayed Measurements: We
evaluate PI-MSA under missing data, delayed measurements,
and their combination on the 906-node system. Missing data
scenarios apply segment-based dropout (10–60 time steps, ˜83–
500 ms) to randomly selected D-PMU nodes; delayed nodes
hold the last valid measurement and progressively recover to
real-time flow. As shown in Fig. 9, under a 30% ratio, mAP drops
by only 2.66% for missing data (96.42%→93.76%) and 1.47%
for delays, the latter preserving temporal continuity. Under
20% missing and 20% delay combined, the model maintains
89.76% mAP with CorLoc above 93%. This robustness stems
from the spatial-temporal adaptive graph learning mechanism,
which dynamically leverages unaffected neighboring nodes to
compensate for corrupted measurements.

Performance comparison under dynamic topology conditions.

C. Generalization to Different Grid Configurations
123-node system, where five three-phase breakers at node pairs
(60–160), (197–97), (151–300), (13–152), and (54–94) switch
states at random intervals of 33–67 ms. From 2,000 generated
samples, 1,000 are combined with static topology data from Section VI-A 1) for training and 1000 for testing, with a predefined
adjacency matrix used throughout to simulate undetected topology changes. As shown in Fig. 8, PI-MSA achieves over 6.5%

1) Generalization to Meshed Transmission Grid: As shown
in Fig. 10, the proposed method achieves 86.13% mAP on
the meshed high-voltage 39-node transmission system, with
fault events (E1–E10) averaging 85.48% and operational events
(E17–E19) averaging 87.94%. In particular, Generator Trip and
Line Trip events achieve 97.89% and 90.16% AP respectively,
the latter despite introducing dynamic topology changes.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

Fig. 13. Comparison of mAP and CorLoc for events E1–E10 at RESadjacent and non-RES-adjacent locations.

Fig. 10. Overall ED-L-C performance of PI-MSA on the New England
39-node transmission system.

Fig. 11.

Comparison with baseline methods across different systems.

Fig. 14. ED-L-C performance comparison between without (w/o) harmonics and with (w/) harmonics on ED-L-C tasks.

Despite these challenges, PI-MSA achieves 85.02% mAP
and 90.18% CorLoc on this system. As shown in Fig. 13,
events at RES-adjacent and non-RES-adjacent locations achieve
87.52% and 86.72% mAP respectively, a gap of less than 1%.
Together with 80.67% mAP for RES-disconnection events, this
confirms that multi-scale adaptive learning effectively extracts
event signatures invariant to RES-induced interference.
D. Model Analysis
Fig. 12.

Modified IEEE 33-node system with RES integration.

As shown in Fig. 11, PI-MSA consistently outperforms all
baselines across distribution and transmission systems, exceeding the best baseline by over 8.5% in mAP. Time-series models
(e.g., TimesNet and NBeats) exhibit pronounced degradation
on meshed transmission grids, while graph-based methods with
adaptive learning (e.g., AGCRN and Graph WaveNet) remain
relatively stable. This is attributed to two factors: the physicsinformed design encodes shortest-path impedance priors, organizing meshed multi-path connectivity into physically meaningful representations with adaptive topology handling; and the
unified ED-L-C formulation jointly optimizes detection, localization, and classification under a single structured objective,
enabling precise events pinpointing under complex and dynamic
grid conditions.
2) Generalization to RES-Integrated Power Grid: The modified IEEE 33-node system is integrated with RES under PQ
control mode, as illustrated in Fig. 12. RES integration introduces increased waveform complexity, including cross-phase
disturbances and noticeable harmonic distortion.

1) Impact of Harmonic Measurement (H-PMU): To investigate the impact of harmonic information on ED-L-C performance, we extend experiments to include third and fifth
harmonic components on the 123-node system. As shown in
Fig. 14, PI-MSA achieves a 1.6% mAP improvement and maintaining the highest performance among all methods. While most
methods benefit from harmonic features that capture distinctive
spatial-temporal event patterns, some models (e.g., AGCRN
and PatchTST) show marginal or no improvement, indicating
difficulty in exploiting high-dimensional harmonic features.
This contrast highlights the advantage of PI-MSA in effectively
leveraging harmonic information.
2) Ablation Studies: To validate the effectiveness of each
component in PI-MSA, we conduct ablation studies on the
IEEE 123-node system, including single-scale, dual-scale, and
component-removal settings. As shown in Fig. 15(a), Adaptive
learning achieves the best single-scale performance (81.33%
mAP), followed by Physics (78.93%) and Grid Topology
(75.62%). The Physics scale outperforms Grid Topology by
3.3%, as admittance encoding provides finer-grained electrical
distance than binary connectivity. Fig. 15(b) shows that Adaptive+Physics yields the best dual-scale result (83.71% mAP),

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SIMA et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED MULTI-SCALE ADAPTIVE GRAPH LEARNING

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 15. Ablation study results for different modules of PI-MSA. (a)
Single-scale. (b) Dual-scale combination. (c) Component analysis with
key modules removed.

Fig. 16. Computational efficiency (runtime, memory, and ED-L-C performance) comparison across methods and system scales.

with 2.6% mAPE gain over Adaptive-only in multi-source scenarios. The complete model further improves to 84.62% mAP.
As shown in Fig. 15(c), removing MHA degrades performance,
and the proposed loss function outperforms BCE by 2.3% by
better balancing event and background examples.
3) Computational Efficiency: Key Baseline Comparison and
Scalability Analysis: Fig. 16 demonstrates the computational

efficiency and scalability of PI-MSA. As system size increases
from 33 to 906 nodes, memory consumption grows modestly
from 0.55 MB to 4.38 MB while maintaining real-time inference speeds (72–299 FPS), benefiting from the compact
STMS-Block design with efficient convolutional operations.
Compared with top-performing baselines on the 123-node system, NBeats achieves high speed but at the cost of significantly
more parameters and memory. In contrast, PI-MSA requires
only 0.26M parameters and 1.01 MB memory while achieving
superior ED-L-C performance. This lightweight design enables
an inference speed of 225 FPS, supporting real-time online event
analysis across different D-PMU reporting rates (30–120 Hz).
VII. CONCLUSION
This study proposed a novel PI-MSA graph neural network for power system event analysis, unifying ED-L-C into
an end-to-end framework that naturally supports multi-source
event analysis without predefined event combination patterns,
simultaneously performing node, and edge-level event analysis
in one-shot inference. The physics-informed graph learning

11

guided by relative electrical distance enhances spatial feature
learning, while the multi-scale architecture captures spatialtemporal event dynamics across different resolutions. Experimental results on systems with different voltage levels and grid
topologies demonstrate that PI-MSA achieves over 5% mAP improvement compared with state-of-the-art methods. The model
exhibits strong generalization and robustness, with less than
1% performance gap across seen versus unseen locations and
RES-adjacent versus non-adjacent scenarios, while maintaining
real-time inference at D-PMU reporting rates up to 120 Hz.
Furthermore, incorporating third and fifth harmonic phasors
yields an additional 1.6% mAP improvement, demonstrating
the capability of proposed model to leverage richer frequencydomain signatures for enhanced event analysis.
The proposed unified ED-L-C formulation features a simple
yet effective design that can be easily transferred to different
deep learning backbones, enabling practitioners to leverage
future advances in graph learning or time-series modeling.
Moreover, the ED-L-C framework extends naturally to other
graph-structured industrial event analysis scenarios, such as
transportation incidents and cyber security incidents.
Despite these advantages, the current framework shows performance degradation when events are spatially adjacent and
temporally highly coupled. Therefore, the future work will focus
on: 1) refining the ED-L-C output structure with higher spatial
resolution for dense event scenarios in compact grids, and 2)
extending the framework to the cyber layer for ED-L-C of communication events and cyber-attacks, thereby further enhancing
power system security and stability.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ahmed et al., “Spatio-temporal deep graph network for event detection, localization, and classification in cyber-physical electric distribution
system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2397–2407, Feb. 2024.
[2] O. Boyaci, M. R. Narimani, K. R. Davis, M. Ismail, T. J. Overbye, and E.
Serpedin, “Joint detection and localization of stealth false data injection
attacks in smart grids using graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 807–819, Jan. 2022.
[3] S. Agarwal and R. Sodhi, “A novel attack path detection framework
considering cascading failures in an interdependent cyber–physical power
system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 7621–7631, Oct. 2025.
[4] H. Yin et al., “Anomaly identification of synchronized voltage waveform
for situational awareness of low inertia systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 2416–2428, May 2025.
[5] Z.-J. Ye, M. Izadi, M. Farajollahi, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “A remedy to
losing time synchronization at D-PMUs, H-PMUs, and WMUs in event
location identification in power distribution systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 641–654, Jan. 2024.
[6] A. Ahmed, S. K. Sadanandan, S. Pandey, S. Basumallik, A. K. Srivastava,
and Y. Wu, “Event analysis in transmission systems using spatial temporal
graph encoder decoder (STGED),” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38, no. 6,
pp. 5329–5340, Nov. 2023.
[7] N. Ehsani, F. Ahmadi-Gorjayi, Z.-J. Ye, A. McEachern, and H. MohsenianRad, “Event detection and characterization in continuous recording of
synchro-waveforms: Field experiments and data analytics,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inf., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 8430–8441, Nov. 2025.
[8] A. Gholami et al., “Detection and classification of anomalies in power
distribution system using outlier filtered weighted least square,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7513–7523, May 2024.
[9] W. Xu, Z. Huang, X. Xie, and C. Li, “Synchronized waveforms – A frontier
of data-based power system and apparatus monitoring, protection, and
control,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 3–17, Feb. 2022.
[10] H. Mohsenian-Rad and W. Xu, “Synchro-waveforms: A window to the
future of power systems data analytics,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 21,
no. 5, pp. 68–77, Sep./Oct. 2023.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12

[11] A. Ahmed, S. Basumallik, A. K. Srivastava, Y. Wu, and S. Choudhury,
“Federated synchrophasor data prediction, aggregation and inference using
deep learning: A case of proactive control for short-term stability,” IEEE
Trans. Power Del., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 823–834, Apr. 2024.
[12] S. Das and B. K. Panigrahi, “A PMU-based data-driven approach for
enhancing situational awareness in building a resilient power systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 4773–4784, Jul. 2022.
[13] A. Ahmed, K. S. Sajan, A. Srivastava, and Y. Wu, “Anomaly detection,
localization and classification using drifting synchrophasor data streams,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3570–3580, Jul. 2021.
[14] A. Vosughi, S. K. Sadanandan, and A. K. Srivastava, “Synchrophasorbased event detection, classification, and localization using koopman,
transient energy matrix, best worth method, and dynamic graph,” IEEE
Trans. Power Del., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1986–1996, Jun. 2022.
[15] S. Peng, M. Liu, L. Chai, and R. Deng, “DST-GNN: A dynamic spatiotemporal graph neural network for cyberattack detection in grid-tied photovoltaic systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 330–343,
Jan. 2025.
[16] R. Yadav, A. K. Pradhan, and I. Kamwa, “Real-time multiple event
detection and classification in power system using signal energy transformations,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1521–1531, Mar. 2019.
[17] G. Cheng, Y. Lin, A. Abur, A. Gómez-Expósito, and W. Wu, “A survey
of power system state estimation using multiple data sources: PMUs,
SCADA, AMI, and Beyond,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 1129–1151, Jan. 2024.
[18] Y. Zhu, Y. Zhou, W. Wei, P. Li, and W. Huang, “GNNs’ generalization
improvement for large-scale power system analysis based on physicsinformed self-supervised pre-training,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 40,
no. 5, pp. 4145–4157, Sep. 2025.
[19] Z. Cui, W. Hu, G. Zhang, Q. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Blaabjerg, “Knowledge-informed deep learning method for multiple oscillation sources localization,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 2811–2814, May 2025.
[20] A. K. Pandey, N. Kishor, S. R. Mohanty, and P. Samuel, “Intelligent fault
detection and classification for an unbalanced network with inverter-based
DG units,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7325–7334, May 2024.
[21] D. Chanda and N. Y. Soltani, “A heterogeneous graph-based multi-task
learning for fault event diagnosis in smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 1427–1438, Mar. 2025.
[22] G. Tanoni, E. Principi, and S. Squartini, “Multilabel appliance classification with weakly labeled data for non-intrusive load monitoring,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 440–452, Jan. 2023.
[23] F. Yang, Z. Ling, Y. Zhang, X. He, Q. Ai, and R. C. Qiu, “Event detection,
localization, and classification based on semi-supervised learning in power
grids,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 4080–4094, Sep. 2023.
[24] A. Aligholian, A. Shahsavari, E. M. Stewart, E. Cortez, and H. MohsenianRad, “Unsupervised event detection, clustering, and use case exposition
in micro-PMU measurements,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 3624–3636, Jul. 2021.
[25] D. Dwivedi, P. K. Yemula, and M. Pal, “Dynamo PMU: A physics informed
anomaly detection, clustering, and prediction method using nonlinear
dynamics on µ PMU measurements,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
2023, Art. no. 3536309.
[26] G. Lu and S. Bu, “Online dynamic security assessment: Using hybrid
physics-guided deep learning models,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 20,
no. 11, pp. 13190–13200, Nov. 2024.
[27] T. Wu, I. L. Carreño, A. Scaglione, and D. Arnold, “Spatio-temporal
graph convolutional neural networks for physics-aware grid learning algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 4086–4099, Sep. 2023.
[28] H. Ma, X. Lei, Z. Li, S. Yu, B. Liu, and X. Dong, “Deep-learning
based power system events detection technology using spatio-temporal
and frequency information,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst.,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 545–556, Jun. 2023.
[29] A. Aligholian and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “GraphPMU: Event clustering via
graph representation learning using locationally-scarce distribution-level
fundamental and harmonic PMU measurements,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 2960–2972, Jul. 2023.
[30] Y. Yuan, Z. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Learning latent interactions for event
classification via graph neural networks and PMU data,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 617–629, Jan. 2023.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

[31] C. Gao, Z. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Wang, and H. Yi, “MPINet: Multiscale
physics-informed network for bearing fault diagnosis with small samples,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 14371–14380, Dec. 2024.
[32] “Resources - IEEE PES Test Feeder,” Accessed: Aug. 2, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://cmte.ieee.org/pes-testfeeders/resources/
[33] Z. Shao et al., “Exploring progress in multivariate time series forecasting:
Comprehensive benchmarking and heterogeneity analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 291–305, Jan. 2025.

Wenxia Sima (Member, IEEE) was born in
Henan, China, in 1965. She received the B.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from Chongqing University, Chongqing, China,
in 1988 and 1994, respectively.
She is a Professor with the State Key Laboratory of Power Transmission Equipment and System Security and New Technology, Chongqing
University. Her research interests include complex disturbances analysis in modern power
system, insulation and overvoltage protection of
transmission and distribution apparatuses.

Jingsong Wang (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering
and automation from the School of Electrical Engineering and Electronic Information, Xihua University, Chengdu, China, in 2021. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering with the State Key Laboratory of
Power Transmission Equipment and System Security and New Technology, School of Electrical
Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
China.
His current research interests include graph representation learning,
event analysis for industrial cyber-physical systems, and online monitoring of smart grids.

Ming Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from Chongqing University, Chongqing, China,
in 2009 and 2014, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the New
York University Tandon School of Engineering,
Brooklyn, NY, USA, from 2016 to 2018. He is
currently a Professor with the State Key Laboratory of Power Transmission Equipment and System Security and New Technology, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China. His research interests include electromagnetic transient simulation, overvoltage in
power systems, high-precision data measurement, and data acquisition.

Xiaohan Li (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Hubei University of Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2020 and 2023, respectively.
She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering with Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China.
Her research interests include flexible direct
current transmission technology and modular
multi-level converters.