IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

1461

PowerDiffuser: Collaborative
Contrastive-Reconstruction Self-Supervised
Learning for Robust Power Load
Signal Representation
Honggang Yang , Student Member, IEEE, Cheng Lian , Senior Member, IEEE,
Bingrong Xu , Member, IEEE, Ruijin Ding , and Zhigang Zeng , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The widespread deployment of smart meters
has created significant opportunities for applying artificial
intelligence technologies to power system tasks. However,
the high cost of data annotation limits the effectiveness of
traditional supervised learning in this domain, making selfsupervised learning an attractive alternative. In this article,
we propose PowerDiffuser, a novel self-supervised learning
strategy tailored for power load signals. By leveraging a
diffusion model framework, PowerDiffuser integrates two
mainstream self-supervised paradigms, namely contrastive
learning and reconstruction-based learning, which enables
the model to effectively capture both periodic patterns and
local features. To address the overfitting issues commonly
observed in generic time-series feature extractors when
applied to power load tasks, we design two modular spatiotemporal feature extractors specifically engineered to
handle samples with varying complexity levels. In addition,
we adapt the involution operator to better align with the
unique characteristics of power load signals. Extensive experiments on the ISMCBT, ETTh and REDD datasets demonstrate that PowerDiffuser consistently outperforms both
time-series general models and existing self-supervised
learning strategies across diverse downstream power load
tasks. Ablation studies further validate the contributions
of the proposed modules and highlight the effectiveness
Received 25 February 2025; revised 15 July 2025 and 25 August
2025; accepted 21 October 2025. Date of publication 24 November
2025; date of current version 5 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 62176193 and Grant 62206204, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China, under Grant
104972025YJS0118. Paper no. TII-25-1156. (Corresponding author:
Cheng Lian.)
Honggang Yang, Cheng Lian, and Bingrong Xu are with the School
of Automation, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China (e-mail: hgyang@whut.edu.cn; chenglian@whut.edu.cn; bingrongxu@whut.edu.cn).
Ruijin Ding is with the State Key Laboratory of Breeding Biotechnology and Sustainable Aquaculture, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: dingrj@ihb.ac.cn).
Zhigang Zeng is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Image Processing and
Intelligent Control of Education Ministry of China, Wuhan 430074, China
(e-mail: zgzeng@hust.edu.cn).
The code is publicly available at https://github.com/HGYang97/
PowerDiffuser.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3627498

of transforming 1-D load signals into 2-D periodicity-based
representations as a preprocessing step.
Index Terms —Involution, power signal, self-supervised
learning, spatiotemporal feature extractors.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE advent of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies has
provided novel approaches for power companies to address
operational challenges, with extensive research conducted on
applications including power load forecasting [1], [2], power
generation forecasting [3], subscriber portrait [4], and electricity
theft detection [5]. The proliferation of smart meters, intelligent
distribution networks, and cloud platforms has enabled power
companies to accumulate vast amounts of data, creating favorable conditions for developing effective AI-based power models.
Nevertheless, manual annotation remains indispensable for
specific downstream tasks to facilitate supervised learning processes. As demonstrated in [6], electricity theft detection based
on power and gas load analysis requires technical experts to
explicitly label fraudulent cases. In a similar vein, the study
in [4] on household attribute inference from smart meter signals
necessitates extensive surveys to obtain accurate labels. These
annotation processes often incur substantial costs and face challenges due to privacy concerns and other practical constraints.
Power load signals inherently manifest as sequential data
streams characterized by temporal dependencies and dynamic
fluctuation patterns. This time-series nature makes them particularly amenable to self-supervised learning (SSL). In the field of
AI, SSL significantly reduces the dependency on manually annotated data by exploiting the intrinsic structure and information
within the data itself to generate supervisory signals. The two
predominant SSL paradigms can be categorized into contrastive
learning and reconstruction-based methods. As schematically
depicted in Fig. 1, contrastive learning establishes positive and
negative sample pairs through carefully designed strategies and
learns discriminative feature representations by minimizing the
feature space distance between positive sample pairs while
maximizing the separation of negative pairs. Fig. 2 illustrates
the fundamental framework of reconstruction-based methods,
where model is trained to reconstruct complete data from partial
or perturbed inputs, thereby capturing the intrinsic structure
and essential features of the data. Through optimization of the
reconstruction error, the model extracts semantically meaningful

T

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

1462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 1. Generic framework of contrastive learning, where positive and
negative sample pairs are defined through augmentation strategies to
learn discriminative feature representations by optimizing similarity metrics.

Fig. 2. General paradigm of perturbation-based reconstruction, which
trains models to recover clean data from partially masked or noisecorrupted inputs, thereby learning robust feature representations via
joint optimization of reconstruction and denoising objectives.

feature representations. Despite these advancements, several
critical challenges persist as follows.
1) While contrastive learning primarily emphasizes global
feature distributions, reconstruction-based methods
demonstrate superior capability in extracting local
sample characteristics. This inherent limitation poses
significant challenges for any single SSL methodology to
holistically capture essential data features across diverse
downstream tasks in the power domain.
2) The effectiveness of both contrastive learning and
reconstruction-based approaches exhibits substantial dependence on task formulation. Excessively complex tasks
may impede model convergence, whereas overly simplistic formulations often yield inadequate self-supervisory
signals.
Due to the significant structural differences between these
two methods, few researchers have explored combining them.
The emergence of diffusion models has inspired us to design
a novel SSL strategy that requires the model to simultaneously perform two tasks: Distinguishing positive and negative
sample pairs and interactively generating reconstructions. We
believe this design can enhance the model’s representational
capacity and improve its training robustness. Specifically, when
a batch of samples is fed into the model, they undergo two
different data augmentation functions, generating two distinct
signals. These signals serve as mutual conditions during the
diffusion process, cross-reconstructing the augmented representations of each other. After the diffusion process, we also
require the classifier to distinguish between positive and negative sample pairs within the batch. We argue that models

trained in this manner can combine the advantages of both
paradigms.
In addition, we develop a specialized deep learning architecture tailored to the unique characteristics of power load
signals, incorporating two key optimizations. First, building
upon previous studies [3], [7] that demonstrate the superior
contextual information provided by 2-D representations during
reconstruction, and considering recent studies [8], [9] in power
applications that show performance improvements through 1-D
to 2-D signal transformations, we reformulate the data into a 2-D
format, defining it as a multichannel time-series self-supervised
task. Second, addressing the overfitting issues observed in
general-purpose temporal models [10], [11], [12] when applied
to low-complexity power tasks or datasets with limited sampling
density, we design two deep learning models based on consistent
spatio-temporal interaction principles to accommodate diverse
downstream tasks.
Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
methodology achieves significant performance improvements
across various power-related downstream tasks. The specific
contributions are as follows.
1) We redefine the representation learning process for power
load signals as a multichannel time-series self-supervised
task and propose an innovative self-supervised learning framework that effectively integrates contrastive
learning and reconstruction within the diffusion model
paradigm.
2) To mitigate overfitting risks, we develop two deep learning architectures based on spatio-temporal interaction
principles, specifically designed to handle multiscale task
complexity levels and recordings with different but fixed
sampling rates, while maintaining compatibility with
both self-supervised learning and downstream task finetuning.
3) Comprehensive experimental evaluations demonstrate
that our proposed methodology achieves state-of-the-art
performance across evaluation metrics in diverse powerrelated downstream tasks.
II. RELATED WORK
Power load signals represent a canonical form of time-series
data where self-supervised learning effectively enhances representation capability. This paradigm provides an efficient framework for extracting meaningful temporal patterns while reducing label dependency, primarily through two approaches: 1)
contrastive learning-based methods leveraging discrimination
between positive/negative sample pairs; and 2) reconstructionbased methods targeting future state reconstruction or missing
segment imputation. While both demonstrate proven efficacy in
temporal representation learning, they differ fundamentally in
implementation architectures.
A. Time Series Self-Supervised Methods Based on
Contrastive Learning
In the contrastive learning paradigm, CPC [13] constructed
positive and negative sample pairs by predicting future time
steps, leading to significant advancements in speech classification tasks. InfoTS [14] addressed the challenge of selecting
meaningful augmentations for time-series data by leveraging

YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

information theory to adaptively choose optimal augmentations. TCN [15] improved upon this approach by employing
a Gaussian distribution-based strategy to constrain the sampling
range for context-positive samples. TNC [16] proposed a selfsupervised framework for learning generalizable representations
of nonstationary time series by leveraging the local smoothness
of signals. Using a debiased contrastive objective, TNC ensured
that neighboring signals were distinguishable from nonneighboring ones in the encoding space. TS2Vec [17] introduced
feature augmentation techniques within hierarchical sample
pairs to achieve multigranularity self-supervised representation
learning. TS-TCC [18] examined the effects of various feature
augmentation methods on contrastive learning performance for
time-series signals and proposed a spatiotemporal interaction
prediction approach to further enhance model generalization.
Although contrastive learning provided effective guidance for
model training, performance improvements relied heavily on
carefully designed positive and negative sample pairs as well as
large batch sizes. This inevitably imposed higher demands on
hardware, particularly GPU memory. To address this challenge,
we proposed a self-supervised strategy that combined reconstruction methods.
B. Time Series Self-Supervised Methods Based on
Reconstruction
The conceptual foundation of reconstruction-based methods
originates from Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [19] in computer
vision. This approach employs an asymmetric encoder-decoder
architecture, where the model’s capability to accurately reconstruct randomly masked images serves as an indicator of the
encoder’s ability to extract deep semantic features. Building
upon this foundation, Tarnet [20] introduced a task-guided masking strategy that leverages attention mechanisms to identify and
reconstruct critical timestamps, thereby enhancing the perceptual relevance of the reconstruction task. Ti-MAE [21] advanced
this paradigm by implementing random masking on embedded
time-series data and training an autoencoder for point-level
reconstruction, effectively bridging the gap between representation learning and reconstruction methodologies, particularly in
forecasting applications. Further innovations were introduced by
TimeMAE [22], which shifted the reconstruction target from raw
point-level data to latent features while concurrently performing
regression tasks. CRT [23] expanded the reconstruction scope
by incorporating frequency-domain analysis through fast fourier
transform, enabling cross-domain masking and reconstruction
of both temporal and spectral signals.
Despite these methodological advancements, reconstructionbased self-supervised strategies inherently present greater
challenges compared to contrastive learning approaches. This is
particularly evident in time-series analysis, where models struggle to implicitly learn masked region features from 1-D contextual information, as reflected in their reconstruction loss metrics.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel approach that
directly learns the underlying distribution of time series through
a diffusion process, complemented by contrastive interaction
constraints, yielding substantial performance improvements.
III. FRAMEWORK
To formally describe the task pipeline, we make the following
definitions. Given a dataset D = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XM }, where

1463

Fig. 3. In diffusion models, the forward process adds noise to timeseries data, while the reverse process trains a neural network to remove
the noise and recover the original data. During denoising, the model
gradually refines the data, using learned knowledge to match real-world
patterns.

X ∈ RL represents a power load signal of length L and M
denotes the number of samples in the dataset. We reshape the 1-D
load signals into 2-D representations during preprocessing. This
transformation ensures each channel strictly preserves temporal
periodicity, specifically by ensuring that each channel corresponds to weekly or monthly sampling points, thereby maintaining physical meaning and temporal structure consistency.
The input data format for our model can thus be expressed as
L
X̂ ∈ RC× C , where C denotes channels.
Our objective is to train model F using a self-supervised
learning strategy to obtain feature representations F = F(X̂) of
power load signals. This representation enables effective transfer
learning through fine-tuning on downstream tasks, enhancing
both generalization capability and robustness.
A. Diffusion Model
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the diffusion model functions through
two key processes: a forward noise-adding process and a conditional reverse denoising process. The forward process systematically transforms a clean input x0 ∼ q(x0 ) into Gaussian noise
xT ∼ N (0, I) by employing a Markov chain transition. This
transition is defined as follows:
 

q(xt |xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I
(1)
where βt ∈ (0, 1) controls the noise schedule at step t. For the
reverse process, we extend the standard diffusion to a conditional
formulation, where the denoising network predicts the noise
component φ (xt , c, t), conditioned on task-specific information c


βt
xt − √1−α
φ (xt , c, t)
t
pθ (xt−1 |xt , c) = N xt−1 ;
, βt I
√
αt
(2)

where αt = ts=1 (1 − βs ). Following DDPM [24], the loss
function optimizes a reweighted objective
L(x0 , c) =

T


E∼N (0,I)  − θ (xt , t, c)2

(3)

t=1

where T is temporal steps. This conditional mechanism enables
targeted refinement of noisy samples toward task-specific distributions.
B. PowerDiffuser
The diffusion model inherently serves as a flexible framework capable of performing reconstruction tasks. By integrating contrastive learning principles, we design a crossreconstruction process to regularize power signal feature
extraction. As illustrated in Fig. 4, PowerDiffuser comprises
two branches: the Weak-to-Strong (W2S) and Strong-to-Weak

1464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 4. Framework of the proposed PowerDiffuser, where signals with strong and weak augmentations are cross-reconstructed from each other
through the reverse process.

(S2W) augmentation-reconstruction branches. Both W2S and
S2W are implemented through conditional DDPMs, where two
augmented tensors derived from the original input signal act as
mutual conditions for cross-reconstruction. Below, we elaborate on PowerDiffuser from both forward and reverse process
perspectives.
Data Augmentation: Contrastive learning, a dominant
paradigm in SSL, aligns representations of similar samples
(positive pairs) while pushing apart dissimilar ones (negative
pairs). In smart meter data analysis, this facilitates distinguishing
distinct consumption patterns (e.g., residential vs. industrial)
and enhances robustness to noise and temporal shifts. Data
augmentation is crucial in constructing meaningful positive and
negative pairs: it generates diverse yet semantically consistent
variants from the same time-series instance, forming positive
pairs, while using sequences from different instances as negatives. Meanwhile, the noise introduced by data augmentation encourages the model to learn invariant representations, enhancing
its resilience to perturbations and reducing overfitting, thereby
improving reliability in real-world applications.
Forward Diffusion Process: In both branches, the forward diffusion processes operate independently, each resembling standard DDPM. Starting from two augmented tensors X̂ W and X̂ S ,
Gaussian noise is progressively added to generate a sequence of
2-D matrices. Following the findings in [24], [25], we set the
diffusion steps T to 1000. This sufficiently large T ensures that
both branches converge to identical noise distributions after corruption, a critical prerequisite for initiating cross-reconstruction.
Cross-reconstruct Reverse Process: The reverse process performs a cross-reconstruction task, where both branches start
from Gaussian noise and iteratively refine the signals via a
shared-parameter neural network for noise prediction and reconstruction. Taking W2S as an example, analogous to conditional
DDPM, the neural network incorporates the weakly augmented
original signal by concatenating it with the input from the
previous diffusion step along the channel dimension. At the
tth diffusion step, the noise predictor φ (·) in the W2S branch
S(t)
takes the reconstructed signal X̂t
from the previous step,
the timestep embedding t, and the condition X̂ W as inputs to
estimate the noise component

 2
S(t)
.
(4)
min  − φ X̂t , c = X̂ W , t,
2

Fig. 5. Detailed computation process of ST-Large. Temporal and spatial network are implemented as one-layer Transformer.

Similarly, the noise predictor in the S2W branch estimates the
noise component as

 2
W (t)
min  − φ X̂t
, c = X̂ S , t,
.
(5)
2

C. Spatiotemporal Neural Network
The purpose of self-supervised training is to obtain a powerful
feature extractor that transforms raw power load signals into
high-quality representations. During the diffusion process, the
denoising network naturally extracts data representations by
learning the recovery process at different noise levels. Inspired
by previous works [26], we demonstrate that designing feature
extractors for two-dimensional power load signals from both
spatial and temporal perspectives is crucial. To address the
overfitting issue in complex networks, we design two different
feature extractors, named ST-Tiny and ST-Large.
ST-Large: As shown in Fig. 5, ST-Large involves two feature
extraction processes. Taking W2S as an example, in the encoder
L
part, the temporal network separates input ∈ RC× C into a tensor
of RC×1×K for extracting intraperiod features. Meanwhile, the
L
spatial network separates it into R1×K× C to extract inter-period
features at the same timestamp. In the fusion module, we use
a basic concat operation to combine the spatial and temporal
features and further integrate condition information. During the
time embedding process, we adopt the same encoding rules as
described in [26]. In the decoder part, we use a Transformer layer
to decode the features and generate inputs for the next stage. It
is worth noting that in this structure, the number of encoder and

YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

1465

Reconstruction: We use the MSE loss to compare the reconstructed outputs with their corresponding augmented tarS(r)
denotes the final denoised output in
gets. Specifically, X̂T
the W2S branch, which is reconstructed from Gaussian noise
conditioned on the weakly augmented signal X̂ W . Similarly,
W (r)
X̂T
is reconstructed in the S2W branch conditioned on X̂ S .
The reconstruction loss is defined as
2
2
1   S(r)
1   W (r)
X̂T,u − X̂uS +
X̂T,u − X̂uW
|Ω|
|Ω|
u∈Ω
u∈Ω
(6)
where Ω denotes the set of element indices of the signal tensors.
The reconstruction loss constrains the model to retain sufficient
information to faithfully reconstruct the input, preventing purely
discriminative training from discarding excessive information.
Contrastive Learning: Given a batch of H input samples, we
apply strong and weak augmentations and perform denoising at
T /2 and T steps, resulting in a total of 6H potential samples.
Among them, the 6 samples derived from the same original
sample are considered positive pairs, while samples from different original inputs are treated as negative pairs. We employ
the Normalized Temperature-scaled Cross-Entropy Loss to optimize the model, ensuring that the representations of the same
sample variations are closer while keeping them distinct from
other samples. This design extends the loss formulation and the
construction of positive and negative sample pairs as proposed in
TS-TCC [18] (https://github.com/emadeldeen24/TS-TCC). The
loss function is formulated as
LR =

Fig. 6. Detailed computational flow diagram of the 1-D involution operator in ST-Tiny.

Algorithm 1: Feature Transformation.
Require: Input: x̂iq ∈ R1×C
Ensure: Output: x̂i+1
∈ R1×C
q
1: procedure FEATURETRANSFORMATION (x̂it )
2:
Initialize learnable convolution kernel θ ∈ RK×C
3:
Given window size K, compute windowed features:
4:
x̂iq:K ∈ RK×C
5:
Extract intermediate feature vector:
6:
Giq ∈ R1×C
7:
Project Git via fully-connected layer W ∈ RC×K :
8:
Ĝiq = (Giq W ) ∈ RK×1
9:
Perform broadcasted multiplication and reduction:
10:
x̂i+1
= (Ĝiq  x̂iq:K )
Element-wise
q
multiplication followed by summation
11: end procedure

decoder layers can be flexibly stacked to meet the requirements
of extracting power load signals of varying complexity.
ST-Tiny: The involution operator [27] is a computation process in the computer vision domain that can replace convolution, commonly considered to have spatial specific and channel
agnostic. We modified its computation process to generalize it
to temporal data and believe that it can simultaneously handle
spatiotemporal features in temporal data, as shown in Fig. 6.
Similar to ResNet-1D [28], the computation traverses multichannel temporal signals along the time dimension. Taking W2S
as an example, the original input to the computation at the ith
involution layer for timestamp q is represented by x̂qi ∈ R1×C .
The specific forward computation is shown in Algorithm 1.

LC = −

H 
6
6


i=1 a=1 b=1,b=a

log H

exp(sim(hi,a , hi,b )/τ )
6

j=1 k=1

exp(sim(hi,a , hj,k )/τ )

(7)
where
1) hi,a and hi,b are feature representations obtained from a
neural network encoder and are 2 -normalized.
2) sim(hi,a , hi,b ) = h
i,a hi,b represents the cosine similarity.
3) τ is a temperature hyperparameter that controls the scale
of contrastive loss, and it is typically set to 0.1 in our
experiments.
The contrastive loss provides a mutual-information lowerbound objective, encouraging embeddings of positive signals
to align while pushing apart negative signals.
Overall, within the diffusion-model framework, the three
loss terms cooperate to form a complementary objective that
enhances discriminability, preserves fidelity, and captures the
data manifold.

D. Loss Functions
The loss construction in the pre-training process is divided
into three components: diffusion process, reconstruction, and
contrastive learning. The final loss function is the sum of these
three parts.
Diffusion Process: We train the feature extractors of the W2S
and S2W branches using the noise prediction loss defined in
(4) and (5). The diffusion objective is equivalent to denoising
score matching; it shapes representations under multilevel noise,
captures the local geometry of the data manifold, and improves
robustness.

E. Theoretical Principles
We discussed the advantages of the PowerDiffuser framework
from the perspectives of mutual information maximization and
information bottleneck theory, and explained why the combination of reconstruction and contrastive learning is effective.
1) Mutual Information Maximization: The essence of selfsupervised learning is to maximize the mutual information between the input X and its latent representation Z, i.e., I(X; Z),
so that Z contains sufficient information to reconstruct X or
predict its attributes.

1466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

a) Reconstruction Learning directly optimizes I(X; Z) by
minimizing the reconstruction loss LR , which enhances
the encoding ability of Z with respect to X.
b) Contrastive Learning implicitly improves I(Z; Y ) by
encouraging the alignment of positive sample pairs,
where Y denotes the target variable of the downstream
task. Specifically:
i) The contrastive objective enforces the similarity between the clean and augmented views (e.g., different
noisy versions) of the same input, Zclean and Zaug ,
which approximates the maximization of the mutual
information I(Zclean ; Zaug ).
ii) Based on the information inequality I(Z; Y ) ≥
I(Zclean ; Zaug ), contrastive loss can be seen as a lower
bound of task-relevant mutual information.
From an information-theoretic perspective, the total loss of
PowerDiffuser can be approximated as
Ltotal ≈ −I(X; Z) − λ · I(Zclean ; Zaug ).

TABLE I
ISMCBT DATASET PARTITIONING AND BRIEF INTRODUCTION

reconstruction learning ensures that the underlying periodic
trends are maintained.

(8)

By jointly optimizing these two objectives, PowerDiffuser
effectively balances signal reconstruction and representation
invariance, leading to improved generalization in downstream
tasks. The combination of both terms provides a decoupled yet
complementary view of the information flow: reconstruction
promotes informativeness, while contrastive learning enhances
consistency under local perturbations or noise.
Due to the long-term dependencies in power load signals,
representations are required to capture cross-temporal dependencies. Contrastive learning achieves this by enforcing temporal invariance constraints, while reconstruction ensures the
temporal continuity of the time series.
2) Information Bottleneck Theory: The information bottleneck theory aims to learn a compact representation Z from
the input X, such that the retained information is maximally
relevant to the target task Y , while minimizing the irrelevant
or nuisance information. This leads to an optimization tradeoff
between I(Z; Y ) and I(Z; X).
a) LR enforces the preservation of complete information
about X in Z (high I(X; Z)), but it may include a large
amount of task-irrelevant noise or redundant features
(e.g., background, disturbances).
b) LC enhances task-relevant features by encouraging invariance under augmentation (e.g., noise injection, temporal
cropping), thus increasing I(Z; Y ) and filtering out nuisance variables unrelated to the downstream task.
Joint optimization of reconstruction loss LR and contrastive
loss LC aligns with the IB principle
min [I(Z; X) − βI(Z; Y )]
Z

where LR constrains the lower bound of I(Z; X) to avoid information loss of critical features; LC increases I(Z; Y ) to enhance
discriminability; β balances the trade-off and can be interpreted
as a compression coefficient larger β, stronger compression.
The nonstationarity of power load signals, such as periodic
fluctuations and sudden noise, requires that the learned representations preserve both global pattern completeness (ensured
by reconstruction-based objectives) and local perturbation invariance (guaranteed by contrastive objectives). For instance,
augmentation strategies in contrastive learning simulate transient disturbances that occur in real-world power grids, while

IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Datasets
The Irish Smart Meter Customer Behavior Trial (ISMCBT)
dataset, curated by Ireland’s energy regulatory authority, comprises smart meter recordings from 4,232 residential households
over 536 days at 30-min resolution, alongside responses to over
200 survey questions per subscriber. We select classification
tasks numbered 300, 310, 450, and 4704 as detailed in Table I.
The ETTh dataset contains hourly-sampled power load
records from Chinese substations, serving as an established
benchmark for multivariate time-series forecasting. We extend
its application to evaluate imputation and short-term forecasting
task performance in this study.
The REDD dataset comprises electricity consumption records
from six U.S. households, capturing both whole-home and
appliance-level power usage across over ten types of devices.
Initially designed for energy disaggregation research, it is repurposed in this study to evaluate anomaly detection performance
under realistic residential load conditions.
B. Data Processing
We conducted temporal segmentation on all datasets to simulate power load signals with varying observation durations.
For the ISMCBT dataset, we established two temporal scales:
weekly segmentation (ISMCBT-Tiny, 336 sampling points restructured into 7 × 48 matrices) and monthly segmentation
(ISMCBT-Large, 1440 points structured as 30 × 48 matrices), where the monthly partitioning adopted 30-day cycles
for standardization. The ETTS dataset underwent dedicated
preprocessing for imputation and short-term time-series forecasting task training, implementing two granularities: ETThTiny with 7 × 24 configuration (168 points) and ETTh-Large
with 30 × 24 structure (720 points). All datasets were normalized and sample interpolation was used to account for
sparse missing values. The matrix transformation explicitly
preserves temporal topology, where row dimensions represent
consecutive days and column dimensions correspond to fixed
measurement intervals (48 daily readings for ISMCBT, 24 for
ETTh), maintaining the intrinsic cyclicity of power consumption
patterns.

YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

1467

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT-TINY DATASET

Since the REDD dataset lacks ground-truth anomaly labels,
we follow common practice by injecting synthetic anomalies
to facilitate the evaluation of unsupervised anomaly detection
methods. Specifically, we introduce four types of anomalies into
the aggregated power consumption data: 1) spike anomalies,
where sudden surges are simulated by amplifying values by
a factor of 2.5–4.0; 2) dropout anomalies, created by scaling
values down to 1% –10% of their original magnitude; 3) noise
bursts, in which localized Gaussian noise is added over short
windows; 4) flat segments, where values are held constant to
mimic sensor faults or frozen readings. The above noise injection
method adopts equal-weight random sampling. Anomalies are
randomly injected into 5% and 10% of the total time steps to
ensure sparsity and realism.
C. Implementation Details
In the experiments, pretraining was conducted for 120 epochs,
and downstream tasks were trained for 80 epochs. A batch
size of 64 was used. The weights of all learnable parameters
in the models were initialized using Kaiming initialization and
optimized with the Adam optimizer. The initial learning rate
was set to 3 × 10−4 , with a weight decay of 1 × 10−5 . All
experiments were implemented using PyTorch and trained on
an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 Ti GPU.
In terms of model implementation, considering the time cost,
ST-Large adopts a structure with one encoder layer and one
decoder layer. ST-Tiny utilizes four involution blocks with
K = 3 as the feature extraction units. For downstream tasks, we
selected the model at diffusion step T = 5 for both linear probing
and fine-tuning, and demonstrated its superiority in ablation
experiments. In the contrastive learning loss, we designed a

two-layer MLP to extract feature representations for hi,a and
hi,b .
V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
A. Downstream Task Experiments
1) Classification Task: Table II and Table III present the performance of PowerDiffuser on classification tasks, comparing it
with both time-series general models and self-supervised strategies under linear probing and fine-tuning settings. PowerDiffuser demonstrates superior classification performance across
most tasks, owing to its integration of contrastive learning and
reconstruction, which effectively captures intricate local signal
patterns and periodic distributions, necessitating robust feature
extraction capabilities.
Under fine-tuning, the Tiny version remains competitive
across all tasks on the ISMCBT-Tiny dataset, outperforming the
second-best model by an average AUC margin of 0.016 across
task300, task310, and task4704. The Large version dominates
ISMCBT-Large, surpassing the second-best model by an average
AUC margin of 0.004 across task300, task450, and task4704.
Under linear probing, the Tiny version also performs competitively on ISMCBT-Tiny, achieving leading or comparable results
in most tasks, with particularly strong performance on task4704.
On ISMCBT-Large, the Large version consistently ranks first
or second across all four tasks. These results demonstrate the
model’s strong transferability and representational capacity,
even under limited supervision.
In addition, two key observations emerge: 1) the experiment
highlights the universality of overfitting in the representation
learning process of power load signals. For instance, general
time-series models and ST-Large models, which have larger

1468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT-LARGE DATASET

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF IMPUTATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT AND ETTH DATASET

YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

1469

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF SHORT-TERM TIME-SERIES FORECASTING TASK ON THE
ETTH DATASET

Fig. 7. Impact of modifying or removing certain settings on the performance of the PowerDiffuser model. The numbers in the figure represent
the accuracy of the classification task.

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF ANOMALY DETECTION TASK ON THE REDD DATASET

parameter sizes, exhibit notable overfitting on the ISMCBT-Tiny
dataset but perform better on ISMCBT-Large. This pattern is
similarly observed in time-series self-supervised models. Since
these models typically employ simpler and modular architectures, their performance shows smaller variations between tiny
and large datasets, underscoring the necessity of designing
power load models tailored to the specific characteristics of the
sampled data; 2) we observed that in self-supervised strategies
based on power load signals, reconstruction-based approaches
generally outperform those based on contrastive learning. This
suggests that power load signals prioritize extracting information from the same time step across local or different cycles,
particularly in scenarios with missing data or disturbances.
2) Imputation Task: Table IV presents the results of the imputation task. To demonstrate the generalization capability of

the method, we conducted experiments on both the ISMCBT
and ETTh datasets. The overall findings align with those of the
classification task. Models with large parameters still exhibit
overfitting on the tiny dataset but perform well on the large
dataset. Our proposed model consistently achieves optimal or
suboptimal results across all settings, with PowerDiffuser-Large
achieving the lowest MSE on ISMCBT-Large and ETTh-Large,
while PowerDiffuser-Tiny performs best on ISMCBT-Tiny. Although performance on ETTh-Tiny is competitive, TimeMAE
achieves the best overall result in this setting.
3) Short-Term Time Series Forecasting Task: Table V compares the forecasting performance of all models on the ETThTiny dataset under two short-term horizons (48 and 96). The
results demonstrate that PowerDiffuser-Tiny exhibits superior
performance in this task. Compared with other self-supervised
baselines, TS-TCC and TimeMAE also perform well, especially
in the fine-tuning setting. Overall, short-term forecasting is a
relatively simple downstream task, and as model size increases,
current methods tend to achieve comparable performance.
4) Anomaly Detection Task: We evaluated the performance
of various models under different anomaly injection rates. As
shown in Table VI, PowerDiffuser demonstrates significant advantages in the anomaly detection task. Notably, under a low
injection rate of 5%, the PowerDiffuser-Tiny model achieves
the best performance with an accuracy of 0.971 and an F1 score
of 0.881. When the anomaly injection rate increases to 10%, the
ModernTCN model excels, reaching an accuracy of 0.969 and
an F1 score of 0.896. This suggests that its short-range feature
extraction structure is particularly effective for capturing highfrequency anomalies. The results also indicate that although traditional time-series models yield relatively high accuracy, their
F1 scores are comparatively lower, reflecting limited capability
in detecting minority-class samples. Since anomaly detection is
an unsupervised process, its performance heavily relies on the
modeling capacity of the feature extractor. Therefore, we argue
that ST is more suitable for capturing patterns in power load
signals.
B. Ablation Experiments
1) Deconstructing PowerDiffuser: To demonstrate the contribution of different components in PowerDiffuser to accuracy
improvement, we systematically deconstructed its design and
evaluated it on two classification tasks, as shown in Fig. 7. To
better highlight the capabilities of the self-supervised process,
we adopted the linear probing approach for downstream tasks.

1470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 8. Impact of models pretrained with different diffusion steps on downstream task performance. (a) Classification task. (b) Imputation task. (c)
Short-term time-series forecasting task. (d) Anomaly detection task.
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN POWERDIFFUSER AND
NONDIFFUSION HYBRID MODEL

a) Contrastive Learning Loss Removal: Removing the contrastive learning loss and relying solely on reconstruction
demonstrated the importance of contrastive constraints.
b) Prediction Target Modification: Changing the diffusion
process target from predicting noise to predicting the original signal surprisingly resulted in worse performance,
aligning with findings in [25].
c) 2-D Signal Conversion: Converting power load signals
into 2-D representations proved crucial, as it provided
both spatial and temporal features, enabling the model to
better capture underlying sample information.
d) Normalization Removal: Eliminating normalization significantly degraded performance, confirming its necessity
as a preprocessing step for power load signals.
2) Ablation on Pretrained Models With Different Diffusion
Steps T: We evaluate the impact of pretraining with different

diffusion steps on downstream performance across four tasks,
using PowerDiffuser-Tiny in all experiments. As shown in Fig. 8,
the model achieves the best performance on most tasks when
the diffusion step is set to T = 5. We believe that allowing a
moderate level of noise during pretraining enables more flexible
fine-tuning in downstream tasks, which is consistent with the
findings in [25].
3) Ablation on Different Feature Augmentation Combinations: Designing data augmentation methods tailored to specific

data characteristics is a critical factor in the success of contrastive
learning. We systematically explored various feature augmentation combinations to identify the optimal strategy for power
load signals, with the results illustrated in Fig. 9. Under the linear
probing setting, we observed that overly aggressive augmentations, such as random noise, rendered the reconstruction process
excessively challenging, as demonstrated in Fig. 9(a).
From a loss perspective, combinations incorporating random
mask methods achieved the lowest loss values. From a downstream task performance perspective (ISMCBT-Tiny, Task310),
the combination of permutation and random mask emerged as
the most effective. Consequently, we adopted this combination
as the default feature augmentation strategy for PowerDiffuser.
This exploration underscores the importance of aligning the
difficulty of self-supervised strategy design with both model
size and sample complexity.
4) Effect of Diffusion Framework: To isolate the contribution
of the diffusion mechanism in our contrastive-reconstruction fusion framework, we construct an alternative hybrid baseline that
does not rely on a diffusion model. Specifically, we implement
a dual-branch encoder structure inspired by MAE [19] and SimCLR [30], where one branch performs masked autoencoding for
reconstruction, and the other branch applies contrastive learning
with augmentations. Both branches share the same backbone
(ST-Tiny) but are trained jointly without any denoising diffusion
process.
Table VII reports the performance comparison between PowerDiffuser and this nondiffusion hybrid baseline in ISMCBTTiny (Task310). PowerDiffuser consistently outperforms it
across all evaluation metrics. This confirms that the integration
of contrastive and reconstruction learning within the diffusion
framework provides synergistic benefits beyond simply combining the two objectives.
In PowerDiffuser, the contrastive loss and reconstruction
loss share a common diffusion-based representation pathway,
whereas in the dual-branch MAE + SimCLR baseline, the two

YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

1471

TABLE VIII
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY BETWEEN POWERDIFFUSER AND BASELINES IN ETTH

5) Computational Efficiency Analysis: We quantify the computational cost of PowerDiffuser and other self-supervised algorithms in Table VIII. Specifically, we perform pretraining on
the ETTh dataset with a batch size of 64.
PowerDiffuser exhibits a relatively large training time, which
is primarily attributed to the iterative nature of the diffusion process and the integration of both contrastive and reconstruction
objectives at each step. In addition, our current implementation
prioritizes modularity and clarity, which results in less runtime
optimization compared to some mature baseline frameworks.
Despite the high training cost, the inference time of PowerDiffuser is 29.7 milliseconds per batch and the peak GPU memory
usage is 4.6 GB. These values remain moderate and are even
lower than those of single-objective self-supervised strategies.
This efficiency is mainly due to the lightweight design of the
ST feature extractor based on involution operations. Therefore,
we consider the offline training time to be acceptable, and
the inference efficiency indicates that PowerDiffuser has the
potential for practical deployment.

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 9. Visualization of the impact of different feature enhancement
combinations on performance. Combinations within the same method
use different random seeds. It is worth noting that in both plots, lighter
colors indicate better performance. (a) Comparison of pretraining loss
values for different feature augmentation combinations on the ISMCBT
dataset. (b) Comparison of different feature augmentation combinations
on the downstream ISMCBT-tiny classification task (Task300).

objectives are executed in parallel and optimized independently.
This may lead to conflicts in the representation space or mutual
interference between objectives, making joint convergence more
difficult. In contrast, the diffusion framework naturally provides
a progressive learning mechanism, which we believe contributes
to more stable and generalizable representation learning. Overall, we argue that PowerDiffuser’s joint objective design exhibits
coupled consistency, rather than a structurally fragmented combination.

This article introduces PowerDiffuser, a self-supervised strategy specifically designed for power load signals. Built on the
diffusion model framework, PowerDiffuser combines two mainstream self-supervised strategies, namely contrastive learning
and reconstruction, effectively balancing global distribution and
local information. We show that general time-series models
often overfit in power load signal tasks and address this by
developing two adaptable feature extractors, ST-Large and STTiny, designed to process raw data of varying complexities.
Furthermore, we offer insights into the generalization of the
involution operator for 1-D data and the preprocessing of power
load signals. Experimental results on real-world datasets confirm the effectiveness of our approach, while ablation studies
emphasize the influence of different design choices on the overall architecture’s performance. We argue that a well-designed
self-supervised strategy is essential for applying artificial intelligence technologies in the power load domain. Future work will
focus on exploring more lightweight self-supervised strategies
to mitigate the substantial computational costs associated with
the diffusion process.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Jiang et al., “Dynamic temporal dependency model for multiple steps
ahead short-term load forecasting of power system,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Appl., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 5244–5254, Jul./Aug. 2024.
[2] P. Zhao et al., “Probabilistic multienergy load forecasting based on hybrid
attention-enabled transformer network and gaussian process-aided residual learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 8379–8393,
Jun. 2024.
[3] W. Liao et al., “Can we trust explainable artificial intelligence in wind
power forecasting?,” Appl. Energy, vol. 376, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 124273.

1472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

[4] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, D. Gan, J. Yang, D. S. Kirschen, and C. Kang, “Deep
learning-based socio-demographic information identification from smart
meter data,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2593–2602,
May 2018.
[5] Y. Zhu et al., “Hybrid-order representation learning for electricity theft
detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1248–1259,
Feb. 2022.
[6] W. Liao, R. Zhu, T. Ishizaki, Y. Li, Y. Jia, and Z. Yang, “Can gas
consumption data improve the performance of electricity theft detection?,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 8453–8465, Jun. 2024.
[7] M. Noroozi et al., “Unsupervised learning of visual representations by
solving jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 69–84.
[8] A. Gao, F. Mei, J. Zheng, H. Sha, M. Guo, and Y. Xie, “Electricity
theft detection based on contrastive learning and non-intrusive load monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 4565–4580, Nov.
2023.
[9] X. Xia et al., “ETD-ConvLSTM: A deep learning approach for electricity
theft detection in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18,
pp. 2553–2568, 2023.
[10] H. Ye et al., “ATFNet: Adaptive time-frequency ensembled network for
long-term time series forecasting,” 2024, ariXv:2404.05192.
[11] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
no. 12, pp. 11106–11115.
[12] H. Wu et al., “AutoFormer: Decomposition transformers with autocorrelation for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2021, vol. 34, pp. 22419–22430.
[13] A. Oord et al., “Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[14] D. Luo et al., “Time series contrastive learning with information-aware
augmentations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4,
pp. 4534–4542.
[15] S. Tonekaboni et al., “Unsupervised representation learning for time
series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representation, 2020.
[16] S. Tonekaboni et al., “Unsupervised representation learning for time
series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representation, 2021, pp. 1–17.
[17] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time
series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 8,
pp. 8980–8987.
[18] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 2352–2359.
[19] K. He et al., “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[20] R. R. Chowdhury et al., “TARNet: Task-aware reconstruction for timeseries transformer,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Min, 2022, pp. 212–220.
[21] Z. Li et al., “Ti-MAE: Self-supervised masked time series autoencoders,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, 2023, pp. 1–20.
[22] M. Cheng et al., “TimeMAE: Self-supervised representations of time series
with decoupled masked autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2303.00320.
[23] W. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Geng, and S. Hong, “Self-supervised time series representation learning via cross reconstruction transformer,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 16129–16138,
Nov. 2024.
[24] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
pp. 6840–6851.
[25] Y. Xing, L. Qu, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and L. Bruzzone,
“CrossDiff: Exploring self-supervised representation of pansharpening via
cross-predictive diffusion model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33,
pp. 5496–5509, 2024.
[26] Z. Senane et al., “Self-supervised learning of time series representation via diffusion process and imputation-interpolation-forecasting
mask,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. 2024,
pp. 2560–2571.
[27] D. Li et al., “Involution: Inverting the inherence of convolution for visual
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2021, pp. 12321–12330.
[28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[29] D. Luo et al., “ModernTCN: A modern pure convolution structure for
general time series analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation,
2024, pp. 1–43.

[30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
Honggang Yang (Student Member, IEEE) received the M.S. Eng. degree from Hubei Nomal
University, Huangshi, China, in 2023.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D degree in traffic information engineering and control with the School of Automation, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China. His current research interests include deeping learning
and optimization algorithm.

Cheng Lian (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and automation and the M.S. degree in control science
and engineering from the School of Automation,
Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China,
in 2008 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in control science and engineering from
the School of Automation, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, in 2014.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Automation, Wuhan University of Technology.
His research interests include machine learning, data mining, and pattern recognition.
Bingrong Xu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in control science and engineering from
the School of Automation, Wuhan University of
Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2015, and the
Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
from the School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, in 2021.
She is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Automation, Wuhan University of
Technology, Wuhan. Her research interests include zero-shot learning, transfer learning, sparse representation, and
low-rank representation.
Ruijin Ding received the Ph.D. degree in hydrobiology from the University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2025.
She has authored several papers in international and national journals at the intersection
of artificial intelligence and biotechnology. Her
research interests include bioelectrical signal
analysis and gene prediction.

Zhigang Zeng (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in systems analysis and integration from the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2003.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
and also with the Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control of the Education
Ministry of China, Wuhan. He has authored or
coauthored more than 200 international journal
papers. His research interests include theory of functional differential
equations and differential equations with discontinuous right-hand sides,
and their applications to dynamics of neural networks, memristive systems, and control systems.
Dr. Zeng has been an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
NEURAL NETWORKS (2010–2011), IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
(since 2014), IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS (since 2016),
and a Member of the Editorial Board of Neural Networks (since 2012),
Cognitive Computation (since 2010), and Applied Soft Computing (since
2013).