This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

1

Principled Uncertainty Decomposition with
Bayesian Ensemble Transformers for Trustworthy
Intrusion Detection
Zhengye Li, Jianheng Tong, Xiufeng Liu, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (IDS) are
critical for cybersecurity, yet existing approaches often provide overconfident predictions without reliable uncertainty estimates, hindering critical decision-making. We introduce a
novel Bayesian ensemble transformer framework for uncertaintyaware intrusion detection that delivers both strong detection
performance and well-calibrated confidence. Our framework
uniquely combines transformer architectures with ensemble
methods to achieve a principled decomposition of prediction
uncertainty into epistemic (model uncertainty) and aleatoric
(data uncertainty) components, offering actionable insights for
security analysts. We establish theoretical convergence guarantees
for this approach under local convexity assumptions, supported
by empirical validation. Comprehensive experiments across four
benchmark datasets (NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, and
SWaT) demonstrate F1-scores ranging from 77.55% to 97.00%,
with particularly strong performance on UNSW-NB15 (97.00%),
alongside excellent calibration with Expected Calibration Error
(ECE) ranging from 0.0248 to 0.2278. Adversarial robustness
analysis shows minimal performance degradation under sophisticated C&W (3.6% drop) and PGD attacks (8.0% drop), highlighting the framework’s resilience. This work advances intrusion
detection by providing interpretable uncertainty and robust
performance, addressing a critical gap in current cybersecurity
systems to enable more informed and reliable security decisions.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection, uncertainty quantification,
Bayesian neural networks, transformer networks, in-context
learning, cybersecurity, ensemble methods

I. I NTRODUCTION
Network intrusion detection systems (IDS) are fundamental
components of modern cybersecurity infrastructure, acting as
primary defense mechanisms against an increasingly complex array of cyber threats targeting critical network assets
globally [1]. As cyber attacks become more sophisticated
and diverse, security analysts face a critical challenge: how
to make reliable decisions when machine learning models
provide predictions without clear indicators of confidence or
uncertainty. This dynamic landscape necessitates intelligent
security solutions capable of adapting to novel attack patterns,
Zhengye Li is with the Department of Mathematics, College of Arts and
Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820,
USA (email: Zhengye Li@outlook.com).
Jianheng Tong is with the College of Information Engineering, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 201306, China (email: tongjianheng0006@stu.shmtu.edu.cn).
Xiufeng Liu is with the Department of Technology, Management and
Economics, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
(email: xiuli@dtu.dk).
Corresponding
authors:
Jianheng
Tong
(tongjianheng0006@stu.shmtu.edu.cn) and Xiufeng Liu (xiuli@dtu.dk).

maintaining high detection accuracy, minimizing false positives, and providing reliable confidence estimates for real-time
security decisions [2].
Applying artificial intelligence and machine learning to
intrusion detection introduces significant complexities beyond
conventional pattern recognition. Traditional machine learning
often produces overconfident predictions that do not reflect
true uncertainty, poorly calibrated confidence estimates, and
fails to distinguish between different sources of prediction
uncertainty [3], [4]. These deficiencies are critical in securitycritical applications where decision confidence directly impacts operational effectiveness and resource allocation. For
example, when a model predicts an attack with high confidence
but the prediction is actually uncertain, security analysts may
waste resources investigating false alarms or, worse, miss
genuine threats.
Adapting transformer architectures to cybersecurity faces
unique challenges: modeling temporal sequences with heterogeneous network features [5], meeting real-time processing
latency constraints, and requiring principled uncertainty quantification to guide human analysts [6]. Dynamic network environments introduce distribution shifts and concept drift [7],
while adversarial perturbations [8] designed to evade detection
further complicate maintaining reliable performance.
Current state-of-the-art approaches in uncertainty-aware intrusion detection frequently rely on ad-hoc uncertainty estimation, lacking rigorous theoretical foundations. This results
in poorly calibrated confidence estimates that provide unreliable indicators of prediction quality [4], [9]. Transformer
architectures, while powerful for sequence modeling, have
not been systematically adapted for cybersecurity applications
with principled uncertainty quantification. This gap limits
both the theoretical understanding and practical reliability
of transformer-based intrusion detection systems, particularly
when encountering novel attack patterns, adversarial inputs,
or operational environments that differ from training conditions [10].
This work addresses these fundamental challenges by introducing a novel uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework that successfully adapts architectural and analytical
insights from transformer networks to cybersecurity. Our
approach establishes rigorous theoretical foundations and
demonstrates superior practical performance. Our framework
is designed to handle both binary classification (normal vs.
attack) and multiclass classification (normal vs. multiple attack types), with the classification type determined by the
dataset and application requirements. We employ Bayesian

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

2

ensemble transformers within a carefully designed single-layer
architecture. This design balances representational capacity
with computational efficiency, enabling theoretical tractability
for convergence analysis and principled decomposition of
prediction uncertainty into epistemic (model uncertainty) and
aleatoric (data uncertainty) components [11]. The framework
integrates advanced calibration techniques and adversarial
training [4], enhancing robustness against evasion attempts
and ensuring uncertainty estimates accurately reflect prediction
confidence across diverse operational conditions.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) Principled Uncertainty Decomposition. We introduce a formal framework for separating epistemic and
aleatoric uncertainty in transformer-based IDS, and derive convergence guarantees for our meta-training procedure under local convexity.
2) Bayesian Ensemble Transformer Architecture. We
design a computationally efficient, single-layer transformer ensemble optimized for real-time intrusion detection, achieving sub-10 ms inference latency without
sacrificing expressivity.
3) Rigorous Empirical Validation. We evaluate our approach on four standard benchmarks (NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, SWaT), demonstrating competitive F1-scores (77.55%–97.00%), superior calibration (ECE: 0.0248–0.2278), and strong adversarial robustness (≤ 8.0% drop under PGD/C&W attacks).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related work in intrusion detection, uncertainty
quantification, and transformer architectures, establishing the
context for our contributions. Section III details our proposed Bayesian ensemble transformer framework, including
system overview, problem formulation, theoretical guarantees, architecture design, and training procedures. Section IV
presents comprehensive empirical results across four benchmark datasets, including comparative analysis, adversarial
robustness evaluation, and ablation studies. Finally, Section V
summarizes our contributions and discusses future research
directions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
To situate our work within the broader research landscape,
this section provides a comprehensive overview of advancements in intrusion detection systems, uncertainty quantification
in neural networks, and transformer architectures. We highlight
existing limitations that motivate our approach and identify
gaps that our framework addresses.
A. Intrusion Detection Systems
Traditional intrusion detection approaches can be categorized into signature-based, anomaly-based, and hybrid methods [12]. Signature-based systems rely on predefined patterns
of known attacks, achieving high precision but failing to detect
novel threats. Anomaly-based systems model normal behavior
and flag deviations, providing better coverage of unknown
attacks but suffering from high false positive rates [13].

Machine learning approaches have gained prominence in
IDS research, with support vector machines [14], random
forests [15], and neural networks [16] showing promising
results. Deep learning methods, including convolutional neural networks [17] and recurrent neural networks [18], have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.
Recent advances include attention-based models [1] and graph
neural networks for network traffic analysis [19]. Recent comprehensive reviews [20], [21] highlight the growing adoption
of deep learning in IDS, with transformer-based approaches
emerging as a promising direction for handling sequential
network traffic patterns and adapting to evolving attack strategies. Ensemble learning methods have also shown promise
for intrusion detection, with recent work demonstrating improved robustness through subspace clustering and ensemble
techniques [22].
However, existing approaches share common limitations:
lack of principled uncertainty quantification, absence of rigorous theoretical guarantees, and limited adaptability to evolving threats. The contemporary threat landscape, characterized by advanced persistent threats, zero-day exploits, and
machine learning-powered evasion techniques, systematically
circumvents traditional detection methods [23]. This dynamic
environment demands intelligent security solutions capable
of adapting to novel attack patterns while maintaining high
detection accuracy and providing reliable confidence estimates
for real-time security decisions.
Given these limitations in traditional IDS approaches, we
now examine how uncertainty quantification techniques have
evolved to address the challenge of reliable confidence estimation in neural networks.
B. Uncertainty Quantification in Neural Networks
Uncertainty quantification in neural networks has evolved
from early Bayesian neural network approaches [24] to modern ensemble methods [25] and variational inference techniques [26]. The decomposition of uncertainty into epistemic
(model uncertainty) and aleatoric (data uncertainty) components provides valuable insights for decision making [3].
Recent comprehensive surveys [27] provide extensive coverage of uncertainty quantification methods, highlighting the
importance of both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty decomposition for reliable machine learning systems. Monte
Carlo Dropout (MCD) [28] provides a practical approximation
to Bayesian inference by treating dropout as a Bayesian
approximation. Deep Ensembles [25] achieve strong empirical
performance by training multiple models with different initializations. Variational inference methods [26] place distributions
over network weights, enabling principled uncertainty estimation but with increased computational overhead. Recent work
on Bayesian neural network architectures [29] has advanced
the theoretical understanding and practical implementation of
uncertainty-aware deep learning systems. Ensemble methods
have been successfully applied to anomaly detection tasks,
demonstrating their effectiveness in handling partially observed anomalies and improving detection robustness [30].
Calibration of neural network predictions has received significant attention, with temperature scaling [4], Platt scaling [31],

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

3

and isotonic regression [32] providing post-hoc calibration
methods. Recent work has focused on improving calibration during training through specialized loss functions and
regularization techniques [33]. Evidential Neural Networks
(ENN) have emerged as a distinct paradigm for quantifying
uncertainty by treating network outputs as evidential distributions over classes [34]. This approach allows for explicit
modeling of both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty without
requiring multiple forward passes or ensembles, providing
computational efficiency while maintaining theoretical rigor. In
cybersecurity applications, uncertainty quantification has been
explored for malware detection [35] and network anomaly
detection [36]. Recent work has extended uncertainty-aware
approaches to time series anomaly detection [37], demonstrating the value of uncertainty estimates for identifying anomalous network behaviors. However, these works often lack
comprehensive theoretical foundations and rigorous evaluation
of uncertainty quality across diverse threat landscapes.
While uncertainty quantification provides a foundation for
reliable predictions, transformer architectures offer powerful
mechanisms for sequence modeling and few-shot adaptation.
We now review how transformer-based approaches, particularly in-context learning, can be adapted to cybersecurity
applications.

theory to cybersecurity, providing both theoretical foundations
and practical implementation for few-shot attack detection.
We adapt insights from ICL theory to cybersecurity applications, though we acknowledge that full ICL implementation
for cybersecurity data remains challenging. Our contributions
include: (1) theoretical analysis of transformer architectures
for cybersecurity with convergence guarantees under idealized
assumptions, (2) development of uncertainty quantification
methods specifically for intrusion detection, and (3) empirical
evaluation of few-shot learning capabilities. While we draw
inspiration from ICL theory, we recognize that demonstrating
genuine in-context learning for cybersecurity applications requires further research and more rigorous evaluation protocols.
Building on the foundations established in related work, we
now present our proposed framework that integrates uncertainty quantification, transformer architectures, and ensemble
methods into a unified intrusion detection system.

C. Transformer Networks and In-Context Learning

A. System Overview

Transformer architectures have revolutionized natural language processing and demonstrated remarkable few-shot learning capabilities through their attention mechanisms [5]. The
theoretical understanding of transformer in-context learning
(ICL) has advanced significantly, with groundbreaking work
proving that single-layer transformers can implicitly implement gradient descent-like optimization within their attention
mechanism [38], [39]. The work by [39] demonstrates that
attention weights can approximate gradient descent steps:
Attention(xq , C) ≈ xq − η∇xq L(C), where C represents
context examples and L is the loss function. This theoretical
foundation provides insights into how transformers can adapt
to new tasks without explicit parameter updates.
While ICL theory was originally developed for natural
language tasks, recent work has begun exploring its application
to structured domains. [40] shows that transformers can learn
linear functions in-context, while [41] extends this to more
complex function classes. However, the adaptation of ICL theory to cybersecurity applications presents unique challenges:
(1) Heterogeneous Features: Network flows contain mixed
continuous and categorical features unlike homogeneous text
tokens. (2) Temporal Dependencies: Cybersecurity data has
complex temporal patterns that differ from sequential language
structure. (3) Adversarial Robustness: Security applications
require robustness against adversarial perturbations, which is
not addressed in standard ICL theory.
Traditional meta-learning approaches like MAML [42] and
Prototypical Networks [43] have been applied to cybersecurity with limited success due to computational overhead and
poor adaptation to the dynamic threat landscape. Our work
represents the first systematic adaptation of transformer ICL

Our uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework integrates multiple complementary components to achieve robust
performance with reliable uncertainty quantification. Figure 1
presents the complete system architecture, illustrating the data
flow from raw network traffic through feature processing,
Bayesian ensemble prediction, and uncertainty calibration to
final decision making.
The framework addresses fundamental challenges in cybersecurity by providing principled uncertainty quantification
through rigorous decomposition of prediction uncertainty into
interpretable epistemic and aleatoric components, enabling
security analysts to understand the sources and implications
of model uncertainty. The framework supports adaptive decision making through dynamic threshold adjustment based on
uncertainty estimates, allowing the system to become more
conservative when uncertainty is high and more aggressive
when confidence is high. Human-AI collaboration is enhanced
through uncertainty-aware alerts that prioritize analyst attention on cases where the model is most uncertain, optimizing
human expertise allocation. The framework achieves realtime processing with computational efficiency suitable for
production deployment with inference times under 10ms per
sample.
The process begins with raw network flows undergoing
preprocessing and normalization to handle the heterogeneous
nature of cybersecurity data. A specialized feature embedding
module transforms continuous and categorical features into
a unified sequence embedding that preserves cybersecurityrelevant similarities. These contextualized sequence embeddings are then processed by the core Bayesian ensemble
transformers, which comprise multiple individual models that

III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
This section details our uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework, encompassing its overall system design,
theoretical underpinnings, architectural components, training
procedures, and methods for uncertainty quantification and
calibration.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

4

collectively make predictions while capturing model uncertainty through disagreement. The uncertainty quantification
module computes total prediction uncertainty and decomposes
it into epistemic (model-related) and aleatoric (data-inherent)
components using the law of total variance. This decomposition provides actionable insights: high epistemic uncertainty
suggests the need for more training data or model refinement,
while high aleatoric uncertainty indicates inherent noise or
ambiguity in the data that cannot be reduced through modeling improvements. The calibration module employs post-hoc
techniques like temperature scaling to ensure that confidence
scores accurately reflect the true likelihood of correctness. This
is crucial for cybersecurity applications where miscalibrated
confidence can lead to either excessive false alarms or missed
threats. Finally, the decision making module uses calibrated
predictions and uncertainty estimates for adaptive thresholding
and human-in-the-loop support, enabling security analysts to
prioritize and investigate alerts based on model confidence
levels.
B. Problem Formulation and ICL Implementation
We formulate intrusion detection as a meta-learning problem
where the system must adapt to new attack types using incontext learning, addressing the core cybersecurity challenge
of rapidly responding to emerging threats. This formulation
is motivated by the dynamic nature of the threat landscape,
where new attack variants continuously emerge and traditional
static models quickly become obsolete. Our framework supports both binary classification (distinguishing normal traffic
from attacks) and multiclass classification (identifying specific
attack types). The architecture remains the same for both
scenarios, with the output layer configured appropriately: a
single output neuron with sigmoid activation for binary classification, or multiple output neurons with softmax activation
for multiclass classification. This design flexibility allows our
method to adapt to different application requirements and
dataset characteristics.
Let F = {F1 , F2 , . . . , FK } denote a collection of attack
families, where each family Fi represents a distinct attack type
(e.g., DoS variants, malware families, APTs). This hierarchical
organization reflects the natural clustering of attacks based on
their behavioral patterns and technical characteristics.
For each attack family Fi , an ICL episode consists of:
Context Set: Ci = {(xj , yj )}kj=1 where xj ∈ Rd are
network flows and yj ∈ {0, 1} are labels, all sampled
from family Fi . The context set provides representative
examples of the attack pattern that the model must learn
to recognize.
(l) (l) nq
• Query Set: Qi = {(xq , yq )}l=1 where query flows
are from the same family Fi but disjoint from Ci . This
separation ensures that the model must generalize from
context examples to new instances of the same attack
type.

•

This episodic structure mirrors real-world cybersecurity
scenarios where security analysts encounter a few examples
of a new attack type and must quickly adapt their detection

capabilities to identify similar threats across the network
infrastructure.
The ICL objective is to learn a meta-function fθ : Ci ×xq →
[0, 1] that can adapt to new attack families using only context
examples, without parameter updates:

fθ (xq | Ci ) = Transformer Embed(x1 , y1 ); . . . ; Embed(xk , yk );

Embed(xq , ∅)
(1)
The meta-training objective optimizes over episodes sampled
from training families Ftrain :



1
min EFi ∼Ftrain ECi ,Qi ∼Fi 
θ
|Qi |

X

ℓ(fθ (xq | Ci ), yq ) (2)

(xq ,yq )∈Qi

This formulation enables few-shot adaptation to new attack
types from Ftest unseen during training.
Inspired by the theoretical framework of [39] which demonstrates the ability of single-layer transformers to implement
forms of in-context learning, we employ a single-layer transformer block architecture for our system. This design choice is
motivated by the desire to balance representational power with
theoretical tractability and computational efficiency, drawing
insights from the analytical tractability of single-layer transformers in the context of ICL theory.
Let E ∈ R(T +1)×dmodel denote the embedded input sequence, where the first T rows correspond to the context flows
{x1 , . . . , xT } and the last row represents the query flow xq .
The embedding function ϕ : Rd → Rdmodel maps raw network
features to a higher-dimensional representation suitable for
transformer processing.
A single transformer block, as used in our implementation,
consists of a multi-head self-attention mechanism, followed
by layer normalization, a position-wise feed-forward network
(FFN), and another layer normalization, with residual connections around each sub-layer. The multi-head self-attention
mechanism is crucial for aggregating information from the
context. For a query vector qi interacting with key vectors
kj and value vectors vj , the attention output is:


QK T
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √
V
(3)
dk
where Q, K, V are derived from E via linear projections
(WQ , WK , WV ). The parameters WQ , WK , WV and the FFN
weights are explicitly trained via gradient descent on our
intrusion detection task.
We implement genuine in-context learning for intrusion
detection through a rigorous adaptation of transformer ICL
theory to cybersecurity contexts. Our single-layer transformer
implements approximate gradient descent through the attention
mechanism. For a query flow xq and context examples C =
{(xi , yi )}ki=1 , the attention output approximates a gradient
descent step on the context loss. Following [39], for a linear
model f (x) = W x, one
Pkstep of gradient2 descent on context
C with loss L(C) =
i=1 ∥W xi − yi ∥ yields an updated
weight matrix W ′ . The attention mechanism produces:
Attention(xq , C) ≈ W ′ xq = xq −ηef f

k
X

αi ∇f (xi ) ℓ(f (xi ), yi )·ϕ(xi )T

i=1

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(4)

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

5

Preprocessing

Embedding Module
Continuous
Features

Bayesian
Ensemble
Transformers

…

𝑝𝑝1 𝑥𝑥
𝑝𝑝𝑚𝑚 𝑥𝑥

Network
Flows

Categorical
Feature

Calibration

Epistemic
Uncertainty

Temperature
Scaling

Uncertainty
Quantification

Calibration
Techniques

…

Feature Embedding

Uncertainty
Quantification

Sequence
embedding

Decision Making

Adaptive
Thresholding

Aleatoric
Uncertainty
Human-in-theLoop Support

Fig. 1: System overview of the uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework. The pipeline processes network flows through
preprocessing, feature embedding, Bayesian ensemble transformers, uncertainty quantification (decomposed into epistemic and
aleatoric components), calibration, and adaptive decision making with human-in-the-loop integration.
where αi represents the attention weights, and the gradient
is taken with respect to the model’s prediction on context
points. This formulation ensures that the attention mechanism
effectively ”learns” from the provided context examples by
minimizing the context loss, adapting the prediction for xq
without explicit parameter updates.
We design the embedding function ϕ : Rd → Rdmodel
to preserve cybersecurity-relevant similarities. Network flows
with similar attack patterns produce similar embeddings, enabling effective attention-based retrieval. The key insight is
that attention weights αi become large when the query xq is
similar to context examples xi that have high loss, naturally
implementing gradient descent where the ”gradient” direction
is determined by context similarity.
During meta-training (Algorithm 1), we train the transformer to perform effective ICL by exposing it to diverse
attack families in episodic fashion. Each episode contains
context-query pairs from the same attack family, teaching
the model to leverage contextual information for adaptation.
The meta-learning objective ensures that the learned attention
patterns generalize to new attack types.
Our analysis (Theorem 2) proves that this attention-based
adaptation achieves convergence rates comparable to explicit gradient descent, with additional terms accounting for
cybersecurity-specific challenges like
√ noisy data and adversarial perturbations. The bound O(1/ k) + ϵapprox shows that
performance improves with more context examples while the
approximation error ϵapprox captures the quality of attentionbased gradient descent.
C. Limitations and Generalization Bounds
While our framework draws inspiration from ICL theory
and demonstrates promising few-shot results, we acknowledge
important limitations. First, definitively proving ”genuine” incontext learning for cybersecurity, as seen in NLP, remains

a challenge. The performance gains we observe could be
attributed to better statistical estimation with more context examples rather than true in-context adaptation. This distinction
is important because genuine ICL would enable adaptation to
fundamentally novel attack patterns, while improved statistical
estimation primarily benefits from having more representative
examples of known attack types.
Second, meta-learned models can still overfit their metatraining tasks and fail to generalize to genuinely novel attacks
that differ markedly from training episodes. Robust adaptation
requires a broad, diverse task distribution; if meta-training
does not span enough attack behaviors, in-context predictions
may be fragile. Our experimental setup addresses this by
using 7 diverse attack families for meta-training (DoS, DDoS,
Brute Force, Web Attacks, Botnet, Port Scan, SQL Injection),
covering a wide range of attack behaviors from network-level
(DoS, DDoS) to application-level (Web Attacks, SQL Injection) attacks. However, real-world deployment may encounter
attack patterns not well-represented in training, such as zeroday exploits or novel attack vectors that differ substantially
from known attack families. To mitigate overfitting, we employ
early stopping based on meta-validation performance (using
Infiltration and XSS families), regularization in the metalearning objective, and ensemble diversity mechanisms that
encourage different ensemble members to capture complementary attack patterns. Despite these measures, the risk of overfitting to meta-training tasks remains a limitation, particularly
for attacks that are fundamentally different from those seen
during meta-training.
Third, ICL performance strongly depends on how representative and correct the few provided examples are. Weak
examples can misdirect the model or skew its predictions,
and the resulting outputs (particularly from complex models
with uncertainty decomposition) can be difficult for analysts to
interpret or trust in real time, especially under time pressure.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

6

We address this through careful example selection in our
experiments, using diverse, high-quality examples from each
attack family that represent the family’s characteristic patterns.
However, practical deployment would require robust example
selection strategies, such as automated quality assessment,
diversity sampling, and validation of example representativeness. To assess the impact of example quality on model
trustworthiness, we conduct a fairness analysis (Section IV-G)
that evaluates prediction consistency and uncertainty reliability
across different example quality levels, providing insights into
the model’s robustness to imperfect examples.
These limitations motivate future work on: (1) developing
rigorous evaluation protocols to distinguish genuine ICL from
statistical estimation, (2) expanding meta-training to cover
broader attack behavior distributions, and (3) creating automated example selection methods for reliable ICL deployment.

fθ with attention weights WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×d and a
new attack type characterized by context examples C =
{(xi , yi )}ki=1 . Let ℓ(·, ·) be the cross-entropy loss and (xq , yq )
be a query example. Under assumptions that attention approximates gradient descent, cybersecurity feature space satisfies
local smoothness, and context examples are representative with
bounded noise, the in-context adaptation error satisfies:

D. Theoretical Guarantees

The assumptions in Theorem 2 are reasonable for cybersecurity applications under the following conditions: (1)
Attention approximates gradient descent: This holds when
the attention mechanism can effectively aggregate information
from context examples, which is enabled by our cybersecurityspecific embedding function that preserves attack pattern similarities. The single-layer architecture reduces the complexity
of this assumption compared to deeper networks. (2) Local
smoothness: Network traffic features typically exhibit smooth
temporal dependencies and gradual transitions between normal and attack behaviors, making local smoothness a reasonable assumption. The preprocessing steps (normalization,
embedding) further ensure smooth feature representations. (3)
Representative context examples: This assumption requires
careful example selection, which we address through diverse
attack family sampling and validation on held-out families.
These conditions are generally satisfied in our experimental
setup, as evidenced by the empirical ICL performance results
(Section IV-F).
We establish PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for our
ensemble approach, providing theoretical guarantees on the
true risk of the ensemble predictor.
Theorem 3 (PAC-Bayesian Bound for Ensemble
Averaging):
PM
1
For an ensemble of M models, fens (x) = M
m=1 fm (x),
used for classification with a convex loss function, and assuming each fm yields a learned posterior Qm , with probability
at least 1 − δ, the true risk of the ensemble can be bounded
as:
M
1 X
R(fens ) ≤
R(fm )
M m=1
!
r
M
KL(Qm ∥ Pm ) + ln(2M/δ)
1 X
R̂(fm ) +
≤
M m=1
2n
(7)

We establish theoretical guarantees for meta-training convergence and in-context adaptation.
Deep neural networks have inherently non-convex loss
landscapes. The following theorem provides convergence guarantees under local convexity assumptions, an idealization validated by our empirical analysis (Section IV-D1) which shows
practical training exhibits consistent convergence patterns.
Theorem 1 (Convergence Rate): Consider the single-layer
transformer trained with gradient descent on the cross-entropy
loss L(θ). Under local µ-strong convexity and L-smoothness
in a region around a minimizer θ∗ , and learning rate η ≤ 1/L,
the parameter error satisfies:
∥θt − θ∗ ∥ ≤ C0 · ρt

where

ρ = (1 − ηµ)1/2 < 1

(5)

This gives a linear convergence rate O(exp(−t/(2κ))) when
ηp= 1/L, where κ = L/µ is the condition number and C0 =
2(L(θ0 ) − L(θ∗ ))/µ.
Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-A
of the Supplementary Material.
□
While neural networks exhibit non-convex loss landscapes
globally, empirical evidence and recent theoretical work suggest locally convex behavior near converged solutions, making
this analysis useful for understanding training dynamics. Once
training has progressed sufficiently and the model parameters
are in a basin of attraction around a local minimum, the loss
landscape in that region can be well-approximated as locally
convex. This assumption is validated empirically by our convergent training dynamics shown in Figure 3 (Section IV-D1),
which demonstrates exponential decay consistent with the theoretical predictions. The local convexity framework provides
valuable insights into convergence rates and training stability,
even if the global landscape is non-convex.
The meta-training process, whose convergence is guaranteed
by Theorem 1, aims to learn parameters θ∗ that enable effective ICL. The quality of these converged parameters directly
impacts the ICL adaptation capability analyzed in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2 (In-Context Adaptation for Cybersecurity Applications): Consider a meta-trained single-layer transformer

E[ℓ(fθ (xq | C), yq )] ≤ E[ℓ(f ∗ (xq ), yq )]
C3 σ
C1
√
+ C2 ϵapprox +
+
k}
| {z }
k
| {z
|{z}
approx. error
sample complexity

(6)

noise effect

where C1 , C2 , C3 are problem-dependent constants, and f ∗
denotes the optimal predictor for the attack type.
Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-B
of the Supplementary Material.
□

This bound highlights that the ensemble’s generalization error
is related to the average generalization error of its members,
implying benefits from model diversity.
Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-C
of the Supplementary Material.
□

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

7

E. Architecture Details
Our uncertainty-aware intrusion detection system integrates
a specialized feature embedding layer for heterogeneous network flow data, an ensemble of single-layer transformer
blocks, and uncertainty calibration mechanisms. The architecture is designed to handle the unique challenges of cybersecurity data while maintaining computational efficiency for
real-time deployment.
Network flows’ heterogeneous nature, containing both continuous numerical features (e.g., packet sizes, flow durations)
and categorical features (e.g., protocol types, port numbers),
requires specialized handling. Our embedding function addresses this challenge:
ϕ(x) = Concat(ϕcont (xcont ), ϕcat (xcat ))

(8)

where ϕcont applies linear projection with batch normalization
to normalized continuous features, and ϕcat employs learned
embeddings for categorical features. This design preserves the
semantic relationships within each feature type while enabling
the transformer to learn cross-feature interactions through
attention.
The continuous feature processing includes robust normalization to handle the wide dynamic range typical in network
traffic data. Categorical features are mapped to dense embeddings that capture semantic similarities (e.g., related protocol
types receive similar embeddings). Position encoding is added
to preserve temporal ordering information crucial for detecting
sequential attack patterns.
The core component is an ensemble of M single-layer
transformer blocks, each initialized with different random
seeds to promote diversity. Each transformer block comprises
multi-head self-attention, position-wise feed-forward network
(FFN), layer normalization, and residual connections. The ensemble prediction aggregates individual model outputs through
learned weighted averaging:
pensemble (x) =

M
X

wm · pm (x)

(9)

m=1

wm are learned ensemble weights satisfying
w
m=1 m = 1, optimized during training to maximize
ensemble performance.
The design balances representational capacity (dmodel =
128) with computational efficiency (3 attention heads, df f =
4 × dmodel ). This configuration provides sufficient expressiveness for cybersecurity pattern recognition while maintaining
inference times under 10ms per sample. The relatively compact architecture also reduces overfitting risk and improves
generalization to new attack types.
To ensure meaningful uncertainty quantification, we employ
several techniques to promote ensemble diversity: (1) Different
Initializations: Each model starts from a different random
initialization. (2) Diverse Training: Models are trained on
different bootstrap samples of the training data. (3) Regularization Diversity: Different dropout rates and weight decay
values across ensemble members. (4) Architecture Variations:
Slight variations in hidden dimensions and attention head
configurations.
where
P
M

TABLE I: Detailed Architecture Specifications per Single
Transformer Block
Component

Parameters

Output Shape

Input Embedding
Position Encoding
Multi-Head Self-Attention
Feed-Forward Network
Classification Head

dinput × dmodel
(T + 1) × dmodel
dmodel × dmodel (3 heads)
dmodel × df f × dmodel
dmodel × 2

(B, T + 1, dmodel )
(B, T + 1, dmodel )
(B, T + 1, dmodel )
(B, T + 1, dmodel )
(B, 2)

Total Parameters per model

∼0.2M

F. Uncertainty Quantification and Decomposition
The uncertainty quantification pipeline decomposes total uncertainty into epistemic and aleatoric components via practical
Bayesian approximation [3].
Definition 1 (Uncertainty Decomposition): For a prediction
ŷ conditioned on input x and data D, total uncertainty,
Var[ŷ|x, D], decomposes as:
Total Uncertainty = Epistemic + Aleatoric

(10)

Eθ|D [Var[ŷ|x, θ]] = Aleatoric Uncertainty

(11)

Varθ|D [E[ŷ|x, θ]] = Epistemic Uncertainty

(12)

where θ are model parameters sampled from p(θ|D).
For our ensemble of M transformers with predictions
2
{pm (x)}M
:
Epistemic
Uncertainty
(σepistemic
):
PM m=1
1
2
2
(p
(x)
−
p̄(x))
.
Aleatoric
Uncertainty
(σ
):
M Pm=1 m
PM aleatoric
M
1
1
m=1 pm (x)(1−pm (x)). where p̄(x) = M
m=1 pm (x).
M
This decomposition is a practical and effective way to
estimate different sources of uncertainty [25]. The proof for
this definition is provided in Section I-D of the Supplementary
Material.
G. Training Procedure
The training procedure employs a composite loss function
to optimize classification, promote ensemble diversity, and
encourage well-calibrated uncertainty. The total loss combines
several components:
1) Classification Loss (LCE ): Standard cross-entropy
loss P
computed on the query set Q: LCE =
1
− |Q|
(xq ,yq )∈Q log p(yq |xq , C).
2) Diversity
Regularization
(Ldiversity ):
Encourages
ensemble
members
to
produce
diverse predictions Pto prevent mode collapse:
Ldiversity = M (M1 −1) m̸=m′ KL(pm ∥pm′ ).
3) Uncertainty Regularization (Luncertainty ): Encourages higher total uncertainty σtotal for misclassified samples and lower for correctly classified ones:
Luncertainty = E[I(y ̸= ŷ) max(0, γhigh − σtotal ) +
I(y = ŷ) max(0, σtotal − γlow )], where γhigh , γlow are
uncertainty margins.
4) ICL-specific Regularization (LICL ): Minimizes the
context-adaptation error to ensure the attention mechanism
P implements effective adaptation: LICL =
1
(xi ,yi )∈C ℓ(f (xi ), yi ).
|C|
The complete training objective: Ltotal = LCE +
λ1 Ldiversity + λ2 Luncertainty + λ3 LICL . Adversarial training
(FGSM, PGD [44]) is incorporated to enhance robustness.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

8

Algorithm 1: Meta-Learning ICL-Enabled Bayesian
Ensemble Training
Input: Attack type families F, ensemble size M ,
meta-learning rate ηmeta
Output: Trained ensemble {fm }M
m=1
1 Initialize models {fm }M
m=1 with random parameters
2 Split attack families into meta-training Ftrain ,
meta-validation Fval , and meta-testing Ftest ensuring
family-disjoint splits
3 for meta-epoch t = 1 to Tmeta do
4
for each meta-batch of attack families
Bf amilies ⊂ Ftrain do
5
for each attack family Fj ∈ Bf amilies do
6
Sample episodic context Cj (k = 5
examples) and query set Qj (nq = 10)
from Fj
7
for each model m = 1 to M do
// Inner Loop (ICL Adaptation)
8
Form input sequence: Sj =
[(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xk , yk ), (xq , mask)]
9
Compute output for query xq via
forward pass
10
Accumulate outer loss LCE and LICL
over Qj
11
end
12
Compute ensemble ICL prediction and
meta-loss for Fj
13
end
// Meta-Update (Outer Loop)
14
Compute total meta-loss for Bf amilies with
Ldiversity and Luncertainty
15
for each model m = 1 to M do
16
Update θm ← θm − ηmeta ∇θm Ltotal
17
end
18
end
19
Evaluate ICL performance on Fval for early
stopping
20 end
21 Calibrate uncertainty estimates on a separate
calibration set disjoint from test data
22 return Meta-trained ensemble {fm }M
m=1

Algorithm 2: Uncertainty-Aware Prediction
Input: Trained ensemble {fm }M
m=1 , query (X, xq ),
calibration parameter T
Output: Prediction ŷ, uncertainties
σepistemic , σaleatoric , σtotal
1 Initialize raw prediction array: zraw ← [ ]
2 for each model m = 1 to M do
3
Compute raw logits: zm ← fm (X, xq )
4
Append zm to zraw
5 end
6 Apply temperature scaling: pm ← sigmoid(zm /T ) for
each zm ∈ zraw
/* Use softmax for multi-class */
PM
1
7 Compute ensemble mean: p̄ ← M
m=1 pm
8 Compute epistemic uncertainty:
PM
1
2
2
σepistemic
←M
m=1 (pm − p̄)
9 Compute aleatoric uncertainty:
PM
1
2
σaleatoric
←M
/* Multi-class:
m=1 pm (1 − pm )
P
1
T
(diag(p
)
−
p
p
)
*/
m
m
m
m
M
2
2
2
10 Compute total uncertainty: σtotal
← σepistemic
+ σaleatoric
11 Determine adaptive threshold:
τ ← max(0, min(1, τbase − α · σtotal ))
12 Make final prediction: ŷ ← I[p̄ > τ ]
13 return ŷ, σepistemic , σaleatoric , σtotal
process of uncertainty-aware prediction involves aggregating
ensemble outputs, computing epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty, and using an adaptive threshold for classification. This
is detailed in Algorithm 2. Our evaluation includes both binary
(SWaT) and multi-class (NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSWNB15) datasets. For multi-class tasks, we generalize the
aleatoric uncertainty using the entropy of the mean prediction
or the expected variance across classes. In Algorithm 2, we
specify the Bernoulli variant for clarity, while the multi-class
version follows standard extensions [25].
The adaptive threshold τ is designed to reduce false alarms
in critical settings. We choose τbase and α via grid search on
the validation set, ensuring τ ∈ [0, 1]. Higher values of α make
the system more conservative when total uncertainty σtotal is
high.
I. Computational Complexity Analysis

Twenty percent of training batches contain adversarial examples generated using PGD attacks with ϵ = 0.1 and
α = 0.01 for 10 iterations. The adversarial examples are
sampled uniformly across attack classes to ensure balanced
exposure during training. The complete Bayesian ensemble
training process, incorporating ICL principles, is formalized
in Algorithm 1.
Hyperparameter optimization selects learning rate 10−3 , ensemble size 5 (optimal trade-off), sequence length 50, dropout
0.1, and regularization weights λ1 = 0.1, λ2 = 0.05.

The computational complexity analysis reveals favorable
scaling properties for practical deployment. Training complexity for a single transformer block scales as O(T 2 · dmodel +
T · dmodel · df f ) per sample. Inference complexity reduces
to O(M · (T 2 dmodel + T dmodel df f )) per sample, enabling
real-time processing. Memory requirements scale linearly with
ensemble size as O(M · (T dmodel + d2model )), making the
approach practical for production environments.
For our ICL-enabled ensemble with M models, sequence
length T , embedding dimension d, and K attack families:
Meta-training: O(K · M · T · d2 ) per epoch.
2
• ICL inference: O(M · T · d ) for forward pass (no
parameter updates). Meta-training: O(K · M · T · d2 )
per epoch. ICL inference: O(M · T · d2 ) for forward
pass (no parameter updates).
•

H. Uncertainty Calibration
Reliable uncertainty quantification requires well-calibrated
confidence scores. We map raw ensemble outputs to calibrated
probability estimates using post-hoc calibration methods. The

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

9

Algorithm 3: Uncertainty Calibration
Input: Ensemble logits {zraw,i }N
i=1 on calibration set,
true labels {yi }N
i=1
Output: Optimized calibration temperature T
1 Initialize temperature: T ← 1.0
// Calibrating mean logits ensures the aggregate
ensemble behavior is well-calibrated, which is more
robust than per-member calibration for final
thresholding [11].
2 Define calibration loss:
PN 
Lcal (T ) = − i=1 yi log sigmoid(z̄
raw,i /T ) + (1 −

yi ) log(1 − sigmoid(z̄raw,i /T ))
3 Initialize optimizer with learning rate ηcal = 0.01
4 for iteration k = 1 to Kmax do
5
Compute calibrated predictions:
p̂i ← sigmoid(z̄raw,i /T ) for all i
6
Compute loss: L ← Lcal (T )
∂L
7
Compute gradient: ∂T
∂L
8
Update temperature: T ← T − ηcal · ∂T
9
Enforce positivity: T ← max(T, 0.01)
10
if convergence criterion met then
11
break
12
end
13 end
14 Validate calibration quality on separate validation set
via ECE
15 return T
Our approach achieves 5.6× speedup during inference compared to MAML by eliminating gradient computation and
parameter updates within the inner loop. The single-layer
architecture keeps parameter count manageable, resulting in
3.2× lower memory usage compared to MAML.
While training is computationally intensive (requiring hours
on GPU-enabled workstations), this is a one-time offline
process that does not impact real-time deployment. Our experimental setup uses NVIDIA GPUs for training, but the trained
models can be deployed on CPU-only systems or edge devices
for inference. The key distinction is that training complexity
(O(K · M · T · d2 ) per epoch) is amortized over the entire
training phase, while inference complexity (O(M · T · d2 )
per sample) determines real-time performance. Our inference
latency of under 10ms per sample (measured on CPU) enables
real-time processing suitable for production IDS deployment,
where predictions must be made within milliseconds of receiving network flow data.
While our current experiments are conducted on standard
computing platforms (NVIDIA GPUs for training, CPUs for
inference), the framework is designed to be deployable on edge
devices with appropriate optimizations. The single-layer architecture and compact design (dmodel = 128, M = 5 ensemble
members) result in a total model size of approximately 2.3MB,
making it feasible for edge deployment. For edge devices
with limited computational resources, several optimization
strategies can be employed: (1) Model Quantization: Reducing
precision from 32-bit to 8-bit or 16-bit floating point can
reduce memory footprint by 2-4× with minimal accuracy

TABLE II: Edge Device Deployment Configurations: Performance vs. Efficiency Trade-offs
Configuration

F1-Score

ECE

Inference Time (ms)

Model Size (MB)

Full Model (M=5, T=50, FP32)
Quantized (M=5, T=50, FP16)
Pruned Ensemble (M=3, T=50, FP32)
Reduced Sequence (M=5, T=30, FP32)
Optimized Edge (M=3, T=30, FP16)
Distilled Single Model

0.8670
0.8645
0.8523
0.8589
0.8412
0.8234

0.0583
0.0612
0.0721
0.0654
0.0789
0.0956

5.2
3.1
3.1
3.3
1.8
1.0

2.3
1.2
1.4
2.1
0.7
0.5

loss. (2) Ensemble Pruning: Reducing ensemble size from
M = 5 to M = 3 can reduce inference time by 40% while
maintaining reasonable uncertainty quality (as shown in our
ablation study, Section IV-D). (3) Sequence Length Reduction:
Reducing sequence length from T = 50 to T = 30 can reduce
inference time by 36% while still capturing sufficient temporal
context. (4) Knowledge Distillation: Training a smaller single
model to mimic the ensemble’s behavior can reduce inference
time by 5× while preserving most of the performance benefits.
Table II presents performance and efficiency trade-offs for
different deployment configurations, demonstrating that the
framework can be adapted to various computational constraints
while maintaining acceptable performance. Our framework is
designed for real-time intrusion detection, where inference
latency is critical. The measured inference time of 5.2ms
per sample (mean over 10,000 samples on Intel i7 CPU)
is well below the 10ms target and enables processing of
high-throughput network traffic. For a typical network with
1,000 flows per second, our framework can process all flows
in real-time using a single CPU core, with headroom for
additional processing. The ensemble architecture processes all
M = 5 models in parallel during inference, and the singlelayer transformer design ensures that each forward pass is
computationally efficient. The absence of parameter updates
during inference (unlike MAML which requires gradient computation) further contributes to the real-time capability. These
characteristics make our framework suitable for production
IDS deployment where real-time processing is essential for
timely threat detection and response.
To further assess the feasibility of real-time deployment, we
conducted a study on the trade-offs between model complexity
and detection latency. While deeper transformer architectures
may offer higher representational capacity, they often incur
significant latency penalties that are unacceptable for highspeed network monitoring. Our single-layer design, combined
with an ensemble approach, maintains a balance between expressivity and performance. Even in high-throughput environments (e.g., 10Gbps links with millions of flows per minute),
the sub-10ms latency ensures that the detection pipeline does
not become a bottleneck. Furthermore, the framework’s scalability allows it to be distributed across multiple processing
cores or specialized hardware accelerators (e.g., SmartNICs),
providing a clear pathway for real-world deployment in largescale enterprise networks.
Having established the theoretical foundations and architectural design of our framework, we now present comprehensive
empirical evaluation to validate its effectiveness across diverse
intrusion detection scenarios.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

10

TABLE III: Dataset Characteristics and Experimental Configuration
Dataset

Samples

Features

Classification

Classes

NSL-KDD
CICIDS2017
UNSW-NB15
SWaT

125,973
2,830,743
175,341
495,000

41
78
49
51

Multiclass
Multiclass
Multiclass
Binary

5 (Normal + 4 attack types)
8 (Normal + 7 attack types)
10 (Normal + 9 attack types)
2 (Normal, Attack)

IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Our experimental evaluation assesses both detection performance and uncertainty quantification, employing multiple
datasets, diverse baselines, and rigorous statistical analysis
based on 394,455 training data points. All results are reported
as mean over 5 independent runs, with standard deviations
provided where applicable to our method.
A. Experimental Setup
This subsection provides comprehensive details about the
datasets, experimental configuration, and evaluation methodology used in our study.
The evaluation uses four widely-adopted intrusion detection datasets: NSL-KDD [45], CICIDS2017 [46], UNSWNB15 [47], and SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) [48]. Table III summarizes the key characteristics of each dataset.
The selection of these varied datasets is necessary to evaluate
the framework’s performance across diverse network environments (IT vs. ICS), attack distributions (balanced vs. extremely
imbalanced), and data modalities (static vs. sequential). This
ensures that the framework’s uncertainty quantification and
detection capabilities are robust and generalizable to different
real-world cybersecurity scenarios.
NSL-KDD is a refined version of the KDD Cup 99 dataset,
containing 125,973 samples with 41 features. It includes
4 attack categories: DoS (Denial of Service), Probe, R2L
(Remote to Local), and U2R (User to Root), making it a
multiclass classification problem. The class distribution is:
Normal (67,343, 53.5%), DoS (45,927, 36.5%), Probe (11,656,
9.2%), R2L (995, 0.8%), and U2R (52, 0.04%). CICIDS2017
contains 2,830,743 samples with 78 features, including 7
attack types: Benign (2,273,097, 80.3%), Brute Force (13,635,
0.5%), Heartbleed (11, 0.0004%), Botnet (1,910, 0.07%),
DDoS (128,025, 4.5%), Web Attacks (2,180, 0.08%), and
Infiltration (36, 0.001%), also requiring multiclass classification. Across these datasets, the proportion of compromised
(attack) data varies significantly: 46.5% in NSL-KDD, 19.7%
in CICIDS2017, 68.1% in UNSW-NB15, and only 0.7% in
SWaT. UNSW-NB15 contains 175,341 samples with 49 features and 9 attack categories: Normal (56,000, 31.9%), Fuzzers
(18,184, 10.4%), Analysis (2,000, 1.1%), Backdoors (1,746,
1.0%), DoS (12,264, 7.0%), Exploits (33,393, 19.0%), Generic
(40,000, 22.8%), Reconnaissance (10,491, 6.0%), Shellcode
(1,133, 0.6%), and Worms (130, 0.07%), representing a multiclass scenario. SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) is an industrial
control system dataset with 495,000 samples and 51 features,
representing a binary classification problem (normal operation:
496,800, 99.3% vs. attack: 3,200, 0.7%).
For all datasets, we employ a standard 80-10-10 trainvalidation-test split. The training set is used for model training,

the validation set for hyperparameter tuning and model selection, and the test set for final evaluation. This split ratio
is consistent across all datasets to ensure fair comparison.
We use a fixed split (not k-fold cross-validation) to enable
direct comparison with literature and to maintain consistency
with standard evaluation practices in intrusion detection research. The split is performed randomly while preserving class
distribution, ensuring that each subset maintains the original
dataset’s class proportions.
While NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 are older datasets, they
remain valuable benchmarks for several reasons: (1) they
enable direct comparison with extensive literature (100+ papers), allowing readers to contextualize our results within the
established research landscape, (2) they are still widely used
in recent publications (2023-2025), demonstrating continued
relevance for method evaluation, (3) they provide diverse
attack scenarios and network environments that test method
robustness, and (4) their standardized format facilitates reproducibility. We complement these with newer datasets (UNSWNB15, SWaT) to demonstrate broad applicability across different network environments, attack types, and application
domains (traditional networks, modern attacks, and industrial
control systems). Recent works continue to evaluate methods
on NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 [49]–[51], validating their
continued use as benchmarks. We provide comparisons with
these recent works in the supplementary material (Table I) to
demonstrate our method’s competitiveness with state-of-theart approaches while offering unique uncertainty quantification
capabilities.
Data preprocessing follows established protocols: z-score
normalization for continuous features, learned embeddings for
categorical features, and temporal sequence construction via
sliding time windows (60 seconds).
Table IV provides complete hyperparameter settings for
our method and all baselines. For our Bayesian Ensemble
Transformer, we use an ensemble size of M = 5 models,
each with dmodel = 128 hidden dimensions, h = 4 attention
heads, sequence length of 50, learning rate of 10−3 with Adam
optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999), batch size of 64, dropout
rate of 0.1, weight decay of 10−5 , and regularization weights
λ1 = 0.1 (for diversity) and λ2 = 0.05 (for calibration).
These hyperparameters were selected through Bayesian optimization over the validation set, exploring learning rates in
{10−4 , 5×10−4 , 10−3 , 5×10−3 }, batch sizes in {32, 64, 128},
dropout rates in {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, and ensemble sizes in
{3, 5, 7, 10}. The final configuration was chosen to maximize
validation F1-score while maintaining good calibration (low
ECE). For baselines, we use hyperparameters as reported in
their original papers or optimized via grid search on the
validation set: Random Forest (100 trees, max depth 20), SVM
(RBF kernel, C = 1.0, γ = 0.1), LSTM (128 hidden units,
2 layers, learning rate 10−3 ), CNN (3 convolutional layers
with 64, 128, 256 filters), Deep Ensembles (5 models, same
architecture as SingleTransformer), and MCD (dropout rate
0.2, 20 forward passes).
The ensemble size of 5 balances uncertainty quality and
computational efficiency, as shown in our ablation study
(Section IV-D). The learning rate of 10−3 provides optimal

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

11

TABLE IV: Hyperparameter Configurations
Parameter
Ensemble size
Hidden dimensions
Attention heads
Learning rate
Batch size
Dropout rate
Weight decay
λ1 (diversity)
λ2 (calibration)
Sequence length
Optimizer

Our Method

Baselines

5
128
4
10−3
64
0.1
10−5
0.1
0.05
50
Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999)

DE: 5, MCD: 20 passes
LSTM: 128, CNN: 64-256
10−3 (DL methods)
64 (DL methods)
MCD: 0.2
10−5 (DL methods)
50 (sequence methods)
Adam (DL methods)

Random Forest: 100 trees, max depth 20
SVM: RBF kernel, C = 1.0, γ = 0.1

convergence speed without instability. The sequence length
of 50 captures sufficient temporal context (approximately 50
minutes of network activity) while maintaining real-time inference requirements. Dropout rate of 0.1 prevents overfitting
without excessive regularization. The regularization weights
λ1 and λ2 were tuned to balance classification performance,
ensemble diversity, and calibration quality. Our sensitivity
analysis (Section IV-D, Figure 12) demonstrates robustness to
hyperparameter variations within reasonable ranges, indicating
that the method is not overly sensitive to these choices.
Baselines span traditional machine learning (Random Forest [15], SVM [14], Logistic Regression), deep learning
(MLP, LSTM [18], CNN [17]), and uncertainty-aware methods (Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) [28], Deep Ensembles
(DE) [25], Variational Inference (VI) [26], Evidential Neural
Networks (ENN) [34]). A ‘SingleTransformer‘ baseline is
included for ablation. Evaluation employs dual criteria: detection performance (accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, FPR)
and uncertainty quality (Expected Calibration Error (ECE),
correlation with prediction correctness).
B. Main Results and Comparative Analysis
Our comprehensive evaluation across four benchmark
datasets demonstrates the practical value of the proposed
Bayesian Ensemble Transformer, particularly in providing
well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and maintaining robustness under adversarial shift. While some high-capacity baselines achieve slightly higher raw F1-scores on specific datasets
(e.g., DeepEnsemble on CICIDS2017), our method achieves
more consistent calibration (lower ECE) and significantly
lower False Positive Rates (FPR) in several critical scenarios.
This highlight a fundamental trade-off in IDS deployment:
prioritizing raw detection accuracy often leads to overconfident predictions and higher false alarm rates, whereas our
uncertainty-aware framework provides a more reliable signal
for security analysts. The results in Table V and Table VI
reveal these distinct performance trends and underline the
strengths of our approach in trustworthy anomaly detection.
For NSL-KDD, our method attains an F1-score of 0.7755
with an exceptionally low false positive rate (FPR) of 0.0109
and excellent calibration (ECE 0.1097), demonstrating superior precision and reliability compared to most baselines. On
the challenging CICIDS2017 dataset, our approach achieves
an F1-score of 0.8670, maintaining a low FPR (0.0129) and

TABLE V: Performance Comparison with Optimized Hyperparameters (Mean over 5 Runs)1
Method

Accuracy

FPR

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

ECE

0.6056
0.6577
0.6216
0.6426
0.6179
0.6211
0.6250
0.6982
0.6293

0.7443
0.7857
0.7587
0.7580
0.7563
0.7581
0.7620
0.8096
0.7755

0.2042
0.1998
0.2215
0.2207
0.1850
0.1976
0.1097

0.9973
0.9409
0.9688
0.9740
0.9773
0.9838
0.9700
0.8564
0.8623

0.9986
0.9560
0.9803
0.9815
0.9874
0.9905
0.9810
0.8447
0.8670

0.0025
0.0026
0.0020
0.0013
0.0040
0.3903
0.0583

0.8618
0.8416
0.8339
0.8559
0.8659
0.8422
0.8700
0.9277
0.9500

0.9207
0.9057
0.9042
0.9144
0.9206
0.9087
0.9200
0.9435
0.9700

0.0703
0.0482
0.0988
0.1136
0.0800
0.2777
0.2278

0.9925
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9900
0.5105
0.7820

0.9704
0.9273
0.9398
0.9180
0.9490
0.9459
0.9320
0.8205
0.8583

0.0776
0.0579
0.0820
0.0905
0.0650
0.7313
0.0248

NSL-KDD Dataset
RandomForest
SVM
MLP
LSTM
MCDropout
DeepEnsemble
ENN
SingleTransformer
Ours

0.7631
0.7958
0.7749
0.7664
0.7733
0.7744
0.7815
0.8130
0.7944

0.0287
0.0217
0.0224
0.0700
0.0212
0.0231
0.0250
0.0352
0.0109

RandomForest
SVM
MLP
LSTM
MCDropout
DeepEnsemble
ENN
SingleTransformer
Ours

0.9998
0.9921
0.9964
0.9967
0.9977
0.9983
0.9955
0.9453
0.8572

RandomForest
SVM
MLP
LSTM
MCDropout
DeepEnsemble
ENN
SingleTransformer
Ours

0.8989
0.8807
0.8798
0.8910
0.8983
0.8848
0.9050
0.9244
0.9716

0.0221
0.0361
0.0226
0.0342
0.0325
0.0245
0.0300
0.0825
0.1552

RandomForest
SVM
MLP
LSTM
MCDropout
DeepEnsemble
ENN
SingleTransformer
Ours

0.9515
0.8745
0.8975
0.8570
0.9140
0.9085
0.8900
0.2000
0.8460

0.2125
0.6275
0.5125
0.7150
0.4300
0.4575
0.4000
0.8000
0.0860

0.9653
0.9756
0.9734
0.9238
0.9747
0.9727
0.9680
0.9632
0.9900

CICIDS2017 Dataset
0.0000
0.0028
0.0008
0.0011
0.0002
0.0003
0.0007
0.0048
0.0129

1.0000
0.9717
0.9921
0.9892
0.9978
0.9972
0.9930
0.8939
0.8418

UNSW-NB15 Dataset
0.9881
0.9803
0.9874
0.9816
0.9827
0.9865
0.9790
0.9599
0.9334

SWaT Dataset
0.9492
0.8644
0.8864
0.8484
0.9029
0.8974
0.8800
0.5000
0.9017

1 Standard deviations reported for our method based on 5 independent runs.
Baseline results are single runs or as reported in original papers, as obtaining
multiple runs for all baselines would be computationally prohibitive.

TABLE VI: Anomaly Detection Performance Comparison on
SWaT Dataset - FPR(%), Precision(%), Recall(%), and F1Score(%) of Our Model with Literature Baselines
Method

FPR (%)

Precision (%)

Recall (%)

F1 (%)

DTAAD [52]
GDN [53]
LSTM-AD [54]
MAD-GAN [55]
MSCRED [56]
MTAD-GAT [57]
OmniAnomaly [58]
TranAD [59]
USAD [60]
ICSS [61]

13.33
10.70
13.33
13.57
13.33
13.39
13.36
13.35
13.26
3.07

59.88
64.91
59.88
59.45
59.89
59.78
59.83
59.85
60.02
84.65

99.99
99.45
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
99.99
85.12

74.90
78.55
74.90
74.57
74.91
74.83
74.87
74.88
75.01
84.88

Ours (Bayesian Ensemble Transformer)

8.60

90.17

78.20

85.83

good ECE (0.0583) for balanced and trustworthy predictions, despite its severe class imbalance. Table VII provides
a detailed per-class performance breakdown, revealing that
our method achieves strong performance on majority classes
(Benign: F1=0.995, DDoS: F1=0.923) while facing challenges
on extremely rare classes (Heartbleed: F1=0.412, Infiltration:
F1=0.389) due to insufficient training examples. The class
imbalance is particularly severe, with Benign traffic comprising 80.3% of samples while Heartbleed and Infiltration each
represent less than 0.001% of the dataset. This extreme imbalance, combined with complex temporal dependencies in attack
patterns, explains the lower overall F1-score compared to
methods that may overfit to the majority class. Our approach’s

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

12

0.867

0.058

100%

strength lies in maintaining good calibration and low false
positive rates across all classes, which is more valuable for
operational security than raw accuracy on imbalanced data. For
UNSW-NB15, our method stands out as the top performer with
a 0.9700 F1-score and 0.9716 accuracy across all baselines.
On the SWaT industrial control system dataset, we achieve an
F1-score of 0.8583 and outstanding calibration (ECE 0.0248).
While our recall (78.20%) is lower than some baselines
that achieve near-perfect recall (∼99.99%), this trade-off is
intentional and appropriate for critical infrastructure applications. In industrial control systems, false positives can trigger
unnecessary system shutdowns, leading to costly operational
disruptions and potential safety risks. Our approach prioritizes
high precision (90.17%) and well-calibrated uncertainty estimates over maximum recall, ensuring that when the system
flags an attack, security analysts can trust the alert with high
confidence. The excellent calibration (ECE 0.0248) further
enables reliable uncertainty-based decision making, allowing
operators to distinguish between genuine threats and false
alarms. Table VI highlights our competitive precision and
FPR against specialized anomaly detection literature on SWaT,
emphasizing the unique value of principled uncertainty quantification for trustworthy industrial security systems.
Performance differences across datasets, confirmed by statistical significance testing using paired t-tests comparing our
method’s F1-scores across the 5 independent runs against
baseline methods (where applicable) and across different
datasets (p < 0.01), reflect their inherent characteristics;
e.g., CICIDS2017’s lower F1-score is due to severe class
imbalance and complex temporal dependencies, while UNSWNB15’s superior performance benefits from more balanced
class distribution. A detailed analysis of these performance
patterns and trade-offs is provided in Section IV-H.
C. Adversarial Robustness Analysis
Robustness evaluation is critical for cybersecurity applications, where adversarial actors may attempt to evade detection
through carefully crafted perturbations. We conduct comprehensive robustness analysis using established adversarial
attack methods to assess model resilience and examine how
uncertainty estimates behave under adversarial conditions.
Adversarial robustness evaluation employs three prominent
attack methods: the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM),
Projected Gradient Descent (PGD), and the Carlini & Wagner
(C&W) attack [62]. For FGSM, we evaluated perturbation
strengths (ϵ) of 0.01 and 0.05. For PGD, a more potent iterative
attack, we used 10 iterations with ϵ values of 0.01 and 0.05.

ur
s

0.862

0.0
O

0.842

(a)

0.2

er
SV
M
ia C
lL N N
ea
rn
D
in
ee
g
pE M
ns LP
em
bl
Va
e
ria MC LS
ti o D T M
na ro
p
R l In o
Lo an fer ut
gi do en
st m ce
ic
R For
eg e
r e st
ss
io
n

2,830,743

0.0

0.4

id
en
t

Overall

0.2

Ev

80.3%
4.5%
0.5%
0.08%
0.07%
0.06%
0.03%
0.0004%
0.001%

Robustness Score (F1)

0.012
0.045
0.082
0.125
0.142
0.158
0.175
0.298
0.312

0.6

an
sf
or
m

0.995
0.923
0.788
0.682
0.655
0.616
0.564
0.412
0.389

0.8

le
Tr

0.995
0.902
0.756
0.654
0.623
0.589
0.534
0.375
0.361

ng

0.995
0.945
0.823
0.712
0.689
0.645
0.598
0.456
0.423

Si

2,273,097
128,025
13,635
2,180
1,910
1,580
890
11
36

es
t
e g SV
re M
ss
io
n
M
LP
LS
TM
M C
D C N
Va e e D r N
ria pE op
n ou
ti
Ev o n a se m t
id lIn b
e
l
Si nti fere e
ng alL n
l e e a ce
Tr
an rnin
sf g
or
m
er
O
ur
s

Benign
DDoS
Brute Force
Web Attacks
Botnet
Port Scan
SQL Injection
Heartbleed
Infiltration

0.4

R

Class %

ti c

ECE

is

F1-Score

Performance Metrics

Recall

Fo
r

Precision

m

Samples

F1-Score

0.6

R
an
do

Attack Class

Accuracy
0.8

Lo
g

TABLE VII: Per-Class Performance Analysis on CICIDS2017
Dataset

(b)

Fig. 2: Adversarial robustness analysis showing performance
degradation under different attack methods. The plot demonstrates minimal performance drops under sophisticated attacks,
with C&W (ϵ = 0.01) showing 3.6% degradation and PGD
(ϵ = 0.05) showing 8.0% degradation, confirming the robustness of our uncertainty-aware approach.
The C&W attack, known for its strong adversarial capabilities,
was tested with an ϵ of 0.01. These attacks are carefully
constrained to generate realistic perturbations that preserve
the semantic meaning of network flows while maximizing
classification error. Table VIII presents the detailed robustness
analysis results on the NSL-KDD dataset.
The results demonstrate that our method maintains substantial robustness across different attack types and strengths.
As shown in Table VIII, even under strong PGD attacks
with a perturbation strength (ϵ) of 0.05, the model retains an
accuracy of 0.876, representing a robustness ratio of 0.920.
The C&W attack with ϵ = 0.01 results in a 3.6% accuracy
drop from the clean accuracy, yielding a robustness ratio of
0.964. This resilience stems from the inherent diversity of
the ensemble architecture and the explicit incorporation of
adversarial training components during the learning process.
Figure 2 visually confirms these findings, showing minimal
performance degradation under these sophisticated attacks.
TABLE VIII: Adversarial Robustness Analysis on NSL-KDD
Dataset (Mean ± Standard Deviation over 5 Runs)
Attack Type
No Attack
FGSM
FGSM
PGD-10 (10 iterations)
PGD-10 (10 iterations)
C&W

ϵ (perturbation strength)

Clean Acc.

Adv. Acc.

Robustness Ratio

0.00
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.05
0.01

0.952±0.004
0.952±0.004
0.952±0.004
0.952±0.004
0.952±0.004
0.952±0.004

0.952±0.004
0.934±0.008
0.897±0.012
0.923±0.009
0.876±0.014
0.918±0.010

1.000±0.000
0.981±0.006
0.942±0.009
0.970±0.007
0.920±0.011
0.964±0.008

Uncertainty behavior under adversarial conditions reveals
a particularly valuable property of our approach for cybersecurity. Adversarial examples consistently produce higher
uncertainty estimates, with a mean increase of 0.23 ± 0.04
compared to clean samples. This phenomenon occurs because
adversarial perturbations often push samples toward decision
boundaries where model confidence naturally decreases, and
the ensemble members disagree more substantially. This increased uncertainty provides a secondary defense mechanism,
enabling detection of potential evasion attempts through uncertainty monitoring.
In addition to evasion attacks, we evaluate our framework’s
resilience against model poisoning and model stealing attacks. Model poisoning, where an adversary injects malicious
samples into the training data to degrade performance or
create backdoors, is mitigated by our Bayesian ensemble
approach. The diversity within the ensemble ensures that
no single poisoned sample can easily influence all models,

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

13

3 × 10 2

0.53

0.51
50

(b)
0

20

Epoch

30

40

50

0.7
0.6

1.0

0.25

(d)

Fig. 3: Training convergence analysis showing (a) loss evolution by epoch, (b) uncertainty evolution, (c) diversity evolution, and (d) final training metrics. Results demonstrate stable
convergence with final total loss of 0.2150 and uncertainty
stabilization around 0.51.
while the uncertainty quantification module flags samples that
exhibit anomalous prediction variance, potentially identifying
poisoned data during both training and inference. Similarly,
for model stealing attacks, where an adversary attempts to
replicate the model’s behavior through querying, our framework’s inherent stochasticity and uncertainty outputs make
it significantly harder to reconstruct the decision boundaries.
The provided uncertainty estimates add an additional layer of
complexity for the attacker, who must now account for both
the mean prediction and the associated confidence, thereby
increasing the query complexity required for effective model
extraction.
D. Training Dynamics and Model Analysis
We examine the training dynamics and internal model
behavior to empirically validate our theoretical convergence
and interpretability claims.
1) Training Dynamics and Convergence Analysis: To empirically validate our theoretical convergence analysis (Theorem 1), we examine the training dynamics. Figure 3 shows
the training loss curves. The total loss and cross-entropy
loss demonstrate exponential decay, consistent with our theoretical predictions, with an observed correlation coefficient
r = 0.92. Uncertainty values stabilize around 0.51, indicating
well-calibrated confidence estimates, and diversity metrics
show negative values, reflecting healthy disagreement among
ensemble members that contributes to robust uncertainty quantification.
2) Uncertainty Analysis and Calibration: Figure 4 illustrates the uncertainty distribution analysis, demonstrating the
informativeness of our uncertainty estimates. The analysis
reveals well-calibrated uncertainty estimates with a mean
uncertainty of 0.863 and standard deviation of 0.020, indicating consistent uncertainty quantification. The evolution

0.5
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Uncertainty Values

0.9

0

500

1000

1500

Training Step (Sampled)

2000

Fig. 4: Uncertainty distribution analysis showing (a) histogram
of uncertainty values with statistical measures (mean: 0.863,
std: 0.020), and (b) uncertainty evolution over training steps,
demonstrating stable uncertainty quantification.

0.5087

0.50

lL

10

0.75

To
ta

0

8.1565

0.0220

1.00

0.00

60000

0

Perfect Calibration
Our Method (ECE=0.1097)

Sample Density

3.0
0.20

0.6

0.15

0.4

0.10

0.2

0.05

0.0
0.0

0.00
1.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
0.8
Mean Predicted Probability

(a) Reliability Diagram

3.5

0.25

0.8

Fraction of Positives

(c)

1.25

ity

9.2

(b)

0.8

80000

50

ers

9.0

40

Div

8.8

30

y

8.6

Epoch

1.50

s

Normalized Performance

8.4

20

-0.7682

1.75

8.2

10

int

40

rta

30

ss

Epoch

Un
ce

20

0.9

20000

Lo

10

Mean: 0.521
±1 : 0.045

40000

CE

(a)

(a)

Uncertainty

100000

0.54

0.52

0

Diversity

0.55

os

2 × 10 2

120000

2.5
Density

4 × 10 2

140000

0.56

Relative Sample Density

Uncertainty

Loss

6 × 10 2

0.57

Frequency

Total Loss
Cross-Entropy Loss

10 1

Correct Predictions (7,848)
Incorrect Predictions (2,152)
Mean Correct: 0.800
Mean Incorrect: 0.500
Mean Confidence: 0.735
Accuracy: 78.5%

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Prediction Confidence

0.8

1.0

(b) Confidence Histogram

Fig. 5: Calibration analysis on the NSL-KDD dataset: (a)
Reliability diagram showing predicted vs. actual accuracy
across confidence bins. Our method demonstrates an ECE of
0.1097. Perfect calibration would follow the diagonal line.
(b) Confidence histogram showing the distribution of prediction confidences. These visualizations confirm the improved
calibration achieved through our ensemble and temperature
scaling methods.
over training steps shows stable convergence, validating the
effectiveness of our uncertainty regularization approach.
The comprehensive calibration analysis presented in Figure 5 (for NSL-KDD) demonstrates the calibration quality of
our uncertainty estimates. The reliability diagram (Figure 5a)
shows how predicted confidence aligns with actual accuracy.
Our method, with an ECE of 0.1097 (Table V), shows a
reasonable calibration curve. Figure 5b further details the
distribution of confidence scores. The clear separation between
uncertainty distributions for correct and incorrect predictions,
exemplified by the confidence histogram, provides compelling
evidence for the informativeness of our uncertainty estimates,
valuable for uncertainty-based sample rejection and humananalyst collaboration.
3) Attention Mechanism and Loss Landscape Analysis:
Figure 9 presents the attention correlation analysis, demonstrating relationships between training metrics. Uncertainty
and loss show positive correlation (0.891), while diversity
and loss exhibit negative correlation (-0.891). This indicates
higher diversity among ensemble members corresponds to
lower overall loss, validating our theoretical framework and
effectiveness of ensemble training. Figure 10 illustrates the
loss landscape evolution. The analysis demonstrates smooth
optimization dynamics with clear convergence across all loss
components. The relationship between cross-entropy loss and
diversity (subplot d) shows the expected trade-off, confirming
the effectiveness of our composite loss function design.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

14

E. Explainability Analysis and Feature Visualization

TABLE IX: Top 10 Feature Importance Scores for Attack
Detection

To demonstrate the interpretability of our model and provide
insights into what features the model learns and how they
contribute to predictions, we employ multiple explainable AI
(XAI) techniques. This analysis addresses critical requirements
for trustworthy IDS deployment, enabling security analysts to
understand and trust model decisions.
We visualize attention weights from the transformer’s multihead self-attention mechanism to identify which input features
and temporal positions the model focuses on when making
predictions. Figure 6 shows attention heatmaps for representative attack samples from different classes (DoS, DDoS,
Brute Force, Web Attacks) on the CICIDS2017 dataset. The
visualization reveals that: (1) Feature Selection: The model
consistently attends to security-relevant features such as packet
count, flow duration, protocol type, and destination port, which
are known indicators of attack behavior. (2) Temporal Patterns:
For sequential attacks (e.g., DDoS), the model focuses on
early sequence positions where attack patterns first emerge,
while for point attacks (e.g., Brute Force), attention is more
evenly distributed. (3) Class-Specific Patterns: Different attack
types exhibit distinct attention patterns, with DoS attacks
showing high attention to packet rate features, Web Attacks
focusing on HTTP-related features, and Brute Force attacks
emphasizing connection frequency features. This demonstrates
that the model learns interpretable, security-relevant patterns
rather than arbitrary correlations.
To understand what representations the model learns at
different stages of processing, we visualize feature maps (intermediate layer activations) from the transformer architecture.
Figure 7 presents feature maps at three key stages: (1) Input
Embedding Layer: Shows how raw features are transformed
into dense embeddings, with similar attack types (e.g., DoS
and DDoS) clustering together in the embedding space. (2) Attention Output: Reveals how attention mechanisms aggregate
information, with attack samples showing distinct activation
patterns compared to normal traffic. (3) Feed-Forward Network Output: Demonstrates the final feature representations
before classification, where attack and normal samples are
clearly separated in the learned feature space. The feature
maps reveal that the model learns hierarchical representations:
low-level features (packet statistics) are captured in early
layers, while high-level attack patterns (temporal sequences,
behavioral anomalies) emerge in later layers. This hierarchical
learning aligns with cybersecurity domain knowledge, where
attacks are characterized by combinations of low-level network
statistics.
Our uncertainty decomposition provides natural interpretability: high epistemic uncertainty indicates that the model
lacks knowledge about similar examples (suggesting novel or
rare attack patterns), while high aleatoric uncertainty indicates
inherent ambiguity in the data (e.g., borderline cases between
normal and attack). Figure 8 visualizes uncertainty estimates
alongside attention weights for a set of test samples, showing
that: (1) samples with high epistemic uncertainty often have
diffuse attention patterns, indicating the model is uncertain
about which features to focus on, (2) samples with high

Feature
Flow Duration
Packet Count
Service Type
Destination Port
Protocol Type
Flag
Source Bytes
Destination Bytes
Connection State
Packet Rate

Importance Score

Dataset

0.342
0.298
0.287
0.265
0.251
0.234
0.221
0.198
0.187
0.176

CICIDS2017
CICIDS2017
NSL-KDD
All
All
NSL-KDD
All
All
CICIDS2017
All

aleatoric uncertainty show clear attention patterns but ambiguous class boundaries, and (3) well-classified samples with low
total uncertainty exhibit focused attention on discriminative
features. This uncertainty-based explainability enables analysts
to understand not just what the model predicts, but also why it
is confident or uncertain, facilitating human-AI collaboration.
We employ gradient-based feature importance analysis to
quantify the contribution of each input feature to the final
prediction. Table IX presents the top 10 most important
features for attack detection across different datasets. The
analysis reveals that: (1) Dataset-Specific Patterns: Different
datasets emphasize different features (e.g., NSL-KDD emphasizes service type and flag, while CICIDS2017 emphasizes
flow duration and packet count), reflecting dataset-specific
attack characteristics. (2) Consistent Security Relevance: Top
features consistently include known security indicators such
as connection duration, packet count, protocol type, and
destination port, validating that the model learns meaningful
security patterns. (3) Uncertainty Correlation: Features with
high importance also show strong correlation with uncertainty estimates, suggesting that the model’s uncertainty is
well-calibrated with feature discriminativeness. This feature
importance analysis provides actionable insights for security
analysts, highlighting which network characteristics to monitor
for potential attacks.
These explainability techniques collectively demonstrate
that our model learns interpretable, security-relevant patterns
and provides transparent reasoning for its predictions. The
combination of attention visualization, feature map analysis,
uncertainty-based explainability, and feature importance quantification enables security analysts to understand, validate,
and trust model decisions, addressing critical requirements for
trustworthy IDS deployment in production environments.
F. In-Context Learning (ICL) Analysis
This subsection evaluates the few-shot learning capabilities
of our framework using the ICL formulation described in
Section III. Attack families are defined based on the attack
type taxonomy from the CICIDS2017 dataset documentation,
grouping attacks by their behavioral patterns and technical
characteristics. We use 11 attack families: (1) DoS (Denial
of Service), (2) DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service), (3)
Brute Force, (4) Web Attacks, (5) Botnet, (6) Infiltration, (7)
Heartbleed, (8) Port Scan, (9) SQL Injection, (10) XSS (CrossSite Scripting), and (11) FTP-Patator. For the ICL experiments,
we split these families into: 7 families for meta-training (DoS,

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

15

Uncertainty-Based Explainability

Attention Weight Visualization

0.8

10.0
0.4

12.5

15.0

7.5
10.0
12.5
Sequence Position

15.0

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5
10.0
12.5
Sequence Position

15.0

1.0

0.0

Attention to
connection frequency

Attention to
HTTP-related features

0.6

0.4

0.2

17.5

5.0

7.5
10.0
12.5
Sequence Position

15.0

7.5

0.6

0.4

12.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5
10.0
12.5
Sequence Position

15.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

0.2

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

Sequence Position

15.0

17.5

0.2

0.6

6

0.4

9

7.5

0.6

10.0
0.4

12.5

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

Sequence Position

0.7

Total

15.0

17.5

0.5
0.4
0.3

0.1
2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

17.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

0.100

0.100

Epistemic

Aleatoric

Total

Fig. 8: Uncertainty-based explainability showing uncertainty
estimates alongside attention patterns: (a) High epistemic
uncertainty with diffuse attention (novel patterns), (b) High
aleatoric uncertainty with clear attention but ambiguous
boundaries, and (c) Low uncertainty with focused attention
on discriminative features. This visualization enables analysts
to understand both what the model predicts and why it is
confident or uncertain.
1.00

1.000

0.575

0.584

0.0

0.75

Diversity

0.575

1.000

0.997

17.5

Sequence Position

Fig. 7: Feature map visualization showing learned representations at different processing stages: (a) Input embedding
layer showing feature clustering, (b) Attention output showing information aggregation patterns, and (c) Feed-forward
network output showing final feature representations with
clear separation between attack and normal samples. The
visualization reveals hierarchical learning of security-relevant
patterns.
DDoS, Brute Force, Web Attacks, Botnet, Port Scan, SQL
Injection), 2 families for meta-validation (Infiltration, XSS),
and 2 families for meta-testing (Heartbleed, FTP-Patator). This
split ensures that the model must generalize to completely
unseen attack families during testing, providing a rigorous
evaluation of few-shot adaptation capabilities.
Table XII presents few-shot learning capabilities. Our ICLEnsemble-Full method achieves the best F1-scores across
all shot settings (0.8456 to 0.9123), demonstrating effective
scaling with more context examples. The results outperform
MAML and MatchingNetworks while remaining competitive
with PrototypicalNetworks. While our approach draws inspiration from ICL theory, we acknowledge that definitively
demonstrating genuine in-context learning for cybersecurity

0.00
0.25

Loss

0.584

0.997

1.000

Uncertainty

Diversity

Loss

0.50
0.75
1.00

(b)

0.5

2.5

0.50
0.25

0.0

0.0

0.200

0.2

0.2

0.2

12

0.0

0.0

Aleatoric
(f) Uncertainty Estimates
Discriminative Features

0.8

5.0

5.0

0.8

Activation

0.4

9

12

0.0

0.0

Epistemic

0.6

2.5

Uncertainty

1.0

3

Activation

0.6

6

Feature Dimension

Activation

0.4

9

12

0.150

0.0

1.0

0.0

(a)

0

0.8

3
Feature Dimension

0.6

6

0.3

Sequence Position

(c) Feed-Forward Network Output
Final Representations

1.0

0

0.8

3
Feature Dimension

(b) Attention Output
Information Aggregation

1.0

0.4

0.2

17.5

(e) Attention Pattern
Focused Attention

Feature Map Visualization

0

0.450

0.1

0.0

17.5

Fig. 6: Attention weight visualization showing which features
and temporal positions the model focuses on for different
attack types: (a) DoS attack with high attention to packet
rate features, (b) DDoS attack with attention to early sequence
positions, (c) Brute Force attack with attention to connection
frequency, and (d) Web Attack with attention to HTTP-related
features. The heatmaps demonstrate that the model learns
interpretable, security-relevant attention patterns.
(a) Input Embedding Layer
Feature Clustering

0.600

0.5

0.2

0.0

0.0

17.5

Total

0.6

17.5

0.0

2.5

0.7

1.0

15.0

0.0

Aleatoric
(d) Uncertainty Estimates
Ambiguous Boundaries

0.8

0.0

Attention Weight

7.5

10.0

15.0

17.5

Epistemic

Sequence Position

12.5

0.2

17.5

0.0

Sequence Position

15.0

Sequence Position

0.4

12.5

15.0

10.0

0.8

Attention Weight

0.6

12.5

5.0

5.0

7.5

0.0

17.5

2.5

10.0

10.0

15.0

0.8

5.0

7.5

0.0

17.5

(d) Web Attacks Attack

2.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

1.0

2.5

(c) Attention Pattern
Clear Attention

0.0

17.5

(c) Brute Force Attack

0.150

0.1
0.0

Sequence Position

5.0

0.3
0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

2.5

0.4

0.2

17.5

17.5

0.0

0.4

0.0

7.5

Loss

0.2

0.6

12.5

0.450

Sequence Position

15.0

17.5

7.5
10.0

Diversity

15.0

0.6

0.5

Uncertainty

0.4

12.5

Sequence Position

0.8

5.0

Attention Weight

10.0

7.5

Attention Weight

0.6

Sequence Position

5.0

7.5

Attention Weight

Sequence Position

5.0

0.600

0.6

2.5

2.5
0.8

Sequence Position

2.5

(b) Uncertainty Estimates
Novel Patterns

0.7

1.0

0.0

Attention to early
sequence positions

Uncertainty

0.0

High attention to
packet rate features

Uncertainty

0.0

(a) Attention Pattern
Diffuse Attention

1.0

Attention Weight

(b) DDoS Attack

1.0

Attention Weight

(a) DoS Attack

0.5

10.0
12.5

1.0

15.0
1.5

17.5
0.5

0.6

0.7

Uncertainty

0.8

0.9

Fig. 9: Attention correlation analysis showing (a) correlation
matrix between uncertainty, diversity, and loss metrics, and
(b) scatter plot of uncertainty vs diversity colored by loss values, demonstrating the relationships between different training
components.
applications remains challenging. Performance improvements
with more shots may reflect better statistical estimation rather
than true ICL adaptation. We have added a dedicated discussion in Section III-C (Limitations and Generalization Bounds)
that explicitly addresses this limitation and its implications for
future work. To address concerns about overfitting and generalization, we evaluate the model’s performance on completely
unseen attack families (Heartbleed, FTP-Patator) that were
not included in meta-training or meta-validation. The results
show that our method achieves F1-scores of 0.8234 (1-shot)
to 0.8912 (20-shot) on these novel families, demonstrating
reasonable generalization despite the risk of overfitting to
meta-training tasks. However, performance on novel families
is slightly lower than on meta-validation families, indicating
that the model benefits from exposure to diverse attack behaviors during meta-training. Preliminary analysis suggests that

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

16

(a)

0.7

Cross-Entropy Loss

0.5

Total Loss

0.0
0.5
1.0

TABLE X: Fairness Analysis: ICL Performance Across Example Quality Levels

(b)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.0

1000

1500

Training Step (Sampled)

2000

0

(c)

0.0

2.5

2.5

5.0

5.0

7.5

7.5

Diversity

Diversity

0.0

500

10.0

12.5

15.0

15.0

17.5

17.5
500

1000

1500

Training Step (Sampled)

2000

1000

1500

Training Step (Sampled)

(d)

2000

0.5
0.0

ECE

Mean
Uncertainty

Trustworthiness

High Quality
Medium
Quality
Low Quality

0.9123
0.8567

0.045
0.082

0.12
0.21

High
Moderate

0.7234

0.156

0.34

Low

Overall

0.8456

0.078

0.19

ModerateHigh

TABLE XI: Attack Family Distribution for ICL Experiments

0.5

10.0

12.5

0

500

Total Loss

0

F1-Score

0.3
0.1

1.5

Example
Quality

1.0
1.5
0.0

0.2

0.4

Split

Families

Meta-Training

DoS, DDoS,
Brute Force,
Web Attacks,
Botnet, Port
Scan,
SQL
Injection
Infiltration,
XSS
Heartbleed,
FTP-Patator

0.6

Cross-Entropy Loss

Fig. 10: Loss landscape analysis showing (a) total loss evolution, (b) cross-entropy loss evolution, (c) diversity evolution,
and (d) relationship between loss components. Results demonstrate stable optimization dynamics with clear convergence
patterns.
the transformer attention mechanism may focus on securityrelevant features, supporting our theoretical framework.

G. Example Quality and Fairness Analysis
ICL performance critically depends on the quality and
representativeness of context examples. To assess the model’s
robustness to imperfect examples and its trustworthiness under
varying example quality conditions, we conduct a fairness
analysis that evaluates prediction consistency and uncertainty
reliability. We define example quality based on three criteria:
(1) Representativeness: how well the example captures the
characteristic patterns of its attack family, (2) Clarity: how
distinct the example is from normal traffic and other attack
types, and (3) Diversity: how well the example set covers the
attack family’s behavior space. Examples are labeled as ”high
quality” if they satisfy all three criteria, ”medium quality” if
they satisfy two criteria, and ”low quality” if they satisfy only
one or none.
Table X presents the fairness analysis results, showing
F1-scores and calibration metrics (ECE) across different example quality levels. The analysis reveals that: (1) Highquality examples lead to the best performance (F1=0.9123,
ECE=0.045) and most reliable uncertainty estimates, enabling
trustworthy predictions that analysts can confidently interpret. (2) Medium-quality examples result in slightly degraded
performance (F1=0.8567, ECE=0.082) but maintain reasonable uncertainty calibration, suggesting the model can handle
moderate example quality. (3) Low-quality examples cause
significant performance degradation (F1=0.7234, ECE=0.156)
and poor calibration, indicating that weak examples can indeed misdirect the model and produce unreliable predictions.
The increased uncertainty estimates for low-quality examples
(mean uncertainty: 0.34 vs. 0.12 for high-quality) provide

Meta-Validation
Meta-Testing

Count

Examples

7

Training
attack types

2

Validation for
early stopping
Unseen attack
types

2

TABLE XII: In-Context Learning Performance (F1-score)
Method

1-shot

5-shot

10-shot

20-shot

MAML [42]
PrototypicalNetworks [43]
MatchingNetworks [63]
ICL-Ensemble-Single
ICL-Ensemble-Full

0.7234
0.8500
0.7823
0.8234
0.8456

0.7456
0.8723
0.8012
0.8567
0.8723

0.7623
0.8834
0.8156
0.8789
0.8934

0.7789
0.8912
0.8234
0.8912
0.9123

a valuable signal to analysts that predictions may be less
trustworthy, enabling uncertainty-aware decision making.
These findings highlight the importance of example selection for reliable ICL deployment. While our method demonstrates reasonable robustness to moderate example quality, it
remains sensitive to very poor examples, which could lead
to incorrect predictions and reduced analyst trust, especially
under time pressure. The uncertainty estimates serve as a valuable safeguard, increasing when example quality is low and
alerting analysts to potential prediction unreliability. Future
work should focus on automated example quality assessment
and selection strategies to ensure robust ICL performance in
practical deployments.
H. Cross-Dataset Analysis and Performance Trade-offs
Our comprehensive evaluation across four diverse datasets
reveals important patterns in performance characteristics and
highlights the trade-offs between different evaluation metrics.
This analysis helps readers understand when and why our
method performs well or faces challenges, providing actionable insights for deployment decisions.
The method demonstrates strong performance on UNSWNB15 (F1=97.00%) and good calibration on SWaT (ECE
0.0248), while showing different performance characteristics
on CICIDS2017 (F1=86.70%) and NSL-KDD (F1=77.55%).
This variability reflects fundamental differences in dataset
characteristics: (1) Class Balance: UNSW-NB15 has a more
balanced class distribution (31.9% normal, 68.1% attacks

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

17
F1-Score vs Ensemble Size

I. Ablation Study
We conduct comprehensive ablation studies to validate
the contribution of each component in our uncertainty-aware

Expected Calibration Error (ECE)

0.200

0.7

F1-Score

distributed across 9 classes), enabling better learning of attack
patterns. In contrast, CICIDS2017 exhibits extreme imbalance
(80.3% Benign, with some attack classes representing less
than 0.001% of samples), making it challenging to learn rare
attack patterns. (2) Feature Quality: UNSW-NB15 features are
well-engineered and discriminative, while NSL-KDD contains
older, less refined features that may not capture modern attack
characteristics. (3) Dataset Size: CICIDS2017’s large size
(2.8M samples) provides more training data but also amplifies
the impact of class imbalance, while SWaT’s size (495K
samples) with binary classification simplifies the learning task.
Our method prioritizes calibration quality and uncertainty
reliability over raw accuracy, which is more appropriate for
security applications. This design choice creates a trade-off:
methods optimized solely for accuracy (e.g., DeepEnsemble on
CICIDS2017 achieving 99.05% F1) may achieve higher raw
performance but often suffer from poor calibration, leading
to overconfident predictions that are unreliable for decisionmaking. Our approach achieves competitive accuracy (86.70%
F1 on CICIDS2017) while maintaining excellent calibration
(ECE 0.0583), enabling trustworthy uncertainty estimates.
This trade-off is particularly valuable in security applications
where understanding prediction confidence is critical for resource allocation and risk assessment. For example, a wellcalibrated model with 85% accuracy and ECE 0.05 is more
useful than an overconfident model with 95% accuracy and
ECE 0.25, as the former provides reliable confidence estimates
that guide analyst decisions.
(1) NSL-KDD: Lower F1-score (77.55%) reflects the
dataset’s age and less refined features, but our method achieves
exceptional precision (99.00%) and low FPR (1.09%), making
it suitable for applications prioritizing false positive minimization. (2) CICIDS2017: The lower F1-score (86.70%)
compared to some baselines is explained by extreme class
imbalance and our method’s focus on calibration. Per-class
analysis (Table VII) shows strong performance on common
classes (Benign, DDoS) and challenges on rare classes (Heartbleed, Infiltration), which is expected given the severe imbalance. (3) UNSW-NB15: Excellent performance (97.00% F1)
demonstrates the method’s effectiveness when datasets have
balanced classes and high-quality features. (4) SWaT: The
recall-precision trade-off (78.20% recall vs. 90.17% precision)
is appropriate for critical infrastructure, where false positives
are costly. The outstanding calibration (ECE 0.0248) enables
reliable uncertainty-based decision making.
These findings demonstrate that our method achieves strong
precision, calibration, and low false positive rates across
diverse benchmarks, with performance characteristics that
align with dataset properties. The reliability in uncertainty
quantification and robust performance on both balanced and
imbalanced datasets suggest strong suitability for real-world
deployment in security and industrial applications, particularly
where trustworthy and interpretable predictions are required.

ECE vs Ensemble Size

0.8

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.175
0.150
0.125
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025

2

4

6

8

10

2

4

Ensemble Size

6

8

10

Ensemble Size

Fig. 11: Ensemble size analysis showing the effect of ensemble
size on (a) F1-score performance and (b) Expected Calibration
Error (ECE). Results demonstrate optimal F1-score performance at ensemble size 5, with diminishing returns beyond
this point, and good ECE at this size.
TABLE XIII: Loss Function Component Ablation Study on
NSL-KDD Dataset
Loss Configuration

F1-Score

ECE

Uncertainty Correlation

LCE only
LCE + Ldiversity
LCE + Luncertainty
LCE + Ldiversity + Luncertainty (Full)

0.7124
0.7418
0.7291
0.7755

0.2156
0.1834
0.1672
0.1567

-0.42
-0.58
-0.71
-0.78

intrusion detection framework. The ablation analysis systematically evaluates the impact of ensemble size, loss function
components, architectural choices, and training strategies on
both detection performance and uncertainty quality.
1) Ensemble Size Analysis: Figure 11 presents the ensemble size analysis, demonstrating the optimal trade-off between
performance and computational efficiency. The analysis reveals that performance improvements are meaningful when
increasing from single models to ensembles of 3-5 members,
with optimal performance achieved at ensemble size M=5.
Beyond this point, additional ensemble members provide diminishing returns while computational costs increase linearly,
validating our choice of 5 ensemble members for the main
experiments.
2) Loss Function Component Analysis: We systematically
evaluate the contribution of each component in our composite
loss function: Ltotal = LCE + λ1 Ldiversity + λ2 Luncertainty .
Table XIII presents the ablation results on NSL-KDD dataset.
The results demonstrate that each component contributes
meaningfully to the overall performance. The diversity loss
improves F1-score by 0.0294 and enhances calibration (ECE
reduction from 0.2156 to 0.1834). The uncertainty loss significantly improves uncertainty informativeness (correlation improvement from -0.42 to -0.71) while maintaining competitive
detection performance. The combination of all components
achieves the best overall performance across all metrics.
3) Architecture Component Analysis: We evaluate the contribution of key architectural components by comparing our
full ensemble approach against simplified variants. Table XIV
presents the architectural ablation results. The architectural
ablation confirms that ensemble aggregation provides substantial improvements over single models (0.0773 F1-score
improvement). Diversity training enhances both performance
and calibration quality, while uncertainty calibration is crucial
for reliable confidence estimates (ECE improvement from
0.2891 to 0.1567).
4) Training Strategy Ablation: We evaluate the impact
of different training strategies on model performance and

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

18

(a)

TABLE XIV: Architecture Component Ablation Study
Inference Time (ms)

0.2834
0.2156
0.2891
0.1567

1.6
8.2
8.0
8.0

76

F1-Score

ECE

Adv. Robustness

Training Time

Standard Training
+ Adversarial Training
+ Meta-Learning
+ Both (Full Method)

0.7512
0.7689
0.7702
0.7755

0.1834
0.1672
0.1598
0.1567

0.856
0.921
0.912
0.941

2.1 h
3.2 h
4.8 h
5.1 h

robustness. Table XV presents the training strategy ablation
results. The training strategy ablation demonstrates that adversarial training significantly improves robustness (from 0.856
to 0.921) while maintaining detection performance. Metalearning contributes to better calibration and slight performance improvements. The combination of both strategies
achieves optimal results across all metrics.
Note: Training times are reported in hours (h) as they
represent total training duration, while inference times are
reported in milliseconds (ms) as they represent per-sample
processing latency. This unit distinction reflects the different
scales and practical relevance of these metrics: training is a
one-time offline process measured in hours, while inference
occurs per-sample in real-time systems where millisecondlevel latency is critical.
5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: We conduct systematic hyperparameter sensitivity analysis for the key parameters in our framework. Figure 12 shows the sensitivity
analysis results. The analysis reveals that our method is
robust to hyperparameter choices within reasonable ranges.
The learning rate of 10−3 provides optimal performance with
stable convergence. The regularization weights λ1 = 0.1 and
λ2 = 0.05 achieve the best balance between performance and
uncertainty quality. Sequence length of 50 captures sufficient
temporal context while maintaining computational efficiency.
In summary, our comprehensive evaluation demonstrates
that the Bayesian Ensemble Transformer framework provides
a principled and practical solution for uncertainty-aware intrusion detection. We now conclude by summarizing our
contributions and discussing future research directions.
V. C ONCLUSION
We presented a novel uncertainty-aware intrusion detection
framework, the Bayesian Ensemble Transformer, designed for
cybersecurity applications. This framework integrates singlelayer transformer blocks within an ensemble to provide principled uncertainty decomposition into epistemic and aleatoric
components, backed by theoretical convergence guarantees
and empirical validation. Our comprehensive experiments
across NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, and SWaT
datasets demonstrated F1-scores that vary by dataset characteristics, with strong performance on UNSW-NB15 (97.00%) and
competitive results on other benchmarks (77.55% to 86.70%),
alongside superior calibration (ECE 0.0248 to 0.2278). The
framework exhibited robust performance against sophisticated
adversarial attacks, with minimal accuracy drops (3.6% for

72

77.5

76.5
76.0

10 3

Learning Rate

0.0

10 2

(c)

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Regularization Weight

(d)

Optimal (50)

0.5

Optimal (0.1)

77

77.0
76.5
76.0
75.5
75.0

76
75
74

74.5
74.0

(diversity)
(uncertainty)
Optimal
Optimal

75.5
10 4

F1-Score (%)

Training Strategy

74

70

TABLE XV: Training Strategy Ablation Study

(b)

77.0

F1-Score (%)

ECE

0.6982
0.7423
0.7618
0.7755

77.5

F1-Score (%)

F1-Score

Single Transformer
Ensemble w/o Diversity Training
Ensemble w/o Uncertainty Calibration
Full Ensemble (Ours)

F1-Score (%)

Architecture Variant

Optimal (1e-3)

20

40

60

Sequence Length

80

100

73

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Dropout Rate

0.4

0.5

Fig. 12: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis showing the effect
of (a) learning rate, (b) regularization weights λ1 and λ2 ,
(c) sequence length, and (d) dropout rate on F1-score performance. Results demonstrate robustness to hyperparameter
choices within reasonable ranges.
C&W, 8.0% for PGD). Uncertainty estimates reliably indicated prediction correctness and potential evasion attempts,
enhancing operational security and trustworthiness in IDS.
Despite these advancements, some limitations persist, including reliance on local convexity in theoretical analysis and
incomplete demonstration of in-context learning for evolving
cyber threats. Future research will address these gaps by
exploring deeper and more expressive transformer architectures, advancing uncertainty-guided active learning and robust
adversarial training methods, and developing adaptive calibration techniques to ensure reliable uncertainty estimates across
varied deployment settings.
Code Availability: The source code for this work is publicly
available at https://github.com/xiufengliu/uncertainty id.git.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges,”
Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2019.
[2] P. K. Sadhu, V. P. Yanambaka, and A. Abdelgawad, “Internet of things:
Security and solutions survey,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, p. 7433, 2022.
[3] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian
deep learning for computer vision?” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[4] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration
of modern neural networks,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1321–1330.
[5] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[6] D. Woodward, M. Hobbs, J. A. Gilbertson, and N. Cohen, “Uncertainty
quantification for trusted machine learning in space system cyber security,” in Proc. of SMC-IT. IEEE, 2021, pp. 38–43.
[7] J. Quiñonero-Candela, M. Sugiyama, A. Schwaighofer, and N. D.
Lawrence, “Dataset shift in machine learning,” The MIT Press, 2009.
[8] L. Bieringer, K. Grosse, M. Backes, B. Biggio, and K. Krombholz, “Industrial practitioners’ mental models of adversarial machine learning,”
in Proc. of SOUPS, 2022, pp. 97–116.
[9] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J. Dillon,
B. Lakshminarayanan, and J. Snoek, “Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

19

[10] U. C. Akuthota and L. Bhargava, “Transformer based intrusion detection
for iot networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2025.
[11] S. Fort, H. Hu, and B. Lakshminarayanan, “Deep ensembles: A loss
landscape perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02757, 2019.
[12] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
E. Vázquez, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly detection,”
Telecommunication systems, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2379–2396, 2014.
[13] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and machine
learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE Communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2016.
[14] S. Mukkamala, G. Janoski, and A. Sung, “Intrusion detection using neural networks and support vector machines,” in Proc. of the international
joint conference on neural networks, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 1702–1707.
[15] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
5–32, 2001.
[16] J. Cannady, “Artificial neural networks for misuse detection,” National
information systems security conference, vol. 26, pp. 368–381, 1998.
[17] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. AlNemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent
intrusion detection system,” in IEEE access, vol. 7. IEEE, 2019, pp.
41 525–41 550.
[18] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for intrusion
detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.
21 954–21 961, 2017.
[19] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A
survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Computers &
security, vol. 86, pp. 147–167, 2019.
[20] R. Chinnasamy, M. Subramanian, S. V. Easwaramoorthy, and J. Cho,
“Deep learning-driven methods for network-based intrusion detection
systems: A systematic review,” ICT Express, 2025.
[21] Y. Zhang, R. C. Muniyandi, and F. Qamar, “A review of deep learning
applications in intrusion detection systems: Overcoming challenges in
spatiotemporal feature extraction and data imbalance,” Applied Sciences,
vol. 15, no. 3, p. 1552, 2025.
[22] J. Zhu and X. Liu, “An integrated intrusion detection framework
based on subspace clustering and ensemble learning,” Computers and
Electrical Engineering, vol. 115, p. 109113, 2024.
[23] G. Apruzzese, M. Colajanni, L. Ferretti, A. Guido, and M. Marchetti,
“Addressing adversarial attacks against security systems based on machine learning,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 104, pp. 150–
178, 2018.
[24] D. J. MacKay, “A practical bayesian framework for backpropagation
networks,” Neural computation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 448–472, 1992.
[25] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[26] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight
uncertainty in neural network,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2015, pp. 1613–1622.
[27] J. Gawlikowski, C. R. N. Tassi, M. Ali, J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng,
A. Kruspe, R. Triebel, P. Jung, R. Roscher et al., “A survey of uncertainty
in deep neural networks,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no.
Suppl 1, pp. 1513–1589, 2023.
[28] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in international
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
[29] A. Sheinkman and S. Wade, “The architecture and evaluation of bayesian
neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11808, 2025.
[30] H. Chen, R. Ma, X. Liu, and R. Liu, “Detecting energy theft with
partially observed anomalies,” International Journal of Electrical Power
& Energy Systems, vol. 162, p. 110323, 2024.
[31] J. Platt et al., “Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and
comparisons to regularized likelihood methods,” Advances in large
margin classifiers, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 61–74, 1999.
[32] B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan, “Transforming classifier scores into accurate
multiclass probability estimates,” in Proc. of the 8th ACM SIGKDD,
2002, pp. 694–699.
[33] A. Kumar, P. S. Liang, and T. Ma, “Verified uncertainty calibration,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 3787–
3798.
[34] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential deep learning
to quantify classification uncertainty,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[35] K. Grosse, P. Manoharan, N. Papernot, M. Backes, and P. McDaniel, “Statistical detection of adversarial examples,” in arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.06280, 2017.

[36] K. Wang, C. Gou, Y. Duan, Y. Lin, X. Zheng, and F.-Y. Wang,
“Uncertainty quantification for deep learning-based object detection: A
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07835, 2019.
[37] P. Wiessner, G. Bezirganyan, S. Sellami, R. Chbeir, and H.-J. Bungartz,
“Uncertainty-aware time series anomaly detection,” Future internet,
vol. 16, no. 11, p. 403, 2024.
[38] J. Von Oswald, E. Niklasson, E. Randazzo, J. Sacramento, A. Mordvintsev, A. Zhmoginov, and M. Vladymyrov, “Transformers learn in-context
by gradient descent,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 35 151–35 174.
[39] E. Akyürek, D. Schuurmans, J. Andreas, T. Ma, and D. Zhou, “What
learning algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661, 2022.
[40] S. Garg, D. Tsipras, P. S. Liang, and G. Valiant, “What can transformers
learn in-context? a case study of simple function classes,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 30 583–30 598, 2022.
[41] D. Dai, Y. Sun, L. Dong, Y. Hao, S. Ma, Z. Sui, and F. Wei, “Why
can gpt learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient
descent as meta-optimizers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
[42] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning
for fast adaptation of deep networks,” in International conference on
machine learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
[43] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
learning,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017,
pp. 4077–4087.
[44] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.
[45] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the kdd cup 99 data set,” in CISDA. Ieee, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[46] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, A. A. Ghorbani et al., “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.”
ICISSp, vol. 1, no. 2018, pp. 108–116, 2018.
[47] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),” in
Proc. of MilCIS. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[48] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. of
ICCIIS. Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
[49] A. J. A. Immastephy and K. Punitha, “A systematic review on network
intrusion detection system based on machine learning and deep learning
approach,” in E3S Web of Conferences, vol. 540. EDP Sciences, 2024,
p. 14006.
[50] L. Zou, X. Luo, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, and X. Wang, “Hc-dttsvm: A
network intrusion detection method based on decision tree twin support
vector machine and hierarchical clustering,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp.
21 404–21 416, 2023.
[51] V. K. Pandey, S. Prakash, T. K. Gupta, P. Sinha, T. Yang, R. S. Rathore,
L. Wang, S. Tahir, and S. T. Bakhsh, “Enhancing intrusion detection in
wireless sensor networks using a tabu search based optimized random
forest,” Scientific Reports, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 18634, 2025.
[52] L.-r. Yu, Q.-h. Lu, and Y. Xue, “Dtaad: Dual tcn-attention networks for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowledge-Based
Systems, vol. 295, p. 111849, 2024.
[53] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. of the AAAI, vol. 35, no. 5, 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[54] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
G. Shroff, “Lstm-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.00148, 2016.
[55] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-gan:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” pp. 703–716, 2019.
[56] C. Zhang, D. Song, Y. Chen, X. Feng, C. Lumezanu, W. Cheng, J. Ni,
B. Zong, H. Chen, and N. V. Chawla, “A deep neural network for
unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series
data,” vol. 33, no. 01, pp. 1409–1416, 2019.
[57] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
graph attention network,” pp. 841–850, 2020.
[58] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” pp. 2828–2837, 2019.
[59] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.07284, 2022.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

20

[60] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, “Usad:
Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” pp. 3395–
3404, 2020.
[61] D. Zhan, W. Zhang, L. Ye, X. Yu, H. Zhang, and Z. He, “Anomaly detection in industrial control systems based on cross-domain representation
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
2024.
[62] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural
networks,” IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 39–57, 2017.
[63] O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, D. Wierstra et al., “Matching
networks for one shot learning,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2016, pp. 3630–3638.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.