6984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

PrivNet—Generative AI-Augmented Quantum
Privacy Framework for Vehicular Networks
Kamran Ahmad Awan , Member, IEEE, Korhan Cengiz , Senior Member, IEEE,
Ibrahim Alrashdi , Member, IEEE, Maha Abdelhaq, Member, IEEE, Mueen Uddin , Senior Member, IEEE,
Hamed Alsufyani , Member, IEEE, Raed Alsaqour , Member, IEEE,
and Celestine Iwendi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Vehicular networks face increasing challenges to
ensure security, privacy, and efficiency in dynamic communication environments. Current solutions often lack adaptability
to evolving threats and efficient mechanisms for preserving
privacy and reducing computational overhead. This study proposes PrivNet, a framework that integrates generative AI with
advanced cryptographic and trust mechanisms to address these
limitations. The framework comprises the Quantum-Augmented
Holographic Cryptographic System (QAHCS) for dynamic
and secure key generation, the Neural Overlap Privacy
System (NOPS) for adaptive pseudonym morphing and
entropy-driven identity obfuscation, and the Self-Supervised
Generative Anomaly Detection (SS-GAI) module for real-time
threat modeling and counter-anomaly injection. The system
also incorporates Hyperledger Mesh for energy-efficient and
secure transaction validation. Simulations were performed using
NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, and Car-Hacking/VeReMi datasets for
300 minutes. The results demonstrate a 12% improvement in
detection accuracy, a 23% improvement in energy efficiency, and
a 22% reduction in resource utilization.
Index Terms— Intelligent transport systems, generative AI,
quantum computing, anomaly detection, data integrity, privacy
preservation.
Received 5 February 2025; revised 18 April 2025 and 30 May 2025;
accepted 11 July 2025. Date of publication 29 July 2025; date of current version 2 June 2026. This work was supported by the Princess
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Grant
PNURSP2025R97. The Associate Editor for this article was H. Karimipour.
(Corresponding authors: Korhan Cengiz; Kamran Ahmad Awan.)
Kamran Ahmad Awan is with the Department of Information Technology, The University of Haripur, Harīpur 22630, Pakistan (e-mail:
kamranawan.2955@gmail.com).
Korhan Cengiz is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Prince
Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 31952, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
kcengiz@pmu.edu.sa).
Ibrahim Alrashdi is with the Department of Computer Science, College
of Computer and Information Sciences, Al Jouf University, Sakaka 73211,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: irrashdi@ju.edu.sa).
Maha Abdelhaq is with the Department of Information Technology, College
of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman
University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
msabdelhaq@pnu.edu.sa).
Mueen Uddin is with the College of Computing and IT, University of Doha
for Science and Technology, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: mueen.malik@ieee.org).
Hamed Alsufyani is with the Department of Computer Science, College
of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 11673,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: h.alsufyani@seu.edu.sa).
Raed Alsaqour is with the Department of Information Technology, College
of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 93499,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: raed.ftsm@gmail.com).
Celestine Iwendi is with the Centre of Intelligence of Things, University of
Bolton, BL3 5AB Bolton, U.K. (e-mail: celestine.iwendi@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3589871

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE evolution of vehicular networks and Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) has been underpinned by significant
advancements in various technological domains [1], [2], [3].
Cryptographic systems have been central to the security
of communications, providing mechanisms to ensure data
integrity and confidentiality [4], [5]. Blockchain technologies
have emerged as tools for decentralized trust management [6],
[7], mitigating the risks associated with a single point of
failure. Meanwhile, anomaly detection methodologies have
gained traction in the domain of vehicular networks [8], [9],
[10], offering proactive measures to counter malicious activities and ensure uninterrupted operations. Current research
exhibits notable limitations that constrain the effectiveness
of these technologies in vehicular networks. For example,
while cryptographic systems introduce security [11], [12], their
computational demands often become a barrier to scalability,
especially in dynamic vehicular environments [13].
The increased reliance on such networks for safety-critical
as well as non-safety-critical operations increases the need
for mechanisms that are capable of protecting sensitive data
and ensuring network non-interruption [14], [15], [16]. Some
of the practical implications include improved passenger
safety, better traffic management, and improved public trust
in autonomous vehicle systems [17], [18]. The problem is
that existing solutions do not balance the demands for privacy,
security, and operational efficiency without making computational burdens excessively prohibitive.
The proposed PrivNet framework addresses fundamental
challenges in vehicular networks, rooted in quantum-inspired
cryptography, dynamic trust management, and anomaly
detection. It utilizes the quantum Augmented Holographic
Cryptographic System (QAHCS), generating multispectrum
interference patterns to build keys resistant to classical and
quantum threats. Hyperledger Mesh introduces chaotic clustering and dynamic fragmentation for decentralized trust with
minimal latency and reduced energy demand [19]. PrivNet
can support secure platooning, intersection management,
and V2X data exchanges in autonomous fleet coordination.
It also embeds a neural overlap privacy system that contextually morphs vehicular identities, preserving anonymity
while ensuring accountability. Anomaly detection is handled

1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

by a self-supervised generative module that adapts to emergent
threats and synthesizes counter-anomalous responses. The
main contribution of this research study can be summarized
as:
1) Novel encryption mechanism based on holographic
memory and quantum-state overlap simulation to generate dynamic, and multi-dimensional keys.
2) Decentralized trust mechanism employs chaotic clustering and stochastic fragmentation to replace conventional
blockchain consensus models.
3) Privacy preservation module is developed, employing neural mapping techniques to dynamically morph
vehicular identities to ensure robust anonymity while
maintaining traceability.
The structure of this article can be summarized as follows:
Section II presents an in-depth review of existing approaches.
Section III details the design, technical components, and
integration of the proposed PrivNet framework. Section IV
discusses the simulation setup, evaluation metrics, and results.
Finally, Section VI concludes the study.

6985

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF I DENTIFIED P ROBLEMS AND P ROPOSED S OLUTIONS

II. R ELATED W ORK
Anomaly detection and secure communication have been
pivotal areas of research in vehicular networks. Techniques
employing deep learning models have shown significant potential for intrusion detection, especially in complex in-vehicle
networks, as highlighted by methods utilizing convolutional
neural networks and adversarial generative networks [9], [20],
[21]. Blockchain-based mechanisms, such as multi-sharding
architectures, have been proposed to improve data sharing
efficiency, introducing novel avenues to improve privacy
and scalability in vehicular networks [7], [22]. Furthermore,
advances in cryptographic approaches, particularly those that
incorporate modular arithmetic and elliptic curve systems,
have focused on resisting specific threats, such as denial of
service attacks [5], [23], [24].
Distributed authentication schemes for roaming services
using smart contracts in mobile vehicular networks address
some of the above issues [25]. Such methods generally
suffer from some computational overheads and scalability bottlenecks. Privacy-preserving reputation management in
cloud-assisted vehicular networks has been another critical
domain which focuses on the protection of sensitive information while ensuring the trust value of the systems [26].
Joint Radar-Communication mechanisms against eavesdropping are robust transmission solutions tailored to vehicular
scenarios [18], [27]. This has been followed by neural
network-based methods that can explain the detection of
anomalies in vehicle network behaviors [10], [28]. Though
these methodologies address transparency and detection accuracy, they often struggle to adapt to emerging threat patterns.
Similarly, privacy-preserving access control schemes tailored
for software-defined vehicular networks have made strides in
combining efficiency with confidentiality, but their practical
deployment in large-scale networks remains limited [12], [24].
Current vehicular network solutions face several critical limitations. Deep learning models excel at anomaly

detection, but lack adaptability to evolving threats and
often fail to explain detected anomalies [16]. Blockchainbased approaches improve privacy and scalability; however,
issues such as high computational overhead and energy
inefficiency remain unresolved. Cryptographic mechanisms,
while robust against specific threats, are computationally
intensive and struggle to handle dynamic vehicular scenarios [2], [3]. Similarly, distributed authentication schemes
and privacy-preserving reputation systems face scalability
bottlenecks and overhead in real-time implementations. The
proposed PrivNet framework addresses these limitations by
integrating generative AI with quantum-inspired cryptographic
systems and blockchain mechanisms (see Table I). It combines
the Self-Supervised Generative Anomaly Detection (SS-GAI)
module for adaptive threat detection, the QAHCS module
for dynamic key generation, and the Hyperledger Mesh
module for energy-efficient transaction validation, achieving
significant improvements in privacy, detection accuracy, and
scalability.
III. P ROPOSED P RIV N ET F RAMEWORK
The PrivNet framework is a novel integration of advanced
cryptographic, privacy-preserving, and security mechanisms
designed to address the multifaceted challenges of vehicular
networks while ensuring scalability, adaptability, and efficiency in dynamic operational environments.

6986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

1) The communication process begins when vehicles
encrypt their messages through keys that NQIC produces
to establish secure data transmission.
2) HL-MDF receives encrypted messages that get
fragmented into multiple parts before being distributed
across decentralized chaotic ledger clusters for
processing.
3) The system uses NOPS to change vehicle identities
dynamically while preserving anonymity through
pseudonym adaptation for maintaining system
accountability.
4) The SS-GAI system tracks network behavior through
self-generated baseline comparisons to identify abnormal system activities which it then neutralizes.
5) The system enables authorized users to retrieve fragmented data which becomes secure information for
making real-time decisions about traffic management or
threat response.
B. Next-Gen Quantum-Inspired Cryptography (NQIC)
The modules of NQIC, QAHCS, offer an innovative encryption method by integrating quantum-like holographic memory
structures. Quantum-state overlap simulations begin with two
states, |φ1 ⟩ and |φ2 ⟩, in a multidimensional Hilbert space
as defined in Equations 1 and 2, respectively. The quantum
overlap between the two states is computed using Equation 3,
which incorporates the phase differences θi j .
Fig. 1.
Workflow of the proposed PrivNet framework where
the generative anomaly detection engine (SS-GAI) transforms vehicular tensor streams X (t) via anomaly induction and synthesis pipeline
fa

|φ1 ⟩ =

g(z)

X −→ Xanom −−→ Xgen → Xcorr , evaluated using metrics Pres = Teff ·Lopt
and suppression ratio Sanom . The RQAHCS module initiates encryption through
quantum state overlap ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ = αi β j eiθi j dφ and holographic interference
P i(ω x+ϕ y)
k
k
H(x, y) =
modulated by entropy dynamics η(κ) → κd
ke
for key generation K = F (H). The encrypted stream De = D ⊕ K
flows into the NOPS pseudonymization system, where neural mappings
⃗ 7→ Pi yield robust identities governed by morphing feedback
N : (Vi , t, C)
Mi = P f + 1Pi and entropy H(Pi ). The Hyperledger Mesh dynamically
n
fragments data D → {Fi }i=1
under entropy field E f , forms chaotic trust
graphs G = (V, E) with edge scores Ei j , and computes validation outcomes
{Rt , Ri } using stochastic consensus Tn ∼ G · St .

A. Framework Architecture
The PrivNet framework is designed as a modular and
interconnected system comprising four primary components:
QAHCS, HL-MDF, NOPS and SS-GAI. The integration of
PrivNet’s components is achieved through a layered architecture, where each layer performs distinct roles Figure 1.
The NQIC module provides secure communication through
encryption of V2V and V2I data. HL-MDF receives these
encrypted data and breaks them into smaller chaotic clusters for trust evaluation and decentralized storage. NOPS
changes vehicular identities actively to maintain anonymity
but enables authorized entities to trace vehicles. The SS-GAI
module operates simultaneously with the system by identifying potential threats through self-evolving anomaly detection
algorithms that analyze traffic patterns. The PrivNet framework functions in practical deployment through a step-by-step
iterative process:

n
X

αi |bi ⟩ ,

(1)

β j |c j ⟩ ,

(2)

αi β j eiθi j dφ.

(3)

i=1

|φ2 ⟩ =

m
X
j=1

Z
⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ =

The composite state |φc ⟩ and holographic interference pattern
H(x, y) are formulated in Equations 4 and 5. The encryption
key K is then derived via a Fourier transform of the interference pattern, as shown in Equation 6.
|φc ⟩ = ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ |φ1 ⟩ ⊗ |φ2 ⟩ ,
p
X
H(x, y) =
ei(ωk x+ϕk y) ,
k=1
Z ∞
K
H(x, y)e−i(ux+vy) d x dy.

(4)
(5)
(6)

−∞

Encrypted data De is generated using the key K as described
in Equation 7. To further enhance security, entropy-controlled
noise is added to the key in Equation 8, and decryption is performed using Equation 9. These steps, detailed in Equations 7
to 9, ensure data confidentiality even in adversarial settings.
De = D ⊕ K,
Kd = K + η(K),
D = De ⊕ Kd .

(7)
(8)
(9)

AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

Algorithm 1 NQIC Workflow
Input: Quantum states |φ1 ⟩, |φ2 ⟩; Plaintext data D
Output: Encrypted data De ; Security metric S
1 begin
2
Compute the encryption key K using the
quantum-state overlap ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩, the composite state
|φc ⟩, and the holographic interference pattern H(x, y)
(Equations 3, 4, 5, 6);
3
Encrypt the plaintext D using De = D ⊕ K and add
entropy-controlled noise η(K) to generate the
modified key Kd (Equations 7, 8);
4
Decrypt the data using D = De ⊕ Kd to verify the
process (Equation 9);
5
Evaluate the security metric S to quantify robustness
against adversarial threats (Equation 10);
6
Recalibrate encryption keys dynamically by
leveraging interference patterns I (x, y) and
amplitude coefficients An (Equations 11, 12);
7
Generate final encryption keys by applying the
Fourier transform on recalibrated interference
patterns (Equation 13);
8 end
9 return De , S

6987

chaotic clustering principles. Dynamic fragmentation begins
with data D divided into smaller fragments Fi :
Fi = F(D, α, β),
n
[
D=
Fi ,

(14)
(15)

i=1

Hi = H(Fi ).

(16)

Here, Equation 14 models the fragmentation process based
on parameters α and β, while 15 and 16 define the fragmentation’s hashed outputs. Entropy is added to ensure
unpredictability:
Ef =

n
X

∥Fi − Hi ∥2 ,

(17)

i=1

Fr = Fi + η(Fi ),

(18)

where E f (Equation 17) calculates entropy and η(Fi ) introduces controlled noise, ensuring fragment randomness. The
fragmented data is organized across a chaotic mesh graph
G = (V, E):
Ei j = σi j · exp(−∥Fi − F j ∥),
X
Pc =
Ei j log(Ei j ).

(19)
(20)

(i, j)∈E

Robustness of the encryption is evaluated using a security metric S, defined in Equation 10, which quantifies the deviation
between the actual and guessed keys.
∥K − Kg ∥
,
∥K∥

S=

N
X

An cos(ωn x + φn y),

(11)

(12)

m=1

The final step, shown in Equation 13, uses the Fourier
transform of the interference pattern to produce adaptive
encryption keys. The system’s ability to dynamically recalibrate holographic parameters as per Equations 11—13 ensures
strong, context-aware encryption for secure communication in
vehicular networks. The encryption and decryption process of
the QAHCS is described in Algorithm 1.
Z ∞Z ∞
F(I ) =
I (x, y)e−i(ux+vy) d x dy.
(13)

St =

m
X

Ck .

(22)

k=1

Equation 21 calculates the average trust score Ck for each
cluster, and 22 aggregates scores for the entire network. The
entire trust network Tn is modeled as:

∥Fr ∥
,
∥D∥
Ld = Rt × Pc .

Rt =

(24)
(25)

Equations 24 and 25 measure validation probability and associated latency reduction. Final security and verification rates
are determined iteratively:
T
X
Rt

,

(26)

Rv = S f · Ld ,

(27)

Sf =

t=1

The Hyperledger Mesh provides a transformative decentralized ledger mechanism by utilizing dynamic fragmentation and

(23)

Trust nodes validate incoming transactions using probabilistic
consensus, avoiding static blockchain mechanisms. The validation probability Rt is given as:

−∞ −∞

C. Dynamic Blockchain Alternative: Hyperledger Mesh

(21)

i=1

Tn = G × St .

M

1 X
|⟨bm |cn ⟩|2 ,
N

1 X
Ei j ,
N

Ck =

n=1

An =

N

(10)

To support dynamic encryption capabilities, the framework
includes interference-based key recalibration. Equation 11
describes the interference pattern I (x, y), while Equation 12
computes the amplitude coefficients An for each term.
I (x, y) =

Here, Equation 19 defines edge weights based on similarity
scores σi j , while Equation 20 computes chaotic entropy Pc
across the graph. Trust scores for clusters are determined
dynamically:

Tn

where 26 evaluates the overall security metric, and 27 computes the verification rate Rv .

6988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Algorithm 2 Dynamic Privacy Augmentation Mechanism
Workflow
⃗ previous
Input: Vehicle identity Vi , contextual factors C,
pseudonym Pprev
Output: Robust pseudonym Probust
1 begin
2
Generate pseudonym Pi using the neural mapping
function N (Equations 28, 29);
3
Compute overlap Poverlap and privacy metric Sprivacy
to assess pseudonym uniqueness (Equations 30, 31);
4
Calculate the adaptation rate Radapt to model
pseudonym dynamics (Equation 32);
5
Apply fuzzification to generate P f , and compute
entropy H(Pi ) for variability (Equations 33, 34);
6
Evaluate switching rates Tswitch and compute the final
pseudonym Pfinal (Equations 35, 36);
7
Calculate morphing dynamics Mi and contextual
variations 1Pi (Equations 37, 38);
8
Evaluate privacy resilience Qres and obfuscation
efficiency Robfuscation (Equations 39, 41);
9
Integrate iterative feedback to compute the robust
pseudonym Probust (Equations 42, 43);
10 end
11 return Probust

To introduce pseudonym variability, a fuzzification process is
applied:
P f = Pi + η(Pi ),
n
X
H(Pi ) = −
pk log( pk ),

The NOPS introduces a biologically inspired mechanism for
the preservation of privacy, utilizing dynamic pseudonym morphing and contextual adaptability. As shown in Algorithm 2,
fuzzy pseudonymization and entropy-driven variability facilitation system ensures robust privacy without compromising
system accountability.
The pseudonym generation begins with a neural mapping
function N , producing pseudonyms Pi from vehicle identity
Vi :
⃗
Pi = N (Vi , t, C),
n
X
⃗ =
⃗
wi j φ j (Vi , t, C).
N (Vi , t, C)

(28)
(29)

j=1

Here, N is a neural mapping function, C⃗ represents contextual
factors, and wi j denotes the weights connecting neurons.
Equation 28 generates pseudonyms, while 29 describes
the mapping process. To quantify the overlap between
pseudonyms and their privacy strength:
Z
⃗
Poverlap = Pi ∩ P j d C,
(30)
Sprivacy = 1 −
Radapt =

Poverlap
,
Pi ∪ P j

∂Pi
.
∂ C⃗

(31)
(32)

Equation 30 calculates the overlap between pseudonyms,
while 31 measures privacy efficiency. The adaptation rate
Radapt , as in 32, captures the dynamics of pseudonyms.

(34)

k=1

where Equation 33 defines the fuzzified pseudonym, and 34
calculates entropy H(Pi ) for variability. The pseudonym’s
dynamic behavior is modeled as:
Z t2
∂P f
dt,
(35)
Tswitch =
∂t
t1
Pfinal = P f ⊕ Pprev .
(36)
Equation 35 evaluates switching rates, while 36 generates
the final pseudonym after applying variability. The system
evaluates pseudonym morphing efficiency as follows:
Mi = Pfinal + 1Pi ,
∂Pfinal
⃗
· 1C,
1Pi =
∂ C⃗

(37)
(38)

where 37 models morphing dynamics, and 38 incorporates
contextual variations. To assess privacy resilience and obfuscation efficiency:
∥Mi − Pauth ∥
,
∥Pauth ∥
∥1Pi ∥
Smorph =
,
Z∥Pi ∥
Qres = 1 −

D. Dynamic Privacy Augmentation Mechanism

(33)

Robfuscation =

⃗
Smorph · Eobfuscation d C.

(39)
(40)
(41)

Equation 39 evaluates resilience against attacks, while 41
quantifies obfuscation efficiency. Finally, to enhance robustness, iterative morphing feedback is integrated:
∂Mi
,
∂t
(k)
Probust = lim Miter .
Miter = Mi + α
k→∞

(42)
(43)

Here, Equation 42 introduces iterative feedback, leading to the
robust pseudonym Probust as defined in 43.
E. Generative Anomaly Intelligence
The SS-GAI introduces an innovative framework for
dynamic anomaly detection and counter-anomaly synthesis.
The detailed process for dynamic anomaly detection and
counter-anomaly synthesis is described in Algorithm 3.
Anomaly detection initiates with traffic data T represented
as a multidimensional tensor X across time t:
X (t) = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn },
1
P(xi ) = e−E (xi ) ,
Z
E(xi ) = ∥X − Xnorm ∥2 .

(44)
(45)
(46)

Equations 44 through 46 define the traffic data structure, its
probability distribution P(xi ), and the energy function E(xi )

AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

Algorithm 3 Self-Supervised Generative Anomaly Detection (SS-GAI) Workflow
Input: Traffic data T , normalized behavior model Xnorm ,
threshold ϵ
Output: Final corrected data Xfinal , resilience metric Pres
1 Data Representation and Anomaly Detection
2 Represent T as tensor X (t); compute P(x i ), E(x i );
3 foreach x i ∈ X (t) do
4
if P(xi ) < ϵ then
5
Mark xi as anomaly, add to Xanom ;
6
end
7 end
8 Compute detection rate Rdet ;
9 Generative Counter-Anomalous Data Synthesis
10 foreach x j ∈ Xanom do
11
Sample Z ∼ N (0, I );
12
Generate Xgen = G(Z);
13
Compute loss Lgen ;
14
Synthesize corrected data Xcorr ;
15 end
16 Iterative Correction and Suppression
17 Aggregate Xcorr across iterations to form Xfinal ;
18 Calculate suppression efficiency Sanom ;
19 Performance Metrics Evaluation
20 Evaluate Teff , Lopt , and Pres ;
21 return Xfinal , Pres

to quantify deviation from normal behavior. The anomaly set
Xanom is identified and quantified as follows:
Xanom = {X (t) : P(xi ) < ϵ},
|Xanom |
,
Rdet =
|X |

(48)

G(Z) = Xgen ,
Z ∼ N (0, I ),

(49)
(50)

Lgen = ∥Xanom − G(Z)∥2 ,
Xcorr = Xanom + Xgen .

(51)
(52)

Equations 49 through 52 detail the generative process, utilizing
a latent variable Z sampled from a Gaussian distribution
to produce corrected data Xcorr . Counter-anomalous data
injection ensures iterative improvement, with subsequent evaluations performed using the following metrics:
n
[

T

1 X
Sanom ,
Teff =
T

(55)

Lopt = min(Ltotal ),
Pres = Teff · Lopt .

(56)
(57)

i=1

Equations 55 through 57 quantify the module’s performance,
combining efficiency and resilience metrics.
IV. S IMULATION AND E VALUATION
The experimental simulations were performed using
MATLAB, integrating TensorFlow and PyTorch libraries. The
NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 datasets were selected to benchmark intrusion detection [29], [30], while the Car-Hacking and
VeReMi datasets provided vehicle network-specific anomalies [31], [32], [33]. Comparative analyzes is perform
against NADS [20], MSBC [22], DASC [25], MSRD [23],
CBACS [24], PPRU [26], STRC [27], and XNAD [28].
A. Dataset Preprocessing and Partitioning
N
Let D = {xi , yi }i=1
denote the dataset, where xi ∈ Rn
represents the feature vector and yi ∈ Y the corresponding
label. For NSL-KDD, categorical features were transformed
via φ : C → {0, 1}k using one-hot encoding, and numerical
features were scaled by min-max normalization:
( j)

( j)

xi

=

xi − min(x ( j) )
,
max(x ( j) ) − min(x ( j) )

(53)

∥Xfinal ∥
,
∥Xorig ∥

(54)

i=1

where Equation 53 aggregates corrected data across iterations,
and Equation 54 calculates suppression efficiency. To further

∀ j ∈ [1, n]

yielding D̃NSL . The transformed set was partitioned such that
D̃NSL = Dtrain ∪ Dtest , with |Dtrain | = 0.7N and |Dtest | =
0.3N . For CICIDS2017, let Ft denote a set of network flows
in window t, and let ρ(x (i) , x ( j) ) be the Pearson correlation
between features. Redundant features satisfying ρ ≥ 0.9 were
removed, and standardization applied:
( j)

xi

( j)

=

xi

− µ( j)
,
σ ( j)

µ( j) = E[x ( j) ], σ ( j) =

p
Var [x ( j) ]

The resulting dataset D̃CIC was split into training, validation,
and test sets in the ratio 3 : 1 : 1. Car-Hacking data were
represented as H = {(m i , ti )}, where m i are CAN frames.
Byte vectors were extracted by applying ψ : Hex → R8 , and
frames with entropy H (m i ) < ε were discarded:
H (m i ) = −

8
X
b=1

(i)
,
Xcorr

Sanom = 1 −

refine performance, threat efficiency Teff and resilience probability Pres are computed:

(47)

where Equation 47 isolates anomalies, and Equation 48 evaluates the detection rate. The detected anomalies are analyzed
using a generative model G, synthesizing counter-anomalous
data Xgen :

Xfinal =

6989

pb log pb ,

pb =

count(b)
8

Retained samples were partitioned into Htrain and Htest with
70% and 30% proportions, respectively. For VeReMi, let V =
{(gi , θi , di )} be the set of GPS logs, heading deviations, and
delays. Samples with ∥gi ∥ < δ were pruned, and labeling was
aligned with ground truth λi ∈ {0, 1}. The final filtered dataset
was divided into Vtrain and Vtest with a 60:40 ratio.

6990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

PrivNet achieved a resistance level of 98. 5%, supported
by the ability of generative AI to simulate advanced attack
patterns. Quantum-resistance tests revealed PrivNet’s effectiveness, scoring 96.7%, outperforming the nearest contender,
STRC, by 7.3%.
As shown in Figure 3, the PrivNet framework again outperformed its peers. With an entropy score of 98.3% and a
negligible probability of re-use of keys of 0. 02%, it ensured
exceptional cryptographic robustness. The resistance to brute
force and quantum attacks stood at 97. 9% and 95. 8%,
respectively, and generative AI effectively mitigates risks.
The results of the Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets are
consolidated in Figure 3. PrivNet recorded its highest entropy
scores: 98. 9% and 99. 2%, respectively, indicating near perfect
randomness in key generation. The resistance to brute force
and quantum attacks was consistently high (98.7% and 97.5%),
reflecting the system’s ability to adapt to various scenarios in
the vehicular network.
Fig. 2. Performance evaluation of PrivNet showcasing pseudonym reuse rate,
identity obfuscation success rate.

B. Privacy Preservation Level
The evaluation of the NOPS focuses on its ability to
anonymize vehicular identities while preserving the integrity
of privacy. The performance of PrivNet is compared with
NADS, MSBC, DASC, MSRD, CBACS, STRC, and XNAD
during a simulation period of 300 minutes. The results for the
NSL-KDD dataset are shown in Figure 2. PrivNet achieved
the highest identity obfuscation success rate of 96.5%. The
pseudonym reuse rate was limited to 0.03%, indicating a robust
system for preserving privacy. The fidelity of the synthetic
identities generated by NOPS reached 94.7%, demonstrating its effectiveness in producing indistinguishable synthetic
profiles.
Figure 2 presents the results for the CICIDS2017 dataset.
PrivNet achieved a pseudonym reuse rate of only 0.02%. Its
success rate in identity obfuscation was 97 1%, demonstrating its adaptability in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, the
fidelity of synthetic identities reached 95.2%, highlighting the
reliability of generative AI in the creation of indistinguishable pseudonyms. Figure 2 consolidates the results for the
Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets. PrivNet achieved near-zero
pseudonym reuse rates (0.01%), indicating unmatched robustness in identity anonymization. The identity obfuscation
success rates reached 98.3% and 97.8%, respectively. The
fidelity of the synthetic identities was consistently high
(96. 8% for Car Hacking and 96. 3% for VeReMi).
C. Cryptographic Strength
The cryptographic strength of the proposed framework,
“PrivNet”, was evaluated using QAHCS. Key metrics such
as cryptographic key entropy, key reuse probability, and
resistance to brute force and quantum-based attacks. The
results of the NSL-KDD dataset are summarized in Figure 3.
The proposed QAHCS demonstrated higher entropy values
(97.8%) and a significantly reduced probability of key reuse
(0. 04%) compared to baseline models. Although MSBC and
DASC exhibited moderate resistance to brute force attacks,

D. Latency Analysis
Latency evaluation aims to assess the efficiency of secure
communication facilitated by PrivNet in vehicular networks
(VANETs). The latency results for the NSL-KDD dataset
are summarized in Figure 4. PrivNet demonstrated a superior end-to-end latency of 2.6 milliseconds (ms) on average,
outperforming all baseline models. Comparatively, NADS and
MSBC exhibited higher latencies of 4.2 ms and 4.0 ms, respectively, due to their reliance on non-generative frameworks.
The trust management latency for PrivNet was reduced by
approximately 18% compared to STRC.
Figure 4 illustrates the results for the CICIDS2017 dataset.
PrivNet achieved an overall latency of 2.3 ms, reflecting
a reduction 20% compared to CBACS and STRC. The
encryption latency for PrivNet was optimized at 1.0 ms,
demonstrating its efficiency in real-time operations. Figure 4
presents the combined analysis for the Car-Hacking and
VeReMi datasets. PrivNet recorded an end-to-end latency of
2.1 ms, demonstrating the lowest latency among all models
tested. The PrivNet encryption module performed at 0.9 ms
that indicates a high degree of operational efficiency.
E. Anomaly Detection Accuracy
The SS-GAI forms a core component of the PrivNet
framework, enabling adaptive threat modeling and counteranomalous data synthesis. Figure 5 summarizes the performance of PrivNet and the baseline models for anomaly
detection using the NSL-KDD dataset. PrivNet achieved a
detection rate of 98.7%, outperforming STRC and XNAD,
which recorded 94.5% and 93.2%, respectively. The false
positive rate for PrivNet was reduced to 1.1%, attributed to
the precision of generative AI in producing realistic counteranomalous scenarios.
The results of the CICIDS2017 dataset are presented in
Figure 5. PrivNet demonstrated remarkable adaptability at
97.5%, significantly outperforming other models. Its detection
rate of 99.1% highlights the efficacy of SS-GAI in identifying
complex attack vectors. Baseline models such as CBACS and
STRC showed strong but comparatively lower performance,

AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

6991

Fig. 3. Comparative evaluation of PrivNet against state-of-the-art models showcasing pseudonym reuse rates, identity obfuscation success rates, and synthetic
fidelity.

F. Energy Efficiency

Fig. 4. Latency evaluation of PrivNet compared to state-of-the-art models
depicting encryption, trust management.

with detection rates of 94.8% and 95.2%, respectively. The
false positive rate of PrivNet of 0. 9% underscores its ability
to minimize erroneous classifications. Figure 5 provides a
combined analysis of the Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets.
PrivNet achieved a detection rate of 98.9% with a false
positive rate of 1.3%, outperforming all baselines. Generative AI significantly improved adaptability to unseen attack
vectors, achieving 96.8%. The PrivNet precision score of
97.6% further emphasizes its effectiveness in creating robust
countermeasures.

This section analyzes the energy consumption of the
Hyperledger Mesh system integrated with generative AI
for optimized transaction validation. PrivNet exhibited a
significant reduction in energy consumption, with an average
energy per transaction of 0.52 Joules, compared to 0.85 Joules
in NADS. The PrivNet system achieved an overall energy
efficiency rate of 61% which surpassed both MSBC and DASC
baseline models at 45% and 48% respectively. The implementation of generative AI decreased computational resource
utilization by 22%.
PrivNet proved to be highly energy-efficient as it consumed
an average of 0.45 Joules per transaction while surpassing all
baseline models. The system achieved an energy efficiency
rate of 65% which exceeded the 50% and 52% efficiency
rates of MSBC and STRC respectively. The simulation period
saw a 25% decrease in computational resource utilization
because of the generative AI integration. PrivNet demonstrated superior performance than all baseline models through
its 0.56 Joules average transaction energy consumption and
60% energy efficiency. The energy efficiency results showed
PrivNet performing better than MSRD and STRC since they
achieved 51% and 53% respectively. The implementation of
generative AI for anomaly validation decreased computational
resource usage by 23% which substantially improved energy
efficiency throughout the 300-minute simulation period.
V. D ISCUSSION
The combination of generative AI with quantum-inspired
cryptography and dynamic blockchain mechanisms enhanced

6992

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Comparative analysis of PrivNet and state-of-the-art models evaluating detection rate, false positive rate, adaptability.

both anomaly detection accuracy and privacy preservation and
energy efficiency. The SS-GAI module showed its ability to
detect new threat patterns better than baseline models by
achieving detection accuracy improvements of up to 12%
across multiple datasets. The analysis of privacy preservation mechanisms showed that the Neural Overlap Privacy
System (NOPS) improved pseudonym reuse and obfuscation
success. The framework used dynamic pseudonym morphing and entropy-driven variability to achieve an 18% higher
anonymization success rate than competing models. PrivNet’s
modular structure supports compatibility with DSRC and
C-V2X protocols that allows integration into existing vehicular
communication stacks without architectural disruption. Additionally, hardware resource limitations and latency sensitivity
have been addressed through lightweight encryption schemes
and asynchronous anomaly detection. The Hyperledger Mesh
module enabled energy-efficient transaction validation reduces
energy consumption per transaction by 23% while maintaining
scalability. Comparisons with models such as NADS and
MSBC confirmed PrivNet’s ability to balance performance and
efficiency.
VI. C ONCLUSION
The integration of innovative technologies in vehicular networks has significant potential to improve security, efficiency,
and privacy. The proposed PrivNet framework introduces a
novel approach by combining generative AI with blockchain

mechanisms to address a critical challenges in vehicular security. The practical implications of this work offer substantial
improvements in real-time vehicular communication systems.
PrivNet demonstrates strong applicability to real-world scenarios, including secure autonomous driving, traffic coordination,
and vehicle-to-infrastructure authentication. Performance analysis reveals that PrivNet outperforms state-of-the-art models,
with an improvement in energy efficiency of up to 23%,
improvements in detection accuracy of 12%, and a reduction in resource utilization 22%. Future work will explore
the enhancement of the scalability and adaptability of this
framework across diverse vehicular networks.
DATA AVAILABILITY S TATEMENT
This study utilised two publicly available intrusion-detection
benchmarks hosted on IEEE Dataport. The first is the
NSL-KDD dataset (DOI: 10.21227/425a-3e55; dataset URL:
https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/nsl-kdd). The second is
the CICIDS2017 dataset (DOI: 10.21227/akxq-9v09; dataset
URL: https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/cicids2017).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers
Supporting Project Number (PNURSP2025R97), Princess
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Li, Y. Chen, K. Li, C. Wang, and B. Chen, “Transportation Internet: A
sustainable solution for intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15818–15829, Dec. 2023.
[2] G. Sun, L. Song, H. Yu, V. Chang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “V2 V
routing in a VANET based on the autoregressive integrated moving
average model,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 908–922,
Jan. 2019.
[3] G. Sun, Y. Zhang, D. Liao, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Bustrajectory-based street-centric routing for message delivery in urban
Vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 8,
pp. 7550–7563, Aug. 2018.
[4] Z. Ying, S. Cao, X. Liu, Z. Ma, J. Ma, and R. H. Deng, “PrivacySignal:
Privacy-preserving traffic signal control for intelligent transportation system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16290–16303,
Sep. 2022.
[5] J. Xiao et al., “CALRA: Practical conditional anonymous and leakageresilient authentication scheme for vehicular crowdsensing communication,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1273–1285,
Jan. 2025.
[6] C. Gu, B. Ma, and D. Hu, “A dependable and efficient decentralized
trust management system based on consortium blockchain for intelligent
transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 19430–19443, Dec. 2024.
[7] Y. Chang et al., “Hierarchical adaptive cross–coupled control of traffic
signals and vehicle routes in large-scale road network,” Comput.-Aided
Civil Infrastruct. Eng., May 2025, doi: 10.1111/mice.13508.
[8] G. Zheng, Q. Ni, and Y. Lu, “Privacy-aware anomaly detection and
notification enhancement for VANET based on collaborative intrusion
detection system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12,
pp. 21172–21182, Dec. 2024.
[9] D. Song, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, and J. Han, “Modeling lane-changing
spatiotemporal features based on the driving behavior generation mechanism of human drivers,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 284, Jul. 2025,
Art. no. 127974.
[10] X. Peng, S. Song, X. Zhang, M. Dong, and K. Ota, “Task offloading
for IoAV under extreme weather conditions using dynamic price driven
double broad reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 10, pp. 17021–17033, May 2024.
[11] J. Liu, L. Zhang, C. Li, J. Bai, H. Lv, and Z. Lv, “Blockchain-based
secure communication of intelligent transportation digital twins system,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22630–22640,
Nov. 2022.
[12] D. Song, J. Zhao, B. Zhu, J. Han, and S. Jia, “Subjective driving
risk prediction based on spatiotemporal distribution features of human
Driver’s cognitive risk,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11,
pp. 16687–16703, Nov. 2024.
[13] S. Zhang et al., “Federated learning in intelligent transportation systems:
Recent applications and open problems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3259–3285, May 2024.
[14] X. Feng, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, J. Li, A. Shen, and M. D. Alshehri,
“Vulnerability-aware task scheduling for edge intelligence empowered
trajectory analysis in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4661–4670, Apr. 2023.
[15] Y. Lai, Y. Xu, D. Mai, Y. Fan, and F. Yang, “Optimized large-scale road
sensing through crowdsourced vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 3878–3889, Apr. 2022.
[16] Z. Xiao et al., “Predicting urban region heat via learning Arrive-StayLeave behaviors of private cars,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10843–10856, Sep. 2023.

6993

[17] S. A. Siddiqui, A. Mahmood, Q. Z. Sheng, H. Suzuki, and W. Ni, “Trust
in vehicles: Toward context-aware trust and attack resistance for the
Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 9546–9560, Sep. 2023.
[18] Y. Yao, F. Shu, X. Cheng, H. Liu, P. Miao, and L. Wu, “Automotive radar
optimization design in a spectrally crowded V2I communication environment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8253–8263,
Aug. 2023.
[19] G. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Intersection fogbased distributed routing for V2V communication in urban vehicular
ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 6,
pp. 2409–2426, Jun. 2020.
[20] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane,
“NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intra-vehicular
networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 22596–22606, Nov. 2022.
[21] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent DeepLearning-Based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854,
Feb. 2023.
[22] J. Huang et al., “Secure data sharing over vehicular networks based on
multi-sharding blockchain,” ACM Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 1–23, Mar. 2024.
[23] M. A. Al-Shareeda and S. Manickam, “MSR-DoS: Modular square rootbased scheme to resist denial of service (DoS) attacks in 5G-enabled
vehicular networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 120606–120615,
2022.
[24] X. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Fan, I. Bolodurina, and J. Cui, “CBACS:
A privacy-preserving and efficient cache-based access control scheme
for software defined vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 17, pp. 1930–1945, 2022.
[25] K. Xue, X. Luo, Y. Ma, J. Li, J. Liu, and D. S. L. Wei, “A distributed
authentication scheme based on smart contract for roaming service in
mobile vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 5,
pp. 5284–5297, May 2022.
[26] Z. Liu et al., “PPRU: A privacy-preserving reputation updating scheme
for cloud-assisted vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1–16, Feb. 2025.
[27] Y. Yao, F. Shu, Z. Li, X. Cheng, and L. Wu, “Secure transmission scheme
based on joint radar and communication in mobile vehicular networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 10027–10037,
Sep. 2023.
[28] S. Aziz et al., “Anomaly detection in the Internet of vehicular networks
using explainable neural networks (xNN),” Mathematics, vol. 10, no. 8,
p. 1267, Apr. 2022.
[29] G. Mohi-ud-din, “NSL-KDD,” IEEE Dataport, 2018, doi: 10.21227/42
5a-3e55.
[30] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, Jan. 2018.
[31] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[32] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[33] J. Kamel, M. Wolf, R. W. van der Hei, A. Kaiser, P. Urien, and
F. Kargl, “VeReMi extension: A dataset for comparable evaluation of
misbehavior detection in VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.
(ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.