IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

2007

Proactive Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection for
Consumer IoT Applications Using Lightweight
Ensemble Learning With Anomaly Analysis
Bipasha Guha Roy, Deepsubhra Guha Roy , Piyali Datta , Surbhi Bhatia Khan , Senior Member, IEEE,
Asma Alshuhail, and Oumaima Saidani

Abstract— The rapid proliferation of consumer IoT devices
from smart home hubs to wearables has expanded the attack
surface, introducing new security and privacy challenges. Traditional Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) often rely on implicit
trust and heavyweight computation, making them unsuitable for
resource-constrained consumer electronics. This paper presents
a proactive, lightweight zero-trust IDS tailored for consumer
applications. Our two-layer architecture integrates a supervised
stacked ensemble classifier (Random Forest, XGBoost, LightGBM) to detect known threats and an unsupervised DBSCAN
(Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise)
-based anomaly detector to identify zero-day attacks. We introduce a feature reduction pipeline driven by correlation and
variance analysis, reducing the feature set by over 50% to fit
edge hardware constraints. Evaluated on the CICIDS collection
dataset (over 9 million flows), the framework achieves 98.48%
accuracy while maintaining real-time processing capability on
Raspberry Pi-class hardware. By continuously scrutinizing both
malicious and benign traffic, our system delivers proactive, trustenhancing defense critical to modern consumer IoT applications.

Received 13 August 2025; revised 17 September 2025 and 21 October
2025; accepted 9 November 2025. Date of publication 21 November 2025;
date of current version 25 March 2026. This work was supported in part by
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, through
the Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting
Project, under Grant PNURSP2026R760; in part by the Deanship of Scientific
Research, Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King
Faisal University, Saudi Arabia, under Grant KFU254151. (Corresponding
authors: Deepsubhra Guha Roy; Asma Alshuhail.)
Bipasha Guha Roy and Deepsubhra Guha Roy are with the IEM Centre
of Excellence for Cloud Computing and IoT, Department of CSE (AIML),
Institute of Engineering and Management, University of Engineering and
Management, Kolkata 700091, India (e-mail: mahatobipasha.91@gmail.com;
roysubhraguha@gmail.com).
Piyali Datta is with the IEM-IIT Mandi Centre for Joint Research on
Human Computer Interaction, Department of CSE (AIML), Institute of
Engineering and Management, University of Engineering and Management,
Kolkata 700091, India (e-mail: piyali.datta@iem.edu.in).
Surbhi Bhatia Khan is with the School of Science, Engineering and
Environment, University of Salford, M5 4WT Manchester, U.K., also
with the Centre for Research Impact and Outcome, Chitkara University,
Rajpura, Punjab 140401, India, and also with the Division of Research
and Development, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara 144411, India
(e-mail: s.khan138@ieee.org).
Asma Alshuhail is with the Department of Information Systems, College
of Computer Science and Information Technology, King Faisal University,
Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: alshuhail@kfu.edu.sa).
Oumaima Saidani is with the Department of Information Systems, College
of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
oscaidani@pnu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3635619

Index Terms— Zero-trust, intrusion detection, consumer IoT
security, ensemble learning, anomaly detection, edge computing,
adaptable defense.

I. I NTRODUCTION

C

ONSUMER applications such as smart home hubs,
wearable health trackers, and connected appliances have
become deeply integrated into daily life. However, this
hyper-connectivity also exposes consumer devices to sophisticated cyber threats. Traditional IDS solutions, typically
designed for centralized infrastructures, often assume implicit
trust among components and demand computational resources
unsuitable for resource-constrained consumer devices [1].
In response, zero-trust security frameworks are gaining traction, treating all entities as untrusted by default and requiring
continuous verification. Yet, proactively detecting known and
unknown threats under stringent hardware and latency constraints remains challenging. This work presents a lightweight,
two-layer zero-trust IDS designed specifically for consumer
IoT applications. The system combines supervised ensemble
learning for high-accuracy detection of known threats with
unsupervised anomaly detection to proactively uncover zeroday attacks.
Designing effective intrusion detection for consumer IoT
environments requires lightweight deployment, detection of
unknown threats, and trust enforcement. The literature addressing the following domains is discussed here.
A. Zero-Trust Security in IoT
Zero-Trust Architecture (ZTA) assumes no implicit trust
across devices or networks and enforces continuous verification [2], [3]. While ZTA has gained traction in enterprise
contexts, its extension to consumer IoT is still emerging [4].
Alalmaie [5] implemented a Zero-Trust edge IDS, integrating
access control and anomaly detection for smart city IoT, but
their deep learning approach introduces latency and energy
challenges.
B. Lightweight IDS for Consumer IoT
IoT-focused IDSs often prioritize low computational cost.
Roy [6] proposed an IDS combining Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) for
smart homes, achieving moderate accuracy with minimal
resource demands. Bafghi [7] introduced LightGBM-based

1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF E XISTING IDS A PPROACHES FOR I OT S ECURITY

lightweight IDS with efficient training but limited generalization to unknown [8]. These solutions either lack anomaly
detection or do not integrate proactive ZT policies [9].

TABLE II
S YMBOL TABLE : N OTATION AND D ESCRIPTION

C. Ensemble and Hybrid Learning Approaches
Nassreddine [10] evaluated ensemble classifiers for network
attacks, showing robustness but requiring powerful nodes.
Chen [11] adopted a hybrid deep RL and autoencoder model
to capture temporal dependencies, but their design suits cloud
settings, not edge devices.
D. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in IoT
Unsupervised models like DBSCAN are valuable for zeroday detection. Alsmadi and Xu [12] demonstrated DBSCAN’s
utility for IoT botnet detection. However, unsupervised models
alone often misclassify benign outliers as [4], [13]. Our
work combines the strengths of supervised ensemble learning
and unsupervised DBSCAN in a two-layer ZT framework
optimized for consumer devices.
Table I compares selected works across key dimensions.
As seen, few systems simultaneously enforce zero-trust, support lightweight edge deployment, and detect novel threats.
Our approach addresses this triad by integrating supervised
ensemble classifiers with unsupervised clustering in a layered
zero-trust design suitable for consumer applications.
II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND M OTIVATION
The proliferation of consumer edge- IoT devices has
reshaped the digital landscape, embedding computation into
daily-use electronics such as smart thermostats, security cameras, wearable devices, and home automation systems using
IoT applications and protocols [16], [17]. Despite their growing ubiquity, these devices often remain highly vulnerable
to cyberattacks due to their inherent design constraints and
lack of robust, integrated security frameworks. Consumer IoT
environments pose distinct challenges:
• Resource Constraints: Most devices operate on
low-power processors with limited RAM and storage, severely restricting the use of conventional or
compute-intensive security solutions [18].
• Heterogeneity and Dynamism: IoT networks are
dynamic, composed of a wide variety of protocols, device
types, and transient connectivity states-complicating the
design of generalized intrusion detection [19], [20].
• High Privacy Sensitivity: Consumer data, including
voice, video, health, and location information, necessitates privacy-preserving models with minimal data
leakage and low tolerance for false outcome [21], [22].

Conventional IDS frameworks either rely heavily on centralization or operate under static trust assumptions, rendering
them inadequate for zero-day resilience and continuous
verification in evolving consumer IoT topologies. Additionally, models optimized for enterprise-scale networks are
computationally impractical for constrained platforms Raspberry Pi, and can be implemented using ESP32, or similar
microcontroller-based systems. To address these gaps, our
motivation stems from the following core objectives:
• Proactive Zero-Trust Enforcement: Design an intrusion
detection framework grounded in zero-trust architecture
principles, where no entity (internal or external) is trusted
by default (all communication is continuously verified).
• Dual-Mode Detection Capability: Integrate both supervised and unsupervised techniques to detect known
(signature-based) and zero-day (anomaly-based) attacks
using a layered ensemble structure.
• Edge-Compatible Efficiency: Ensure the proposed
model maintains a lightweight computational footprint,
enabling real-time inference and low power consumption
on consumer-grade embedded platforms.
This research is driven by the growing need to operationalize zero-trust principles in the context of consumer IoT, where
attack surfaces are wide, defense capabilities are fragmented,
and user tolerance for false alerts is minimal. The goal is to
build a trustworthy, scalable, and proactive defense mechanism
tailored to the realities of consumer device security.
III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
A. Proposed Architecture: Layered Design
To satisfy the stringent security, efficiency, and scalability
demands of consumer IoT applications, we propose a layered

ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS

2009

achieving both horizontal and vertical trust enforcement.
By avoiding centralized inference or deep learning models, the
architecture is both edge-compliant and latency-aware. Feature reduction was carried out using correlation filtering and
variance thresholding, while DBSCAN parameters (ε, minPts)
were empirically tuned via grid search to balance anomaly
precision and false positive rate.

Fig. 1. Layered architecture of the proposed proactive zero-trust IDS for
consumer IoT applications.

Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection System (ZT-IDS) designed
for proactive threat mitigation. The architecture, illustrated
in Fig. 1, follows the foundational zero-trust paradigm of
continuous verification and operates in two tightly coupled
analytical layers. This modular design is optimized to execute
on resource-constrained edge devices such as Raspberry Pi,
smart home hubs, or IoT gateways, where memory and processing power are at a premium.
1) Feature Reduction Module: Incoming traffic flows are
first preprocessed and passed through a lightweight feature
engineering unit that employs correlation-based filtering and
variance thresholding. Redundant or low-informative features
are discarded, reducing dimensionality while preserving discriminatory power. This module ensures the downstream
classifiers receive a compact representation x ′ ∈ Rk , where
k ≪ d, the original feature space dimension.
2) Layer 1 – Ensemble-Based Classifier: The first detection
layer is a supervised ensemble meta-classifier that identifies known attack patterns employing a stacked ensemble of
three heterogeneous learners: Random Forest (RF), XGBoost
(XGB), and LightGBM (LGB). Each base model produces
a probabilistic prediction, which is aggregated using a soft
voting mechanism or a learned meta-layer:

1
f RF (x ′ ) + f XGB (x ′ ) + f LGB (x ′ )
3
If the ensemble confidence exceeds a classification threshold θ, the flow is labeled as malicious and appropriate alerts
are generated. Otherwise, it is forwarded to the anomaly
detection layer for deeper scrutiny.
3) Layer 2 – DBSCAN-based Anomaly Detector: Traffic
instances deemed benign by Layer 1 are subjected to unsupervised clustering using DBSCAN. This layer targets the
detection of zero-day or previously unseen attacks by isolating
outliers in high-dimensional space. Formally, for each point x ′ :
Pens (x ′ ) =

Nε (x ′ ) = {x j ∈ Rk : ∥x ′ − x j ∥ ≤ ε}
If |Nε (x ′ )| < minPts, the sample is treated as an anomaly and
flagged as a potential zero-day threat. Otherwise, it is logged
as legitimate traffic.
This dual-layer structure enforces a proactive defense
cycle: Layer 1 detects known threats with high precision,
while Layer 2 continuously monitors for emergent anomalies

B. Research Problem Formulation and Hypotheses
This work is guided by two core research questions, each
linked to a hypothesis that is evaluated through the proposed
layered intrusion detection framework.
RQ1: Can a lightweight ensemble model accurately classify
known attacks in consumer IoT traffic while maintaining edge
deployability?
1) Hypothesis H1 : A compact ensemble classifier E =
{ f RF , f XGB , f LGB } with dimensionality-reduced input x ′ ∈ Rk
can achieve classification accuracy A ≥ τ1 (e.g., 95%) on
known attack instances with total inference time TE < δ ms
on edge hardware. Formally,


Ex∼Dknown ⊮ arg max E(x ′ ) = y ≥ τ1 , TE < δ
(1)
where Dknown is the known-attack traffic distribution, and
⊮(·) is the indicator function.
RQ2: Can DBSCAN identify previously unseen (zero-day)
attacks with minimal false positives when applied only to
Layer-1-benign flows?
2) Hypothesis H2 : Applying DBSCAN on a filtered set of
benign-labeled samples X benign can detect novel attacks with
anomaly precision P ≥ τ2 (e.g., 90%) and false-positive rate
F P R < γ . Let:
DBSCANε (X benign ) = C1 , . . . , Cn , O

(2)

where O represents outlier points, then:
|O ∩ Dzero-day |
≥ τ2 ,
|O|

FPR =

|O ∩ Dbenign |
<γ
|Dbenign |

(3)

where Dzero-day and Dbenign denote zero-day and truly benign
instances, respectively.
C. Methodology: Mathematical Formulation and Sequence
Let x ∈ Rd be an input feature vector after reduction.
1) Layer 1: Stacked Ensemble: Each base classifier h m (x)
maps x to a probability of being malicious: pm =
h m (x), m ∈ {1, . . . , M}. The ensemble combines these
using a meta-classifier g (logistic regression): pens (x) =
g h 1 (x), h 2 (x), . . . , h M (x) . Traffic is flagged malicious if
pens (x) ≥ θens . While the computational complexity of
Random Forest is O(n log n) per tree, XGBoost / LightGBM
needs O(K d log n), with K boosting iterations.
2) Layer 2: DBSCAN-Based Anomaly Detector: Remaining
benign traffic passes to DBSCAN. For sample pairs (xi , x j ),
d(xi , x j ) ≤ ε. Samples with fewer than minPts neighbors
become outliers and are reclassified as malicious. The complexity is O(n 2 ) (optimized to O(n log n) with indexing).
3) Knowledge Base and Continuous Verification: The IDS
continuously updates the statistical knowledge base, i.e., mean
and variance of benign flow as well as the cluster structure
from DBSCAN, enabling adaptive detection over time.

2010

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

D. Dbscan Clustering
Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd be the set of benign-labeled
vectors. For each point xi , define:

TABLE III
E VALUATION OF L AYER -1 AND L AYER -2 FOR D IFFERENT I OT S CENARIOS

Nε (xi ) = {x j ∈ X : ∥xi − x j ∥ ≤ ε}
Points with |Nε (xi )| < minPts are labeled outliers. The hyperparameter (ϵ and minPts) tuning is performed by assessing the
quality of the cluster using the Silhouette Score.
E. Evaluation Metric Formulation
To comprehensively assess the performance of the proposed
Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection System (ZT-IDS), we formulate
a multi-perspective evaluation model composed of classification accuracy, anomaly precision, false positive rate, and
resource efficiency.
Layer 1: Ensemble Classifier Metrics are considered to be
the Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC) [23].
N with true labels
Let the set of test samples be X = {xi}i=1
N
N
Y = {yi}i=1 and predicted labels Ŷ = { ŷi}i=1
from the
ensemble classifier E. Then, we define:
TP +TN
(4)
Accuracy =
T P + T N + FP + FN
TP
Precision =
(5)
T P + FP
TP
Recall (TPR) =
(6)
T P + FN
Precision · Recall
(7)
F1-score = 2 ·
Precision + Recall
Z 1
AUC-ROC =
T P R(F P R −1 (x)) d x
(8)
0

where T P, T N , F P, and F N represent true positives,
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively [23].
Layer 2: Anomaly Detection Metrics (DBSCAN) Let
X benign ⊂ X be the samples labeled as benign by Layer 1.
DBSCAN partitions these into K clusters and a set of
outliers O:
DBSCANε (X benign ) ⇒ {C1 , . . . , C K },

O = Noise

(9)

OTP : true zero-day anomalies correctly marked as outliers
and OFP : benign points wrongly marked as outliers.
|OTP |
Anomaly Precision =
(10)
|OTP | + |OFP |
|OFP |
False Positive RateLayer 2 =
(11)
|Xbenign |
Additionally, we define the Noise Ratio as:
ρ=

|O|
|Xbenign |

(12)

F. Algorithm: Two-Layered Proactive Zero-Trust IDS
Algorithm 1 summarizes the layered intrusion detection
pipeline integrating both known and zero-day attack detection. Formally, Layer-1 ensemble classification is defined as
pens (x) = 13 ( f R F (x) + f X G B (x) + f LG B (x)), and Layer-2

anomaly detection via DBSCAN as Nε (x) = {x j : ∥x − x j ∥ ≤
ε}, |Nε (x)| < minPts ⇒ x ∈ O.
DBSCAN was selected over alternatives such as Isolation
Forest and k-means because it does not assume linear separability or fixed cluster counts, making it more suitable for
sparse IoT traffic where attack flows appear as density outliers.
As shown in Table III, our ensemble consistently outperforms
lightweight baselines such as Decision Tree and SVM across
all scenarios, justifying its selection for Layer-1.
Algorithm 1 Two-Layered Proactive Zero-Trust IDS
Require: Input network flow x , lightweight ensemble classifier g , anomaly detector A
(e.g., DBSCAN), thresholds θens , θan
1: x ′ ← FEATUREREDUCTION(x)
{Preprocessing and normalization}
2: Layer-1: pens ← g(h 1 (x ′ ), h 2 (x ′ ), h 3 (x ′ ))
{Ensemble of base learners}
3: if pens ≥ θens then
4:
return Alert: Known Attack (L1)
5: else
6:
Layer-2: label ← A. pr edict (x ′ )
{Anomaly-based zero-day detection}
7:
if label == outlier then
8:
return Alert: Zero-Day Detected (L2)
9:
else
10:
L OG F LOW(x’, pens )
{Benign flow; update edge knowledge base}
11:
end if
12: end if

1) System-Level Metrics: To ensure feasibility on consumer
devices, we evaluate:
Inference Latency T
N

=

1 X
ti
N

(per flow)

(13)

i=1

Memory Footprint M
= Peak RAM usage during inference
(14)
ModelSize S = Disk space-trained model components (15)
An efficient edge-compatible model must satisfy T < δt ,
M < δm , S < δs , where δt , δm , and δs are device-specific
operational thresholds (e.g., δt < 50ms, δm < 100MB, etc.).
IV. I MPLEMENTATION AND E VALUATION
A. Real-Time Evaluation Scenarios
To validate the ZT-IDS framework across diverse consumer
IoT environments, five representative real-time scenarios were
emulated on Raspberry Pi hardware, each increasing in traffic
complexity and threat intensity (see Table III). The evaluation considers inference latency (T ), memory footprint
(S), accuracy, and anomaly precision, following the metric
formulations described in Section V. In the Smart Light
Bulb case (Scenario 1), the IDS analyzed deterministic Wi-Fi
traffic under minimal noise. Results show 98.1% accuracy,
latency T = 8.7ms, and near-zero outlier ratio (ρ ≈
0), confirming suitability for low-risk static IoT devices.

ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS

2011

TABLE IV
S CENARIO -W ISE S HAPLEY A DDITIVE E X P LANATIONS (SHAP) I NTERPRETATION AND ATTACK S IMULATION S TRATEGY

Fig. 2. SHAP feature importance (Top 10 Features) across five IoT attack scenarios. Each bar chart highlights dominant features contributing to model
decision per scenario.

Fig. 3. ZT-IDS framework across multiple dimensions: (a) Layer-1 classification and Layer-2 anomaly detection, (b) Feature separability in attack flows,
(c) Outlier isolation of zero-day anomalies, (d) Temporal deviations under attack, (e) Classification precision across known threats, and (f) Feature-wise
behavior divergence between benign and malicious flows.

The Smart Door Lock (Scenario 2) introduced a spoofed
access attempt over Zigbee; while the ensemble layer misclassified one flow, Layer-2 (DBSCAN) successfully isolated the
spoof as an outlier, achieving over 80% anomaly precision.
The Smart Camera with DNS Tunneling (Scenario 3)
tested encrypted flow handling, where Layer-1 maintained

0.86 recall despite variability in payloads, while Layer-2 distinctly clustered DNS-tunneled packets (F P R < 10%). In the
Multi-IoT Home with Botnet Infection (Scenario 4), five
heterogeneous devices generated concurrent flows, validating
scalability. The ensemble maintained F1 ≥ 0.92 with latency
T < 40ms and memory M < 70MB, successfully isolating

2012

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE V

TABLE VI

E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP FOR ZT-IDS I MPLEMENTATION

E VALUATION M ETRICS FOR E DGE V S C LOUD O FFLOADING

B. Experimental Setup

C. Visualization Framework and Interpretability Analysis
To enhance interpretability and scenario-specific insight,
a visualization suite (Figure 3) was developed for the proposed
ZT-IDS. The radar chart (a) contrasts Layer-1 (ensemble
classifier) and Layer-2 (DBSCAN anomaly detector) using
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score-highlighting that
while Layer-1 detects known attacks efficiently, Layer-2
strengthens defense against unseen anomalies, validating the
hybrid architecture. The 3D PCA projection (b) reveals the
separability and overlap of benign and malicious flows in latent
space, supporting risk estimation. The DBSCAN cluster map
(c) visualizes how outliers are isolated from dense benign
regions, confirming Layer-2’s unsupervised capability. The
time-series view (d) captures flow-duration deviations linked
to attack events, indicating temporal sensitivity. The confusion
matrix (e) summarizes Layer-1 results, showing strong true
positive and negative rates with minimal misclassifications.
Finally, the parallel coordinates plot (f) visualizes variations
across SHAP-ranked features (e.g., port, protocol, and timing
flags), enabling multi-dimensional interpretation of benign vs.
attack traffic. Together, these visual analyses provide both
quantitative validation and intuitive interpretability of ZT-IDS
decisions across diverse IoT scenarios.

Experiments were performed on a Raspberry Pi 4
(4 GB RAM), validating the ZT-IDS on the CICIDS dataset
containing over 9 million network flows of benign and attack
traffic. Table V summarizes hardware, frameworks, and evaluation metrics. The Pi consumed 3.5–4.2 W during active
detection, confirming its suitability for low-power IoT deployment. The “Botnet” scenario emulates volumetric DDoS and
PortScan misuse, while the “Zero-Day” case injects synthetic
jitter into benign flows to represent unseen temporal anomalies. Botnet traffic exhibits high ACK rates and bursty packets,
whereas Zero-Day attacks show timing irregularities in Flow
Duration and Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) Std. Figure 2 shows
SHAP interaction values for the most influential features—
Destination Port and Flow Duration. Each point represents a
test flow, where horizontal spread denotes interaction strength.
The nearly symmetric clustering of Destination Port around
zero indicates context-dependent influence, while Flow Duration interacts subtly with it to separate benign and attack
flows. The tight spread near zero suggests limited higher-order
effects, validating the lightweight model’s interpretability. The
latency-jitter plots are grouped under performance metrics,
and memory–bandwidth under resource metrics (Figs. 4-5),
supporting efficient IoT-level visualization and interpretive
validation.

D. Comparative Discussion
The visualization suite links numeric results to semantic
insights, showing each ZT-IDS component’s role in decisionmaking. It enables real-time detection interpretation, model
refinement, and forensic analysis. The combined use of classification and anomaly detection is validated through their
complementary performance in visualizations. ZT-IDS delivers
strong results-98.48% accuracy, sub-1GB memory use, and
ultra-low latency-making it suitable for real-time edge deployment. Table VI highlights ZT-IDS performance across five
consumer IoT scenarios under edge, hybrid, and cloud-assisted
modes. Key metrics include inference time, power use, latency,
and offloading bandwidth. In lightweight cases (e.g., Smart
Bulb, Botnet), edge-only execution yields low latency (6-15
ms) and power (3.5-4.1 W). For complex threats like DNS
tunneling or zero-day attacks, offloading reduces inference
time (e.g., 3.1 ms on TPU) but adds network latency. Cloud
GPU use also improves detection precision in high-threat cases
at modest bandwidth cost (1.2-1.5 MB/s). These results support adaptive deployment: using the cloud for complex threats
while maintaining edge autonomy for routine tasks, core to the
zero-trust model of continuous verification. Beyond classification accuracy, we also report anomaly precision (92.4%) and

compromised nodes without affecting benign ones. Finally,
the Wearable Health Monitor under Zero-Day Attack (Scenario 5) simulated jitter-based stealth injections in BLE traffic.
As expected, Layer-1 exhibited moderate AUC-ROC (< 0.85)
due to unseen timing variations, while Layer-2 achieved 94%
anomaly precision with ρ ≈ 0.12, demonstrating resilience to
novel threats.
Overall, these five scenarios illustrate the adaptability of
ZT-IDS to both known and unknown attacks in constrained IoT
environments. The hybrid ensemble–DBSCAN architecture
maintains low latency and energy footprint while effectively
scaling across traffic diversity and device types.

ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS

2013

Fig. 4. System performance metrics across Zero-Trust IDS scenarios: (a) latency profiling, (b) edge resource utilization, (c) jitter variability, (d) delay
time-series, (e) flow volume distribution.

false-positive rate (< 3%) for the DBSCAN layer, together
with latency measurements confirming sub-15ms inference at
the edge. These complementary results further validate the
robustness of the proposed IDS across both supervised and
unsupervised detection modes.
E. System Performance Visualization
To assess the real-time viability and responsiveness, we conducted multi-metric profiling for each emulated scenario.
Figure 4 presents latency, resource usage, timing variability,
and traffic behavior across the five IoT threat scenarios. The
average inference latency is lowest in edge-only scenarios,
such as Smart Bulb (Figure 4(a)), validating the feasibility of local processing. However, latency increases notably
in cloud-assisted scenarios due to transmission and queuing overhead. Figure 4(b) reflects the CPU and memory
utilization trends. Scenario 4 (Botnet) shows higher memory requirements due to the volume of anomalous flows
and ensemble activity. In Figure 4(c), jitter variability is
pronounced in Scenario 5 (Zero-Day), simulating stealthy
timing-based anomalies. Stable timing behavior is evident in
Scenarios 1 through 3. Figure 4(d) illustrates packet delay
signals, with offloaded scenarios showing greater fluctuation, indicating queue and network variability effects. Lastly,
Figure 4(e) visualizes packet flow volume over time. Scenario 4 (Botnet) and Scenario 5 (Zero-Day) exhibit bursty
traffic due to attack behavior and noise injection, while Scenario 1 demonstrates periodic, stable flow characteristics.
F. Edge Vs. Cloud Deployment Trade-Offs
We present a compact comparison of three critical metrics in Figure 5, where Figure 5(a) reveals that end-to-end
inference latency remains lowest for edge-only deployments,
such as the Smart Bulb and Botnet scenarios, where local
processing avoids external round-trip delays. In contrast,
cloud-reliant setups-especially the DNS Tunnel and Zero-Day
cases-suffer increased latency due to transmission and queueing delays. The hybrid GPU mode (e.g., Door Lock) offers a
latency-power middle ground. Figure 5(b) shows power usage
increases significantly when GPU/TPU inference is triggered,
reflecting the cost of cloud burst compute and data uplink.
Edge-native scenarios remain energy-efficient under 4.5W,
suitable for lightweight devices like Raspberry Pi 4 or Jetson
Nano. Figure 5(c) demonstrates that offloading introduces
notable bandwidth overhead (up to 1.8 MB/s in the DNS
tunneling case), which may strain consumer-grade uplinks and
introduce potential bottlenecks. Together, these results support

the architecture’s flexibility: low-power edge inference for
known benign or high-frequency traffic, with cloud-enhanced
detection for stealthy, encrypted, or zero-day threats.
G. Resource Utilization Metrics Across IoT Security
Scenarios at the Edge
To evaluate the operational viability of the proposed
ZT-IDS in varied consumer IoT environments, we measured
inference latency, jitter variability, memory usage, and bandwidth overhead (Figure 6). Inference latency (Figure 6a)
remains under 15 ms in most edge-only setups, such as Smart
Bulb and Door Lock, while attack-intensive scenarios like
DNS Tunnel and Zero-Day show slightly longer delays due
to encrypted or obfuscated flows. Memory usage (Figure 6b)
reaches around 70 MB for complex traffic such as Botnet and
Zero-Day, but the ensemble-based architecture keeps overall
demands moderate. Bandwidth overhead (Figure 6c) peaks at
about 1.8 MB/s for cloud-reliant scenarios, whereas edge-only
modes incur no offloading, making the approach well-suited to
bandwidth-limited environments. Jitter variability (Figure 6d)
is minimal for benign traffic but shows wider distributions
in Zero-Day and DNS Tunnel, supporting temporal anomaly
detection in the Layer-2 engine. These observations confirm
that ZT-IDS preserves computational feasibility at the edge
while ensuring robust detection.
H. System Impact Analysis With and Without ZT-IDS
To assess the runtime efficiency we analyzed system
resource usage across Before Attack (normal operation), During Attack without IDS (unmitigated compromise), and During
Attack with ZT-IDS (active defense). (i) Before attack, the
baseline performance is under expected load, (ii) during attack
(no IDS), sharp spikes arise in memory, disk I/O, network,
and power due to malicious activity, and (iii) with ZT-IDS,
same threat scenario occurs, but with active anomaly detection
and mitigation reducing system strain. Lightweight baselines
such as decision-tree and SVM-based IDS have been reported
in prior IoT studies, but our two-layer hybrid demonstrates
superior adaptability by combining supervised ensemble detection with unsupervised anomaly discovery, enabling improved
handling of zero-day threats while sustaining low edge latency.
1) Comparative Discussion: The attacks increase activity
across cores, suggesting multi-threaded payloads (Fig. 7a).
ZT-IDS significantly curbs surges in memory, power, network, and I/O (Fig. 7b), and ZT-IDS cuts memory use
by 28%, disk I/O by 17%, and network load significantly,

2014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. End-to-end inference latency across edge and cloud modes for each scenario. Edge-only scenarios achieve the lowest latency, while cloud-offloaded
cases introduce network-induced delays, highlighting the trade-off between accuracy and responsiveness.

Fig. 6. Resource utilization metrics across IoT security scenarios: distribution of latency, jitter, memory, and offloading bandwidth under Zero-Trust analysis.

Fig. 7. System resource utilization: live CPU load distribution, memory/network/disk/power profile over time, and summarized resource cost with and without
ZT-IDS.

with slight power efficiency gains (Fig. 7c). These results
confirm ZT-IDS’s ability to reduce the impact of attacks
with minimal overhead, supporting it for resource-constrained
consumer IoT.
For completeness, we briefly contrast our approach with
simpler lightweight baselines such as Decision Tree (DT) and
SVM, which are commonly applied in IoT IDS literature.
While DT and SVM achieve reasonable accuracy on known
attack classes, prior studies and our preliminary trials showed
limited robustness against zero-day anomalies and higher
false positive rates. In comparison, our ensemble-DBSCAN
pipeline sustains stronger accuracy with lightweight efficiency,
demonstrating a better balance between detection reliability
and edge deployability.

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This study introduces proactive ZT-IDS, a lightweight
two-layer intrusion detection framework for consumer IoT
with 98.48% accuracy and <15 ms latency, demonstrating feasibility for IoT deployments. Unlike prior IoT IDS
studies that depend on deep models or single-mode detectors, the proposed model uniquely combines a lightweight
ensemble (RF + XGBoost + LightGBM) for known attacks
with a DBSCAN anomaly layer for zero-day detection.
Unlike existing approaches tested only in high-resource settings, this framework demonstrates scalable, interpretable,
and edge-deployable intrusion detection, enhanced with
SHAP-based explainability and robust performance against
timing-based (jitter) evasion attacks. The proposed ZT-IDS

ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS

scales efficiently under thousands of concurrent flows, sustaining sub-45 ms per-flow latency and under 90 MB memory even
during high-volume simulations on Raspberry Pi-class hardware. The ensemble–DBSCAN pipeline maintains throughput
without observable degradation in classification accuracy or
anomaly precision, primarily due to the reduced feature
space and asynchronous flow batching at the preprocessing
layer. This confirms its feasibility for real-world consumer
IoT deployments involving dense, bursty traffic. A supervised ensemble classifier with an unsupervised DBSCAN
anomaly detector balances accuracy with edge deployability.
The ensemble achieved 97. 4% precision and 96. 9% F1
score for known attacks, while the anomaly layer attained
91.2% precision on zero-day threats with less than 4. 7%
false positives. ZT-IDS also reduced memory usage, disk I/O,
and network overhead by 28%, 17%, and 57% during attacks,
showing its effectiveness and system stability under threat.
Future work will explore the following:
Adaptive Thresholding:
Dynamically adjust ensemble and anomaly detection thresholds based on behavioral baselines to improve robustness in
evolving traffic conditions.
Federated Deployment:
We will extend this lightweight Z-T IDS through federated or distributed detection frameworks, allowing opt-in
collaborative learning across heterogeneous IoT devices while
preserving privacy [24].
Explainable AI Integration:
Incorporate explainability tools such as SHAP or Local
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) to enhance
trust and interpretability of model decisions for security analysts and users.
Adversarial Robustness Testing:
Evaluate resilience against evasion, poisoning, and adversarial attacks to ensure model integrity in adversarial
environments.
Autonomous Knowledge Base Update:
Automate online learning by enabling continuous updates to
the statistical and clustering components of the IDS without
manual intervention.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by Princess Nourah bint
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, through the
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers
Supporting Project, under Grant PNURSP2026R760; in part
by the Deanship of Scientific Research, Vice Presidency for
Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal University, Saudi Arabia, under Grant KFU254151; and in part by the
Institute of Engineering and Management (IEM) Trust under
Grant IEMT(S)/2024/02-G19 and Grant IEMT(S)/2023/02G05.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Guha Roy, B. Mahato, D. De, and S. N. Srirama, “Quality of
experience aware recommendation system with IoT data filtration for
handshaking among users using MQTT-SN protocol,” J. Ambient Intell.
Humanized Comput., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 8811–8826, Jul. 2023.

2015

[2] A. Rehman et al., “Immersive embedded consumer model leveraging
AI with zero-trust architecture for cyber-physical system,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., p. 1, Mar. 2025.
[3] A. Hussain et al., “Ensuring zero trust IoT data privacy: Differential
privacy in blockchain using federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1167–1179, Feb. 2025.
[4] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. S. Thangakrishnan, T. V. Ramana,
A. K. Bashir, and A. A. AlZubi, “Artificial intelligence-based zero
trust security approach for consumer industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5411–5418, Aug. 2024.
[5] K. N. Q. M. S. A. Iftikhar, F. B. Hussain and M. Sookhak, “Securing
edge based smart city networks with software defined networking
and zero trust architecture,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 244, 2025,
Art. no. 104341.
[6] A. Roy, “Lightweight intrusion detection for IoT using SVM and PCA,”
Int. J. Netw. Secur., 2022.
[7] R. Bafghi, “A lightweight ensemble learning framework for IoT intrusion
detection,” Comput. Secur., 2021.
[8] S. U. Jan, S. Ahmed, V. Shakhov, and I. Koo, “Toward a lightweight
intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 42450–42471, 2019.
[9] N. Musa Shanono, Z. Muslim, N. Azman Abu, S. Rahayu Selamat, and
H. Nahar, “Intrusion detection system in lightweight devices: Issues and
challenges,” Bull. Electr. Eng. Informat., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 800–812,
Feb. 2025.
[10] G. Nasserddine, M. Nassereddine, and O. Al-Khatib, “Ensemble learning
for network intrusion detection based on correlation and embedded
feature selection techniques,” Computers, vol. 14, Oct. 2025.
[11] M. Emeç and M. Ozcanhan, “A hybrid deep learning approach for
intrusion detection in IOT networks,” Adv. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 22,
pp. 3–12, 2022.
[12] I. Alsmadi and D. Xu, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in IoT using
DBSCAN,” Comput. Commun., 2020.
[13] K. Zhang, J. Sun, Q. Feng, X. Huang, C. Jiang, and M. S. Hossain, “Joint
optimization of fairness and energy efficiency in zero-trust federated
learning for consumer Internet of Things: A lossy communication perspective,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1156–1166,
Feb. 2025.
[14] D. Javeed, M. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A federated
learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for Internet of
Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, 2024, Art. no. 103540.
[15] M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc.
KDD, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[16] D. Guha Roy, B. Mahato, D. De, and R. Buyya, “Application-aware
end-to-end delay and message loss estimation in Internet of Things
(IoT)—MQTT-SN protocols,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 89,
pp. 300–316, Dec. 2018.
[17] B. Guha Roy, D. Guha Roy, P. Datta, S. B. Khan, A. Albuali, and
A. Almusharraf, “Quality of experience aware service selection model to
empower edge computing in IoT,” Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 2025,
no. 1, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 5573818.
[18] F. Pereira, R. Correia, P. Pinho, S. I. Lopes, and N. B. Carvalho, “Challenges in resource-constrained IoT devices: Energy and communication
as critical success factors for future IoT deployment,” Sensors, vol. 20,
no. 22, p. 6420, Nov. 2020.
[19] W. J. Ladeira et al., “Consumer adoption of Internet of Things,”
J. Consum. Behav., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 673–693, Mar. 2025.
[20] J. Z. Zhang and C.-W. Chang, “Consumer dynamics: Theories, methods,
and emerging directions,” J. Acad. Marketing Sci., vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 166–196, Jan. 2021.
[21] A. A. Tudoran, “Rethinking privacy in the Internet of Things: A
comprehensive review of consumer studies and theories,” Internet Res.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 514–545, Mar. 2025.
[22] W. Kim, Y. Park, J. Shin, and M. Jo, “Consumer preference structure
of online privacy concerns in an IoT environment,” Int. J. Market Res.,
vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 630–651, Sep. 2022.
[23] S. Zhang, M. Li, and J. Li, “WaveConv-sLSTM-KET: A novel framework for the multi-task analysis of oil spill fluorescence spectra,” Appl.
Sci., vol. 15, no. 6, p. 3177, Mar. 2025.
[24] P. Das, M. Singh, and D. G. Roy, “Framework using federated deep
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Secur. Blockchain Technol. (ICNSBT),
vol. 481. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, p. 369.