IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

1063

RDSAD: Robust Threat Detection in Evolving Data
Streams via Adaptive Latent Dynamics
Abdullah Alsaedi , Zahir Tari , and Redowan Mahmud

Abstract—Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) are the backbone of
Industry 4.0, seamlessly integrating physical and software components for advanced automation in diverse sectors. Recent cyber
incidents have shown that these systems are increasingly vulnerable to targeted attacks. Undetected attacks on CPSs can disrupt
operations, compromise safety, and cause significant economic
losses. Thus, anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
are essential to ensure their safety and security, especially in an
unsupervised setting where manual labelling is cost-prohibitive.
However, current methods encounter significant challenges with
complex and evolving characteristics of data streams generated
from CPSs, like high dimensionality, uncertainty, and changing
patterns, often resulting in high false alarms and missed attacks.
This article introduces RDSAD, an unsupervised, robust and adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detection method tailored to effectively monitor evolving complex CPS data streams. RDSAD integrates two innovative components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition (DDR) for capturing the underlying system dynamics, and
Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) for adaptive model updates
in response to changing patterns. Through extensive evaluations,
the experimental results demonstrate the superior performance
of RDSAD compared with static and streaming state-of-the-art
methods. It achieved the best AUC of 0.90 and 0.88 on SWaT and
WADI datasets, respectively, and it obtained efficient runtime with
large data streams.
Index Terms—Cyber-physical systems, cybersecurity, anomaly
detection, concept drift, deep state-space model.

I. INTRODUCTION
YBER-PHYSICAL Systems (CPSs) have emerged as essential technologies within Industry 4.0, seamlessly integrating physical and software components. This drives advancements in automation, intelligent decision-making, and connectivity, transforming industrial processes and powering critical
infrastructure like smart factories, power plants, and water networks [1]. With the growing prevalence of CPSs, their integration with the Internet has become increasingly widespread.
However, this connectivity also exposes their vulnerabilities to

C

Received 26 February 2024; revised 31 May 2025; accepted 22 September
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version 14 January
2026. (Corresponding author: Abdullah Alsaedi.)
Abdullah Alsaedi and Zahir Tari are with the RMIT Centre of Cyber
Security Research and Innovation (CCSRI), School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: alsaedi.abdullah11@gmail.com; zahir.tari@rmit.edu.au).
Redowan Mahmud is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia
(e-mail: mdredowan.mahmud@curtin.edu.au).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3614294, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3614294

various cyber threats. These vulnerabilities, if exploited, can lead
to substantial disruptions in their underlying physical processes.
Consequently, CPSs face significant risks and threats that can
compromise their overall security and integrity [2], [3]. Targeted
attacks, involving carefully planned steps to achieve specific
goals, have become a major threat [1], [2]. Attackers often
manipulate CPS data (i.e., sensor readings, and actuator states) to
disrupt operations. Unlike Information Technology (IT) attacks,
CPS attacks can have severe consequences, as demonstrated
by the targeted attack on the Ukrainian power grid, impacting
approximately 225,000 of customers [4]. Similarly, in 2021,
hackers attempted a cyberattack on a water treatment plant in
Oldsmar, Florida, using a zero-day exploit to gain unauthorised
remote access. This enabled them to maliciously alter the chemical levels of the water supply [5]. Several other high-profile
incidents, including the Colonial pipeline ransomware attack
and Stuxnet-like events, further demonstrate the seriousness of
targeted attacks on critical infrastructure [1], [2], [4]. Conventional security measures in IT-based systems (e.g., firewalls and
intrusion detection systems) are insufficient for comprehensive
CPS protection. Their inability to analyse and detect attack
patterns within operational data, such as sensor readings or
actuator commands, makes them vulnerable to targeted attacks
that manipulate such data at a granular level [2], [6]. These
limitations have motivated researchers to develop new intrusion detection methods specifically tailored for CPSs [2], [3],
[6], [6], [7]. These methods focus on monitoring CPS data to
identify malicious activities like unauthorised changes in sensor
readings or actuator commands, potentially indicating attempts
to alter the internal operations of the target CPSs [2], [6].
Recently, anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
have emerged as a promising solution in CPS security due to their
ability to learn from CPS data autonomously, without relying
on human intervention [3], [6], [7]. These anomaly-based IDSs
can leverage the power of Machine Learning (ML) methods to
learn the ‘normal’ behaviour patterns of the CPS during training.
During runtime, they can automatically detect anomalies and deviations from these patterns as potential cyberattacks, enabling
preventive actions [1], [2]. While they are effective at detecting
such attack patterns, several critical challenges arise.
Challenge 1. Capturing the underlying normal behaviour
in complex systems: A core challenge in anomaly detection
lies in designing models that effectively learn the underlying
normal behaviour “normality” in dynamic and unpredictable
environments like CPSs [8], [9]. CPSs, as engineered systems,
integrate control logic with dynamic environments, leading to

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

interactions characterised by uncertainty and complex temporal
dependencies. Capturing these intricacies is crucial for accurate
detection [8], [9]. Moreover, CPS data often presents additional
challenges like high dimensionality and the absence of ground
truth labels [10]. Effectively handling these factors while simultaneously accounting for uncertainty and temporal dynamics
makes unsupervised anomaly detection in CPSs a significant
challenge.
Challenge 2. Adapting to normality shifts in CPSs: CPSs face
constant changes due to factors like environmental variations,
technology integration, and operational shifts [1]. These changes
can lead to concept drift [11], where the underlying statistical
properties of data evolve over time. In anomaly detection, this
manifests as a normality shift [12], meaning the definition of
the underlying patterns of normal behaviour changes. Although
significant progress has been made in anomaly-based intrusion
detection methods, most existing methods [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17] work under a closed-world and static assumption. This
means they expect real-time data distribution to relatively match
the training data. This assumption might hold true in static environments but hinders their effectiveness in dynamic and evolving
system states where data patterns shift unpredictably [11], [18].
For instance, in water treatment plants, variations in raw water
quality due to seasonal changes can redefine normal operation [11]. Static-based anomaly detection models, unaware of
this evolving normality, might misclassify normal events as
anomalies or miss actual attacks, potentially reducing system
trust and security [11], [12], [19]. Therefore, deploying adaptive
anomaly detection solutions is crucial for CPSs. These solutions
can continuously learn and adjust to changing data patterns, ensuring reliable and effective intrusion detection even in dynamic
environments [12], [19], [20].
Challenge 3. Overcoming self-poisoning and catastrophic
forgetting: Recent works [21], [22], [22], [23], [24], [25] have
proposed streaming anomaly detection solutions that continuously update the detection model in real time to address
challenge 2. However, these solutions often rely on passive
updates that encounter additional issues. These updates can
be resource-intensive, especially with high-dimensional data
streams [11], [26]. More importantly, they face two major
challenges: self-poisoning [27] and catastrophic forgetting [26].
Self-poisoning occurs when the model mistakenly learns from
attack observations as normal behaviour during the passive
updates. This can lead to an inability to accurately detect real
attacks in the future [10], [27]. Catastrophic forgetting happens
when continuous updates cause the model to forget previously
learned patterns of normal behaviour as it adapts to new data.
This can result in misclassifying legitimate normal events as
attacks [26], [27]. The combined impact of these challenges
can be significant, resulting in increased false alarms, missed
attacks, and reduced system trust. Addressing them is crucial for
developing robust and reliable threat detection methods capable
of adapting to evolving normal behaviour while preserving their
knowledge base.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we introduce a
novel unsupervised anomaly-based threat detection method,
called Robust Attack Detection for Evolving Data Streams via

Adaptive Latent Dynamics Learning (RDSAD). It is specifically
tailored for real-time monitoring of complex CPS data streams.
It effectively captures the underlying normal behaviour, detects
deviations as attack patterns, and adaptively updates its detection
model to accommodate changing behaviours. It achieves this
through two key components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition
(DDR) and Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA).
To address the first challenge, the DDR integrates a novel neural architecture, inspired by deep state space-based generative
models [8], [9], to effectively capture low-dimensional latent
dynamics of the underlying normal behaviour of monitored systems. Unlike prior works [13], [14], [15], [21], [22], [23], [24],
[25], DDR explicitly considers both the uncertainty and temporal
dependencies in data streams through two distinct latent states:
continuous states for temporal learning and stochastic states
for uncertainty modelling, leading to improved inference and
more effective threat detection. Additionally, DDR incorporates
a statistics-driven emission approach [18], [28], with density reconstruction and moving averages, further enhancing robustness
in dynamic environments.
To effectively adapt to the evolving environments and normality shifts (the second challenge), the SMA continuously
monitors for shifts in the underlying latent dynamics and adaptively updates the model in response. Contrary to existing methods [21], [22], [23], [24], [25] that are prone to catastrophic
forgetting due to continuous adaptation and self-poisoning from
misinterpreting attack or anomalous observations (the third
challenge), SMA employs a robust update decision approach
to prevent self-poisoning and an adaptive regularisation term
to preserve previously acquired knowledge, ensuring model
integrity and reliability. The key contributions of this paper are
outlined as follows:
r Developed a novel unsupervised anomaly-based threat
detection method, RDSAD, that learns and adapts to the
evolving normal behaviours of the monitored system, enabling robust and accurate detection of potential attacks.
r Designed a Dynamic Deviation Recognition (DDR) based
on an innovative neural architecture, enabling robust representation of system dynamics and effective threat detection.
r Introduced a Shift-aware Model Adaptation (DMA)
method that continually tracks shifts in underlying dynamics. It adaptively updates RDSAD in response to these shifts
through a robust update decision. This minimises the risk
of self-poisoning from anomalous observations, ensuring
sustained model accuracy and reliability. Additionally, it
preserves the integrity of accumulated knowledge via an
adaptive regularisation term.
r Conducted comprehensive experiments and evaluations on
four distinct datasets to evaluate the performance of the
proposed RDSAD. The experimental results demonstrate
that RDSAD outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms
of both performance metrics and runtime efficiency.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II introduces some
basic notations and concepts. Section III details the proposed
RDSAD. Section IV presents the related works. Section V
outlines the experimental setup, followed by Section VI, which

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF NOTATIONS

1065

prior distribution over the latent dynamics and θ is the model
parameter. However, direct computation of pθ (z|x) is a challenging task except for a simple model, mainly due to the intractable integral
involved in computing the marginal likelihood

pθ (x) = pθ (x|z) pθ (z)dz [29]. As a solution to this issue,
variational inference [30] is applied to estimate an approximate
distribution of the true posterior, denoted as qφ (z|x). Therefore, the problem is formulated as an optimization problem to
maximize the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), L formulated
as:

discusses the experimental results. Finally, Section VII provides
a summary and concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND
A. Basic Notation
This paper presents vectors as bold lower-case letters, such
as x. Matrices are denoted in bold upper-case letters, such as
X. The time index is denoted as subscript xt . A sequence
of observations from time 1 to t is represented as x1:t . The
necessary notations for the proposed solution are outlined in
Table I.
B. State-Space Models
This section briefly introduces State-Space Models (SSMs)
since RDSAD works on an SSM-like model. SSMs are widely
used to model sequential data by learning the relationship between latent variable z t and observed variable xt . It is assumed
that an observation xt depends directly on a latent process z t :
z t = fθ (z t−1 , xt ) + t ,

(latent dynamics)

(1a)

x̄t = gθ (z t ).

(emission)

(1b)

where z ∈ RL , x ∈ Rm , and θ represents the model parameters.
fθ is the transition function that governs the latent dynamics
(i.e., it defines the evolution of the state over time), while
gθ is the emission function, which outlines the relationship
between the latent state and the observed data. SSMs offer an
elegant framework for modelling and estimating densities of
data streams. Nonetheless, classical SSMs are often limited to
linear models, thereby lacking the capacity to effectively model
complex real-world data streams.
C. Deep SSMs and Variational Inference
The State-Space Models (SSMs) can be effectively extended
by incorporating Neural Networks (NNs) into the structure,
leading to Deep State-Space Models (Deep SSMs) [8], [9].
These deep SSMs can capture the characteristics of latent dynamics z, achieved through the computation of the posterior
θ (z)
, where pθ (z) denotes the
distribution pθ (z|x) = pθ (xptθ|z)p
(x)

L(φ, θ; x) = Eqφ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] − DKL (qφ (z|x)||p(z))
(2)
where the Kullback-Leibler divergence, DKL , ensures that the
approximate distribution q(z|x) is close to the prior distribution
p(z). The qφ (z|x) and pθ (x|z) are the inference and generative
models, respectively. These models are constructed using deep
neural networks and then trained jointly via backpropagation,
leveraging the reparameterisation trick for gradient computation [30]. Lastly, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) can
be employed to establish connections between the SSMs and
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [8], enabling the acquisition
of non-linear State-Space Models (SSMs) that incorporate the
latent dynamics and emission models as outlined in (1a) and
(1b), thereby offering a powerful approach to handle complex,
real-world sequential data streams.
D. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Neural Ordinary differential equations (neural ODEs) are a
significant advancement in modelling dynamical systems, given
their capability to capture long-term dependencies and manage
irregularly sampled time series data [31]. Traditional approaches
to modelling time-series and sequential data, such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs), involve applying a sequence of transformations to a hidden state at fixed intervals:
ht = fθ (ht−1 , xt )

(3)

where t ∈ {0, . . . , T } and h is the hidden state. In contrast,
neural ODEs describe the continuous evolution of hidden states
using an ordinary differential equation: h = f (h(t), t), where
f acts as a neural network. Given an initial value h(t0 ), this
dynamic can yield results at any time point t1 :
h(t1 ) = h(t0 )+

 t1
t0

f (h(t), t)dt = ODESolve(h(t0 ), f, t0 , t1 ).

(4)
However, the integral in (4) requires expensive numerical
solvers, resulting in high computation costs. To overcome this
issue, Neural Flow [31] was proposed as a recent advancement in
neural ODEs. It models the solution curve of ODE directly with a
neural network, substantially lowering computation costs. Neural ODEs and Neural Flow have proven practical and effective
approaches in modelling dynamic systems handling irregularlysampled data streams.

1066

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detection in evolving data streams.

E. Problem Definition
Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . } represent high-dimensional observations from CPSs arriving in a continuous stream. Given the
unbounded nature of such data streams, we employ sliding
windows of size T to process the data in real-time. A sliding
window W , starting at time step t, is defined as a sequence
of T consecutive observations, xt+1:t+T = {xt+1 , . . . , xt+T },
where each xt ∈ Rm is an m-dimensional vector associated with
a timestamp t.
Adaptive unsupervised anomaly-based intrusion detection
aims to identify unusual patterns in these data streams that deviate from established normal behaviour, potentially indicating
attacks and system anomalies. As depicted in Fig. 1, the detection model M, parameterised by Φ, continuously analyses data
through sliding window W of size T . The model, M, performs
inference on this window, generating a set of anomaly scores
for the observations within W , denoted as {M(xi ; Φ)|xi ∈ W }.
Considering probability-based scoring, observations with scores
below a defined threshold, suggesting they have a low probability
of being normal, are flagged as potential attacks. The model M
then updates its parameters Φ in an unsupervised manner, incorporating the latest data from the stream to refine its detection
capabilities.
A key challenge in CPS anomaly detection lies in effectively
capturing the underlying patterns of normal behaviour. This task
is compounded by the inherent uncertainty and temporal dependencies within the high-dimensional data streams generated
by CPSs [11]. In this context, each variable in data streams is
perceived as a stochastic process produced with auto-correlated
temporal properties [8], [10]. Furthermore, the dynamic nature
of CPSs often leads to changes in the underlying patterns of
the normal behaviour, known as normality shift [11], [12].
This poses a critical challenge to maintaining accurate anomaly
detection over time.
Definition 1 (Normality Shift [11], [12]): Given a time period
[0, t], and a window of observations x0:t ={x0 , x1 , . . . , xt },
following a certain distribution P0:t (x). Normality shift occurs
at time t + 1 if ∃t : Pt (x) = Pt+1 (x), indicating a covariate
shift in the distribution of input data streams.
Building upon the challenges of adapting to normality
shifts, continuous learning through passive updates encounters
additional issues: self-poisoning [27] and catastrophic forgetting [26]. We formally define self-poisoning (highlighted in
Fig. 1 by the red shaded area) as:

Definition 2 (Self-Poisoning [27], [32]): Let A represent a
set of attack observations, self-poisoning occurs when a detection model M with parameters Φ inadvertently learns from A
during its continual update process, compromising its ability to
accurately detect future attacks.
Catastrophic forgetting (depicted as the trailing-off pattern in
Fig. 1) is formally defined as:
Definition 3 (Catastrophic Forgetting [26]): Let H represent
a set of historical observations reflecting normal behaviour.
Catastrophic forgetting occurs when the performance of M
on H decreases significantly after being continuously updated
with new data. This happens because new information gradually
replaces information about past normal behaviour within the
model’s internal parameters Φ.
III. THE PROPOSED SOLUTION
This section discusses RDSAD in more detail. Fundamentally,
RDSAD adaptively learns from the evolving normal behaviours
of the monitored system, ensuring robust and accurate detection
of attacks even as the system changes. The effectiveness of
RDSAD stems from its two essential components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition (DDR) and Shift-aware Model Adaptation
(SMA) as depicted in Fig. 2. The DDR component is dedicated
to learning and capturing the underlying latent dynamics of the
monitored system, with any significant deviations from these
learned dynamics detected as potential threats. It accomplishes
this through its two integral phases: System Representation
Learning (SRL) and Deviation Detection (DD), which together
form an effective and robust threat detection method. The SMA
enhances RDSAD with robust and adaptive model updates in
real time. This adaptability is achieved through two operations:
latent-space shift identification and robust update decision. In
the following sections, a detailed discussion of each component
is provided, beginning with the two phases of DDR followed by
SMA.
A. System Representation Learning (SRL)
SRL aims to learn the underlying latent dynamics that govern the normal behaviour of monitored systems, transforming
high-dimensional observations into effective low-dimensional
latent representations. While real-world CPS data is often
high-dimensional, many physical systems operate on lowdimensional latent dynamics [2], [3], [7]. These underlying dynamics can be effectively captured by a few latent state variables
that represent the principal properties of the monitored systems.
Due to their reduced dimensionality, these representations are
computationally efficient and memory-friendly, making them
optimal for monitoring system operations. The SRL comprises
a Temporal Embedding Network (TEN) and an inference model.
TEN serves as a feature extraction layer that processes input data
streams, converting them into a form suitable for the inference
model. Its primary function is to enhance the model’s capability
to learn from the data streams, thereby enabling an effective
representation of the system’s underlying dynamics. The inference model, working in conjunction with TEN, leverages the

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

Fig. 2.

1067

The overview of RDSAD.

temporally extracted features to model the probability distribution p(z t |x1:t ), where z t corresponds to compact, time-variant
latent states representing the system’s normal behaviour over
time. In what follows, we discuss the TEN and the inference
model in more detail.
1) Temporal Embedding Network: Temporal Embedding
Network (TEN), denoted as ϕ, is constructed using Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN) [33], which are known to
be more time-efficient than traditional RNN-based structures,
and can often produce superior prediction performance with
sequential data. TCN is based on a 1-D convolution network
that operates on temporal dimensions using a dilation factor d.
Formally, it is defined as:
ϕ(x) =

k−1


f (i) · xs−d·i

(5)

Fig. 3. Graphical demonstration of inference and emission models. Nodes
correspond to various variables, and edges indicate the dependencies between
them. Circular nodes represent latent stochastic variables, and diamond-shaped
nodes correspond to GRU-flow variables.

factorised qφ distribution as follows:

i=0

where f ∈ R
refers to the convolutional filter of size k. s −
d · i indicates the direction of past information in the streams.
d corresponds to the dilation factor. When d = 1, this forms a
regular convolution where the filter is applied to every sequential
element in the series. However, as d increases, the filter is applied
at larger gaps in the input series. This expands the receptive field
of the network to capture long-term patterns in the data.
2) Inference Model: The inference model plays a crucial role
within SRL by capturing the latent dynamics of the observed
data streams. Specifically, it models the posterior distributions
of the input observations x as compact latent dynamics (e.g.,
z and h), represented as pθ (z, h|x). However, this direct modelling of the posterior becomes intractable due to the inherently
complex integration involved (as discussed in Section II-C).
Consequently, we leverage a filtering-based structured variational inference [29]. This works particularly well for streaming
data by approximating the posterior distribution of the current
latent dynamics based only on past and current information.
This approach creates a structured approximate posterior with a
k×d

qφ (z, h|x) =

T


qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ),

(6a)

t=1



qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ) ∼ N μzt , diag(σ 2zt ) ,

(6b)

μzt = ζφμ (z t−1 , ht , ϕ(xt )),

(6c)

σ zt = Softplus[ζφσ (z t−1 , ht , ϕ(xt ))].

(6d)

The approximate posterior is modelled as a diagonal multivariate Gaussian distribution, where μzt and σ zt represent the
mean and variance, respectively. These parameters are determined by two fully-connected neural networks with a single
hidden layer, denoted as ζφμ and ζφσ , respectively. The softplus
activation function, Softplus(x) = log(1 + ex ), is utilised to
ensure a positive and nonlinear transition from the latent states
to σ. Finally, φ refers to the parameter sets of the inference
model, while ϕ denotes the Temporal Embedding Network
(TEN) (discussed in Section III-A1). A graph illustration of the
inference model is depicted in Fig. 3(a) in which the current
latent variable z t conditioned on the previous latent variable

1068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

z t−1 , the current hidden state ht , and the current observation xt .
In RDSAD, the internal dynamics of the underlying behaviours
are captured through the interaction of two distinct latent states:
(1) Continuous Latent States (h) and (2) Stochastic Latent States
(z). Together, these latent states provide a robust and compact
representation, thereby enhancing the ability of RDSAD to
detect potential deviations in the monitored system.
Continuous latent states: They capture the long-term temporal
dependencies and transitions of the latent variables by tracking
their continuous evolution. This allows the model to effectively
account for temporal dependencies within the data. We model
the transition function of h with ideas from neural Ordinary
Differential Equations (neural ODEs). In particular, we utilise
GRU-flow [31] as the transition function to model the continuous
latent state hi ∈ Rh . GRU-flow models the continuous evolution
of latent states h and captures their temporal dependencies in
a flexible and adaptive manner using an ordinary differential
equation. As detailed in Section II-D, this approach leverages
the strengths of neural ODEs and Neural Flow [31], providing an
effective way to capture the continuous dynamics of the system.
The evolution of the latent state in continuous time is defined
as:
u(t, h) = αu · sigmoid(fu (t, h, ϕ(x)))

(7a)

r(t, h) = αr · sigmoid(fr (t, h, ϕ(x)))

(7b)

h̃(t, h) = tanh(fh̃ (t, r(t, h)  h, ϕ(x)))

Fh (t, h) = h + g(t) (1 − u(t, h))  h̃(t, h) − h

(7c)
(7d)

where u(.) and r(.) denote the update and reset gates, respectively. The parameters αu and αr are scalars ∈ R that control the
impact of the gates and maintain the property of invertibility in
the flow, thereby facilitating the learning of long-term dependencies and providing greater control over the state evolution. h̃(.)
represents the intermediate hidden state. The functions fu , fr
and fh̃ are fully-connected neural networks that represent the
transformations applied to compute the gates and the candidate
hidden state. g is a continuous function that satisfies g(0) = 0,
and  denotes element-wise multiplication. Fh (.) denotes the
flow function which models the evolution of the GRU state h in
continuous time.
Stochastic latent states: These state variables capture latent
dynamics generating the data and their associated uncertainty.
Each stochastic latent variable z t is conditioned on both the
previous stochastic variable z t−1 and the current continuous
state ht . This allows it to extract information about the historical
context (from z t−1 ) and the current system context (from ht ),
making it more reflective of the actual evolving state of the
system. This richer representation allows us to track subtle
changes in the latent dynamics, which can manifest as normality
shifts in the observed data (see Section III-D1). We employ a
transition distribution for z that is characterised by a multivariate
Gaussian distribution, defined as follows:


(8a)
pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ) ∼ N μ̂zt , diag(σ̂ 2zt )
μ̂zt = ζθμ̂ (z t−1 , ht ),

(8b)

σ̂ zt = Softplus[ζθσ̂ (z t−1 , ht )].

(8c)

μ̂zt and σ̂ zt are the mean and variance of the transition distribution, respectively. μ̂zt is derived from a fully-connected
neural network ζθμ̂ with a ReLU function, and σ̂ zt generated
by ζθσ̂ with the Softplus activation function. By considering the
uncertainty, the stochastic latent states can incorporate a certain
level of randomness or variability, which can potentially improve
the capability of the model to handle complex and noisy data
streams.
B. Deviation Detection
RDSAD utilises a dynamic deviation detection approach that
combines density reconstruction estimation with moving averages. This method assigns deviation scores to incoming observations for real-time intrusion detection. Under the density-based
approach, normal observations typically exhibit normal behaviours and have higher reconstruction densities. Conversely,
anomalies deviate from this normality and are statistically rare,
leading to lower densities [34]. RDSAD leverages this principle
based on two main components: emission model and deviation
verification.
1) Emission Model: The emission model is constructed with
the ability to map the latent dynamics to sufficient statistics of
certain conditional distributions of observations pθ (xt |z t , ht ),
which relies on a sample from latent dynamics z t and ht as
shown in Fig. 3(b). Current works in generative time-series
models have commonly employed Gaussian distributions as an
emission model [8], [9]. However, Gaussian distributions are
known to be sensitive to extreme values and fluctuations, a
common characteristic of anomalies. This can lead the emission model to inadvertently fit both normal and anomaly data
simultaneously. This simultaneous fitting leads to an inability to
accurately identify true anomalies, compromising the effectiveness of the detection system [18]. To address this, we adopt the
Student-t distribution, a heavy-tailed distribution that is based
on the principles of robust statistics [18], [28]. The Student-t
distribution is more robust to extreme values and fluctuations,
allowing for more accurate identification of true anomalies
compared to a Gaussian assumption. Formally, we employ a
Student-t distribution with a location-scale generalisation as the
emission model as follows:


γ v+1
1
2
1+
p(x | v, μ, σ) =  v  √
v
vπσ
γ 2

x−μ
σ

v+1
2 − 2

,

(9)
where γ denotes the gamma function and v represents the
degrees of freedom. In this context, the emission model based
on sufficient statistics can be expressed as:
pθ (xt |z t , ht ) = ST (xt ; vxt , μxt , σxt ) .

(10)

where θ represents the parameter sets of the emission model,
and ST denotes the Student-t distribution. vxt , μxt , and σxt
correspond to the sufficient statistics of the emission distribution. These statistics are parameterised by a neural network as

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

follows:

1069

Algorithm 1: Deviation Threshold.
vxt = Softplus[ζθv (z t , ht )] + 1

(11a)

μxt = ζθμ (z t , ht )

(11b)

σxt = Softplus[ζθσ (z t , ht )]
(11c)
μ
where the functions ζθv , ζθ and ζθσ are fully-connected neural

networks with one hidden layer. The heaviness of the tail is managed by the degree of freedom parameter v. Unlike traditional
approaches that consider v as a time-invariant constant, in our
configuration, v is parameterised using a neural network to allow
it to be data-driven and adaptable over time [28]. By adopting
the Student-t distribution and parameterising its components
dynamically, our emission model is robust to extreme values
and fluctuations, leading to more accurate intrusion detection.
Compared to other heavy-tailed distributions (e.g., Cauchy and
Laplace), the Student-t distribution offers a more stable and
adaptable formulation due to its tunable degrees of freedom,
which balance tail heaviness and variance control [18], [28].
2) Deviation Verification: The deviation verification involves two primary steps: calculating a deviation score and
establishing a deviation threshold.
Deviation Score: Building upon the emission model and density reconstruction, we calculate a deviation score to quantify
how much an observation deviates from normal behaviour. We
leverage the log-likelihood of the observation xt conditioned on
latent dynamics z t and ht as follows:
t = log pθ (xt |z t , ht ).

(12)

where t denotes likelihood value. High log-likelihood indicates
good reconstruction, aligning with normal behaviour, while low
values suggest deviations (i.e., anomalies). This approach allows
for real-time requirements and efficient processing in streaming
settings [8]. To quantify this deviation, we define the deviation
score st at time t as the difference between the current likelihood
and a measure of “consistent normal behaviour” ct :
st = t − ct ,

(13a)

1 ∗
.
d 

(13b)

d

ct =

t =1

Here, ct dynamically captures this normal behaviour through
a moving average of past likelihood scores ∗ for normal observations within a window of size d. This is more robust
and adaptable than raw log-likelihood scores, as it considers
the recent context of normal behaviour. For instance, transient
changes or noise would not drastically affect the average compared to a single score, providing a more accurate intrusion
detection in non-stationary environments. Next, We describe
how to automatically establish the deviation threshold, which
utilises the deviation score to drive the final detection decision.
Deviation Threshold Settings: The deviation threshold serves
as the criterion for determining whether an observation significantly deviates from normal behaviour. We automatically
set this threshold using the principle of Extreme Value Theory
(EVT) [18], a statistical approach for analysing extreme values
in data distribution. EVT, specifically the Peaks-Over-Threshold

(POT) theorem [18], helps us focus on the tail of the deviation
score distribution, where potential anomalies are more likely to
reside. We leverage a Generalized Pareto distribution (GPD) to
model this tail, and the threshold is obtained by fitting the tail
proportion of a GPD as follows:
F̄ (s) = P (ε − s > s|s < ε) ∼

1+

ξs
β

− ξ1

.

(14)

where F̄ represents the tail of the distribution, and ε is the initial
threshold of deviation scores. The parameters ξ and β correspond
to the shape and scale of GPD, respectively. They are estimated
through The Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). The term
ε − s refers to the portion below the initial threshold ε, which is
empirically set to a low quantile. The final threshold η is obtained
as follows:


−ξ̂
N ·ρ
β̂
−1 .
(15)
η ≃ε−
Nε
ξˆ
where ρ is the target probability level for observing the event
s < ε, N is the number of observations, and Nε is the number
of si that are less than the threshold value ε (i.e., the number of
si s.t. si < ε). Two parameters involved in POT require tuning:
ρ and low quantile. They can be established empirically (see
Section V-D). These model-wide parameters allow us to adaptively adjust the deviation threshold to accommodate potential
changes in the data over time. This adaptive nature is further
enhanced by the Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) process
(Section III-D), which recalculates the threshold based on the
latest data when changes are detected.
Algorithm 1 summarises the initialisation steps for the deviation threshold. The initial threshold ε is set as the low quantile of
the deviation score samples (s1 , . . . , sn ), where n is the number
of samples in s. In Line 3, we construct the set Y (i.e., “a portion
below the threshold”), which includes the differences between
the initial threshold ε and each score si that is below ε. This set
is then used to fit a GPD, enabling us to infer the distribution
of the lower extreme values. The final threshold η is computed
according to (15).
C. Model Training
This section details the training process of RDSAD, which
jointly optimises the inference parameters (φ) and emission
parameters (θ) to learn effective latent representations within
the “latent dynamic space”. This space captures the underlying
structure and dynamics of the data streams, enabling accurate
deviation detection and adaptation. We achieve this joint optimisation through Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes (SGVB)

1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

estimator [30], which maximises the Evidence Lower BOund
(ELBO) objective L:
⎡
⎡
⎤
T

⎢
L(φ, θ) =
⎣Eqφ (zt |zt−1 ,ht ,xt ) ⎣log pθ (xt |z t , ht )⎦



t=1
reconstruction term

− DKL (qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt )



⎤

⎥
pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ))⎦


KL-divergence term

(16)
The ELBO comprises two main terms. The first term is the
‘reconstruction term’, which represents the log-likelihood of the
data streams. It ensures the ability of the model to accurately
reconstruct the input data xt from the latent dynamics z t and
ht . The second term, the ‘KL-divergence term’, guides the
inference model towards learning informative latent dynamics.
This KL-divergence term measures the difference between the
learned variational distribution (qφ ) and a prior distribution
(pθ ) on the latent dynamics, ensuring they capture meaningful
information. The expectation E is approximated using Monte
Carlo integration [29]. Instead of directly sampling z t from
qφ , we use a reparameterisation trick [30], where we sample
an auxiliary random variable  from a standard normal distribution N (0, I) and then obtain z t through a differentiable
transformation gφ (.) as z t = gφ (xt , ). This allows us to obtain
a differentiable estimator of the evidence lower bound L in (16)
during optimisation, as it permits gradients to flow back through
the network.
D. Shift-Aware Model Adaptation (SMA)
This section presents the Shift-aware Model Adaptation
(SMA). Unlike conventional approaches that necessitate frequent model updates [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], RDSAD incorporates SMA, which provides robust and adaptive learning
capabilities in real time. SMA continually monitors changes
in the underlying system dynamics, triggering an update only
when significant changes are identified. By selectively updating
the model based on relevant changes, it ensures that the model
maintains accurate and effective in capturing the evolving dynamics of the system. This is to minimise unnecessary updates,
which can be computationally expensive and potentially fail to
capture the historical semantic patterns. SMA involves two key
steps: 1) Latent-space shift identification and 2) robust update
decision. In the subsequent sections, we discuss each step.
1) Latent-Space Shift Identification: The goal here is to
track and identify normality shifts in system dynamics within
the stochastic latent space. To achieve this, we introduce two
latent windows of equal length T named the reference and
current window. The reference window, represented as z r =
{z t−T , . . . , z t−1 }, captures the historical samples and serves as
a baseline for comparison, remaining fixed unless a shift is detected. The current window, denoted as z c = {z t−T +1 , . . . , z t },
continuously updates with the latest stochastic latent variables,
reflecting the evolving characteristics of the latent dynamics.

To quantify the difference between these windows and detect
potential shifts, we adopt a variant of the energy distance metric [35]. This metric has several desirable statistical properties
that enable us to quantitatively measure changes between two
sets of samples. By computing the energy distance, we derive
a change score δ. Formally, the change score δ is defined by
the energy distance E(., .), which is computed as the weighted
average of squared distances between two sets of samples in
z-space as follows:
δt = E(z r , z c ) :=

T
−1 
T

2

2
 (i)

zr − zc(j)  . (17)
T (T − 1) i=1 j=i+1

where . denotes the euclidean norm. Typically, δ approaches
a value close to 0 when the two sets of samples, z r and z c ,
are drawn from similar distributions, indicating a high degree of
similarity. Conversely, δ increases as the difference between the
two sample sets grows. The change score δ (17) provides a quantitative measure of changes in the latent space, allowing us to
track shifts in the system’s dynamics over time. However, to distinguish between transient fluctuations and significant changes
in the underlying system dynamics, we need to effectively
quantify the intensity and significance of the detected changes.
To this end, we leverage the intensity-aware analyser [36], which
builds upon the computed change scores δ. This analyser unitises
concepts from a CUSUM-like test, allowing us to track the
presence of changes and their intensity and persistence over time.
The intensity of the changes is measured through the cumulative
variable mt , defined in (18), which maintains the accumulated
difference between the recently observed score values and the
average of previously observed values.
mt = max(m̄t + δt − ν, 0), m0 = 0.

(18)

Here, m̄t is the calculated mean of the observed change score
δt at time t, and ν is an adjustable parameter which represents
the acceptable level of change, typically assigned a value near
zero [36]. Finally, the intensity Δt at time t defines as Δt =
Mt − mt , where Mt = max0≤i≤t (mi ). If Δt exceeds a shift
threshold Υ, then shift is identified, triggering potential model
adaptation. The shift threshold Υ is dynamically calculated as a
factor of the mean of the historical change scores, represented as
Υt = κ ∗ m̄t . Here, κ is a constant known as the ‘shift-factor’.
Consequently, lower κ increases potential adaptation frequency
by relaxing shift evidence requirements, while higher κ reduces
it [36]. This dynamic approach allows the threshold to adjust
based on the average of change scores over time.
2) Robust Update Decision: The proposed robust update
decision selectively determines when to update the model by
leveraging information from latent-space shift identification and
deviation detection, ensuring reliable and accurate updates. In
particular, we incorporate a heuristic constraint that only uses
new normal observations for updates. This protects the model
from self-poisoning by anomalies, which could degrade its
performance. The model update is triggered only when two
conditions are met: 1) significant shift detected: the change
intensity Δt must exceed the dynamic shift threshold Υt , and 2)
normal observation confirmed: the deviation score st must be

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

Algorithm 2: Shift-Aware Model Adaptation (SMA).

1071

on detection performance. Specifically, the posterior distribution
of the emission parameters learned from the previous sequence
at time t − 1 becomes the new prior distribution for the current
sequence at time t. The posterior distribution p(θ|x1:T ) after
seeing T window of observations is recovered by applying
Bayes’ rule:
p(θ|x1:T ) = p(θ)

T


p(xt |θ) ∝ p(xT |θ)p(θ|x1:T −1 ). (20)

t=1

above the deviation threshold η, confirming that the current observation is likely normal. This ensures the model incorporates
new knowledge from legitimate normality shifts while being
robust to anomalies or transient fluctuations. However, in some
cases, an update might be declined even if a shift is detected:
shift with anomaly: if the change intensity is higher than the shift
threshold Δt > Υt , but the deviation score st is less than or equal
to the deviation threshold η (e.g., potential attack observations),
the model update is declined. This measure acts as a safeguard,
ensuring the model is not inadvertently updated with unreliable
data, thereby preserving its integrity. The conditions for the
model update process are summarised as follows:

Δt > Υt ∧ st > η, Initiate model update
(19)
Δt > Υt ∧ st ≤ η, Decline model update
The overall functioning of the Shift-aware Model Adaptation
(SMA) is outlined in Algorithm 2. Suppose the change score
Δt surpasses the shift threshold Υt and the deviation score st
is above the deviation threshold η. In that case, SMA initiates a
reset of its internal variables and triggers an update (Line 11).
However, if the change score Δt exceeds the shift threshold Υt
while the deviation score st is equal to or less than the deviation
threshold η, the model update is declined (Line 14). For all other
instances where no shift is detected, SMA merely refreshes its
internal statistics and proceeds to process the incoming data
without taking additional actions (Line 17).
3) Adaptive Regularisation Term: To prevent catastrophic
forgetting, which occurs when a model forgets previously
learned information during adaptation, we incorporate an adaptive regularisation term inspired by Bayesian online learning [37]. This term encourages the model to update its
parameters gradually, building upon past knowledge while incorporating new information effectively. Our adaptive regularisation term achieves this by penalising large changes in the
model’s parameters. This ensures that the model builds upon
its existing knowledge base rather than starting from scratch
with each new data point. We specifically perform Bayesian
inference over the emission parameter θ within our deep state
space-based generative model because of its significant impact

where p(xT |θ) is the likelihood of the observations, and
p(θ|x1:T −1 ) is the previous posterior of the parameters θ which
serves as the new prior. This allows the model to build upon the
learned information from past observations, effectively utilising
the posterior distribution as a prior belief to guide the inference
model for the current sequence. This can facilitate knowledge
transfer from the past to the current data streams (i.e., forward
transfer) [38]. Moreover, it can alleviate catastrophic forgetting
by penalising drastic changes from the previously learned information. Often, the posterior distribution is intractable, necessitating approximation methods. We use the online variational
inference (VI) [37] to approximate the posterior of (20) by a
parametrised distribution p(θ|x1:T ) ≈ q̄(θ) through a sequence
of projections, which are defined via the minimisation of KL
divergence over the set of allowed approximate posteriors Q:


q̄(θ) = arg min DKL q̄(θ) Z −1 q̄t−1 (θ)p(xt |θ)
(21)
q∈Q

where Z −1 is the normalisation constant. q̄(θ) is an approximate
posterior modelled as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. However, in the context of online variational inference, the variance
of the Gaussian posterior approximation tends to shrink as new
observations are incorporated over time. This can potentially
lead to the loss of information from previous data streams,
especially when learning from non-stationary and dynamic environments [26], [38]. Similar to [38], we integrate Bayesian
exponential forgetting into the VI process as a forgetting factor,
which assigns progressively less weight to older observations.
This allows our model to adapt to new data while still retaining valuable knowledge from the past. The forgetting factor is
incorporated into the update equation (20) for the approximate
posterior, ensuring recent observations have a stronger influence
while gradually forgetting older ones. This helps maintain a balance between adaptation and knowledge preservation, mitigating “posterior shrinkage” and enabling better continual learning.
The Bayesian exponential forgetting is defined as follows:
q̄t (θ) = q̄t−1 (θ)p(xt |θ)(1−)

ΔT /τ

(22)

where  is a small positive constant, and τ represents a timeconstant corresponding to the mean value of the time-lags, expressed as ΔT = T − t. By incorporating the forgetting factor,
the posterior distribution places a relatively higher emphasis on
the likelihood of recent observation, which allows the model to
adapt to non-stationary data distributions and avoid excessive
influence from past information.
To this end, we incorporate the adaptive regularisation term in
(21) with the learning process of RDSAD, which is equivalent to

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

maximising the evidence lower bound (ELBO). We can modify
the ELBO in (16) with respect to q̄ and φ as follows:
⎡
⎡
⎤
T
⎢
L(φ, q̄t (θ)) =
⎣Eqφ (zt |zt−1 ,ht ,xt ) ⎣log pθ (xt |z t , ht )⎦



t=1
reconstruction term

− DKL (qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt )



⎤

⎥
pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ))⎦


KL-divergence term

− DKL (q̄t (θ) q̄t−1 (θ))




(23)

adaptive regularisation term

By incorporating the Bayesian adaptive regularisation with the
ELBO objective, the model can adapt to the underlying change
while retaining knowledge from previous observations. This
approach enables efficient real-time learning and adaptation with
improved generalisation performance [26], [38].
Overall, RDSAD’s SMA mechanism specifically addresses
the practical challenge of frequent normality shifts encountered
in CPS environments. Our extensive experiments (Section VI-E)
involving varying anomaly contamination levels confirm SMA’s
effectiveness in dynamically adapting to shifts while minimizing performance degradation. This confirms RDSAD’s robust
suitability for real-world CPS scenarios characterized by rapid
and frequent environmental variations.
E. RDSAD Runtime Procedure
RDSAD is initially trained offline with the available normal
dataset to optimise the model parameters and set the threshold
settings. During the runtime, it actively monitors system behaviour for potential attack patterns. It also incrementally adapts
to incoming data streams when change is identified, adjusting its
internal structure to accommodate changes. Algorithm 3 outlines
the overall runtime procedure of RDSAD. The algorithm begins
by initialising the necessary parameters and data structures.
Line 1 assigns the initial latent variables (z p ) using values
from the training phase. The sliding window (W ) and the
variable (z c ) maintaining the current latent variables are also
initialised. As new observations arrive, they are incorporated
into the sliding window. Once the window reaches its pre-set size
(T ), the algorithm iterates through each timestep. Lines 13-17
depict the computation steps to construct the inference and
emission models at the current timestep, thereby capturing the
underlying data dynamics. Line 19 updates z c with the newly
derived latent variable (z t ), and the oldest latent variable is
removed to maintain the window size. The likelihood score of
observation xt is calculated in Line 18. RDSAD then calculates
the deviation score s (Line 21). If an update is triggered by
the Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) (see Algorithm 2),
z p is updated with z c (Line 24), and the deviation threshold is
recalculated (Line 25). Line 27 updates the parameters (φ, θ)
using the Adam optimisation for an incremental model update.
RDSAD continuously assesses the current observation xt for
deviation from the normal behaviour in Line 30. Aa alarm is
raised if the deviation score st is less than or equal to the

threshold η. Conversely, when st exceeds η (e.g., indicating
normal behaviour), the statistics for consistent behaviour (c)
get updated (Line 34). RDSAD continually processes the data
stream, removing the oldest observation from the sliding window
(Line 39) and incrementing the timestep.
1) Computational Complexity: The computational complexity of RDSAD per input sequence is approximately O(T ·
(D · H + H 2 )), where T is the sequence length, D is the
feature dimension, and H is the size of the latent GRU state.
This complexity stems from the GRU-based modeling of latent
dynamics (input-to-hidden and hidden-to-hidden transitions),
along with amortized inference in the variational learning framework. Since these operations are applied linearly over time,
RDSAD’s complexity scales linearly with both sequence length
and input dimensionality. Additionally, the Shift-aware Model
Adaptation (SMA) module performs lightweight updates only
when a significant concept drift is detected, introducing minimal computational overhead. These design choices ensure that
RDSAD remains efficient and scalable for real-time deployment
in streaming CPS environments. This theoretical analysis aligns
with our empirical findings presented in Section VI-B.
IV. RELATED WORK
This section discusses existing anomaly-based detection
methods in industrial applications that have garnered significant attention in recent years. Specifically, we focus on two
distinct approaches: static-based and streaming-based detection
approaches. These approaches represent different paradigms for
detecting malicious threats.
A. Static-Based Detection
Static-based anomaly detection methods operate by performing offline training on a batch of data and do not update their parameters during runtime. While static-based detection methods
can operate in real time, they typically require frequent offline
training or model updates to adapt to changing patterns in the
data effectively.
Several static-based anomaly-based detection methods have
been proposed in various domains [7], [13], [14], [15]. Deep
learning-based anomaly detection, such as a deep one-class
classification method, named DeepSVDD [13], and Variational
Autoencoder (VAE) with a gating parameter β [14], have shown
promise in capturing complex data patterns. Similarly, Zong
et al. [15] leverage a deep Autoencoder (AE) with Gaussian
Mixture Model (GMM), named DAGMM, to flag anomalies
in low-density regions of the learned normal behaviour distribution. However, the aforementioned methods cannot capture time
dependencies in sensor data.
In contrast, some recent works [16], [17] addressed some
of these limitations by incorporating Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to capture temporal dependencies in sensor data,
improving anomaly detection in sequential data. Malhotra et
al. [16] propose LSTM-ED, a multi-sensor anomaly detection method based on LSTM. Furthermore, Park et al. [17]
introduced LSTM-VAE, which integrates LSTM with VAE by

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

Algorithm 3: RDSAD Runtime.

1073

their advancements, these static methods still face limitations, particularly their inability to handle temporal uncertainty
effectively or proactively manage concept drift, self-poisoning,
and catastrophic forgetting.
Overall, the performance of static-based detection methods
can degrade when faced with significant changes in the underlying data patterns. They often require manual intervention to
update the model parameters, which can be time-consuming and
not feasible in dynamic environments. This deficiency restricts
their ability to promptly react to new or evolving threats, potentially compromising system security [23], [25], [26], [27].
B. Streaming-Based Detection

replacing the feed-forward network in a VAE with LSTM. Nevertheless, these methods also have their constraints, in capturing
the inherent variability and stochastic nature of sequential data
streams. In the context of sequential data modelling, incorporating the temporal dependencies of stochastic variables is crucial
for accurately representing the underlying dynamics of the input
data streams [8], [9].
Recently, advanced static-based approaches leverage graphbased methods, and digital-twin paradigms have emerged. Deng
et al. [39] introduced the Graph Deviation Network (GDN),
a method exploiting graph structures to effectively model feature relationships in multivariate time-series. Yang et al. [40]
proposed Agent-based Dynamic Thresholding (ADT), employing an adaptive dynamic thresholding approach to enhance
robustness against evolving anomaly patterns. Similarly, digitaL twin-based Anomaly deTecTion wIth Curriculum lEarning (LATTICE) [41] leveraged digital-twin methodologies to
enhance anomaly detection in CPS environments, effectively
managing shifts through adaptive strategies. However, despite

Unlike static-based anomaly methods, streaming-based
anomaly detection methods enable real-time adaptation to evolving patterns in streaming data without frequent offline training [23], [25], [26]. Several popular streaming anomaly detection methods exist in the literature. Methods like STORM [21]
and HS-Tree [22] utilise sliding window approaches for anomaly
detection in streaming data, focusing on global distance-based
anomalies and leveraging tree-based structures, respectively.
Pevny et al. [24] present an ensemble-based approach called
LODA that leverages histograms based on random projections to
generate anomaly scores. Some works have utilised Deep Learning (DL) methods to propose online and streaming anomaly
detection. Mirsky et al. propose KitNET [25], an online unsupervised deep learning approach that employs an ensemble of
autoencoders for cyber-attack detection. However, these methods do not consider the time dependencies in the data streams.
In contrast, Saurav et al. [23] develop Online-RNN-AD, a
deep learning method for online time series anomaly detection
that leverages Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to learn the
temporal dependencies in the data streams. Moreover, Hartl et
al. [42] introduced SDOstream, a streaming anomaly detection
approach based on low-density models designed for real-time
outlier detection. While effective in detecting anomalies in
a streaming context, SDOstream lacks explicit mechanisms
for handling temporal dependencies, uncertainty, and dynamic
shifts.
Despite their advancements, these streaming-based methods
lack effective and shift-aware solutions that can proactively
update the model when changes are detected in the underlying
data patterns. Furthermore, they often exhibit some challenges
like self-poisoning and catastrophic forgetting, hindering their
ability to maintain model integrity over time and recognise
previously learned normal behaviours. While memory-based solutions from online and continual learning literature like pseudorehearsal methods [43] and experience replay [27] offer potential
mitigation, their primary application in supervised learning scenarios limits their direct applicability to unsupervised intrusion
detection in industrial CPS [26], [27].
Table II provides a brief comparison between RDSAD and existing static and streaming methods. In contrast to prior research,
RDSAD explicitly considers both the uncertainty and temporal
dependencies in data streams. This allows RDSAD to capture
essential information from the data streams, leading to improved

1074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE II
A COMPARISON OF EXISTING SOLUTIONS

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF THE DATASETS. THE ANOMALIES PERCENTAGE WITHIN THE
TEST SAMPLES

originates from a large-scale water treatment plant replica located at the Singapore University of Technology and Design
(SUTD). It was collected over 11 days, capturing the statuses
and readings from 51 sensors and actuators. The WADI dataset
contains measurements from 123 sensors and actuators gathered from the water distribution testing environment at SUTD
University. Finally, the GAS dataset was collected over 36
months from several chemical sensors installed in a gas delivery
system. The objective is to keep track of six various types of
gaseous substances. The first three datasets contain anomalies
representing diverse security threats, including cyber-attacks
designed to disrupt the availability and integrity of the testbed
systems where the datasets originated. In the GAS dataset, the
presence of Acetaldehyde, a harmful chemical, is considered a
threat pattern. All datasets were labelled by domain experts, and
anomalies are exclusively found within the test data.
B. Benchmark Methods

inference and more effective detection of deviation and changes.
Furthermore, RDSAD incorporates a shift-aware update approach, selectively updating the model when significant changes
in data patterns are identified. It also employs robust update
decisions to prevent self-poisoning during the update process,
preserving the model’s integrity. Finally, RDSAD introduces an
adaptive regularisation term that mitigates catastrophic forgetting in an unsupervised setting by constraining the parameter
values to not change significantly from their previously learned
value. Unlike memory-based methods, RDSAD does not rely
on memory architectures or storage of prior data streams. By
avoiding the need for storage of data, RDSAD reduces resource
demands and significantly mitigates potential data privacy concerns, making it a more effective and privacy-preserving solution.
V. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
Extensive experiments were carried out to compare the performance of RDSAD with those of the state-of-the-art methods.
In what follows, we describe the datasets, benchmark methods,
implementation settings, as well as the evaluation metrics used
in the experiments.
A. Datasets
Four benchmark datasets, well-established in security research, are used for the experiments: TON_IoT [44], Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [45], Water Distribution Dataset
(WADI) [46], and GAS [47]. Table III provides a summary of
the characteristics of each dataset. Descriptions of each dataset.
The TON_IoT dataset comprises data streams collected from
seven various IoT/IIoT services (e.g., weather and temperature)
functioning on a medium-scale IoT network. The SWaT data

Several state-of-the-art methods are used as baselines to evaluate the performance of RDSAD. A selection of both static and
streaming methods is considered to ensure a thorough comparison in the anomaly detection context. The static-based methods include: DeepSVDD [13], Beta-VAE [14], DAGMM [15],
LSTM-ED [16], and LSTM-VAE [17], (see Section IV-A).
The streaming-based methods comprise: STORM [21], HSTree [22], Online RNN-AD [23], LODA [24], and KitNET [25],
(see Section IV-B).
C. Implementation Settings
We implemented RDSAD using Python (version 3.7.14) and
Pytorch (version 1.12.1). The machine on which RDSAD and
all baseline methods are executed comes with an integrated
Intel Xeon, E5-1650 CPU, and 32.0 GB RAM, operating on a
Windows 10 OS. To ensure reproducibility and fair comparison,
detailed implementation settings and baseline parameters are
available in Appendix A, available online.
D. Parameters Settings
Here, we discuss the parameter settings for RDSAD. We
empirically set the window size to T = 50 for GAS, T = 100
for SWaT and WADI and T = 150 for ToN_IoT, respectively.
The Temporal Embedding Network ϕ is configured with a
TCN model with two blocks of convolutional layers with ReLU
activation function. Each block has two temporal convolutional
layers with a kernel size of k = 3. Moreover, the inference and
emission models are configured with two fully connected layers.
The inference model is structured with a first layer containing
32 neurons and a second layer comprising 64 neurons. Conversely, the emission model is constructed with 64 neurons in
its first layer and 32 in the second. The GRU-flow is configured
with 64 units. We observed that the chosen architecture of this
model provided sufficient capacity to achieve improved performance. However, incorporating additional capacity yielded
minimal benefits while simultaneously increasing model sizes
and runtime. Furthermore, the scalar parameters αu and αr

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

of GRU-FLOW are set to their default values 0.4 and 0.8,
z
−e−z
respectively. The Tanh activation function tanh(z) = eez +e
−z
is utilised in GRU-flow due to its computational efficiency.
We employ 2 -norm regularisation with a coefficient of 10−6
across all layers as a measure to avoid model overfitting. The
dimension of the z-space is empirically determined and set to
4 Section VI-G). For the deviation threshold, the value of q is
typically chosen within the range of 10−3 and 10−5 to allow
for some flexibility and accommodate potential errors in setting
the value of q. In our experiment, we set q to (e.g., 10−4 ) for
all datasets to achieve a high true positive rate (i.e., accurate
deviation detection) while keeping a low false positive rate (i.e.,
minimising incorrect detections). The low quantile is set to
0.01 for ToN_IoT, 0.05 for both SWaT and WADI and 0.07 for
GSA-Drift. For the adaptive regularisation term, We construct a
Bayesian network over θ parameters using a fully-connected perceptron consisting of two layers. Each layers incorporates 100
hidden units, which employ ReLU activation functions. We use a
Gaussian mean-field approximation over each of the parameters
θ. We place a standard normal Gaussian over each parameter
as the initial prior (p0 (θ)). This choice reflects our initial belief
about the parameter values before any data streams are observed.
We set the parameter  for Bayesian exponential forgetting to
 = 0.05, as in the original paper. The coefficient λ controlling
the regularisation in SMA (i.e., penalizing deviation from past
latent encodings) was fixed at 0.1in our experiments. This value
was selected based on preliminary runs using a grid search
over λ ∈ 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, where 0.1 yielded the most stable
trade-off between plasticity (i.e., adaptation to new concepts)
and stability (i.e., memory of past normality patterns). Lastly,
we apply Adam optimizer for stochastic gradient descent [29],
setting an initial learning rate of 10−3 to optimise the model
parameters of both RDSAD (θ and φ) and the Bayesian network.
The initial average training time of our model for the ToN_IoT,
SWaT, WADI, and GAS datasets is approximately 52, 45, 68,
and 30 minutes, respectively, on an Intel Xeon E5-1650 CPU
with 32 GB RAM (Section V-C). Training times scale linearly
with data size, confirming computational efficiency for large
CPS deployments.
E. Evaluation Metrics
The performance of RDSAD and benchmark methods is
evaluated using precision, recall, F-score, and the Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC). PreciP
sion = (T PT+F
P ) represents the proportion of correctly detected
P
anomalies among all predicted anomalies. Recall = (T PT+F
N)
is the ratio of correctly detected anomalies to the total number
recision)
of actual anomalies. F-score = 2 ∗ (Recall∗P
Recall+P recision calculates
the harmonic mean of precision and recall [3]. The term TP
represents the number of true-positives predictions, and FP
refers to false-positives whereas FN denotes the number of
false-negatives predictions. AUC-ROC measures the ability of
the model to distinguish true anomalies from normal data at
various thresholds. Higher AUC-ROC values indicate better
overall performance, with 1 being perfect and 0.5 representing
random chance [3].

1075

VI. RESULTS
This section discusses the experimental results obtained from
evaluating RDSAD on various aspects: overall performance,
scalability, robust updates, ablation study, and parameter sensitivity.
A. Overall Performance
Table IV provides the precision, recall, F-score, and AUC
for our proposed RDSAD as well as the baseline methods
applied across four public datasets: ToN_IoT, SWaT, WADI and
GAS. We conducted five experimental runs for each dataset
and reported the average and standard deviation (±) of the
results. The highest-performing scores have been highlighted
in bold for easy reference. RDSAD consistently achieves the
highest results across all the benchmark datasets. Specifically,
it obtains the highest precision values of 0.7071 and 0.6157
on the ToN_IoT and GAS datasets, respectively. While GDN
achieves exceptional precision of 0.9935 on SWaT, it has a lower
recall of 0.6812, indicating potential challenges in detecting all
anomalies in certain contexts. In contrast, RDSAD achieves an
optimal balance with high precision (0.9175), recall (0.8552),
and the highest F-score (0.8851) and AUC (0.9006). ADT
Shows balanced results across datasets, achieving an F-score
of 0.6296 on ToN_IoT and 0.8043 on SWaT. On the WADI
dataset, RDSAD has the second-best precision score of 0.8316
compared to LSTM-ED, which has the best precision of 0.9239.
In addition, RDSAD achieves the best F-score with values of
0.7628 and 0.8851 on the ToN_IoT and SWaT datasets, as well
as 0.8474 and 0.6686 on WADI and GAS datasets, respectively.
Moreover, RDSAD outperforms all baseline methods in terms
of AUC metric with the highest values of 0.8112, 0.9006, 0.8555
and 0.7861 on ToN_IoT, SWaT, WADI, and GAS datasets,
respectively. These results highlight the overall effectiveness and
robustness of RDSAD in various scenarios.
Even though LODA obtains the highest recall values across
the majority of datasets, it exhibits a notable low precision.
Specifically, on the SWaT dataset, LODA achieves a recall
score of 0.9860 but with the lowest precision at 0.1227. Similarly, it demonstrates the best recall values on ToN_IoT and
WADI datasets, at 0.9840 and 0.9649, respectively, but these are
contrasted with low corresponding precision scores of 0.3897
and 0.0575. This is attributed to the inherent limitation of
LODA, where the employed random projection fails to preserve
the accurate pairwise distances of the original space. As a
result, LODA may not provide precise outlier estimation due to
this constraint. LATTICE demonstrates moderate performance,
achieving competitive F-scores (e.g., 0.7642 on WADI), but
its imbalance between precision and recall, particularly on
ToN_IoT and GAS datasets, reveals constraints in handling
diverse anomaly patterns. Similar insight was observed in other
methods. For example, KitNet has a recall of 0.9248 and 0.6520
with low precision of 0.2836 and 0.2795 on SWaT and GAS
datasets, respectively. DeepSVD scores 0.8026 in a recall but
with a precision of 0.2757 on the SWaT datasets. Similarly,
DAGMM obtains a recall of 0.8749 with the second-lowest
precision of 0.2125 On the SWaT datasets. Moreover, HS-Tree

1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF PRECISION, RECALL, F-SCORE, AND AUC METRICS FOR RDSAD AND BASELINE METHODS ON THE BENCHMARK DATASETS, PRESENTED WITH
± STANDARD DEVIATION

shows similar fluctuations in precision and recall on SWaT and
GAS datasets. These findings indicate that these methods can
successfully detect a significant proportion of abnormal observations. However, their low precision suggests that many of the
detected observations are incorrect, resulting in a high number
of false positives. This limitation might stem from the failure
of these methods to adapt and update their internal structures to
capture the evolving patterns in the streaming data, leading to a
higher number of false positives and lower precision.
In contrast, while some methods have high precision, they
often show relatively low recall scores. For example, LSTM-ED
demonstrates a precision value of 0.6445, yet it has a low recall of
0.2970 on the ToN_IoT dataset. DeepSVD and Online-RNN-AD
have precision values of 0.5005 and 0.4900 with low recall scores
of 0.1944 and 0.1257 on the ToN_IoT dataset. Furthermore,
Beta-VAE, LSTM-VAE and LSTM-ED show good precision
values and have relatively low recall scores on the SWaT dataset.
This arises because these methods accurately identify only a
limited number of abnormal observations. However, they fail to
detect most abnormal instances, leading to a low recall rate. This
reduced performance may be attributed to the inability of these
methods to accurately identify certain anomalies and their lack
of handling uncertainties inherent in the data streams, which
further contribute to the lower recall rate. Finally, SDOstream
achieves an F-score of 0.5107 on ToN_IoT and 0.7289 on
SWaT, indicating reasonable detection capabilities, particularly
in streaming data contexts. However, RDSAD consistently outperforms SDOstream and other streaming methods, highlighting
RDSAD’s ability to handle real-time adaptive scenarios robustly.

RDSAD exhibits a minimal disparity between precision and
recall, indicating its superior robustness compared to other methods. It shows a balanced performance in all evaluation metrics,
highlighting its ability to effectively identify anomalies while
simultaneously minimising false positives and false negatives.
This close alignment between the metrics signifies that our
model excels in its ability to strike a balance, thereby ensuring
robust deviation detection performance. RDSAD is designed
with a Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) that enables it to
dynamically adapt and update its internal structures in real time,
effectively capturing the evolving patterns in the streaming data.
This adaptability allows it to maintain a balance between detecting anomalies and minimising false positives. Furthermore,
RDSAD leverages a deep state-space model and incorporates a
t-student distribution, which can effectively consider uncertainty
and capture the underlying patterns hidden within the noisy data.
B. Scalability
This section presents the scalability of RDSAD and various
streaming methods in terms of runtime performance across varying sample sizes and dimensions. To conduct these experiments,
the DataStream module was utilised in scikit-multiflow [48] to
generate synthetic datasets. The sample size experiments were
conducted on four synthetic datasets, each consisting of 100
dimensions and varying sample sizes of 1000, 5000, 25000, and
125000. Similarly, the scale-up experiments were performed on
four synthetic datasets with a fixed sample size of 500, while the
dimensions varied in a range of 1000, 5000, 25000, and 125000.

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

1077

TABLE V
TRAINING TIME AND ESTIMATED MEMORY USAGE ON SWAT DATASET

Fig. 4. Runtime in relation to: (a) various sample sizes and (b) a different
number of dimensions.

Fig. 4 illustrates the runtime associated with the sample
and dimension experiments. The overall results illustrate that
RDSAD consistently demonstrates linear and proportional increases in runtime in relation to both sample size and dimension. Regarding sample size experiments, RDSAD demonstrates
superior runtime efficiency across various sample sizes compared to other streaming methods, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a).
Online-RNN-AD exhibits the second-best runtime performance.
HS-Tree and KitNet exhibit moderate runtime performances,
with SDOstream closely following LODA due to their similar
underlying approach. STORM experiences the worst runtime
due to the computational burden of processing larger sample
sizes. The increased number of data points necessitates extensive distance calculations and detection operations, leading to a
notable increase in computational time. For the scale-up experiments, the runtime performance of RDSAD and the streaming
methods is depicted in Fig. 4(b). Notably, all methods, except
for LODA, demonstrate competitive runtimes between 1000 and
25000. This enhanced efficiency can be attributed to integrating
dimensionality reduction within these methods, contributing
to faster runtime execution. Both STROM and RDSAD have
a slight increase in runtime as the dimensions extend from
25000 to 125000, while the remaining methods demonstrate
consistent and stable performance. In contrast, LODA has the
worst runtime among the other methods. As the dimensions of
the data increase, LODA’s computational complexity escalates
due to the generation of random projections and the computation
of density estimation histograms for each projection, resulting
in higher computational costs.
Our empirical scalability evaluations (Fig. 4) clearly indicate
the feasibility and practicality of deploying RDSAD in realworld industrial CPS scenarios involving varying data complexities and sizes. Specifically, RDSAD demonstrated linear
computational complexity, ensuring practical scalability with
larger datasets and higher dimensional data streams.
C. Computational Cost Analysis
In addition to detection accuracy, the practical deployment
of anomaly detection models in cyber-physical systems (CPSs)
requires efficiency in terms of training time and memory usage.
This section provides a comparative analysis of the computational cost of RDSAD against a subset of representative static
and streaming baseline methods. Particularity, we selected six

Fig. 5.

Retraining effect on RDSAD’s performance.

methods to represent a diversity of architectural approaches, including graph neural networks (GDN), reinforcement learningbased models (ADT), online learning (KitNET, SDOstream),
and hybrid deep generative models (DAGMM, LSTM-VAE).
We measure the average training time (in seconds) and estimate memory usage (in megabytes) using PyTorch’s built-in
memory profiler, evaluated on the SWaT dataset.
As shown in Table V, RDSAD achieves competitive training
time (45 s) with moderate memory requirements (750 MB),
outperforming many deep learning-based approaches (e.g.,
DAGMM and LSTM-VAE) while maintaining higher detection
performance. Unlike methods that rely on large encoder-decoder
architectures, RDSAD uses a compact generative model with
adaptive update mechanisms that minimize retraining and reduce memory pressure. While streaming baselines (KitNET,
SDOstream) are faster and they have lower memory usage, this is
justified by RDSAD’s advanced features (e.g., uncertainty modeling, concept drift adaptation) that offer an effective balance
between runtime efficiency and detection robustness.
D. The Effect of Robust Update Decision
This section discusses the influence of the proposed robust
update decision on the overall accuracy of RDSAD using SWaT
and WADI datasets, as they are widely used in security research.
Three update scenarios are considered: (1) without any update,
(2) with a regular update, and (3) with a proposed robust update
decision. The objective is to evaluate how these update methods
affect the overall performance of RDSAD. Fig. 5 presents the
results for both datasets. The robust update decision consistently
surpasses the performance of the other two scenarios. This can
be attributed to its ability to selectively decline updates during
potential anomalies, preventing their negative influence on the

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 6. AUC performance under varying contamination and noise levels on
SWaT dataset.
Fig. 7.

model and mitigating self-poisoning. Thus, it plays an indispensable role in countering the effects of anomalies, enhancing
RDSAD’s overall performance significantly.
E. Robustness Under Extreme Conditions
To evaluate the robustness of RDSAD under extreme scenarios, we conducted two additional experiments: (I) contamination
with anomaly samples and (II) additive Gaussian noise injection,
as depicted in Fig. 6.
1) Anomaly Contamination: We injected varying levels of
abnormal data into the training set of the SWaT dataset at
contamination rates of 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20%. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), RDSAD maintains a high AUC and
shows minimal performance degradation compared to other
streaming methods. Methods like STORM and LODA degrade
rapidly (AUC drops to 0.59 and 0.40, respectively). RDSAD’s
Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) mitigates self-poisoning
by selectively updating the model only during confirmed normality shifts, preserving detection accuracy. This highlights its
robustness in self-supervised settings where perfect separation
between normal and abnormal data may not be feasible.
2) Gaussian Noise Injection. We injected additive Gaussian
noise into SWaT sensor readings as it is very common in sensor
measurements, using zero-mean noise with varying standard deviation σ ∈ [0.0, 0.05]. Fig. 6(b) shows that RDSAD maintains
stable performance (AUC = 0.8782 at σ = 0.05), degrading
by only 2.5% from baseline. This robustness of RDSAD is
attributed to its probabilistic modeling and dynamic adaptation
features. Nonetheless, KitNet and SDOstream suffer significant
drops (AUC declines by 5–7%) due to their reliance on static
feature assumptions.
F. Ablation Study
To assess the impact of the main components of RDSAD on its
overall performance, an ablation study was conducted by removing one component at a time. This resulted in the creation of four
distinct variants of RDSAD, namely: RDSAD-v1, RDSAD-v2,
RDSAD-v3 and RDSAD-v4. In the first variant, RDSAD-v1,
the TCN component was omitted and replaced with a regular
RNN. The second variant, RDSAD-v2, replaces the GRU-flow
with a basic GRU. In RDSAD-v3, the regularisation term in
(23) was removed from the configuration of RDSAD. Lastly,
in RDSAD-v4, a Normal distribution is employed as emission

Impact of various components of RDSAD.

instead of student-t distribution. This evaluation allows for a
comprehensive understanding of the individual contributions of
these components to the performance of RDSAD.
Fig. 7 depicts the comparative performance of RDSAD and
its variants. The integration of each component into RDSAD
significantly enhances the overall performance. In particular,
RDSAD is slightly better than RDSAD-v1, which is based on
RNNs. Compared to a regular RNN, RDSAD leverages TCN
that utilises dilated convolutions, allowing for a larger receptive
field and capturing information from a broader temporal context.
This enables TCNs to model complex temporal relationships and
dependencies more effectively than regular RNNs. Moreover,
RDSAD outperforms RDSAD-v2 because a basic GRU cannot
capture the continuous evolution dynamics of latent states within
evolving data streams. Furthermore, RDSAD exhibits superior
performance compared to RDSAD-v3, which lacks an adaptive
regularisation term. The absence of this term in RDSAD-v3
leads to catastrophic forgetting, losing past knowledge during
updates. This highlights the importance of the adaptive term
in RDSAD, as it preserves knowledge and contributes to its
improved performance. Finally, RDSAD achieves better results
than RDSAD-v4 with Normal distribution. This suggests that introducing a heavy-tailed distribution can enhance the robustness
of the overall performance.
G. Parameter Sensitivity
This section investigates the performance of RDSAD with
respect to variations in the dimension of latent z-space, window
length, and shift factor. The goal is to examine how these
parameters impact the effectiveness of RDSAD on the selected
datasets. The F-score of RDSAD is examined while varying the
latent z-space dimension within a range of {2, 32}, as depicted in
Fig. 8(a). It is observed that the results consistently demonstrate
that the highest F-score is achieved when the dimension of z is
set to 4 for all datasets, and the performance stabilises beyond
this dimension. Consequently, a dimension of 4 is selected for
the z-space representation. To evaluate the influence of window length, we conducted experiments using different window
lengths, specifically T = [50, 100, 150, 200, 250]. Fig. 8(b) illustrates the results corresponding to these five different window
lengths. RDSAD demonstrates a good performance with a window length of T = 100 for both the SWaT and WADI datasets.

ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS

Fig. 8.

Parameter sensitivity of RDSAD.

Similarly, it achieves satisfactory results with a window length
of T = 150 for the ToN_IoT dataset and T = 50 for the GAS
dataset. Overall, the fine-tuning of the window length aligns
with the specific monitoring requirements of the user and the
application. Lastly, we studied the sensitivity of the shift factor
κ, experimenting with various values ranging from very small to
larger, as shown in Fig. 8(c). A small shift factor is undesirable, as
it corresponds to a low number of required instances that must be
observed before declaring a change, making the model prone to
detecting changes even with insignificant variations. Conversely,
the results demonstrate stable and effective performance as the
shift factor κ grows to moderate and large values, representing
a higher number of required instances. These values ensure
that significant changes are detected with greater confidence
while avoiding excessive false positives triggered by transient
or insignificant variations.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has introduced RDSAD, an unsupervised, robust, and adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detection method
for evolving complex CPS data streams. RDSAD integrates
two innovative components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition
(DDR) for seamlessly capturing underlying system dynamics
and detecting attack patterns, and Shift-aware Model Adaptation for robust and adaptive model updates to accommodate
changing system behaviours. Our experimental results across
four benchmark datasets demonstrated that RDSAD achieves
superior performance and an efficient runtime than state-ofthe-art methods. This performance across various datasets illustrates the versatility and robustness of RDSAD, marking
it as a promising solution for various dynamic applications.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there is room for further
improvement. RDSAD’s performance depends on the assumption that the underlying distribution of normal behavior can

1079

be effectively modeled in the latent space. In highly stochastic or weakly structured systems, this assumption may not
hold. Furthermore, we recognise potential challenges associated
with directly deploying deep-learning-based methods such as
RDSAD on low-power edge devices commonly used in CPS
deployments. To practically address this challenge, future research directions could include lightweight model design and
compression methods (e.g., pruning, quantization, or knowledge distillation) to streamline RDSAD for resource-constrained
environments. Furthermore, while RDSAD’s SMA mechanism
effectively mitigates self-poisoning and catastrophic forgetting
under standard anomaly scenarios, it currently lacks protection
against adversarial attacks. In particular, adversaries may craft
subtle input perturbations to manipulate deviation scores or
trigger misleading shift detections, resulting in false negatives
or unnecessary model updates. Addressing this vulnerability
is a critical direction for future work. We plan to investigate
robust adversarial training strategies tailored for unsupervised
streaming contexts, including resilience to gradient-based attacks (e.g., FGSM, PGD) and consistency enforcement in latent
space representations. Additionally, we plan to investigate more
realistic mechanisms for simulating normality shifts, such as
synthetically inducing gradual changes in the statistical properties of normal data (e.g., mean or variance drift) or introducing
controlled latent space perturbations that mimic domain evolution over time. To support reproducibility and future research,
we intend to publicly release the implementation of RDSAD,
along with the evaluation scripts, upon publication. Finally,
we aim to evaluate RDSAD on additional CPS domains such
as power grids and autonomous systems to further assess its
generalizability.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Kayan, M. Nunes, O. Rana, P. Burnap, and C. Perera, “Cybersecurity of
industrial cyber-physical systems: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
no. 11s, pp. 1–35, 2022.
[2] J. Giraldo et al., “A survey of physics-based attack detection in cyberphysical systems,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 51, no. 4, 2018, Art. no. 76.
[3] A. Alsaedi, Z. Tari, R. Mahmud, N. Moustafa, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“USMD: UnSupervised misbehaviour detection for multi-sensor data,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 724–739,
Jan./Feb. 2023.
[4] D. U. Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power grid,”
Electricity Inf. Sharing Anal. Center, vol. 388, no. 1–29, 2016, Art. no. 3.
[5] The Florida water plant attack signals a new era of digital
warfare. Accessed: Apr. 20, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.darktrace.com/en/blog/the-florida-water-plant-attack-signalsa-new-era-of-digital-warfare-its-time-to-fight-back/
[6] M. Ike, K. Phan, K. Sadoski, R. Valme, and W. Lee, “SCAPHY: Detecting
modern ICS attacks by correlating behaviors in SCADA and physical,” in
Proc. 2023 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2023, pp. 20–37.
[7] Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Cheng, G. Peng, and D. Yao, “Deep learning-based
anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems: Progress and opportunities,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[8] M. Fraccaro, S. K. Sønderby, U. Paquet, and O. Winther, “Sequential
neural models with stochastic layers,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 2207–2215.
[9] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio,
“A recurrent latent variable model for sequential data,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 2980–2988.
[10] Y. Song, J. Lu, H. Lu, and G. Zhang, “Learning data streams with changing
distributions and temporal dependency,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 3952–3965, Aug. 2023.

1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[11] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under
concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12,
pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019.
[12] D. Han et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Normality shift
detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–13.
[13] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[14] I. Higgins et al., “beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, pp. 1–12.
[15] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 1–19.
[16] P. Malhotra et al., “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor
anomaly detection,” 2016 arXiv:1607.00148.
[17] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[18] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[19] M. Du, Z. Chen, C. Liu, R. Oak, and D. Song, “Lifelong anomaly detection
through unlearning,” in Proc. 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
Secur., 2019, pp. 1283–1297.
[20] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.
[21] F. Angiulli and F. Fassetti, “Detecting distance-based outliers in streams of
data,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2007, pp. 811–820.
[22] S. C. Tan, K. M. Ting, and T. F. Liu, “Fast anomaly detection for streaming
data,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2011, pp. 1511–1516.
[23] S. Saurav et al., “Online anomaly detection with concept drift adaptation
using recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. ACM India Joint Int. Conf. Data
Sci. Manage. Data, 2018, pp. 78–87.
[24] T. Pevnỳ, “Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 102, pp. 275–304, 2016.
[25] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc.
Symp. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[26] M. Delange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in
classification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 7,
pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022.
[27] F. Barbero, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Transcending
TRANSCEND: Revisiting malware classification in the presence of concept drift,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 805–823.
[28] L. Li, J. Yan, Q. Wen, Y. Jin, and X. Yang, “Learning robust deep state
space for unsupervised anomaly detection in contaminated time-series,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 6058–6072, Jun. 2023.
[29] M. D. Hoffman, D. M. Blei, C. Wang, and J. Paisley, “Stochastic variational
inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1303–1347, 2013.
[30] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–14.
[31] M. Biloš, J. Sommer, S. S. Rangapuram, T. Januschowski, and S. Günnemann, “Neural Flows: Efficient alternative to neural ODEs,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 21325–21337.
[32] L. Tao, L. Feng, J. Yi, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Better safe than sorry:
Preventing delusive adversaries with adversarial training,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 16209–16225.
[33] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, arXiv:
1803.01271.
[34] A. Soule, K. Salamatian, and N. Taft, “Combining filtering and statistical
methods for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 5th ACM SIGCOMM Conf.
Internet Meas., 2005, pp. 31–31.
[35] D. Sejdinovic, B. Sriperumbudur, A. Gretton, and K. Fukumizu, “Equivalence of distance-based and RKHS-based statistics in hypothesis testing,”
Ann. Statist., vol. 41, pp. 2263–2291, 2013.
[36] A. Alsaedi, N. Sohrabi, R. Mahmud, and Z. Tari, “RADAR: Reactive
concept drift management with robust variational inference for evolving
IoT data streams,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1995–
2007.
[37] T. Broderick, N. Boyd, A. Wibisono, A. C. Wilson, and M. I. Jordan,
“Streaming variational Bayes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2013, pp. 1727–1735.

[38] R. Kurle, B. Cseke, A. Klushyn, P. Van Der Smagt, and S. Günnemann,
“Continual learning with Bayesian neural networks for non-stationary
data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–13.
[39] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4027–
4035.
[40] X. Yang, E. Howley, and M. Schukat, “ADT: Time series anomaly detection for cyber-physical systems via deep reinforcement learning,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 141, 2024, Art. no. 103825.
[41] Q. Xu, S. Ali, and T. Yue, “Digital twin-based anomaly detection with
curriculum learning in cyber-physical systems,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
Methodol., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1–32, 2023.
[42] A. Hartl, F. Iglesias, and T. Zseby, “SDOstream: Low-density models
for streaming outlier detection,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw.
Comput. Intell. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 661–666.
[43] F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual learning through synaptic
intelligence,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3987–3995.
[44] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “TON_IoT
telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and IIoT for data-driven
intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165130–165150,
2020.
[45] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
[46] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28.
[47] A. Vergara, S. Vembu, T. Ayhan, M. A. Ryan, M. L. Homer, and R. Huerta,
“Chemical gas sensor drift compensation using classifier ensembles,”
Sensors Actuators B: Chem., vol. 166, pp. 320–329, 2012.
[48] Scikit multiflow, “A machine learning package for streaming data in
Python,” Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-multiflow.github.
io/

Abdullah Alsaedi received the PhD degree from
RMIT University, Melbourne, in 2024, with a specialization in cybersecurity, focusing on network systems. He is an assistant professor with the College
of Computer Science and Engineering, Taibah University, Saudi Arabia. His research interests include
cyber-physical systems (CPSs) cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and network security.

Zahir Tari is a full professor with Distributed Systems, RMIT University (Australia) and the research
director with the RMIT Cyber Security Centre (CCSRI). His main expertise is in the areas of system’s
performance (e.g., P2P, cloud, edge, IoT) as well as
system’s security (e.g., SCADA, smart grid, cloud,
IoT). He is an associated editor of the ACM Computing Surveys and was an associate editor of the
IEEE Transactions on Computers (TC) and IEEE
Transactions on Parallel.

Redowan Mahmud received the PhD degree from
the School of Computing and Information Systems,
University of Melbourne (Australia), in 2020. He is
currently working as a lecturer (computing discipline)
with the School of Electrical Engineering, Computing
and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University. His
research interests include Internet of Things, fog and
edge computing.