IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

333

Revisiting the Intrusion Detection in
In-Vehicle Networks
Muhammad Asif Khan , Senior Member, IEEE, Hamid Menouar, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Mohamed Abdallah , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—An in-vehicle network (IVN) is the internal communication network that connects all sensors and control units in
an autonomous vehicle. Sensors and control units use the IVN to
send perception-related messages and control commands for the
normal and safe operation of the vehicle. However, the IVN, by
design, is vulnerable to network attacks due to a lack of adequate
security mechanisms. This paper presents a Dynamic Windowing
Intrusion Detection System (DWIDS) that adapts its detection
window in real-time based on observed anomalies, enabling
accurate and responsive attack detection. Unlike prior methods
that focus on static configurations or single-attack detection,
DWIDS supports multi-label classification and real-time tuning
of detection parameters. The system is evaluated using two public
benchmark datasets (CHD and IVN-IDS challenge) which feature diverse and imbalanced attack types. Experimental results
demonstrate high performance across key metrics (e.g., >98%
precision, >97% recall and F1-score), including for rare attacks.
The findings confirm DWIDS’s practicality and robustness for
deployment in real-world autonomous vehicle environments.
Index Terms—Attacks, autonomous vehicles, CAN bus, ECU,
in-vehicle network, IVN, intrusion detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION
UTONOMOUS vehicles (AVs) are becoming commonplace in today’s transportation system, revolutionizing
the way people and goods move. These vehicles leverage
advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine
learning, computer vision, and sensor fusion to perceive their
environment and make real-time decisions without human
intervention. AVs promise to enhance road safety by minimizing accidents caused by human error, improve traffic
efficiency through smart routing, and reduce carbon emissions by promoting eco-friendly driving patterns. However,
the widespread adoption of AVs also presents challenges,
including cybersecurity concerns, particularly related to
in-vehicle networks (IVNs) [1], [2], [3]. Intrusion detection
in IVNs is a critical safety requirement, yet existing solutions
often rely on unrealistic assumptions or lack scalability for

A

Received 10 December 2024; revised 10 July 2025; accepted 31 October 2025. Date of publication 12 December 2025; date of current version 26 December 2025. This publication was made possible by TUBITAK-QNRF joint Funding Program (Tubitak-QNRF 4th
Cycle grant # ICC04-0812-210017) from the Qatar National Research
Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The findings herein reflect
the work, and are solely the responsibility of the authors. The Associate Editor for this article was A. Amditis. (Corresponding author:
Muhammad Asif Khan.)
Muhammad Asif Khan and Hamid Menouar are with Qatar Mobility
Innovations Center, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: asifk@ieee.org).
Mohamed Abdallah is with Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3628885

real-time, multi-attack environments. This study addresses
these limitations by proposing a practical, generalizable, and
adaptive IDS design tailored for deployment in real-world
autonomous vehicle platforms.
An IVN connects various electronic control units (ECUs),
sensors, and actuators, facilitating real-time communication for
autonomous driving functions.
The Controller Area Network (CAN) [4] is a communication protocol for in-vehicle networks developed by Bosch
in the 1980s. CAN allows the various sensors and electronic
control units (ECUs) in a vehicle to communicate with each
other via a single two-wire system. CAN is also used in
industrial automation, medical equipment, and other fields.
The CAN bus protocol was not designed with security
in mind and thus has some intrinsic attributes that make
it vulnerable to attacks. Although alternative communication
protocols have been developed to address its shortcomings.
CAN-FD (Flexible Data-rate CAN) [3] offers higher bandwidth and supports longer payloads, allowing for the inclusion
of cryptographic checksums and authentication fields. FlexRay
[3], another alternative, provides fault tolerance, deterministic
timing, and improved electromagnetic interference resistance,
making it suitable for safety-critical applications. However,
widespread adoption of these protocols is limited due to cost,
compatibility issues, and increased system complexity. As a
result, practical IDS solutions that operate over legacy CAN
systems remain highly relevant for the near-term deployment
in autonomous vehicles. First, CAN does not have builtin mechanisms for authentication, and any malicious node
connected to it can send messages (susceptible to spoofing
attacks) [5]. Second, CAN is a broadcast network, and all
nodes connected to it receive every message. Thus, a malicious
node can inject a message to affect the entire network. Third,
messages on the CAN bus are not encrypted, thus a malicious
node connected to it can see all messages sent by all other
nodes.
The commonly known attacks on IVN are Denial of Service
(DoS), Distributed DoS (DDoS), fuzzy, spoofing, and replay
attacks. DoS attacks are caused by flooding messages on the
communication bus, saturating the network and thus blocking normal traffic. DDoS attacks DoS attacks that originate
from multiple origins i.e., electronic component units (ECUs),
leading to more effective communication disruptions. The AV
under a DoS/DDoS attack fails to perform normal functions
e.g., brake control, leading to catastrophic incidents. In fuzzy

1524-9050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

TABLE I
A S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON IDS FOR IVN

attacks, the attacker transmits random or deliberately crafted
messages to cause errors or unusual behavior, such as disabling
safety-critical systems. Though fuzzy attacks can overwhelm
the IVN similar to DoS attacks causing communication disruption, their primary goal is to analyze the behavior of one
or more ECUs to fuzzy attacks to craft more sophisticated
exploits. In spoofing attacks, the attacker impersonates a legitimate ECU by injecting malicious messages into the network.
A spoofing attack typically performs a specific malicious
function e.g., triggering an emergency stop, disabling the
brakes, etc. In replay attacks, the attacker captures valid IVN
messages and replays them later. These can cause out-ofcontext abnormal behavior e.g., locking the doors or altering
speed control. Replay attacks are also called Man-in-theMiddle (MiM) attacks.
There are a couple of recent surveys [1], [3], [6], [7], [8]
on intrusion detection in CAVs. A closer look at these surveys
and some related works (Table I), highlights an interesting
observation i.e., merely all these works report a significantly
high detection performance over several metrics. Such an
ideal performance can indicate two possibilities; First, the
intrusion detection problem in IVN is easy in general, and
simple off-the-shelf machine learning models can be used to
detect anomalies and attacks on the IVN. Second, the publicly
available datasets used in most of these works are smaller in
size and lack complexity, and the problem can be difficult and
complex in real-world scenarios.
A. Contribution and Organization
The contribution of this work is as follows:
• A critical analysis of current IDS methods in IVNs,
revealing their limitations in generalization and real-world
feasibility (Section II);

• A novel Dynamic Windowing Intrusion Detection System
(DWIDS) that adapts detection granularity in real-time
based on observed metrics (Section III);
• Implementation of both single-frame and multi-frame
models, including multi-label classification;
• Extensive evaluation on two public datasets with imbalanced attack distributions, demonstrating superior performance across detection metrics (Section IV).
The results of the evaluation are critically discussed
and compared against earlier works (Section V). Interesting
conclusions are drawn and directions for future work are
highlighted in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Methods for Developing Ids
Earlier works on IDS used signature-based methods and
traditional machine-learning methods [20] to detect malicious
frames in IVNs. For instance, [21] use Recursive least squares
(RLS) and cumulative sum (CUSUM) algorithms to detect
attacks that use fake time stamps. Similarly, [22] uses the
historic frame arrival rates using the sliding window technique
to detect malicious/fake frames. However, since these methods
rely on frame timestamp data, they often fail to classify
aperiodic messages correctly.
Recently, more advanced deep learning architectures such
as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [12], [23], Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) [11], [12], [13], [24], [25],
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9], [26] are
used. CNNs work well on images to automatically extract
spatial features from data. Since CAN bus data is sequential
and single-dimensional (1D), most works applying CNNs on
CAN bus data transform the 1D CAN message frames to

KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS

two-dimensional (2D) spatial data (frames). LSTM [27] is
a type of recurrent neural network (RNN) designed to learn
and retain long-term dependencies in sequential data. LSTM
was developed to handle the vanishing gradient problem of
standard RNNs [11]. LSTM defines a window to segment a
continuous data stream into fixed-length intervals or sequences
and feed it as input to the LSTM model. A sliding window
technique is then used to create overlapping sequences, allowing the model to maintain context as it processes the data. The
window size is an important parameter for IDS to measure the
response time of the model to potential attacks.
Song et al. [17] proposed an IDS system based on deep
CNN (DCNN). Since CNN works best on 2D grids (e.g.,
images), the sequential frames are stacked together to form
2D grids (frames). These frames are then fed to an InceptionResNet CNN network. The network reports F1 score of higher
than 99.9% on car-hacking dataset [28]. Baldini [18] proposed
a CNN-based IDS system for IVN. The CAN bus messages
are converted into histograms and features are extracted using
correlations of histograms and fed to 1D CNN. The performance is evaluated using the standard metrics, reporting
accuracy higher than 99% and car-hacking [28] and ROAD
[29] datasets. Hanselmann et al. proposed CANet [11] to
combine LSTM with autoencoders [30]. CANet uses multiple
independent LSTM models for each CAN ID to capture the
temporal patterns in CAN bus data to generate outputs that are
aggregated and then fed to an autoencoder for final anomaly
detection CANet achieves a high true negative rate (TNR
>0.99). However, the use of separate LSTM models for each
CAN ID is almost an impractical approach. Although the
authors in [11] used only 13 CAN IDs in their evaluation,
it will require a huge number of LSTM sub-networks to
implement a fully-fledged IDS system to scan all CAN IDs.
For instance, in standard CAN (ISO [4]), the CAN ID is an
11-bit identifier allowing for a total of 211 = 2048 possible
CAN IDs. Similarly, in extended CAN [4], the CAN ID is a
29-bit identifier, allowing for a total of 229 = 536, 870, 912
possible CAN IDs.
Khan et al. [13] proposed an IDS based on bidirectionalLSTM evaluated on the UNSWNB-15 dataset [31] and car
hacking dataset (CHD) [28] reporting accuracy of 98.88%
and 99.11%, respectively. They also compared the results
against other methods including SVM, NB, DT, and ANN. The
Bi-LSTM outperformed all methods. ANN (on CHD) achieved
the second-highest recall and F1 score. The work however
neither describes the architecture of the LSTM model, nor
the window size. Zhang et al. [12] proposed a ConvolutionLSTM evaluated on CHD [28] with a reported accuracy of
higher than 99% on all attacks. The results are compared
against MobileNetV3 [15], EfficientNet [16], and CANet [11]
and showed higher accuracy scores than all models. Like
[13], the study does not provide details about the window
size used in the LSTM model. Reference [32] also proposed
an encoder-decoder network (CNN as decoder and LSTM as
decoder) for IDS, reporting 99% accuracy and 0.32% falsepositive rate on ROAD dataset [29]. Authors in [9] propose a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) for intrusion detection
in CAN bus data. The CAN IDs from CAN frames are used

335

to extract patterns in CAN IDs and represented as a 2D image
(called CAN image) using a one-hot encoder. Authors consider
different input sizes in the range of 32-128 CAN IDs to form
the CAN image. Since each CAN frame is separately labeled
in the original dataset as normal/attack, the CAN image is
labeled as “attack” if at least one CAN ID in the CAN image
belongs to an attack frame. Then a GAN model is trained on
the CAN images to detect intrusions. In [10], authors used the
survival analysis method to classify CAN frames as normal
or attack. The authors defined chunks of different sizes in the
range of 50-300 frames using only the CAN ID of the frame.
Recently, [14] proposed an IDS system based on statistical
characteristics of CAN frames using a window-based method
to classify chunks of CAN frames. Window sizes in the range
of 50-1000 are used, whereas CAN ID is used as a feature. The
method efficiently detects fuzzy, merge, and denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks.
A summary of these works is presented in Table I. Different
than the above methods, [23] uses CNN to identify the CAN
message source using the physical characteristics of the CAN
bus channel. Reference [26] used GANs to detect bus-off,
spoofing, masquerade, replay, fuzzy, and same origin method
execution (SOME) attacks. Reference [33] proposed authentication between electronic control units to secure the CAN
bus. Reference [34] used anomaly detection method based on
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) to detect frame-level attacks
without using labeled data. A closely related work is [35], in
which the authors proposed a two stage IDS for IVN. In the
first stage, the model predicts the traffic as normal and attack.
In the second stage, the model identifies the type of attack.
Some recent works have also used large language models
(LLMs) such as BERT [36], but these models are not suitable
for real-time performance due to the high computational loads.
While many recent IDS studies report high accuracy (often
>99%), most rely on narrow evaluation settings e.g., single
dataset (often balanced), static window sizes, or single attack
types, and lack analysis of model generalizability or realtime feasibility. For instance, most 2D-CNN-based models
[12], [23] incur high computational laod due to the deeper
architectures used in them and are not lightweight enough
for embedded deployment. LSTM-based architectures [12],
[13] show strong temporal modeling but scale poorly when
applied per CAN ID. GAN-based methods [26] are effective in
detecting unseen patterns but lack interpretability and exhibit
unstable training. LLM based methods [36], [37], [38] incur
huge computational load and are not feasible for real-time
inference. In contrast, our DWIDS is model-agnostic, supports
multi-label detection, and uses adaptive windowing, making
it more suitable for real-world latency-sensitive deployment.
Unlike most earlier works that used a single dataset or a single
vehicle model (Table I), this paper validates the performance
over cross-vehicle datasets.
B. Analysis
The review of the aforementioned works notes some important observations;
1) Choosing Features: Some earlier studies used timestamps to derive frames’ inter-arrival times, whereas most

336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 1. Intrusion detection in IVN: The ECUs transmit unencrypted sensor
data frames over the CAN bus. The IDS monitors the CAN bus transmissions
to detect malicious frames before they trigger an action at the AV controller.

3) Choosing Evaluation Metrics: Most of these works
report performance evaluation over several classification metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and false
positive rate (FPR), without explicitly investigating their
importance in the context of the dataset used and the available
attack scenario. By definition, some of these metrics are not as
useful measures as others. For example, most of the datasets
for IVN are imbalanced datasets with a huge number of normal
and few attack messages. Thus, achieving a higher accuracy
score is merely due to the large number of normal messages
and is not an indication of the model detection of attacks.
Thus, it is important to use the appropriate metrics for a given
attack model. Additionally, some authors e.g., [35] proposed
two stage detection. We believe such models will incurs huge
processing and the inference delay encountered will not be
suitable for real-time applications like in autonomous vehicles.
III. P ROPOSED S CHEME

recent studies use only CAN ID as a feature. The reason to
use only timestamps in earlier studies is that these studies are
using signature techniques e.g., the inter-arrival time of frames
are compared against historical frames to detect abnormalities.
The motivation to use CAN IDs is that they are attributes
of different ECUs and reflect the transmission patterns of
individual ECUs in a chunk of frames. The payload (data)
field is often not used as a feature because the content of
data fields is associated with the individual manufacturers. The
exclusion of the payload field is thus an attempt to develop
universal models that are free and can be deployed in crossplatform vehicles. However, the payload field contains the
most important information that can be used to train a model,
which can effectively enhance the model’s performance.
2) Choosing Sample Size: An important aspect is the chunk
size. Some studies use IDS that classify each individual frame.
However, many studies use only the CAN ID field as a feature
by combining CAN IDs from multiple frames into chunks and
label each chunk as normal or attack chunks. This approach is
completely disintegrated from the earlier approaches because
using CAN ID only as a feature can not be used in singleframe prediction. The size of this chunk (obtained via sliding
window) varies across studies. Intuitively, this is a modeling
aspect and should be carefully chosen. For example, in a DoS
attack, the attacker sends a large number of dummy frames,
and thus a longer window may be needed to identify the DoS
attack pattern. Spoofing attacks are typically intermittent or
involve sporadic messages. A shorter chunk may help detect
sudden changes in communication quickly. Replay attacks
typically involve repeating specific patterns. The chunk size
needs to be long enough to capture enough instances of
these patterns. Therefore, the chunk size should be large
enough to capture the normal variation in traffic but short
enough to detect anomalies promptly (single frame ideally). A
shorter window provides quicker detection of anomalies but
may increase false positives. It can be more responsive to
sudden changes or transient attacks. A longer window offers
better context and may reduce false positives by considering
more data, but they might delay the detection of fast-moving
attacks.

We first evaluate the two formal approaches i.e., (i) single
frame intrusion detection, and (ii) multi-frame (chunk) intrusion detection, with few modifications to achieve high model
generalization, and then present a novel approach that best
suit real-world implementations in autonomous vehicles. Fig. 2
depicts the two approaches (single frame and multi-frame) for
developing an IDS for IVNs. To implement the IDS, the CAN
bus data need the following pre-processing steps to train any
ML/DL model.
A. Pre-Processing
In both approaches, the raw frames are first pre-processed
to extract the training dataset (or data for inference during
production). An ML/DL model is then trained using the train
sets. Some common pre-processing steps involved are: In case
of separate datasets for each type of attacks, the datasets for
each attack are merged. The timestamps are removed. The
CAN IDand Datafields are converted to decimal values and
then to tensors. The attack label Tis first replaced by [N, D,
F, G, P]to denote Normal, DoS, Fuzzy, Gear, and RPM
spoofing frames. Then the labels are mapped to integer values
[0,1,2,3,4]respectively.
B. Method 1: Per-Frame Detection Analysis
In this analysis, the processed dataset is used directly, such
that each frame serves as a single sample. The individual
frame labels are used to evaluate the performance over the
five metrics. In this analysis, we assumed two scenarios; first
when the CAN ID is used as a feature alongside the Data field,
and second when the CAN ID is not used as a feature (only the
Data field). Although it does not make any sense to drop the
CAN ID from the feature space if it plays a role in improving
the accuracy because it is always visible in CAN frames, the
purpose of dropping the CAN ID in the latter approach is to
investigate if there is a strong dependency of the accuracy on
the CAN ID or not. In other words, it ensures that the model
is not learning or overfitting to a single feature (CAN ID) and
would be able to generalize to malicious frames with different
CAN IDs.

KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS

337

Fig. 2. The proposed scheme showing a 1D multi-class ML/DL model (top) and multi-label classification using 2D-CNN model (bottom) for IDS.

C. Method 2: Frame Sequence Analysis
In this analysis, CAN frames (in the original order) are
stacked to form a single sample. The frame stacking is
typically done using the timestamp value i.e., Starting with
the first frame, the frames are stacked in chunks such that all
frames are transmitted during the time window (e.g., 0.5s) and
are extracted to form one sample. The process is repeated until
it reaches the last chunk.
The frames in each chunk are then arranged to form square
2D images (a single-channel heatmap and a 3-channel RGB
image). Since the CAN frames are not transmitted using a fixed
frequency, the number of frames in each chunk is different.
Thus, padding is applied while creating square images. If
the dataset does not have timestamps, fixed-sized chunks are
extracted to form squared heatmaps and images, and padding
is used in the last chunk. All chunks are then labeled carefully.
Since in the original dataset, each frame is independently
labeled, it is fairly possible a chunk (sample) will contain more
than one type of attack frame in addition to normal frames.
The goal is to train all possible attacks in a given chunk (which
represents a fixed time window). This process in presented in
Algorithm 1.
D. The Proposed Dynamic Windowing Ids (DWIDS) Scheme
We propose a dynamic windowing IDS (DWIDS) method
in which the size of the window adapts based on the type of
traffic or detected anomalies. This can provide more flexibility
and improve detection performance. The proposed method
regularly assesses the trade-offs between detection speed and
accuracy by monitoring metrics like false positives, false
negatives, and detection latency to fine-tune the window size.
More specifically, these metrics are used in a feedback loop
to fine-tune the window size dynamically, ensuring that the
IDS maintains a balance between fast detection (to prevent
further attacks) and accurate identification (to reduce false

Algorithm 1 Process CAN Data for Multi-Label Classification
1: Input: CAN data (DataFrame), time slot (column), labels
(0-4)
2: Output: 2D heatmaps, 3D RGB images, multi-labels
3: Initialize empty lists: heatmaps, images, labels
4: for each chunkin DataFrame do
5:
chunk_data← Extract rows from DataFrame based
on timeslot (0.5s)
6:
X← chunk_data.iloc[:, 1:10].Columns 1 to
9
7:
y←chunk_data.iloc[:, label_column].Extract
labels
8:
if size of Xcannot be transformed into square then
9:
padding_size← Calculate required padding
10:
X← Pad Xwith zero-values to make it square
11:
end if
12:
heatmap← Convert Xto 2D heatmap
13:
image← Convert Xto 3D RGB image
14:
Initialize multi_label← np.zeros(5) .For 5 classes
15:
for each lin np.unique(y) do
16:
multi_label[l]← 1 .Set index to 1 if class is
present
17:
end for
18:
Append heatmapto heatmaps
19:
Append imageto images
20:
Append multi_labelto labels
21: end forreturn heatmaps, images, labels

alarms). The system relies on real-time analysis and optimization techniques, such as heuristics or machine learning,
to make data-driven decisions about window adjustments. The
proposed DWIDS is presented in Algorithm 2 and is explained
as follows:

338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Algorithm 2 Dynamic Windowing Intrusion Detection System
(DWIDS)
1: Initialize window size W ← W0 .Start
2: Set thresholds: FPmax , FNmax , Lmax .Max acceptable
metrics
3: Initialize performance metrics: FP, FN, L ← 0
4: while IDS is active do
5:
Chunks collected using window W
6:
Analyze data and detect anomalies
7:
if Anomaly detected then
8:
W ← max(Wmin , W − ∆W) .Reduce W
9:
else
10:
W ← min(Wmax , W + ∆W) .Expand W
11:
end if
12:
Update metrics: FP, FN, L.
13:
if FP > FPmax or FN > FNmax or L > Lmax then
14:
Fine-tune W ← W ± ∆W .Adjust W
15:
end if
16:
Wait for the next monitoring interval
17: end while
The window size W is initialized with W0 . Environmentspecific thresholds are defined for false positives (FP), false
negatives (FN), and latency (L). The IDS collects traffic data
chunks within the current window (W) and performs anomaly
detection. If an anomaly is detected, the window size is
reduced to allow more precise monitoring. If no anomaly is
detected, the window size is expanded to enhance efficiency.
At the end of each detection, the performance metrics (FP,
FN, and L) are updated. If these metrics exceed predefined
thresholds, the window size is fine-tuned further to balance
accuracy and speed. The system waits for the next monitoring
interval and continues the process.
To ensure real-time applicability in AV environments,
DWIDS was designed to be model-agnostic and compatible with lightweight architectures. Our experiments included
efficient implementations such as 1D-CNN and MLP, which
achieved high detection performance with low latency. These
models can be deployed on embedded automotive platforms
with constrained resources, supporting the practical feasibility
of DWIDS without requiring heavy computational loads. The
DWIDS framework is designed with deployment feasibility
in mind. Compared to state-of-the-art models that require
per-CAN ID LSTM instances or large CNN backbones,
DWIDS supports compact classifiers (e.g., 1D-CNN, MLP)
that can execute within the memory and latency constraints
of automotive-grade ECUs (e.g., 10–50 ms inference time on
NVIDIA Jetson Nano). Moreover, the dynamic windowing
mechanism can be tuned for different latency-accuracy tradeoffs depending on application criticality (e.g., braking vs.
infotainment subsystems).
IV. E XPERIMENTS AND E VALUATION
A. Datasets
We used two datasets namely HCRL car-hacking (CHD)
[28] and intrusion detection challenge (IVN-IDS) [10] in this
study. The selection of the CHD [28] and IVN-IDS [10]

TABLE II
CH DATASET [28] S TATISTICS

datasets is motivated by their widespread use in recent IDS
research, their availability in standard CAN frame format, and
the inclusion of multiple attack types (e.g., DoS, fuzzy, spoofing, and replay). These characteristics allow for reproducible
benchmarking and compatibility with both single-frame and
chunk-based detection models. However, the datasets also have
few limitations. First, they are collected from a limited set of
vehicles and may not generalize to all vehicle types or brands.
Second, the attacks use synthetic or replayed attack traffic that
may not fully reflect adversarial behavior in real-world CAN
bus scenarios. Third, environmental and driving context data
(e.g., speed, weather, driver state) are typically absent, which
limits holistic behavioral analysis.
1) HCRL Car-Hacking [28]: The car hacking (CH) dataset
is constructed from CAN traffic collected via the OBD-II port
from a real vehicle. Four different attack messages are injected
including DoS attacks, fuzzy attacks, gear spoofing attacks,
and RPM gauge spoofing attacks. The dataset contains 300
intrusions, each 3 to 5 seconds long. In DoS attacks, a message
with CAN ID: 0 00000 is injected every 0.3 milliseconds. In
fuzzy attacks, messages with random CAN ID are injected
every 0.5 milliseconds. In spoofing attacks, messages with
specific CAN ID related to RPM/gear information are injected
every 1 millisecond. The dataset is publicly available as
comma-separated value (CSV) files. Each CSV file contains
CAN messages in a specific format given as follows:
2) HCRL Intrusion Detection Challenge: The Intrusion
Detection Challenge dataset [10] is a rich dataset of CAN
bus data collected from HYUNDAI Sonata, KIA Soul, and
CHEVROLET Spark. The dataset contains three types of
attacks including Fuzzy, Malfunction, and Replay. The dataset
contains (i) timestamp, (ii) CAN ID, (iii) Data length code,
(iv) Data, and (v) Label. The fuzzy attacks consist of randomly
generated CAN messages. Both the CAN IDs and Data fields
are randomly generated. The CAN IDs in attack frames ranged
from 0×000 to 0×7FF and contained both actual CAN IDs of
the vehicle and non-existing CAN IDs (which do not belong
to the same vehicle). The malfunction attacks used selected
CAN ID from the same vehicle, with a simulated Data field.
Replay attacks involved injecting past normal data from the
same vehicle into the CAN bus.
The dataset is further analyzed in Table III.
There is no Flag field in the dataset to identify attack
messages. However, messages with CAN ID: ‘00000 indicate
a DoS attack, and CAN ID: 0 0x1640 indicated impersonation

KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS

TABLE III
IVN IDS C HALLENGE DATASETS [10] S TATISTICS

339

attacks (both Gear and RPM spoofing) involve the injection of
frames with the specific ID of the particular ECU responsible
for controlling gear and RPM sensors. Intuitively, the former
two attacks (DoS and fuzzy) can be detected by modeling
the data in sequences whereas the latter two attacks (gear and
RPM) need to be detected by analyzing each (single) frame
because even a single spoofing frame can cause the attack to
alter the AV response/action.
C. Metrics
The proposed IDS system is evaluated using standard classification metrics i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, and false
positive rate (FPR) used throughout the related works. These
metrics are calculated as follows 1:
9
8
P+T N
>
ˆ
Accuracy (Ac) = T P+TT N+FP+FN
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
TP
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
Precision
(Pr)
=
>
ˆ
T P+FP
>
ˆ
=
< Recall / TPR (Re) = T P
T P+FN
(1)
FP
FPR = FP+T N
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
TN
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
TNR (1-FPR) = T N+FP
>
ˆ
>
ˆ
;
:
Pr×Re
F1 score (Fs) = 2 × Pr+Re

Fig. 3. Histogram of CAN IDs in car-hacking dataset.

attacks. The traffic with timestamps between 0 sec - 250 sec
are all attack-free messages, whereas all traffic after 250 sec
contains attack messages mixed with normal traffic. Fig. 3
shows the distribution of CAN IDs in both datasets.
B. Threat Model
In this study, we use the four common attacks (i.e., DoS,
Gear Spoofing, RPM Spoofing, Fuzzy) used in several studies
and available in the existing datasets. Fig. 4 depicts the raw
CAN frames from the car-hacking dataset [28]. It can be
observed that the DoS attack is when a bulk of messages are
injected with high-priority CAN ID (0000) either at regular or
varying intervals. The fuzzy attack is also the injection of bulk
frames with random CAN IDs. On the other hand, the spoofing

where, TP, FP, TN, and FN denote true positive, false positive,
true negative, and false negative. Accuracy is the proportion
of all samples (TP+TN+FP+FN) correctly detected (TP+TN).
Precision is the proportion of correctly predicted positive
samples (TP) among all positive predictions (TP+FP). Recall
is the proportion of true positive predictions among all positive
samples i.e., it measures the proportion of actual positives
that are correctly identified. It is also called sensitivity or
True Positive Rate (TPR). FPR is the proportion of actual
negatives (FP+TN) that are incorrectly identified as positives
(FP). TNR is the proportion of actual negatives that are
correctly identified. TNR is also called specificity. The F1
score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. A low F1
score suggests that either precision or recall (or both) are poor.
Accuracy can be misleading in imbalanced datasets where one
class dominates. Precision focuses on the quality of positive
predictions, penalizing false positives (FP). Recall focuses on
capturing all actual positives, and penalizing false negatives
(FN). High precision means few false positives, whereas high
Recall means most positive samples are identified. As you
increase precision (fewer false positives), Recall might drop
(more false negatives), and vice versa. FPR gives a trade-off
between identifying true positives and avoiding false positives.
FPR and Recall highlight the balance between detecting positives and avoiding false positives. TNR is complementary to
FPR since, T NR = 1 − FPR.
In the context of attacks on IVNs, the metrics should be
carefully chosen. For example;
• Attack messages are typically rare i.e., the datasets are
imbalanced, and thus high accuracy is often due to the
large number of normal samples, and not the model’s
ability to detect attacks.
• Precision is crucial to avoid false alarms, whereas Recall
is critical to detect actual attacks. In IDS, missing an
actual attack is usually more dangerous than flagging a
few non-attacks. Thus, recall is a more critical metric than
precision.

340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 4. Raw CAN frames showing normal frames (white background) and attack frames (red background).

• TNR (how the model detects normal samples) is also
a less critical metric. However, FPR (i.e., 1-TNR) can
be critical for system trustworthiness. A high FPR (low
TNR) means too many normal messages are incorrectly
flagged as attacks. The IDS will thus incorrectly detect a
DoS attack.
D. Baselines for Single-Frame Intrusion Detection
1) Decision Trees: A decision tree (DT) is a tree-like model
where each internal node represents a decision on a feature,
each branch represents an outcome of the decision, and each
leaf node represents a class label or regression value. A DT
splits data into branches, each branch represents a decision
rule based on feature values, leading to a final prediction at the
leaf nodes. DTs are highly interpretable, simple to implement,
and computationally inexpensive to train. DTs do not require
feature scaling and can handle both numerical and categorical
data. However, DTs are prone to Overfitting, especially when
using deep trees.
2) Random Forest: Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble
learning method that combines multiple decision trees to
improve predictive performance and control overfitting. It constructs a “forest” of trees by training them on random subsets
of the data and features. RF uses bootstrapping (sampling
with replacement) to train each tree on a different subset of
the data. RF, compared to a DT, is less prone to overfitting.
They are also relatively more accurate and robust to noise
and outliers. However, they are more complex to implement
and computationally intensive (takes much longer to train and
predict).
3) Extreme Gradient Boosting: Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) is an ensemble method that builds a strong
model by combining the predictions of multiple decision

trees. XGBoost has high speed and accuracy, particularly
on structured/tabular data. It can handle missing data and is
relatively less prone to overfitting.
4) Multilayer Perceptron: Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs)
is a class of artificial neural networks (ANNs) that are fully
connected and consist of multiple layers of neurons. MLPs
work well on small to medium-sized tabular datasets and
can model complex non-linear relationships. However, MLPs
are sensitive to hyperparameters, prone to overfitting, and
computationally intensive.
5) Convolution Neural Networks: Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) are a class of deep learning models, primarily
used for spatial data (e.g., images, video, and audio). CNNs
typically require large amounts of data to avoid overfitting.
They use parameter sharing to reduce the number of parameters and computational cost.
6) Log-Short Term Memory Network: LSTM (Long ShortTerm Memory) is a special type of Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) designed to handle long-term dependencies in sequential data (e.g., time series, natural language, speech, and
video), where the order of the elements matters. RNNs (and
LSTM) use outputs from the previous time step and fed back
into the network along with the current input. Vanilla RNNs
are the simplest forms of an RNN, where each time step
is treated identically, and the hidden state is updated using
a fixed activation function (e.g., tanh). LSTMs can process
sequences of varying lengths. They are typically slow to train
and complex to tune.
V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
We first analyzed the number of CAN IDs in both datasets.
These are depicted in Fig. 3. The analysis shows that both
datasets have a large number of CAN IDs available to allow

KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS

341

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of six baseline models on the CH dataset [28] for single-frame intrusion detection, showing accuracy, precision, recall,
F1-score, and FPR with and without the CAN ID feature.

models to learn from other features and not to overfit to a
single feature (CAN ID). Thus, CAN ID can serve as an
effective feature in the training of ML/DL models for IDS.
A. Single Frame Attack Detection
We first trained the six baseline models on both datasets
separately. The analysis in Table II and III shows that the
datasets are imbalanced (large difference in number of each
attack and normal frames), thus we used class-weights so that
the model is not biased toward the majority class. We used
quite simple settings (mostly default settings) for each model,
since the focus is not to extensively finetune the models, but to
judge the IDS task in general using off-the-shelf models. The
decision tree (DT), random forest (RF) are implemented in
Scikit-learn, XGBoost is implemented using xgboost library,
whereas the MLP, CNN, and LSTM models are implemented
using PyTorch (trained up to 10 epochs). The models are
trained on fixed size of the train set (70%) and tested on test
set (30%) and the results are computed across all metrics.
The detailed evaluation is depicted in Fig. 5. The results show
that all models fairly achieve very high performance over all
metrics. Surprisingly, we repeated the experiments for two
separate cases (i) with CAN ID, and (ii) without CAN ID, to
understands whether the CAN IDs are responsible for the high
accuracy and may lead to overfitting. However, interestingly
for both cases, the very high performance scores were achieved
for all metrics. Notably, slightly lower performance (still
acceptable) are achieved for some methods e.g., RF in few
cases.

We further analyzed these results to investigate if the high
scores are due to the high number of normal cases, but on the
contrary, the models have correctly predicted attack classes
too, as depicted in the confusion matrices in Fig. 6 and 7.
The confusion matrix shows that in the case of CAN ID is
included in the feature set, most models (except DT which was
relatively) accurately identifies DoS, gear, and RPM spoofing
attacks with close to 100% accuracy. However, a few instances
of fuzzy attacks were wrongly predicted. On the other hand,
in the case when CAN ID is not included in the feature set,
the number of misclassified fuzzy attacks further increased.
It shows that the CAN ID plays a role in the detection.
The gear and RPM spoofing attacks use the same CAN ID
throughout the dataset. Thus are more accurately detected.
Fuzzy attacks use different CAN IDs (a total of 2048 CAN
IDs are used across fuzzy attacks and the CAN IDs are also
used in normal frames) and the data fields contain different
values even for the same CAN ID in different fuzzy attack
frames. The detection of fuzzy attacks is thus non-trivial and
more relatively challenging.
B. Multi-Frame Attack Detection
In this section, the proposed DWIDS model is evaluated
over the car-hacking dataset and IVN-IDS challenge datasets,
and results are reported in Table IV and V, respectively.
The model achieved high performance across all classes on
both datasets, with average precision, recall, and F1 scores in
the 0.96-0.98 range. The model also performed consistently
well for both majority (“Normal,” 72% in car-hacking and

342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 6. Confusion Matrix using single-frame intrusion detection (without inclding CAN ID used as a feature).

Fig. 7. Confusion Matrix using single-frame intrusion detection (with CAN ID included as a feature).

78% in IVN-IDS challenge) and minority classes (e.g., “DoS”
and “Fuzzy”, “Replay”), demonstrating robustness against

class imbalance. The weighted average scores in both tables
further highlight the model’s effectiveness in handling the

KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS

TABLE IV
M ULTILABEL C LASSIFICATION U SING DWIDS ON
C AR -H ACKING DATASET [28])

343

can provide a layered defense approach, balancing anomaly
detection with message integrity.
R EFERENCES
[1]

TABLE V
M ULTILABEL C LASSIFICATION M ETRICS (IVN-IDS
C HALLENGE DATASET [10])

dataset’s distribution. Unlike traditional IDS models that are
limited to single-label classification or fixed window detection, DWIDS enables simultaneous identification of mixed
attack types within short temporal windows. This enhances
responsiveness and reliability in real-world driving conditions
where multiple attack vectors may manifest concurrently.
The consistent performance across two imbalanced datasets
confirms DWIDS’s robustness and generalization capability.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This study proposes DWIDS, a dynamic, adaptive intrusion
detection system for IVNs, designed for real-time, multiattack, and resource-constrained environments. The system
outperforms conventional IDS models across key metrics, even
in imbalanced and multi-label scenarios. These results suggest
that DWIDS is a practical and scalable solution for securing
next-generation autonomous vehicles. In future work, several
promising directions can be pursued to enhance the practicality
and robustness of IDS for IVNs. First, evaluating DWIDS
on datasets with rare or stealthy attack types, such as lowrate spoofing or gradual replay attacks to assess robustness
in edge cases. Second, integrating temporal context from
external traffic data (e.g., GPS, driver behavior) may improve
attack attribution and reduce false positives. Third, lightweight
versions of DWIDS should be developed for deployment on
embedded ECUs with limited computational resources. Fourth,
adversarial robustness should be examined to ensure the IDS
can defend against crafted attack inputs. Lastly, combining the
DWIDS with in-vehicle authentication and encryption schemes

W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
[2] M. Han, A. Wan, F. Zhang, and S. Ma, “An attribute-isolated secure
communication architecture for intelligent connected vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 545–555, Dec. 2020.
[3] M. Almehdhar et al., “Deep learning in the fast lane: A survey on
advanced intrusion detection systems for intelligent vehicle networks,”
IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 869–906, 2024.
[4] Road Vehicles–Controller Area Network (CAN)—Part 1: Data Link
Layer and Physical Signalling, Standard 11898-1:2024, 2015.
[5] C. Shang, J. Cao, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Niu, and H. Li, “CEAMP: A
cross-domain entity authentication and message protection framework
for intra-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
no. 7, pp. 6780–6795, Jul. 2024.
[6] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, Jul.
2023, Art. no. 119771.
[7] O. Ajibuwa, B. Hamdaoui, and A. A. Yavuz, “A survey on AI/ML-driven
intrusion and misbehavior detection in networked autonomous systems:
Techniques, challenges and opportunities,” 2023, arXiv:2305.05040.
[8] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11,
pp. 1–40, Feb. 2023.
[9] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[10] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh.
Commun., vol. 14, pp. 52–63, Oct. 2018.
[11] M. Hanselmann, T. Strauss, K. Dormann, and H. Ulmer, “CANet: An
unsupervised intrusion detection system for high dimensional CAN bus
data,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58194–58205, 2020.
[12] A. Zhang, K. Wang, B. Wang, and Y. Wu, “LiPar: A lightweight parallel
learning model for practical in-vehicle network intrusion detection,”
2023, arXiv:2311.08000.
[13] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An
enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious
activities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022.
[14] J. Khan, D.-W. Lim, and Y.-S. Kim, “Intrusion detection system
CAN-bus in-vehicle networks based on the statistical characteristics of
attacks,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 7, p. 3554, Mar. 2023.
[15] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), CA, CA, USA, Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
[16] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for
convolutional neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:1905.11946.
[17] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[18] G. Baldini, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection system using convolutional neural network and multi-scale histograms,” Information,
vol. 14, no. 11, p. 605, Nov. 2023.
[19] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, and K. Ahmed, “Deep transfer learning based intrusion detection system for electric vehicular
networks,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, p. 4736, Jul. 2021.
[20] A. S. Bin Shibghatullah, “Mitigating developed persistent threats (APTs)
through machine learning-based intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive analysis,” SHIFRA, vol. 2023, pp. 17–25, Mar. 2023.
[21] K.-T. Cho and K. G. Shin, “Fingerprinting electronic control units
for vehicle intrusion detection,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2016, pp. 911–927.
[22] A. Taylor, N. Japkowicz, and S. Leblanc, “Frequency-based anomaly
detection for the automotive CAN bus,” in Proc. World Congr. Ind.
Control Syst. Secur. (WCICSS), Dec. 2015, pp. 45–49.
[23] W. Jeong, S. Han, E. Choi, S. Lee, and J.-W. Choi, “CNN-based adaptive
source node identifier for controller area network (CAN),” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 13916–13920, Nov. 2020.
[24] S. Longari, D. H. Nova Valcarcel, M. Zago, M. Carminati, and S. Zanero,
“CANnolo: An anomaly detection system based on LSTM autoencoders
for controller area network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1913–1924, Jun. 2021.

344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

[25] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed,
and A. Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder
architecture for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021.
[26] J. Qin, Y. Xun, Z. Deng, and J. Liu, “GPIDS: GAN assisted contextual
pattern-aware intrusion detection system for IVN,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 12682–12693, Sep. 2024.
[27] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[28] Hacking and Countermeasure Research Lab, car-hacking dataset for the
intrusion detection, Korea Univ., Seoul, South Korea, 2021.
[29] M. E. Verma, M. D. Iannacone, R. A. Bridges, S. C. Hollifield, B. Kay,
and F. L. Combs, “Road: The real ornl automotive dynamometer controller area network intrusion detection dataset (with a comprehensive
can IDS dataset survey & guide),” 2020, arXiv:2012.14600.
[30] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,”
in Proc. ICML Workshop Unsupervised Transf. Learn., 2012, pp. 37–49.
[31] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[32] H. Alqahtani and G. Kumar, “A deep learning-based intrusion detection
system for in-vehicle networks,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 104, Dec.
2022, Art. no. 108447.
[33] J. Cui et al., “Lightweight encryption and authentication for controller
area network of autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 14756–14770, Nov. 2023.
[34] J. Cao et al., “Anomaly detection for in-vehicle network using selfsupervised learning with vehicle-cloud collaboration update,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 7454–7466, Jul. 2024.
[35] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage
intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using
rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[36] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
2025.
[37] S. Yang et al., “Large language models for network intrusion detection
systems: Foundations, implementations, and future directions,” 2025,
arXiv:2507.04752.
[38] E. Nwafor and H. Olufowobi, “CANBERT: A language-based intrusion
detection model for in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2022, pp. 294–299.

Muhammad Asif Khan (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.Sc. degree in telecommunication
engineering from the University of Engineering and
Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2009, the M.Sc.
degree in telecommunication engineering from the
University of Engineering and Technology, Taxila,
Pakistan, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from Qatar University in 2020. He is
currently a Research Scientist at Qatar Mobility
Innovations Center (QMIC), Doha, Qatar. He published more than 50 peer-reviewed journal articles,
conference papers, and book chapters. He also served as a TPC member of
numerous conferences, including NeurIPS, ICCV, ICC, Globecom, CCNC,
VTC, ICCE, BigData, Sensors, and GEM. He was awarded the Post-Doctoral
Research Award (PDRA) from Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) for
his research work as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at Qatar University,
Doha. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON T ECHNOLOGY AND
S OCIETY, and IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING L ETTERS.

Hamid Menouar (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree from the Esteemed French School
Telecom Paris Tech in 2008. He is the Principal
Research and Development and the Innovation Lead
of Qatar Mobility Innovations Center (QMIC). In
his role, he spearheads the design and development
of cutting-edge solutions aimed at enhancing the
quality of life. His leveraging state-of-the-art technologies like AI and the IoT, he focuses on creating
smart, efficient, and sustainable cities. He possesses
extensive expertise in AI, the IoT, connected and
automated mobility, and uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAV) or drones. His
research endeavors have yielded a remarkable collection of scientific research
publications, both in esteemed international conferences and journals, along
with multiple patents. Several of his innovative solutions have played a pivotal
role in the success of Qatar FIFA World Cup 2022.

Mohamed Abdallah (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA,
in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently a
Professor and the Associate Dean of undergraduate studies and quality assurance with the College
of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa
University, Ar-Rayyan, Qatar. He has authored or
co-authored more than 220 articles, contributed to
four book chapters, and holds four patents. His
research interests include AI for communications,
6G networks, wireless security, electric vehicles, and smart grids. His recognitions include a Research Fellow Excellence Award at Texas A&M University
at Qatar in 2016 and multiple IEEE Best Paper Awards. He was also a Nortel
Networks Industrial Fellow from 1999 to 2003.