1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

RISK-4-AUTO: Residually Interconnected and
Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks for
Automotive Network Traffic Classification
Anurag Dutta , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Sangita Roy , Member, IEEE,
and Rajat Subhra Chakraborty , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In modern automobiles, a Controller Area Network
(CAN) bus facilitates communication among all electronic
control units for critical safety functions, including steering,
braking, and fuel injection. However, due to the lack of
security features, it may be vulnerable to malicious bus trafficbased attacks that cause the automobile to malfunction. Such
malicious bus traffic can be the result of either external
fabricated messages or direct injection through the on-board
diagnostic port, highlighting the need for an effective intrusion detection system to efficiently identify suspicious network
flows and potential intrusions. This work introduces Residually
Interconnected and Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks
(RISK-4-AUTO), a set of four deep neural network architectures for intrusion detection targeting in-vehicle network traffic
classification. RISK-4-AUTO models, when applied on three
hexadecimally identifiable sequence-based open-source datasets
(collected through direct injection in the on-board diagnostic
port), outperform six state-of-the-art vehicular network intrusion
detection systems (as per their accuracies) by ≈1.0163% for
all-class classification and ≈2.5535% on focused (single-class)
malicious flow detection. Additionally, RISK-4-AUTO enjoys a
significantly lower overhead than existing state-of-the-art models,
and is suitable for real-time deployment in resource-constrained
automotive environments.
Index Terms—Controller area network (CAN), in-vehicle security, Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN), network forensics,
network traffic classification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ODERN automobiles depend entirely on embedded electronic devices, commonly termed Electronic
Control Units (ECUs) [1] for critical functions like steering,
fuel injection, braking, etc. These ECUs communicate through
Controller Area Network (CAN) bus systems following the
ISO 11898 standard [2]. The communication over a CANbus follows a broadcast mechanism to ensure efficiency,

M

Received 14 January 2025; revised 12 June 2025 and 5 October 2025;
accepted 22 October 2025. Date of publication 24 October 2025; date
of current version 29 December 2025. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao.
(Corresponding author: Rajat Subhra Chakraborty.)
Anurag Dutta and Rajat Subhra Chakraborty are with the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India (e-mail: anuragdutta@ieee.org;
rschakraborty@cse.iitkgp.ac.in).
Sangita Roy is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala 147004, India (e-mail:
sangita.roy@thapar.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3625404

reliability, and the ability to present a consistent systemstate snapshot to all ECUs [3]. The CAN data frame format
and the protocol for the CAN-bus communication schemes
ensure excellent message integrity, and thus CAN is very wellsuited for environments with inherently high electromagnetic
interference and electrical noise, e.g., vehicles and industrial
production environments.
However, the protocol lacks any in-built cryptographic
mechanism to ensure message confidentiality and sender
authenticity [3]. As a result, the communication between ECUs
is vulnerable to being hijacked by any attacker, resulting in
severe automobile malfunctions, sufficient to wreak havoc on
the road, and posing a threat to lives and infrastructures.
Malicious CAN messages capable of causing malfunction of
the ECUs can be generated in two major ways [3]:
1) Through direct physical injection of fabricated CAN
messages [4] on the CAN-bus via the on-board diagnostic port of the vehicle, or,
2) via fabricated messages injected to the CAN-bus by a
telematics device [5] capable of wireless communication
with external agents. This threat is exacerbated by the
existence of wireless communication technology and
standards (e.g., IEEE 802.11p [6], [7]) for vehicular
communication.
A modern vehicle has an extensive attack surface with numerous and diverse attack vectors. For example, it has been
recently demonstrated that Android infotainment units etc. can
also serve as attack vectors [8].
To counter these threats, efficient and accurate Intrusion
Detection System (IDS) needs to be deployed, which monitors
the CAN-bus in real-time, and in case of any suspicious
traffic, immediately quarantines (or flushes, if needed) such
data frames. Efficient specialized IDS for vehicular network
traffic have been proposed in several recent works. Tariq et al.
combined the heuristics of Reinforcement Learning with
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [9], and later in another
work made use of Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
(Conv-LSTM) network for classification of network traffic on a CAN-bus [10]. Similarly, Song et al. suggested
using Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) [3], and
Javed et al. hybridized Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
with Attention-based Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [11].
Seo et al. added to the pool by using Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) for data augmentation, and further improving

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO

Fig. 1. Some examples of the generated two-dimensional visual representation of spatial and temporal characteristics of in-vehicle network traffic
from the HCRL-Car Hacking Dataset. The horizontal axis represents
normalized frame arrival timestamps (in seconds), and the vertical axis
representing the corresponding frame sizes (in bytes).

the prediction efficiency [12]. Ashraf et al. proposed a
novel architecture, LSTM-Autoencoder-IDS (LSTMIDS) [13],
which to the best of our knowledge, reports the best classification performance till date.
In this paper, we introduce Residually Interconnected and
Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (RISK-4AUTO), a novel combination of four deep learning-based IDS.
RISK-4-AUTO models combines Residual Neural Network
(ResNet) [14], [15], [16] and Kolmogorov-Arnold Network
(KAN) [17], [18], [19], for malicious in-vehicular network
traffic classification, in particular those resulting from direct
injection attacks. The RISK-4-AUTO IDS models make use of
visual classification techniques to distinguish among different
frames for a given network flow.
Fig. 1 exemplifies such a visual representation for three
classes (one benign, two malicious) from the HCRL-Car
Hacking Dataset (in-vehicle network traffic), with the
horizontal axis representing normalized frame arrival timestamps (in seconds), and the vertical axis representing the
corresponding frame sizes (in bytes). It can be observed
visually from the figure that the benign flow of traffic is
densely, uniformly, and more importantly periodically welldistributed, whereas the injected flow is either sparsely (due to
anomalous timing characteristics) or non-uniformly distributed
(due to sudden spikes in message size, frequency, etc). The
deep learning models learn the underlying patterns from
these visual representations in a supervised manner. Later, the
trained models are applied to distinguish between different
classes of in-vehicle network traffic flows. Fig. 2 depicts the
three phases.
All of the four proposed models under RISK-4-AUTO
achieved superior performance compared to the state-of-theart (S-O-T-A), when applied on the HCRL network traffic
datasets [20], [21], [22]. For example, the best classification
accuracy achieved by RISK-4-AUTO was 99.76% for distinguishing five (four malicious and one benign) different types
of network flows of the HCRL-Car Hacking Dataset,
compared to the previous best-reported accuracy of 99.01%.

1077

Further, we evaluated the models (on each of the three
datasets) for their ability to distinguish between injected
and normal flow of traffic from every malicious flow category (focused detection), where for each of those attacks
corresponding to the three HCRL datasets, one or more RISK4-AUTO models achieved a perfect (i.e., 100% accurate)
classification.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents some notable works from the existing literature that
aligns the research problem, and our contributions. Section III
discusses the preliminaries necessary for proposing the RISK4-AUTO Intrusion Detection Systems for automotive network
classification. Section V presents the supervised framework,
the adopted mini-FlowPic algorithm for histogram generation,
the three HCRL datasets and the four proposed deep neural
network architectures. Section VI describes the experimental
setup, and the experimental results to evaluate the effectiveness
of the RISK-4-AUTO IDS models. Finally, Section VII
concludes the research.
II. R ELATED W ORKS AND O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
This section reviews some works from the existing literature
on the topic under consideration, some of which have been
mentioned already in Section I.
Tariq et al. combined reinforcement learning-based adaptive
threshold adjustment with rule-based heuristics (e.g., message
rate, ID validity) with a Recurrent Neural Network to learn
temporal attack signatures [9]. They also suggested using a
reward-driven fine-tuning to update anomaly thresholds online,
thus improving the adaptability, and generalizability to new
(unidentified) traffic patterns. One major limitation of this
technique is the complexity of reward shaping, as poorly
designed reward functions can lead to increased false positive
rates. Also, from a practical point of view, training RNNs for
automotive intrusion detection typically requires substantial
volumes of labeled data, which makes both the turn-around
time, and developmental cost high. In a follow-up work [10],
they proposed CAN-Transfer, where pre-trained ConvolutionLSTM (Conv-LSTM) was used on CAN dataset. Herein,
the Convolutional layers extracted spatial feature patterns
from CAN message representations, and the LSTM captured
temporal dependencies. Although it achieved the-then state-ofthe-art accuracy in intrusion detection, the accuracy depends
on the volume of data available for fine-tuning the modules;
in case of scarce data availability, performance degrades.
Song et al. suggested using Deep Convolutional Neural
Network (DCNN) [3] for mapping CAN frames to 2D
images (time vs. ID axes), eliminating the need for manual feature engineering and ensuring low false negative
and therefore lower overall error rates. This technique’s
effectiveness was significantly influenced by the volume
and quality of labeled training data available for training
the network. Further, the underlying network architecture
under this DCNN involves large depth of convolutional
layers, which increases the inference time, compared to
shallow-networks. Javed et al. proposed CANIntelliIDS [11],
where they hybridized Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
with Attention-based Gated Recurrent Unit (AGRU). The

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Pictorial demonstration for the workflow of the RISK-4-AUTO framework. The methodology has three phases: (I) capturing the CAN bus traffic
session from the ECUs of any automobile; (II) employing a “Session Plotter” (Algorithm 1) for generation of two-dimensional histograms, and annotating
them based on the “Flag” field present in the session header, and, (III) finally, the malicious traffic classification is performed in a supervised manner using
Kolmogorov-Arnold Network.

CNN backbone performed spatial feature extraction, and
Attention-augmented GRU focused on class-specific salient
features. They further reported ≈10% improvement on
mixed-attack benchmarks, compared to prior models. Despite
achieving state-of-the-art accuracy, a major shortcoming of
CANIntelliIDS was its memory overhead during inference
due to attention mechanisms. Seo et al. proposed GIDS [12],
where the CAN traffic data was augmented using spectralnormalized GAN. It further increased the model robustness
to noise and often generalizable to newer samples, without
explicit training. However, GAN based augmentation may (in
some instances) generate unrealistic samples (as the generation
is unconstrained), which cause the training to be unstable.
Additionally, the synthetic samples make the detection module
vulnerable to rote-learning, by memorizing the GAN generated
patterns. Yang et al. proposed MTH-IDS [23] (a three-tier
detection architecture) combining signature-based filtering at
the edge, anomaly detection in fog, and global correlation in
the cloud. It hybridizes a lightweight rule-based check with
a deep-autoencoder and random-forest as an ensemble model
balancing speed and detection depth. It is also vulnerable to
communication latency due to multi-tier coordination.
Araujo-Filho et al. [24] implement a machine learningbased Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), using isolation
forest algorithms on CAN frame payload data to achieve
real-time attack detection and prevention within timing constraints on resource-constrained hardware. Ashraf proposed
LSTM-Autoencoder-IDS (LSTMIDS) [13], trains an LSTMautoencoder on benign CAN sequences (only), and flags the
frames whose reconstruction error exceeds a threshold as
anomalies. Till date, it achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with
≈99% accuracy on select benchmark datasets.
A. Our Contributions
The proposed RISK-4-AUTO models outperform the limitations of the existing state-of-the-art, as they do not require

a very large volume of data, in contrast to [9], [10]. They
map the time-series to histograms (refer to Algorithm 1),
increasing information gain per data-instance. Besides, unlike
state-of-the-art models which have very-deep networks
for classification [3], RISK-4-AUTO models have limited
residually-connected convolutional layers (one-two; refer to
Fig. 3) and thus offers faster inference, with no memory
or computational overhead arising from additional model
complexity (like attention mechanism [11], coordinationlatency [23] etc). Additionally, RISK-4-AUTO achieves
≈1.0163% improvement for all-class classification, and
≈2.5535% on focused (single-class) malicious flow detection, besides relatively low inference time, in comparison
to lightweight detection systems from the literature
like [10], [24]. This is also one of most important
requirement for implementation of any model on a
resource-constrained environment.

III. BACKGROUND : V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION OF
N ETWORK T RAFFIC , R ES N ET AND KAN
A. FlowPic for Visual Representation of Network Packets
“FlowPic” [25], [26] was one of the early contributions
towards visual representation-based techniques for network
traffic identification. Shapira et al. in their contribution
devised a methodology to convert network traffic time series
(continuous) data to their (discrete) visual representation,
as histograms. By normalizing both arrival times and sizes
into a fixed [0, # MTU − 1] range and binning into an
(# MTU × # MTU) grid, FlowPic yields a grayscale image
capturing spatiotemporal traffic patterns. In their seminal
work, Shapira et al. considered MTU = 1500, which
was updated to 64, 128, 256 respectively in their followup work, mini-FlowPic [27]. Inspired by the performance
boost, we inherit mini-FlowPic with dimension 64 × 64
in Section V.

DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO

Fig. 3.

1079

Proposed architectures of RISK-4-AUTO Intrusion Detection Systems for malicious automotive traffic classification through visualization.

B. Residual Neural Network (ResNet)

C. Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN)

AlexNet [28] was the first CNN-based architecture that got
mass attention, particularly after it’s astonishing performance
at the ImageNet 2012 competition [29], [30], [31].
Subsequently, every other model that aimed to outperform
AlexNet relied on using more layers of computation as a
measure to overcome the margin of error, but this came up
with a trade-off. Adding more layers introduced the Vanishing
Gradient (gradient tends to zero) [32], and Exploding Gradient
(gradient tends to infinity) [33] problems in the deep neural
networks. Residual Blocks came to the rescue, by enabling
the deeper neural networks to train on a given dataset with
lower experimental error. Residual Blocks introduced Skip
Connection that connects activations from non-adjacent layers
by skipping layers in between. This enables the network
to skip any layer by regularization if that layer contributes
to degrading performance of the model. Mathematically,
the Residual Block operation is represented as in
eqn. (1):

Kolmogorov Arnold Network (KAN) was introduced in [17]
to overcome the limitations of the existing Multi-layer
Perceptrons (MLPs). MLPs decide the numerical values of
the node weights using fixed activation functions, whereas
KAN updates the weights using trainable activation functions.
Inheriting from the “Universal Approximation Theorem”, for
MLPs any function y = f (x) can be approximated as in eqn. (2)

y=
a[Ω · x + β]
(2)

x → a[x] + x

(1)

where a[x] refers to the activation from any neural layer with
input feature x.
Since our proposed RISK-4-AUTO models solely depend
on learning patterns from FlowPic images generated for automotive network traffic flow, the vanishing gradient problem
may adversely affect the precision of the IDS. Hence, we have
made Residual Blocks an integral part of the proposed RISK4-AUTO models.

where a[ · ] is the fixed activation function (e.g., ReLU,
tanH, etc.), and (ωi,j ∈ Ω, βj ∈ β) are the model
weights, and bias respectively. Contrary to that, inheriting
from the “Kolmogorov-Arnold Representation Theorem”, the
approximation (for KAN) can be made as in eqn. (3)

 
φ[x]
(3)
y=
Φ
where φi,j ∈ φ are the real-valued functions (trainable,
specifically B-Splines), and Φ ∈ Φ is the mapping (composition) function of th layer. Further, the real-valued functions
are defined as:


K

xi
(b)
(s)
·
λi,j ,k · Bk [xi ] (4)
φi,j [xi ] = μi,j ·
+
μ
i,j
1 + e −xi
k =1

and the composition functions as:
⎡
⎤
φ,1,1 φ,1,2 · · · φ,1,L
⎢ φ,2,1 φ,2,2 · · · φ,2,L ⎥
⎢
⎥
Φ = ⎢ .
..
.. ⎥;
..
⎣ ..
.
.
. ⎦
φ,L,1 φ,L,2 · · · φ,L,L

φ,i,j ≡ φi,j

(5)

1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Histogram Generation Algorithm
Require: n, T , and Π
 T , Π are n-dim vectors
 H is the 2-D Histogram
Ensure: Hi,i ∈ H
1: function S ESSION P LOTTER(n, T , Π)
2:
Initialize vectors T~ , Π̃ with NULL entries.
3:
for i = 0 to n − −1do
Ti −T0
T˜i ← Tn−1
4:
 Normalization of
−T0 · # MTU
packet arrival times

i −Π0
· # MTU  Normalization of
Π̃i ← ΠΠ
5:
n−1 −Π0
packet sizes
6:
end for
7:
Initialize H(# MTU×# MTU) ← 0(# MTU×# MTU)
for j = 0 to n − −1 do
8:
9:
H   ˜ ← H   ˜ + 1
 Increment
Πj ,Tj
Πj ,Tj
10:
end for
11:
return H
12: end function
(b)

(s)

where, (μi,j , μi,j ) are the weights for the “biological”
term (Swish), and “spline” term (λi,j ,k being the spline
coefficients).
IV. P ROPOSED S OLUTION
This section, describes the supervised framework, the
adopted mini-FlowPic algorithm for histogram generation and
the four classifier model architectures constituting RISK-4AUTO.
A. The Supervised Framework
This framework (refer to Fig. 2) considers sequential data
stream (from the CAN bus) consisting of standard network
parameters in the form, {Timestamp (in UTC), CAN message
Identifier (in Hexadecimal), Number of packets (n), n packet
arrival time stamps (normalized form: T ), n tuples of packet
sizes (normalized form: Π, in bytes)} and a “Flag”}.
The “Flag” field represents the status of the message
under consideration, i.e., either the message is injected on
the CAN bus, or it is evolving originally. The time-series
corresponding to aforementioned set of five (excluding “Flag”)
features are mapped to form a two-dimensional histogram
(as per Algorithm 1), which is then further used for the
classification (both multi-class and binary) using supervised
learning algorithms. Algorithm 1 constructs a 2D histogram
that captures the joint distribution of (normalized) packet
arrival times and their sizes within a network session. First,
both packet arrival times (T ) and sizes (Π) are normalized to
a fixed resolution (as constrained by the definition of # MTU).
These normalized values are then used to index into the 2D
histogram grid H, incrementing the count at the corresponding
location for each packet, which enables visualization of spatial
and temporal characteristics of the network traffic.
B. RISK-4-AUTO: Residually Interconnected and
Superimposed Kolmogorov Arnold Networks
This subsection describes the four classifier model architectures constituting RISK-4-AUTO, as depicted pictorially in
Fig. 3.

1) Linear KAN (L IN -KAN) is the most simple, and
lightweight classifier of all the RISK-4-AUTO IDS
models. It takes a visual histogram of dimension (64
× 64) as input, then rearranges (through a Flatten
Layer) the entire feature set from the two-dimensional
histogram into a single one-dimensional array consisting
of 4096 features, and inputs it to the KAN layer in
batches of 32 features each. The KAN layer further
learns from the underlying features, such that for any
input feature set, it maps the set (through Softmax
Activation Layer) to any one of the network traffic
classes (five in our case).
2) Residual KAN (R ES -KAN) is the next model in the
cluster. It has an incremental architecture on the L IN KAN model, wherein before channelizing the feature
vectors to the KAN layers, they are passed through
two consecutive sequences of Residual Layers, and
MaxPool2D (with kernel size 2 × 2) for better extraction of the spatio-temporal feature. The first network
maps between ninput = 1 and noutput = 5, while
the second network maps between ninput = 5 and
noutput = 25. Afterwards, the model retraces the
computational path as followed by L IN -KAN.
3) Batch-Normalized Residual KAN (R ES -KAN BN ) is similar to the R ES -KAN model, the only difference being
an additional learnable BatchNorm2D layer after each
of the Residual Layers. The BatchNorm2D layers
scale and shift the normalized activations from the
respective predecessors, improve the flow of features and
gradients between the corresponding layers, and counter
the internal Covariate Shift.
4) Dual-Residual-KAN (R ES -KAN II ), which is the bestperforming model in the cluster. It again has an
incremental architecture on the R ES -KAN model, with
two KAN layers for feature extraction and mapping.
This way, the extraction is smoother than its predecessors, thus retaining and transmitting deep features, which
in turn makes the classification more accurate.
The rationale behind the choice of specific model parameters is as follows; Firstly, the output histograms generated
by Algorithm 1 are of dimension 64 × 64. Consequently,
the input histograms to the RISK-4-AUTO model retain the
same dimensions. These histograms are grayscale, with gray
values normalized to the range [0, 255], and, being spread
across a single channel, correspond to a total of 4096 features.
Secondly, the first residual network layer in each of the RISK4-AUTO models is configured with ninput = 1 and noutput =
5, while the subsequent layer uses ninput = 5 and noutput =
25. As the input histogram is represented as a two-dimensional
grayscale image, where the intensity at each pixel corresponds
to the frequency of specific features, this setup effectively
captures unimodal information (ninput = 1). The choice of
noutput = 5 ensures that the input is expanded into multiple
feature maps, facilitating the extraction of spatial relationships
in the histogram. This design aligns conceptually with (a
maximum of) five network traffic classes, as is the upper bound
for most of the automotive network traffic datasets. But if
needed, the dimension can be expanded based on requirements. The subsequent layer, configured with ninput = 5 and

DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO

noutput = 25, maintains a scaling ratio of five, consistent with
the preceding layer. Finally, the use of MaxPool2D with a
kernel size of 2 × 2 allows for downscaling the features while
retaining most of the relevant information. A kernel size of
two is a commonly adopted choice for smaller image samples.
Additionally, the KAN layer had the following hyperparameters: grid-size = 10 (complexity of the network),
spline-order = 3, that determines the order of the
trainable activation functions – B-Splines (here degree-three
polynomials), noise-factor = 10−2 (for regularization,
and to prevent overfitting). These values were initialized
randomly, and 10% data was left out for validation during
model training to determine the effective parameter values.
Subsequently, these parameter values were updated through
cross-validation.

1081

TABLE I
A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL-C AR H ACKING DATASET

TABLE II
A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL CAN W ITH F LEXIBLE
DATA R ATE DATASET

V. E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY
This section presents the datasets and the methodology
(experimental setup) used for validating the proposed RISK4-AUTO models.

TABLE III
A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL B-CAN DATASET

A. Dataset
In this research, for experimentation, three open-source
CAN traffic based datasets made available by the “Hacking
and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL)” were chosen.
The datasets include Car-Hacking Dataset (HCRL-CHD) [20],
CAN with flexible data rate Dataset (HCRL-CAN-FD) [21]
and Bus-type topology CAN (HCRL-B-CAN) [22] Dataset
were chosen. These datasets (as reported in the data collection methodology by HCRL) were collected through
direct-injection in the on-board diagnostic port. The reason
behind the choice of these datasets is the large number of
data points available with these datasets. Besides, existing
literature mostly considers these datasets (as a whole, or in
sets), which enabled us to compare state-of-the-art with the
proposed framework. Refer to Table I, II and III for the dataset
details. Each of these three datasets is a hexadecimally identifiable sequence-based dataset consisting six main attributes,
as discussed in Section IV-A. The three datasets have the
following characteristics:
1) The Car-Hacking Dataset [20] covers five types of CAN
traffic of which one is for benign flow, and the remaining
four are: (I) DoS attack, (II) Fuzzy attack, (III) Gear
spoofing attack, and (IV) RPM spoofing attack.
2) CAN with flexible data rate Dataset [21] covers three
types of CAN traffic: (I) Flooding attack, (II) Fuzzy
attack, and (III) Malfunction.
3) Finally, the Bus-type topology CAN Dataset [22] covers
three types of CAN traffic of which one is for benign
flow, and the remaining two are: (I) DDoS attack, and
(II) Fuzzy attack.
B. Experimental Setup
The RISK-4-AUTO deep learning models were implemented in Python using the PyTorch (v. 2.4)
framework, and were evaluated on three open-source datasets
as discussed in Section V-A. All experiments were carried

Fig. 4. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
the HCRL-CHD.

out on a system with 16 GB main memory, Intel Core
i7-1065G7 @1.30 GHz processor and an NVIDIA
GeForce MX330 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) with 2
GiB in-built memory. Existing literature mostly performs an
all-class classification, but to the best of our knowledge,
no other published work has reported intra-class detection
for each class of these attacks. We have made the codes
and processed data (2D histograms, some selected instances)
open-sourced at [34] for reproduction.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
This section describes in detail, the obtained results
(Section VI-A) from the experiments mentioned in
Section V-B, and also performs an ablation study
(Section VI-B) on different components of the RISK-4-AUTO
model, and their influence (overall) on the intrusion detection
efficiency.

1082

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-C AR H ACKING DATASET

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-CAN W ITH F LEXIBLE DATA R ATE DATASET

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-B US -T YPE CAN DATASET

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
DoS-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD

A. Results
Since this work is related to classification, common
performance metrics – Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and
F1-Score are considered for evaluating the models. The
three datasets (as mentioned in Section V-B) are subjected
to a 80:10:10 train-test-validation ratio for the experiments.
Additionally, the Time-to-Train (TTTr), and Time-to-Test
(TTTe) were measured to present the computational overhead
of the proposed models, alongside comparing them to the
temporal dependencies of the pre-existing models. From a
practitioner’s point of view, the high training time might seem
like a trade-off for achieving more accuracy, but note that
training the model is a one-time process. Once the model
has been trained and saved, the same model can be
queried any number of times with very little computational
overhead (Time-to-Test).

Fig. 5. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
the HCRL CAN-FD.

The following S-O-T-A IDS were considered as baseline
(mentioned along with their respective publication venues in
chronological order by their publication years), (I) LSTM
Autoencoder based IDS (LSTMIDS) [13], (II) GAN based IDS
(GIDS) [12], (III) CNN and Attention-based Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU) CAN IDS (CANintelliIDS) [11], (IV) Deep
Convolutional Neural Network IDS (DCNN) [3], (V) Transfer
Learning based IDS (CANTransfer) [10], and (VI) Heuristic
RNN IDS (RNN+Heuristics) [9]. Tables IV, V, and VI present
the all-class classification (five classes in HCRL-CHD, and

DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO

1083

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD

TABLE XIII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Malfunction-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD

Fig. 6. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
the HCRL-B-CAN.
TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD

TABLE IX
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Gear-Spoofing-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD

TABLE X
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
RPM-Spoofing-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD

TABLE XI
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Flooding-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD

three classes each in HCRL-CAN-FD, and HCRL-B-CAN) of
the network flows, compared to six state-of-the-art intrusion
detection systems.

TABLE XIV
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
DDoS-Attack F ROM HCRL-B-CAN

TABLE XV
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL-B-CAN

The best set of results corresponding to each stratum of
multi-class classification have been highlighted in bold font.
Drawing from the experimental observations from the aforementioned tables, for HCRL-CHD, the best of the proposed
RISK-4-AUTO models outperformed the best from the stateof-the-art by 0.7576%; even the base variant of the proposed
models –R ES -KAN outperforms by 0.6568%. Alongside to
reprove the overfitting issues, their confusion matrices have
also been reported (refer to Fig. 4). Similarly, for HCRLCAN-FD and HCRL-B-CAN, the best of the proposed models
outperformed the best from the state-of-the-art by 0.4523%,
and 1.8398% respectively; and the base variant of by 0.3920%,
and 0.3393% respectively. The respective confusion matrices
for the HCRL-CAN-FD and HCRL-B-CAN have also been
reported in Fig. 5, and 6. Apart from all-class classification,
this research also presents the focused single-class attack
detection (i.e., whether the attack is performed by injected,
or normal message flow). Corresponding to each of the
four malicious flows in HCRL-CHD the single-class attack
detection results have been presented in Table VII, VIII, IX,
and X. Similarly, Tables XI, XII, and XIII presents the

1084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE XVI
I MPLICATIONS OF D IFFERENT C OMPUTATIONAL L AYERS FOR THE C LASSIFICATION P ROCESS

focused single-class attack detection metrics for HCRL-CANFD (three malicious flows); and Tables XIV, and XV presents
the focused attack detection metrics for HCRL-B-CAN (two
malicious flows). For each of the tables, one can observe, that
they outperform the state-of-the-art models when evaluated
single-class by ≈2.5535% on an average, with a deviation of
0.4596.

B. Ablation Study
We performed an ablation study to judge the impact of
the different computational layers in the neural networks
considered by us. Table XVI presents the layer-wise ablation
study with respect to the accuracy (validation), TTTr (sec.),
TTTe (sec.) and the model size (kB). Although it is common
practice to present the model sizes in terms of the number
of parameters, we feel that from an implementation point of
view, model size (in kB) would enable the practitioner to
make a better choice of the model based on their requirements.
Prioritizing on the model accuracy (as a primary decider),
a color-code of green , yellow , and red is adopted
denoting significant improvement, negligible changes, and
degradation respectively.
Further, the collection of four different models allows the
practitioner to make an informed choice of the model they
might need, based on requirements. If the need of the hour
is achieving more accuracy, without much constraints on the
spatiotemporal requirements of the model, complex variants
(Batch-Normalized Residual KAN (R ES -KAN BN ) and DualResidual-KAN (R ES -KAN II ) should be considered. But, if it
is needed to implement a robust, lightweight system, Residual
KAN (R ES -KAN) can be thought of.

VII. C ONCLUSION
We have proposed RISK-4-AUTO, a collection of four
deep-learning-based models for the classification of in-vehicle
network traffic. The models under RISK-4-AUTO combine the
novel Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (enabling trainable activation functions) with the Residual Network architecture. The
models were applied on the open source HCRL Datasets, and
when evaluated based on their performance compared to other
state-of-the-art intrusion detection systems, an ≈1.0163%
improvement on an all-class classification, and ≈2.5535%
improvement on focused malicious flow detection was
observed. Additionally, these models can be extended to
other in-vehicle networks, e.g., Automotive Ethernet, Serial
Peripheral Interface, Safety Systems, etc.
Although the proposed set of RISK-4-AUTO models can
work well for the ten different attacks across three datasets, it
cannot be generalized for completely out-of-the-box attacks.
To the best of our knowledge, except GIDS [12], no other
models are generalizable beyond the attacks they have been
trained for, and even in GIDS the GAN-based augmentation
has been reported to work well on attacks, similar to those
on which the models have been trained. Our future research
will be directed towards detecting fabricated message based
attacks.

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Kaiser, U. Schaefer, and G. Haaf, “Electronic control
unit,” in Automotive Mechatronics: Automotive Networking, Driving
Stability Systems, Electronics. Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer, 2014,
pp. 18–43.
[2] G. M. Smith. “What is can bus (controller area network) and how it
compares to other vehicle bus networks.” Accessed: Dec. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://dewesoft.com/blog/what-is-can-bus

DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO

[3] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[4] L. B. Othmane, L. Dhulipala, M. Abdelkhalek, N. Multari, and
M. Govindarasu, “On the performance of detecting injection of fabricated messages into the can bus,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 468–481, Jan./Feb. 2020.
[5] A. Anwar, A. Anwar, L. Moukahal, and M. Zulkernine, “Security
assessment of in-vehicle communication protocols,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 44, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 100639.
[6] F. Arena, G. Pau, and A. Severino, “A review on IEEE 802.11p for
intelligent transportation systems,” J. Sens. Actuat. Netw., vol. 9, no. 2,
p. 22, 2020.
[7] Y. Wang, A. Ahmed, B. Krishnamachari, and K. Psounis, “IEEE 802.11p
performance evaluation and protocol enhancement,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Veh. Electron. Safety, 2008, pp. 317–322.
[8] A. R. Bharadwaj, M. K. Akhilesh, H. A. Abhiram, and R. Ravish,
“Popcorn attack: Intrusion into can remotely through android application
of infotainment system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Eng. Commun. Syst.
(ICKECS), vol. 1, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[9] S. Tariq, S. Lee, H. K. Kim, and S. S. Woo, “Detecting in-vehicle CAN
message attacks using heuristics and RNNs,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Inf.
Oper. Technol. Secur. Syst., 2019, pp. 39–45.
[10] S. Tariq, S. Lee, and S. S. Woo, “CANTransfer: Transfer learning based
intrusion detection on a controller area network using convolutional
LSTM network,” in Proc. 35th Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., 2020,
pp. 1048–1055.
[11] A. R. Javed, S. Ur Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. Reddy,
“CANintelliiDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller
area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[12] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[13] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed,
and A. Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder
architecture for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021.
[14] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[15] H.-K. Lim, J.-B. Kim, J.-S. Heo, K. Kim, Y.-G. Hong, and
Y.-H. Han, “Packet-based network traffic classification using deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2019,
pp. 46–51.
[16] C. Su, Y. Liu, and X. Xie, “Fine-grained traffic classification based
on improved residual convolutional network in software defined
networks,” IEEE Latin America Trans., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 565–572,
Apr. 2023.
[17] Z. Liu et al., “KAN: Kolmogorov-Arnold networks,” 2024,
arXiv:2404.19756.
[18] A. D. M. Ibrahum, Z. Shang, and J.-E. Hong, “How resilient are
Kolmogorov–Arnold networks in classification tasks? A robustness
investigation,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 22, 2024, Art. no. 10173.
[19] M. Abd Elaziz, I. A. Fares, and A. O. Aseeri, “CKAN: Convolutional
Kolmogorov–Arnold networks model for intrusion detection in IoT
environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 134837–134851, 2024.
[20] H. K. Kim et al. “HCRL-car hacking dataset.” 2020. Accessed:
Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/
car-hacking-dataset
[21] H. K. Kim. “HCRL-can with flexible data rate dataset.” 2022. Accessed:
Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/
can-fd-intrusion-dataset
[22] H. Kim. “HCRL-B-can dataset.” 2022. Accessed: Dec. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/b-can-intrusion-dataset,
[23] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered
hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[24] P. F. De Araujo-Filho, A. J. Pinheiro, G. Kaddoum, D. R. Campelo,
and F. L. Soares, “An efficient intrusion prevention system for can:
Hindering cyber-attacks with a low-cost platform,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 166855–166869, 2021.
[25] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.

1085

[26] T. Shapira, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is as
easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
[27] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification
with mini-flowpic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas.
Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
[28] M. Z. Alom et al., “The history began from AlexNet: A comprehensive
survey on deep learning approaches,” 2018, arXiv:1803.01164.
[29] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
pp. 84–90, 2017.
[30] K. He, R. Girshick, and P. Dollár, “Rethinking ImageNet pretraining,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
pp. 4918–4927.
[31] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[32] S. Hochreiter, “The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent
neural nets and problem solutions,” Int. J. Uncertainty, Fuzziness Knowl.
Based Syst., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 107–116, 1998.
[33] G. Philipp, D. Song, and J. G. Carbonell, “The exploding gradient
problem demystified-definition, prevalence, impact, origin, tradeoffs, and
solutions,” 2017, arXiv:1712.05577.
[34] A. Dutta et al. “RISK-4- AUTO codebase.” Accessed: Dec. 2024. https://
github.com/Anurag-Dutta/RISK-4-Auto,

Anurag Dutta (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the bachelor’s degree in computer science
and engineering from the Government College of
Engineering and Textile Technology, Serampore,
India. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur. His research interests
include time-series forecasting, computer vision,
image processing, and the applications of artificial
intelligence in digital forensics.

Sangita Roy (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Tech. degree from the West Bengal University
of Technology and the M.Tech. degree from
the Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology,
Bhubaneswar, and the Ph.D. degree from IIT Patna.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Patiala, India. Her research interests include computer network, network security, image processing,
and deep learning.

Rajat Subhra Chakraborty (Senior Member,
IEEE) is a Professor with the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur.
His area of research is hardware security, VLSI
design, and digital content protection through watermarking. He is a Senior Member of ACM.