IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

3753

SAGA: Synthetic Audit Log Generation for
APT Campaigns
Yi-Ting Huang , Ying-Ren Guo , Yu-Sheng Yang, Guo-Wei Wong , Yu-Zih Jheng, Yeali S. Sun ,
Jessemyn Modini, Timothy Lynar , and Meng Chang Chen

Abstract—With the increasing sophistication of Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs), the demand for effective detection and mitigation strategies and methods has escalated. Program execution
leaves traces in the system audit log, which can be analyzed to
detect malicious activities. However, collecting and analyzing large
volumes of audit logs over extended periods is challenging, further
compounded by insufficient labeling that hinders their usability.
Addressing these challenges, this paper introduces SAGA (Synthetic Audit log Generation for APT campaigns), a novel approach
for generating find-grained labeled synthetic audit logs that mimic
real-world system logs while embedding stealthy APT attacks.
SAGA generates configurable audit logs for arbitrary duration,
blending benign logs from normal operations with malicious logs
based on the definitions the MITRE ATT&CK framework. Malicious audit logs follow an APT lifecycle, incorporating various
attack techniques at each stage. These synthetic logs can serve
as benchmark datasets for training machine learning models and
assessing diverse APT detection methods. To demonstrate the usefulness of synthetic audit logs, we ran established baselines of
event-based technique hunting and APT campaign detection using
various synthetic audit logs. In addition, we show that a deep
learning model trained on synthetic audit logs can detect previously
unseen techniques within audit logs.
Index Terms—Technique hunting, APT campaign, provenancebased detection, synthetic audit log, deep learning.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE emergence of Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs),
such as Fancy Bear (APT28) and Lazarus Group Elfin
(APT33), poses significant challenges to the cybersecurity community. APT campaigns, typically orchestrated by advanced
threat actors with economic or political motives,involve multiple
stages, including gaining initial access to a victim environment,
remaining undetected for extended periods, exfiltrating sensitive
data, and compromising system integrity. Despite progress in

T

Received 20 November 2024; revised 30 October 2025; accepted 28 November 2025. Date of publication 5 December 2025; date of current version 12
March 2026. This work was supported in part by CITI, Academia Sinica and in
part by MOST under Grant NSTC 114-2221-E-011-080-MY3, Grant 114-2634F-001-001-MBK, and Grant 114-2221-E-001-018. (Corresponding author:
Yi-Ting Huang.)
Yi-Ting Huang is with the National Taiwan University of Technology and
Science, Taipei 106, Taiwan (e-mail: ythuang@mail.ntust.edu.tw).
Ying-Ren Guo and Meng Chang Chen are with Academia Sinica, Taipei City
115201, Taiwan (e-mail: mcc@iis.sinica.edu.tw).
Yu-Sheng Yang, Guo-Wei Wong, Yu-Zih Jheng, and Yeali S. Sun are with
National Taiwan University, Taipei City 106319, Taiwan.
Jessemyn Modini and Timothy Lynar are with the University of New South
Wales, Kensington 2052, Australia.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3640696, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3640696

malware analysis [1], [2], effective detection and mitigation of
APT attacks remains a critical priority. A key obstacle in APT
threat studies is the lack of a widely recognized benchmark
dataset [3], which is essential to develop AI/ML-based solutions
and objectively evaluate methods. This challenge motivates the
study of synthetic audit log generation in this work.
System audit logs, which record traces of program execution,
play a crucial role in log analysis for threat detection. For
example, MITRE ATT&CK Evaluations [4] provide emulation
plans that allow cybersecurity providers to assess their product’s
ability to detect simulated cyber attacks through system logs.
With the advancement of data-driven artificial intelligence methods, it has become increasingly effective in addressing certain
cyber threats, such as attack analysis [5], [6], [7], which offer
the potential for timely Technique detection. These approaches
typically rely on high-quality labeled audit logs for model training. In addition, it allows for the enhancement and comparison
of various methods.
However, labeling large volumes of audit logs over long
periods poses challenges, especially when APT attacks lack
obvious indicators. Researchers often rely on publicly available
datasets such as the DARPA Transparent Computing Engagement [8], Operationally Transparent Cyber (OpTC) [9], and
LANL’s dataset [10], as well as smaller datasets that are rarely
shared due to privacy and proprietary concerns. Moreover, some
datasets provide fine-grained labels on malicious entities [5] or
processes [11], while others [8], [9] only report attack scenarios
over time intervals, without linking them to specific system
events. This shortage of labeled logs limits a deeper understanding of attack behaviors and restricts the development of
AI/ML-based cybersecurity defense studies [12], [13].
The absence of such audit logs motivates the development
of methods for generating configurable synthetic audit logs that
fulfill the following key requirements.
r Realism: Synthetic audit log should closely resemble the
real audit logs.
r Scenario coverage: They should represent a broad spectrum of APT campaigns, including recent and emerging
threats.
r Detailed labeling: Logs should include fine-grained labels such as specific Techniques or equivalents mapped
to events in the audit log.
r Higher-Level representation: Along with raw events, they
should offer higher-level abstractions, facilitating easier
understanding, examination, and communication.

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

r Flexibility: The framework should be able to generate logs
of any duration and include any number of APT campaigns.

r Diversity: The framework should be able to generate previously unseen logs, which would benefit model training
and examination.
This study introduces SAGA (Synthetic Audit Log Generation for APT Campaigns), a framework for generating configurable synthetic audit logs. SAGA is aligned with the MITRE
ATT&CK framework and terminologies, chosen for its openness, comprehensiveness, and availability. The generated synthetic audit log contains both benign and malicious (APT campaigns) audit logs, with benign logs representing normal system
and user operations and malicious logs constructed from predefined Technique templates. Each APT campaign in the logs,
comprising stages/tactics with corresponding techniques, which
are reflected in the audit logs.
The specific tasks of this study include:
r Obtaining attack scenarios: Use a red team emulator to
collect and label logs with technique identifiers based on
the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
r Designing the SAGA framework: Develop the SAGA
framework and workflow to address the aforementioned
challenges.
r Synthesizing configurable audit logs: Create synthetic audit logs that combine APT attack scenarios and benign
behaviors, resembling real data logs.
r Verifying SAGA usefulness: Run existing systems using
the SAGA synthetic audit log as input to demonstrate its
effectiveness. Furthermore, show that models trained on
the synthetic audit log can successfully identify previously
unseen malicious behaviors in new datasets.
To demonstrate the usefulness of synthetic audit logs, we
tested established baselines and the existing methods across
various applications, including APT intrusion detection, technique hunting, and APT campaign detection. The objective of
this empirical study is to demonstrate that SAGA synthetic audit
logs can be used effectively and meaningfully in cybersecurityrelated audit log applications. The focus is not on comparing
the performance or goodness of these methods, as they target
different objectives and operate in distinct contexts, making
direct comparison uninformative.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we introduce the audit log and its related issues
using a running example of an APT campaign.
A. System Audit Log
System audit logs are records of system events such as file
access, process creation and termination, and network access.
Each system event depicts the interaction between two system
entities, typically represented as <subject, operation, object>,
where the subject refers to a process entity or a program, and
the object represents a system entity such as a process, file,
registry, or network socket. The operation signifies the action
performed by the subject on the object. For example, the event
<WinRAR.exe, CreateFile, IOC_09_11.rar> indicates that the

Fig. 1.

Example of audit log events captured by Procmon.

WinRAR process creates a file named IOC_09_11.rar. System
events, along with their subjects and objects, include attributes
such as meta-information, properties, and other details provided
by the system, which can further describe the event and context.
These details will be discussed in the subsequent section. System
audit logs can be obtained using built-in kernel event logging
mechanisms such as Windows Event Tracing (ETW) and Linux
Audit, or through additional tools like Procmon, Sysmon, and
CamFlow.
In this study, we use Procmon as the primary logging tool.
Procmon, short for Process Monitor is a Windows utility that
monitors and records real-time system activities, including process actions, file system activities, registry changes, and more.
Fig. 1 provides an example of the captured system events.
The first row records the event <firefox.exe, QueryOpen, ...
\IOC_09_11.rar>, along with attributes such as timestamp, PID,
and object value, which indicate a query for the existence of
the RAR file. The audit log is proved useful for analyzing
malicious attempts and APT attacks, offering insights into their
characteristics.
B. APT Attack Lifecycle
Frameworks such as Lockheed Martin’s cyber kill chain [14],
MITRE ATT&CK framework [15], and Mandiant adversary
lifecycle [16] define the lifecycle of cyber attacks, helping
defenders understand the collective operations and intention of
APT attacks. This study uses the Mandiant adversary lifecycle,
a , as a reference for the APT attack lifecycle,
depicted in Fig. 2
although other frameworks can be equally applicable. Each
stage/tactic encompasses associated Techniques, and each Technique may have several implementations/abilities. In addition,
this lifecycle framework helps to generate and analyze synthetic
audit logs. Note that in this paper, we consider Technique and
Sub-Technique equally and use the term Technique to represent
both.
A typical APT attack consists of multiple stages, including
initial compromise, establishing foothold, internal reconnaissance, escalating privileges, moving laterally, maintaining presence, and ultimately complete mission. Note that the stages of
internal reconnaissance, escalating privileges, moving laterally,
and maintaining presence may occur multiple times, and not all
a shows the
four stages are necessary in every instance. Fig. 2
lifecycle stages corresponding to the APT28 campaign.

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

3755

Fig. 2. 
a Mandiant attack lifecycle [16] of APT28. 
b The APT28 attack provenance graph, derived from [17], presents five malicious events labeled with six
techniques, which are mapped to the corresponding stages of the attack lifecycle. In each zoomed-in box, the dotted boundary color corresponds to its specific
stage in the attack lifecycle. Rectangular nodes represent files, diamond-shaped nodes represent sockets, oval nodes denote processes, and the edges illustrate the
causal relationships between the entities. The red arrow edges indicate the sequence of malicious events.

Fig. 3.

SAGA workflow.

C. Running Example
We refer to APT28 threat intelligence reports [17] to construct
the attack scenario illustrated in Fig. 2, which serves as the runa outlines its attack lifecycle,
ning example in this work. Fig. 2
b shows the corresponding APT audit log. In the
while Fig. 2
initial stages of the attack, phishing emails containing malicious
attachments are sent to the victim to download the attachment
IOC_09_11.rar. This activity is designated as the Technique
b , of the
T1566.001 Spearphishing Attachment, as (1) in Fig. 2
attack lifecycle stage Initial Compromise. This malicious attachment exploits a vulnerability in WinRAR versions below 6.23 (as
mentioned in CVE-2023-38831). When the victim clicks on the
IOC_09_11.rar file, it triggers subsequent malicious activities
designated as T1204.002 User Execution: Malicious File of the
b .
attack lifecycle Establish Foothold, as (2) in Fig. 2

The attack proceeds by establishing a reverse shell between
the attacker and the victim, designated as T1071 Application
Layer Protocol of the Establish Foothold stage, marked as (3)
in the figure. Next, it steals information such as local state
files, corresponding to T1082 System Information Discovery and
T1005 Data from Local System, marked as (4) and (5) of the
Internal Reconnaissance stage. Finally, the stolen information
is uploaded to a web servicewebhook.site, designated as T1567
Exfiltration Over Web Service of the Complete Mission stage,
b .
shown as (6) in Fig. 2
III. SAGA GENERATIVE MODEL
The SAGA generative model involves collecting audit logs
from a red-team emulator to create a repository of attack pattern
templates with fine-grained labels. These templates are then
used, following lifecycle selection instructions, to generate synthetic audit logs that embed APT campaigns. Fig. 3 provides an
overview and the workflow of SAGA, which will be discussed
in detail in the following subsections. To mitigate the risk of
detection models overfitting on artificial patterns, SAGA introduces variability in both attack implementation in Section III-A
and artifact representation in Section III-C3. In Section III-A,
SAGA collects attack pattern from a red-team emulation platform that supports multiple abilities per Technique, enabling the
generation of diverse execution paths and behavioral variants.
In Section III-C3, SAGA incorporates entity-level variability

3756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

by replacing generalized entities with hyponyms derived from
real-world malware samples and synthetic variants. This combination of implementation diversity and entity-level variation
helps generate a wide range of realistic log instances.
A. Attack Pattern Collection and Labeling
The first task of SAGA is to collect labeled audit logs,
as depicted in Fig. 3. The Red Team Platform, such as
CALDERA [18], [19] and Atomic Red Team [20], simulates
real-world adversaries in a controlled environment. In this study,
we use CALDERA to emulate real-world attacks by adversaries.
Our choice is based on its open source nature and alignment with
the MITRE ATT&CK framework. To deploy CALDERA, we
configure a master server and set up Remote Access Tool (RAT)
clients on a compromised host. An ability of CALDERA refers
to a specific implementation of an ATT&CK Technique, representing a discrete adversarial behavior. After acquiring audit
logs from a red team emulator and process monitor, the next step
is to extract the relevant attack patterns and assign appropriate
Technique labels. CALDERA-generated reports provide details
for each executed attack, including process IDs, commands used,
and associated technique IDs. We employ a semi-automated
labeling method to annotate audit logs based on handcrafted
rules tailored to specific attack techniques.
To develop specific rules for each ability, three authors applied their expert knowledge based on the MITRE ATT&CK
framework [15] to define rules for identifying attack-related
events. In the case of T1566.001, the ability of T1566.001
involves using the Invoke-WebRequest cmdlet of PowerShell, which indicates network activity connecting to the
GitHub website. Furthermore, the flag -OutFile and parameter \$env:TEMP\PhishingAttachment.xlsm suggests that a file
named PhishingAttachment.xlsm will be created on the target
system. To ensure accurate labeling, rules are designed and
applied using both forward and backward tracing, since not
all events generated during an attack should be considered
malicious and labeled with the Technique identifier. Some may
represent background or system activities. Only events exhibiting these specific malicious actions and artifacts are considered
malicious for this particular ability, and custom labeling rules are
crafted to capture this behavior. We validated these rules using
a set of manually labeled logs and through cross-verification via
code review among the three authors.
When given a CALDERA-generated report, SAGA uses
the attack-related Process ID (PID) as the root to construct a
comprehensive process family tree that captures all associated
processes. By mapping these process IDs to the corresponding
audit logs and applying handcrafted rules, SAGA can accurately
assign the appropriate technique ID to the relevant log entries.
B. Attack Pattern Templates Abstraction
Each attack pattern corresponds to a specific instance of a
Technique with particular parameter values. To enable the generation of a wider variety of attack patterns, it is essential to abstract
these patterns into a more abstract form. These abstractions can
then be instantiated with legitimate parameter values, allowing

Fig. 4.

Attack pattern template model.

Fig. 5.

APT28 Attack pattern template example.

for the creation of new attack patterns. This approach facilitates
greater flexibility and diversity in the generation of new attack
instances.
We abstract each attack pattern into an attack template, which
specifies its prerequisites, outcomes, timings, and the corresponding stage and Technique in the attack lifecycle. This metainformation serves as a blueprint for generating diverse attack
instances while maintaining consistency among the generated
instances. Fig. 4 shows the attack template model, which is
explained in more detail with an example in Fig. 5. Algorithm 1
shows the details of template generation.
Attack Identification: The entity Attack Identification includes
the attack stage and Technique, which together define the identity
of the attack pattern template, as shown in Fig. 4. For example,
lines 1–3 of Fig. 5 illustrate an attack pattern template associated
with Technique T1566.001 Spearphishing Attachment and the
stage Initial Compromise in the adversary lifecycle.
Attack Pattern: The entity Attack Pattern is associated with an
attack identity and consists of a sequence of events generated by
a specific ability, categories and descriptors of artifacts presented
in the event. In this context, the category provides a broad classification, while the descriptor offers a more specific identification. For example, if an event contains the artifact Firefox, it falls
into the category process with the descriptor browser. To support
the generalization of attack pattern templates, Table I outlines
a collection of categories and descriptors used in SAGA, which
can be considered as forming a hypernym relationship. The
table outlines six categories, File, Network, Cmdline, Process,

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

TABLE I
CATEGORIES AND DESCRIPTORS USED IN THIS STUDY

3757

information table records previously executed attacks and the
system entities utilized, as well as the system entities provided
by the external environment, to facilitate Prerequisite matching.
An attack pattern is generated only when all Prerequisite are
satisfied; more details are given in Section III-C2.
Outcome: The entity Outcome lists the artifacts produced after
executing this attack (line 11 of Algorithm 1) , such as a phishing
file (as indicated on line 17 of Fig. 5), collected sensitive information, and changes in system state. In a complete APT attack
chain, Outcome may serve as prerequisites for subsequent attack
patterns. Therefore, defining the Outcome within the template is
crucial, as it not only impacts the immediate effects of the attack,
but also has long-term implications for future attack strategies
and defensive measures.
C. APT Lifecycle and Technique Selection

Algorithm 1: Generate Attack Pattern Template.
Input: Attack pattern A and events E
Output: Attack pattern template P
1: Let T AB that stores known system entities and their
descriptors and categories, as defined in Table I.
2: Initialize P with the stage and Technique, as described
in Subsection “Attack Identification”.
3: for each event e in E do
4:
for each system entity s in E do
5:
if s already used then
6:
Replace s with its descriptor d from T AB.
7:
else
8:
Find its descriptor d and replace s.
9:
Set the descriptor as a prerequisite.
10:
end if
11:
Set d as an outcome if it still exists.
12:
Insert e into P .
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return P
Registry, and System, each subdivided into specific descriptors.
Refer to lines 3-6 of Algorithm 1.
Subsequently, additional attack instances can be generated by
instantiating these attack pattern templates during the generation
of synthetic audit logs. Using the same running example, three
system entities (artifacts) are involved in phishing: Firefox accessing Microsoft Exchange and downloading IOC_09_11.rar
through the browser. These entities can be substituted with
hypernyms (as shown in line 12 of Algorithm 1 and lines 7-10
of Fig. 5), such as replacing Firefox with Process.browser and
IOC_09_11.rar with File.phishing.
Prerequisite: The entity Prerequisite specifies conditions related to the system resources required for the execution of an attack pattern (lines 8-9 of Algorithm 1) , such as process.browser
and file.phishing (as shown in lines 12-15 of Fig. 5) of the
attack pattern template T1566.001 of APT28. To generate a
specific malicious audit log (i.e., an attack pattern), a campaign

SAGA supports both random and user-specified APT campaign generation, and in this subsection, the random APT
campaign generation is introduced. The generation of an APT
campaign is conditioned on the adversary lifecycle, involving
lifecycle stage transitions, attack template selections, and attack
pattern instantiation. The transition process of the lifecycle stage
determines the subsequent stage according to the current status.
An example of an adversary Mandiant lifecycle is shown in
a . The attack template selection process chooses the
Fig. 2
attack templates for each stage, while the artifact substitution
process instantiates the events for an attack pattern.
1) Lifecycle Stage Transitions: As described in Section II-B,
threat actors follow a systematic, strategic approach, executing
actions sequentially. An APT campaign begins with two initial
stages: initial compromise (IC) and establish foothold (EF). This
is followed by an incubation period consisting of four stages:
escalate privileges (EP), internal reconnaissance (IR), move
laterally (ML), and maintain presence (MP). The incubation
period may occur once or multiple times, and within each
incubation period, individual stages may be omitted or repeated.
Finally, the last stage, complete mission (CM), is executed once
or not at all, marking the successful completion of the attack. The
Context-Free Grammar representation of a campaign generation
is presented in Table II. The lifecycle is defined in line 6. As
b , the stages of APT28 include Initial
an example, in Fig. 2
Compromise, Establish Foothold, Internal Reconnaissance, and
Complete Mission.
2) Attack Template Selection: For each stage of an APT campaign, the number of attacks can be either randomly determined
or specified by the user. An attack template (TQ) may also be
randomly selected based on the current stage and prerequisites,
or as specified by the user. Note that there may be benign
events (BE) preceding the attack pattern templates (TQ) that the
operation is described in line 8 of Table II. In line 8, malicious
audit logs (MA) consist of either a sequence of benign events
(BE), the selected attack pattern instance (In(T Q)), malicious
audit logs (MA), or sequences of benign events (BE) and the
selected attack pattern instance (In(T Q)). Next, the abstracted
arguments of the template are replaced with artifacts to generate
diverse audit events, as the instantiation of an attack pattern

3758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE II
CONTEXT FREE GRAMMAR FOR CAMPAIGN GENERATION

described in line 10 (In(T Q)) and elaborated in Section III-C3.
The construction of the malicious audit log continues until all
stages have been completed.
A campaign information table, as depicted in Fig. 4, is created
to maintain information about the executed attack templates,
including their associated lifecycle stage, as well as the system
entities used and their statuses. Given the current stage, the
prerequisites of a template are examined against the campaign
information table to determine whether they are satisfied. For
example, if a threat actor uses a phishing email template during
the initial compromise stage, the campaign information table
will record the details of the phishing email template, including
the entity File.phishing. In the second stage (EF), the templates
for this stage will refer to the campaign information table to
check whether their prerequisites are met. Only if the prerequisites are met can they be considered potential templates for this
APT campaign.
3) Attack Pattern Instantiation: In Section III-B, we discuss
the creation of attack templates through the generalization of
system entities. While instantiating an attack pattern template,
these generalized system entities are replaced by appropriate and
meaningful artifacts (or a hyponym) to form a validated attack
pattern. This approach enables the generation of a wide range
of attack instances.
There are two methods for collecting the hyponyms of generalized system entities. The first method involves using artifacts collected from real-world data, such as malware names,
attack-related file names, and registry paths. To gather these artifacts, we leveraged VX-Underground [22] and VirusTotal [23].
VX-Underground provides approximately 10,000 malware hash
values associated with APT campaigns collected over the past
five years. Each hash was subsequently queried on VirusTotal to
extract relevant artifacts from the behavioral analysis reports. In
total, 157,806 artifacts were obtained and mapped to the generalized system entities defined in the attack templates for subsequent instantiation. For example, by querying VirusTotal using
a sample hash value 78a3e4702d9fc13b2ef917211cd65b44, we

Algorithm 2: Synthetic Audit Log Generation.
Input: Lifecyle {LC}, Attack pattern instances
{ln(T Q)}, Benign audit log {BA}
Output: Synthetic audit events SA
1: while while LCi in LC exists do
2:
for each stage in LCi do
3:
// Include an attack pattern instance ln(T Q) in the
stage. Line 8 of Table II.
4:
M A = BE + In(T Q) + M A | BE + In(T Q)
5:
where In(T Q) is an instantiated attack template,
as Line 10 of Table II. BE is a short list of benign
events.
6:
end for
7: end while //Obtain all malicious audit logs {M A}
8:
9: Initialize SA with given background events.
10: for each BAi in {BA} do
11:
// Perform Cb (SA, BAi ), as Line 1 of Table II.
12:
for each evt in {BAi } do
13:
evt.start = BAi .start + evt.relative
14:
end for // Insert event evt to synthetic audit log.
15:
SA = SA ∪ BAi
16: end for // Insert benign audit log BEi .
17: for each M Ai in {M A} do
18:
// Perform Cm (SA, M A), as Line 1 of Table II.
19:
for each In(T Qj ) in {M Ai } do
20:
for each evt in {In(T Qj )} do
21:
evt.start = In(T Qj−1 ).end +
In(T Qj ).lapse + evt.relative
22:
end for // Insert event evt to synthetic audit log.
23:
SA = SA ∪ In(T Qj )
24:
end for // Insert technique In(T Q) to synthetic log.
25: end for // Insert malicious audit log M A to synthetic
audit log.

can extract a file %APPDATA%\ ... \Startup\twainResolver.lnk.
The dropped file, twainResolver.lnk, is classified under the system entity type file, as indicated in the ‘file’ section of the
VirusTotal report. It is then recognized as ‘file.short’ based on
regular expression matching, and a shortcut file in the Windows startup folder to implement an attack behavior such as
T1547.009 Shortcut Modification.
The second source of artifacts, such as usernames and process
IDs, which are indicated with ∗ Table I, is generated using the
Faker library in Python [21]. Faker efficiently generates realisticlooking random data that mimics real-world information. These
random artifacts are used to populate attack instances within
the templates. Once attack patterns are generated for all stages
as a chronological sequence of labeled events, the prerequisites
for every attack pattern must be satisfied to validate the attack
sequence, which is then considered an APT campaign.
D. Synthetic Audit Log Generation
A synthetic audit log comprises several benign and APT
campaign audit logs, with their composition methods detailed in

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

Fig. 6.

Composition of synthetic audit log.

Algorithm 2. A benign audit log is recorded from normal software activities, such as web browsing, Windows Office usage,
file downloads, etc., and is represented as a sequence of events, as
defined in lines 2 and 3 of Table II. Each benign audit log includes
a start time (BA.start) and log length (BA.length), with each
event having a relative time (evt.relative) to the log start time.
The notation Cb (SA, BA) in the first line of Table II denotes
the composition of a benign audit log BA into a synthetic audit
log SA. The composition involves setting the starting time of
the first event to the specified time of the benign audit log, and
adjusting the start times of all other events by adding the log
start time to their relative times. The procedure is described in
lines 9 to 14 of Algorithm 2.
For the composition of an APT campaign audit log into a
synthetic audit log, denoted as Cm (SA, M A) in the first line
of Table II, it merges each pair of benign events (BE) and
attack technique events (ln(T Q)) sequentially until all pairs
are combined. A BE is usually a short sequence of benign
events that occurs before the particular Technique (ln(T Q)).
The composition of BE follows the same method as that for
BA. The composition of T Q, which refers to the audit log events
representing a particular Technique, provides flexibility in both
the start time and duration. This means that a Technique audit
log can begin at any time and span any length. The start time of
a Technique audit log is set to the end time of the preceding
Technique plus the lapse time ln(T Q).lapse, which can be
specified by the user or determined randomly by SAGA. The
procedure is described in lines 15 to 22 of Algorithm 2.
Fig. 6 depicts a composition of 3 benign audit logs and 4
APT audit logs. Note that the logs may overlap and the APT
audit logs can be extended for any duration. SAGA explicitly
leverages process identifiers, parent-child process relationships,
and event timestamps to preserve the underlying process structure, temporal ordering, and causal dependencies that are critical
for contextual consistency in audit logs. To avoid unrealistic
combinations of events, SAGA maintains semantic coherence
at both the process and artifact levels. For example, when two
events involve shared entities, such as a file, registry key, or
named pipe, SAGA preserves these dependencies to ensure that
the resulting logs reflect plausible and continuous behavior. As
illustrated in Section II-C, a user downloads a malicious attachment IOC_09_11.rar via a browser (T1566.001: Spearphishing
Attachment), and subsequently opens it using Microsoft Word
(T1204.002: Malicious File Execution). Although these steps
span separate processes, their interaction through a shared artifact forms a coherent and realistic attack sequence. In this
way, SAGA ensures that injected attack behaviors are not only
chronologically plausible but also contextually consistent with

3759

normal system operations, mitigating the risk of generating
disjointed or unrealistic event flows.
There are still tasks that need to be addressed, such as establishing process relationships. For example, in an audit log,
the ProcMon operation ProcessCreate (as shown in Fig. 1)
creates a new process, and their parent-child relationship must be
preserved. SAGA treats artifacts with the same descriptor within
a single attack pattern template as belonging to the same process.
Otherwise, operations from different templates are considered
independent processes.
IV. USEFULNESS STUDY OF SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG
In this section, we evaluate the usefulness of synthetic audit
logs for various detection methods in different APT attack
scenarios. First, we show the variety of synthetic audit logs
that SAGA can produce, from those that mimic real-world
APT attacks (denoted as the C Group) to randomly generated
logs (denoted as the G group), and finally to composite both
groups (denoted as the M group). Next, we assess whether
state-of-the-art audit log-based and provenance-based malicious
detection methods can effectively use the synthetic audit log as
their target datasets. In addition, we discern the performance
and operation differences of these methods when applying their
original datasets versus various synthetic data logs. Note that
the objective of this study is not to identify the best-performing
methods or models, as each approach has its own specific focus,
design considerations, and inherent limitations.
This section begins by outlining the settings for the empirical
study, including the synthesized datasets, labeling, metrics, and
machine hardware and software configurations. Our analysis
focuses on three sets of empirical studies to demonstrate the
usefulness of the synthesized attack datasets: 1) assessing the
effectiveness of APT intrusion detection by, 2) evaluating the
accuracy of Technique hunting, and 3) gauging the effectiveness
of campaign attribution. Finally, we will conduct a case study to
evaluate the effect of model training using synthetic audit logs
to test the model on an unseen dataset.
A. Evaluation Settings
Datasets: The experiments utilize synthetic audit log datasets
generated by SAGA (hereafter referred to as the SAGA dataset),
which is publicly available at [24]. A synthetic audit log, as
described in Section III, includes both benign behaviors and malicious APT attack scenarios. Similarly to previous research [5],
[25], the benign audit logs cover a variety of everyday activities,
such as watching YouTube videos, downloading and compiling
source code from GitHub, writing and sending emails, running
Python programs, playing video games, reading news articles,
and composing Word documents. This diversity ensures that
the synthetic audit logs accurately reflect typical user behavior.
For malicious events, we prepared 169 abilities executed on the
MITRE CALDERA [19] red-team emulator to generate labeled
malicious audit events. These events were then processed into
attack pattern templates for further synthetic audit log generation. Each of the 169 attack pattern templates was instantiated
with artifact replacements, as described in Section III-B, to form

3760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

the datasets used in the empirical study. The training dataset
for Technique hunting consists of 16,900 attack patterns, each
of which is an instantiation of a attack pattern template. This
dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1
ratio.
Given the limited availability of audit logs labeled with
Techniques, we used the attack pattern templates to create
APT campaigns. These scenarios include eight APT attack
campaigns (“known” group) based on cyber threat intelligence
reports from real-world APT campaigns, including Higaisa [26],
admin338 [27], APT28 [17], FIN7 [28], CobaltGroup [29],
Gamaredon [30], Patchwork [31], and GorgonGroup [32]. Moreover, using SAGA random generation capability, we produced
20 APT campaigns (“random generated group”). From these 28
APT campaigns, we randomly selected 3 to create new composite scenarios involving multiple APT campaigns targeting a
single victim host, resulting in 10 composite campaigns (“composite” group). To demonstrate the versatility and flexibility of
SAGA, each of the above APT campaigns was generated over
three different time periods: 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d.
Labeling: For each generated APT campaign, SAGA labels
malicious events with APT stages, Techniques, abilities, manipulated system entities, and other operation-related attributes. In
addition, it includes threat actors, when applicable. Malicious
audit events are labeled using the BIO2 scheme [33] covering
7 attack stages, 80 Techniques, and 169 abilities, as shown in
Table S1 of Supplementary Material A.
Evaluation Metrics: We adopt three evaluation metrics for
different tasks: APT intrusion detection, Technique hunting, and
APT campaign attribution. The APT intrusion detection task
aims to identify any APT intrusions or anomalies within the
dataset under examination. Technique hunting seeks to identify
Techniques violated based on MITRE ATT&CK definitions.
APT campaign attribution aims to determine the most probable
APT campaign present in the dataset. To evaluate performance,
we use standard classification metrics: precision (P), recall (R),
F1 score (F1), and accuracy (ACC).
For APT intrusion detection, we frame it as a binary classification problem, determining whether a malicious event exists
in the audit log. Since different target systems or methods
apply their own tests to detect APT intrusion on an event, a
graph, or a time window interval, we adapt to their respective
evaluation designs to assess performance. Technique hunting is
treated as a multi-class classification task, where each classifier
determines whether a specific Technique has been employed in
one or more events. For APT campaign attribution, we analyze
the Techniques identified from the Technique hunting task to
determine the most likely APT campaign for the audit log. We
rank the ground truth against the predictions and employ a Top-K
measurement to evaluate the performance of the APT campaign
attribution.
Established Baselines: For APT intrusion detection, we
demonstrate the usefulness of generated attack datasets using
three types of systems: event-based (AirTag [6]), graph-based
(Unicorn [34]), and time window-based (KAIROS [7]) intrusion
detection systems. The reasons for choosing the three systems
are not only that they are established baselines, but also that their

TABLE III
COMPUTATION OVERHEAD OF AUDIT LOG GENERATION

codes are publicly available and the systems can be installed and
executed without issues.
For Technique hunting, we used the Sigma rules [35], an open
signature-based rulebase contributed by numerous security practitioners, and SFM [36], a deep learning approach that provides
Technique hunting functionality. We selected Sigma as a baseline because it is a widely adopted, community-driven detection
framework, actively maintained by practitioners worldwide. As
noted by [37], Sigma has also been shown to align closely
with several commercial rulesets, making it a meaningful and
representative point of comparison. A major portion of these
rules align with the MITRE ATT&CK framework with 70 rules
mapped to the Techniques identified in this study. SFM integrates
three key technologies: anomaly detection to mitigate the impact
of data imbalance, a multi-class classifier for Technique hunting,
and subgraph matching for APT campaign attribution. SFM
was selected because it was one of the few systems specifically designed to address both the Technique hunting task and
APT campaign attribution, making it particularly suited for the
evaluation of complex attack scenarios. All models and methods
were installed with configurations as close as possible to those
described in their original publications. Code modifications were
only made to ensure compatibility with the structure of the
synthetic audit logs.
Computation Configurations: For empirical studies, we used
a Windows 10 operating system with 8 GB of memory with an
Intel i9-10900F CPU as our victim system. For defender model
development, we employed AMD EPYC 7282 16-Core Processor CPU running Ubuntu 20.04 system with 1 TB of memory
and two NVIDIA A100 80 GB GPUs. Neural network training
was performed using PyTorch 1.13.1 and Python 3.10. The
computational overhead of generating malicious audit events
and audit log composition was measured and listed in Table III.
B. APT Dataset Generation
In this section, we provide a more detailed discussion on
the considerations for generating the APT dataset, focusing
primarily on generation guidance, attack scenarios, and duration.
Generation Guidance: SAGA offers flexibility in generating
APT campaigns, based on user specifications, randomly, or
through a combination of both. For example, SAGA generates
eight known APT campaigns (denoted from C1 to C8) following user specifications, with their lifecycles and Techniques
presented in Table IV. To further illustrate SAGA’s versatility,
we also used its random generation capabilities to create 20
additional campaigns (denoted from G1 to G20), showcasing
its capacity to create varied attack scenarios. The lifecycles
and Techniques of these randomly generated campaigns are
presented in Table S2 of Supplementary Material A, while

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

3761

TABLE IV
APT ATTACK SCENARIOS BASED ON CYBER THREAT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS

TABLE V
STATISTICS FOR THE THREE TIME DURATIONS IN THE EIGHT APT ATTACKS

the detailed statistics, including sizes, number of entities, and
number of events, are provided in Table S3 also in Supplementary Material A. This flexibility highlights the scalability
and adaptability of our approach in simulating a wide range of
cyberattack scenarios, enabling the creation of customized and
diverse testing environments to thoroughly evaluate detection
methods.
Attack Scenario: We introduce two variations in attack scenarios: one involving a single campaign targeting the system and
another featuring three simultaneous campaigns. This variation
in attack composition allows for a comprehensive assessment
of detection methods in more complex, multi-campaign situations. For instance, the M1 attack scenario consists of three
separate attacks, Higaisa, G1, and admin338, each employing
distinct Techniques and targeting the same compromised host.
Additional details on the ten generated composite campaigns
can be found in Table S4 in Supplementary Material A, due to
the constraints of the manuscript space.
Attack Duration: To account for the variability in the duration
of the attack, we generated synthetic audit logs with durations
of 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d. Although SAGA can create logs
of any length, we limited the maximum duration to 1 d in this
study, considering the computational overhead of the intrusion
detection systems discussed in Section IV-C Table V, Table S3
and Table S4 in Supplementary Material A, presents statistical
descriptions of logs for each duration. As shown in Table V, the
average number of events increases with log length: 910,711
for 15-minute audit logs, 1,184,512.5 for 1-hour audit logs, and

14,263,393.25 for 1-day audit logs. This variability reflects the
evolving nature of APT attacks, which are not constrained by
fixed timeframes, highlighting SAGA ability to generate audit
logs of various durations. It also allows for a more thorough
examination of how different detection methods perform over
varying time intervals.
C. APT Intrusion Detection
APT intrusion detection is defined as the task of identifying
potential APT attacks within an audit log, as established in
previous studies [6], [7], [34]. To demonstrate the usefulness
of SAGA datasets in supporting APT intrusion detection, we
present the detection results using their own evaluation schemes
of various methods and then discuss the causes of performance
difference, considering the following factors: test granularity,
Technique used, attack scenario, and duration. Table VI presents
the performance of the three intrusion detection systems, AirTag
(event-based), Kairos (time window-based) and Unicorn (graphbased) across various SAGA datasets. More details can be found
in Tables S5, S6, and S7 of Supplementary Material B. Performance data for E3-CADETS, E3-THEIA, and E3-ClearScore
were copied directly from their respective original papers. Unicorn, which analyzes the entire provenance graph to detect
anomalies, generally performed well in both precision and recall.
AirTag, on the other hand, which identifies intrusions by analyzing individual events, struggled with high rates of false positives
and false negatives. When exposed to SAGA’s broader technique

3762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE VI
AVERAGE PERFORMANCE OF THE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

coverage, multi-stage campaign structure, and temporal variation, AirTag, a one-class SVM anomaly detection model built
on a customized BERT embedding, struggles to find a stable
decision boundary across such diverse contexts. Kairos was
designed with specific assumptions about event sequence timing,
which may not align with the more flexible and richly structured
scenarios generated by SAGA. By grouping events within time
windows, Kairos tended to reduce both false positives and false
negatives, resulting in relatively low precision but higher recall.
Test granularity: Test granularity refers to the unit of target
tested in a detection method. For example, the text granularity of
AirTag is based on individual events. In a test using the APT28
campaign dataset (15 minutes), AirTag generated 301,069 false
positives and missed 14,098 malicious events out of 1,209,895
total events. On the other hand, Kairos, which uses time window
as its test granularity, incorrectly flagged 42 benign windows
and missed just one malicious window out of 67 total windows.
Table VI presents the performance of the three detection systems, each using its own scoring method (i.e., a formula to
calculate the performance metrics). This highlights the significant influence of the test granularity and scoring method
on the reported results, making direct comparisons between
performance data difficult and, at times, not meaningful. Since
SAGA provides labels for each event, its datasets are versatile enough to support various test granularity and scoring
methods.
Technique impact: The generated campaigns (G) feature a
greater number and diversity of Techniques compared to the
synthetic known campaigns (C). To assess the impact of varying
the number and types of Techniques used in different campaigns,
we provide details of the audit logs for the known campaigns in
Table IV, and for the generated campaigns in Table S2 of Supplementary Material A. As shown, the audit logs for the generated
campaigns contain more and a broader range of Techniques than
those in the synthetic known campaigns. Table VI presents the
average performance of each detection system, showing that the
C group consistently outperforms the G group. This decline in
performance is directly correlated with the increasing number
and diversity of Techniques.

Attack Scenario Impact: SAGA is capable of generating synthetic audit logs containing multiple APT campaigns, referred to
as composite campaigns (M group), designed to reflect complex
real-world scenarios. Details of these composite campaigns,
labeled M1 to M10, are provided in Table S7 in the Supplementary Material B. As the complexity of the M group audit logs
increases, the detection performance gradually declines (e.g.,
from C_15 min to M_15 min), as shown in Table VI.
Duration Impact: To demonstrate its ability to generate synthetic audit logs of varying length, 15 minute and 1 h attack
scenarios were generated to detect APT intrusions. An APT attack typically employs a “low-and-slow” approach, maintaining
a prolonged presence on the target machine, which makes the
intrusion difficult to detect. As shown in Table VI, the detection
performance gradually decreases with longer durations for the
same context.
In summary, synthetic audit logs can be tailored in terms of
duration, the number and type of embedded APT campaigns,
and the types of APT campaigns. As the complexity of these
scenarios increases, the performance of detection methods tends
to degrade.
D. Evaluation on Technique Hunting
To demonstrate the practical utility of fine-grained Technique
labeling, Technique hunting is the task of identifying potential threats, specifically Techniques, as defined by the MITRE
ATT&CK framework. SAGA follows Algorithm 2 to generate
attack campaigns, where each event is labeled with its corresponding Technique identifier. This structured synthetic audit
log allows detection methods to effectively perform Technique
hunting. The approaches are used for Technique hunting; one is
SFM and the other is using Sigma rules. The performance results
of Technique hunting for each APT attack campaign are reported
in Table VII that details are given in Table S9 in the Supplementary Material C. The results indicate significant performance
distinctions between SFM and Sigma rules, regardless of the
generation method, attack scenario, or duration. SFM is capable
of recognizing attack patterns by learning from synthetic data,

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

3763

TABLE VII
THE PERFORMANCE OF TECHNIQUE HUNTING

Fig. 7.

whereas Sigma rules are limited to detecting attack patterns that
match pre-defined signatures. This underscores the importance
of the generated datasets in facilitating the advancement of
learning-based model methodologies.
However, both methods showed significant performance fluctuations across various attack scenarios. For example, the average standard deviations of precision during the 15-min scenarios
were 33.92% and 32.25% for SFM and Sigma rules, respectively.
Several factors contributed to this variability. First, there was
a high incidence of false positives associated with specific
attack behaviors. Second, the substantial imbalance between the
number of malicious events and the overwhelming prevalence
of benign activities skewed the evaluation of attack behaviors.
Lastly, benign activities and malicious events were intertwined
and exhibited different patterns in various datasets, complicating
the recognition of attack patterns.
For instance, recognizing T1105 Ingress Tool Transfer (ITT3)
requires identifying the following sequence of audit events
within interleaved benign event sequences: <browser.exe, TCP
connect, XXX.com>, <browser.exe, FileCreate, payload.exe>,
and <xxx, Process Create, payload.exe>. This sequence indicates that a malicious payload was downloaded from an external
C2 server and executed on a compromised machine. These
malicious events are causally correlated and in audit log, they
were intertwined with benign and background events, making
the recognition of this Technique particularly challenging.
On the other hand, while Sigma rules perform efficiently, they
are based on contributions from human experts and may not
encompass all attack behaviors, such as T1055.002 Portable Executable Injection (PEI) and T1491 Defacement (DF2) identified
in this empirical study. As a result, certain malicious behaviors
went undetected in the APT campaigns C-6, C-8, G-11, and
G-13. These findings address the limitations of manually crafted,
signature-based detection methods and highlight the importance of datasets like those generated by SAGA, which provide
comprehensive logs from red-team emulation campaigns. Such
datasets support the development and evaluation of both rulebased detection systems and learning-based models in a realistic
environment.
E. APT Campaign Detection Evaluation
APT campaign detection involves identifying a potential APT
campaign embedded in an audit log, which is characterized by

The top k ranking results of APT campaign detection by SFM.

a series of coordinated attack patterns. In line with the MITRE
ATT&CK framework, an APT campaign can be described as a
sequence of Techniques. SFM leverages this structure to detect
the most likely APT campaign by comparing the discovered
Techniques (Gq ) against a pool of known APT campaigns (Gc ).
In this empirical study, Gc includes 8 known campaigns and
30 randomly generated APT campaigns. Fig. 7 illustrates the
ranking of each SFM-identified campaign over three different
durations, 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d. SFM successfully identified
most campaigns within the top 3 rankings across all three time
durations: 74% for 15 minutes, 84% for 1 h, and 79% for
1 d. Notably, 50% of the campaigns were ranked first in both
1 h and 1 d scenarios. One reason for this success could be
that the temporal causal relationships is established among the
Techniques discovered by SFM, which effectively distinguishes
the most probable campaign from others. Furthermore, SFM
demonstrated resilience to discrepancies between the discovered
ability graph Gq and the campaign Techniques Gc . However,
the M group, consisting of multiple campaigns in a single
scenario, posed a greater challenge compared to the groups of
single campaigns. In addition, the results further suggest that as
the duration of audit log grows, the complexity of identifying
APT campaigns also increases. In conclusion, this evaluation
highlights the potential of SAGA in effectively supporting the
detection of APT campaigns.
F. A Case Study of Unseen APT Campaign
In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of SAGA synthetic audit log datasets in training an APT campaign model to
be applied to previously unseen APT campaigns, even when the
campaign audit logs follow a different format and organization.
Specifically, SFM was trained using SAGA datasets and tested
on the DARPA TC E3 Fivedirection dataset to detect attack
behaviors (i.e., Techniques) within the logs.
The E3 Fivedirection dataset includes a complex attack scenario (4.4 Phishing Email with Excel Macro [38]). As illustrated in Fig. 8, the attacker used a phishing attachment to
lure the victim into downloading and executing malware that
triggered subsequent malicious activities, including establishing
a remote command shell and gathering various system information. From the detection results, it shows that SFM was able to
successfully identify part of the attack sequence. For example,
during the initial compromise phase, the SFM successfully

3764

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

The DARPA TC E3 Fivedirection attack graph.

flagged the system events corresponding to the victim downloading the phishing attachment, <thunderbird.exe, WriteFile,
BoviaBenefitsOE.xlsm>, as T1566.001 Spearphishing Attachment. Additionally, during the Establish Foothold phase, the
system events corresponding to the execution of the phishing
attachment, <Excel.exe, CreateFile, BoviaBenefitsOE.xlsm>,
were also correctly flagged as T1204.002 User Execution: Malicious File.
However, some attack behaviors were not correctly identified by SFM. For example, during the Establish Foothold
phase, when the attacker used PowerShell to download a malicious payload (update.ps1) from a C2 server, SFM successfully
marked the system events related to the download activity,
<powershell.exe, CreateFile, update.ps1>, as T1105 Ingress
Tool Transfer, but it failed to include the system events, PowerShell connection to the C2 server, <powershell.exe, TCP
connect, 208.75.117.5> in T1105. This limitation could be
attributed to gaps in the SAGA dataset’s representation of certain attack behaviors, or SFM’s difficulty in detecting subtle
variations in event sequences.
However, these results highlight the practical value of the
SAGA dataset in supporting practical cybersecurity applications
and providing a solid foundation for future improvements to
dataset generation strategies. They also underscore the need
for further improvements in APT campaign detection models
to enhance their capability and accuracy.
V. RELATED WORK
Existing Benchmarks for Host-based Intrusion Detection:
As noted in the survey by [3], the majority of studies on
host-based intrusion detection have relied on self-constructed
attack scenarios for evaluation. Some works have utilized existing public datasets such as CERT’s dataset [39], LANL’s

dataset [10], StreamSpot [25] ADFA [40], and DARPA Transparent Computing (TC) [8], as well as OpTC [9]. CERT’s
dataset provides synthetic background data alongside malicious
operations, such as logon and email activities, carried out
by multiple threat actors across five distinct attack scenarios.
LANL’s dataset consists of 58 consecutive days of event data
collected from LANL’s corporate computer network, including logon events, process events, DNS lookups, network flow
events, and a set of well-defined red teaming events representing malicious activities. StreamSpot includes one attack
activity—a drive-by download initiated by visiting a malicious
URL that gains root access to the visiting host—along with
five benign activities forming three scenarios. However, these
datasets primarily focus on event action types (i.e., operations)
and timestamps, lacking critical details regarding the underlying
system entities involved in the audit events. This absence limits
their ability to clearly describe the full context of each event,
which is essential for comprehensive attack pattern analysis and
detection.
ADFA comprises three datasets: ADFA-LD (Linux), ADFAWD (Windows), and ADFA-WD-SAA (Windows for Stealth Attacks). Among these, ADFA-WD is the most relevant to SAGA.
However, it only contains DLL traces of processes collected by
Procmon and includes twelve zero-day attacks executed on a
host.
DARPA’s TC program included five engagements and the
OpTC dataset. The E3 and E5 engagements, featuring two
and eight multi-stage APTs respectively, are widely used for
intrusion detection, alongside benign background activity. The
OpTC dataset, created to assess scalability, simulated a three-day
APT on a 1,000-host test network during a two-week experiment. However, these datasets lack thorough documentation
and labels, which limits their usefulness for precisely evaluating
attack behaviors and audit events.

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

TABLE VIII
COMPARISONS WITH SYNTHETIC APT DATASET GENERATION

Synthetic APT Dataset Generation: While there are some
publicly available attack datasets, few research focus on constructing datasets for simulating multi-stage APT attacks [41],
[42], [43], [44]. To steal organization data, DAPT2020 [41]
imitated the exploited web vulnerability in a production network,
and Unraveled [43] created skeletons of user profiles to emulate
user behavior based on predefined job pipelines. These datasets
encompass network traffic and multi-host log information, covering limited attacks (i.e., 10 and 15) within attack stages over
a fixed collection duration (i.e., 1 week or 6 weeks), In contrast,
our generated APT dataset includes and labels 7 attack stages,
80 techniques, and 169 abilities, offering configurable attack
patterns and collection duration on single-host audit events. This
flexibility allows for more detailed and customizable simulation
of attack behaviors.
PWNJUTSU [42] and LADEMU [44] considered adversaries’ TTPs, defining the operational semantics of Techniques
as specifications for procedures. PWNJUTSU utilized a semiautomated approach where each attack step was crafted by
professional human Red Teamers, providing a highly skilled
yet partially manual campaign construction process. In contrast,
LADEMU offered a proof-of-concept (PoC) implementation
using the red-team emulator Caldera and demonstrated the use
of a single attack scenario, APT29. Our study introduces a
workflow of campaign generation with event logs, enabling
fully automated APT simulations based on TTPs specified in
the MITRE ATT&CK framework. This approach eliminates
the need for manual intervention, ensuring more consistent and
scalable attack simulations. Table VIII contrasts SAGA with
previous framework and highlights SAGA’s unique advantages,
particularly its configurability (in terms of duration, techniques,
and campaign design), fine-grained labeling, and high degree of
automation.
Host-based Provenance analysis: Learning-based provenance analysis methods have shown notable improvements in
the detection of intrusions and have accelerated the investigative
process of various attacks [3], [5], [6], [7], [34], [45], [46], [47].
These learning-based models employ a range of representation learning techniques to encode provenance graphs, enabling effective anomaly detection. Examples include graph

3765

representation methods used in Unicorn [34], Kairos [7], and
MAGIC [46]; translation-based embedding techniques in WATSON [48] and ShadeWatcher [45]; and language models in
AirTag [6] and DrSec [47]. Our research demonstrates that applying event-based [6] and graph-based intrusion detection [7],
[34] to our synthesized campaign datasets results in effective
detection of intrusion events.
Technique Hunting: HOLMES [49] generates detection signals by matching 16 predefined attack patterns and constructing
a high-level scenario graph embedded with TTPs to indicate
APT campaign activities. RapSheet [50] creates a tactical provenance graph using 67 rules within a commercial EDR tool,
aligning it with MITRE ATT&CK. KRYSTAL [51] leverages
Sigma rules [52] to detect known attack patterns, converting
them into SPARQL queries for threat detection. Although these
rule-based approaches are effective, their manual creation and
upkeep are resource-intensive. Our study addresses this limitation by introducing a flexible approach to APT dataset generation using a red-team emulator for audit event collection, enabling a learning-based methodology. Additionally, we propose
a straightforward method (SFM) for identifying attack patterns,
providing a baseline for future research.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study presents a generative APT campaign framework,
SAGA, designed to synthesize synthetic audit logs for nearly
any configuration. These logs support the training of various
machine learning-based APT-related detection machine learning
models and facilitate the evaluation of various APT-related
detection methods. To demonstrate the usefulness of SAGA’s
synthetic datasets, a collection of empirical studies were conducted across multiple established baselines for APT intrusion
detection, Technique hunting, and APT campaign detection.
In light of the observation of artifact leakage, distributional
shift, benign syntheticity, and attack covertness in the synthetic
datasets [11], we emphasize that the SAGA-generated datasets
are not limited to single-campaign training or evaluation. They
can be flexibly composed to include multiple campaigns, time
spans, and benign activities, allowing researchers to design
training and testing splits that better reflect real-world conditions
and capture diverse, multi-stage attack behaviors. Furthermore,
SAGA enables researchers to explore distributional shifts by
generating stage-specific audit logs, supporting the training and
evaluation of models on early-stage versus late-stage attack
behaviors.
The authenticity of SAGA-generated logs is grounded in two
factors: the faithful implementation of attack techniques and the
construction of realistic attack sequences. SAGA relies on a redteam emulator (i.e., Caldera) to execute concrete implementations of ATT&CK techniques. The more faithfully the emulator
reproduces adversary behaviors, the more realistic the resulting
logs. For sequence construction, SAGA supports both expertinstructed campaigns, emulating real-world APT scenarios as
defined by domain experts (similar to manual red-teaming), and
sampled sequences, assembled from statistically plausible and
logically coherent technique transitions. This design enables

3766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

SAGA to generate scalable and scenario-driven audit logs, addressing the broader need for labeled and scenario-driven log
data for learning-based APT detection research.
The quality of SAGA datasets depends on access to extensive, high-quality campaign knowledge and diverse Technique
implementations. The current implementation of SAGA uses
169 abilities and 80 Techniques, with ongoing efforts to expand
these numbers to enhance the usefulness of SAGA datasets and
cover more sophisticated APT campaigns. While the ATT&CK
framework is continuously evolving, SAGA is designed to be
extensible. New techniques can be integrated by either updating
Caldera with additional abilities as they become available, or
manually constructing new attack templates through expertguided red-team emulation. Furthermore, we also recognize
the potential of advanced tools such as large language models
(LLMs) used in [53] to assist in the automatic attack generation – a promising direction for future research. Given the
inherent differences between synthetic and real-world data, we
caution that experimental results obtained using SAGA should
be interpreted carefully, as synthetic logs may not present in
real environments. As highlighted in [11], careful evaluation
is necessary to avoid overestimating generalization capabilities
due to unintended signals in synthetic datasets. In this work, the
Windows operating system is used as the target environment;
however, the concept can be readily applied to other platforms
as well.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-T. Huang, C. Y. Lin, Y.-R. Guo, K.-C. Lo, Y. S. Sun, and M. C.
Chen, “Open source intelligence for malicious behavior discovery and
interpretation,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 776–789, Mar./Apr. 2022.
[2] G.-W. Wong, Y.-T. Huang, Y.-R. Guo, Y. Sun, and M. C. Chen, “Attentionbased API locating for malware techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 19, pp. 1199–1212, 2024.
[3] M. Zipperle, F. Gottwalt, E. Chang, and T. Dillon, “Provenance-based
intrusion detection systems: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55,
pp. 1–36, 2022.
[4] M. Engenuity, “Att&ck evaluations,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
attackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/
[5] A. Alsaheel et al., “{ATLAS}: A sequence-based learning approach
for attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021,
pp. 3005–3022.
[6] H. Ding, J. Zhai, Y. Nan, and S. Ma, “{AIRTAG}: Towards automated
attack investigation by unsupervised learning with log texts,” in Proc.
32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.), 2023, pp. 373–390.
[7] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” 2023, arXiv:2308.05034.
[8] DARPA, “Transparent computing engagement,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing
[9] DARPA, “Operationally transparent cyber (optc) data release,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data
[10] A. D. Kent, “Comprehensive, multi-source cyber-security events data set,”
Los Alamos National Lab. (LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States),
Tech. Rep. LA-UR–15-23810, 2015.
[11] J. Liu, M. A. Inam, A. Goyal, A. Riddle, K. Westfall, and A. Bates, “What
we talk about when we talk about logs: Understanding the effects of dataset
quality on endpoint threat detection research,” in Proc. 2025 IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy, 2025, pp. 112–129.
[12] D. Arp et al., “DoS and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.
[13] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Ferreira, A. Gupta, and L.
Z. Granville, “AI/ml for network security: The emperor has no clothes,”
in Proc. 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2022,
pp. 1537–1551.

[14] Lockheed Martin Corporation, “Gaining the advantage: Applying cyber
kill chain methodology to network defense,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://www.lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/lockheed-martin/rms/
documents/cyber/Gaining_the_Advantage_Cyber_Kill_Chain.pdf
[15] B. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. Miller, K. Nickels, A. Pennington, and
C. Thomas, “MITRE ATT&CK: Design and philosophy,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/pr18-0944-11-mitre-attack-design-and-philosophy.pdf
[16] M. Google Cloud, “Targeted attack life cycle,” Accessed: Aug. 24, 2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://cloud.google.com/security/resources/
insights/targeted-attack-lifecycle
[17] APT28, “Cve-2023–38831 exploited by pro- Russia hacking groups
in ru-ua conflict zone for credential harvesting operations,” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://blog.cluster25.duskrise.com/2023/10/12/cve2023-38831-russian-attack
[18] A. Applebaum, D. Miller, B. Strom, C. Korban, and R. Wolf, “Intelligent,
automated red team emulation,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., 2016, pp. 363–373.
[19] “Mitre caldera,” 2023, [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mitre/
caldera
[20] “Atomic red team,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://atomicredteam.io/
[21] R. Bordet and other contributors, “Faker: Python package that generates
fake data,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://faker.readthedocs.io
[22] “Vx underground,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://vx-underground.
org/
[23] “Virus total,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.virustotal.com/gui/
home/upload
[24] S. Dataset, “The synthetic audit log dataset with APT campaign,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://saga-tw.github.io/dataset/
[25] E. Manzoor, S. M. Milajerdi, and L. Akoglu, “Fast memory-efficient
anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc.
22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
pp. 1035–1044.
[26] Malwarebytes, “New lnk attack tied to higaisa APT discovered,” 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.malwarebytes.com/blog/news/2020/06/
higaisa
[27] Mandiant, “China-based cyber threat group uses dropbox for malware
communications and targets Hong Kong media outlets,” 2015. [Online].
Available: https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/china-based-threat
[28] Mandiant, “Fin7 evolution and the phishing lnk,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/fin7-phishing-lnk
[29] Ptsecurity, “Cobalt strikes back: An evolving multinational threat to
finance,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.ptsecurity.com/upload/
corporate/ww-en/analytics/Cobalt-2017-eng.pdf
[30] CERT-EE, “Gamaredon infection: From Dropper to entry,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ria.ee/sites/default/files/content-editors/
kuberturve/tale_of_gamaredon_infection.pdf
[31] Cymmetria, “Unveiling patchwork-the copy-paste apt,” 2016. [Online].
Available: https://web.archive.org/web/20180825085952/https://s3-uswest-2.amazonaws.com/cymmetria-blog/public/Unveiling_Patchwork.
pdf
[32] Unit 42, “The gorgon group: Slithering between nation state and cybercrime,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/
unit42-gorgon-group-slithering-nation-state-cybercrime/
[33] E. F. T. K. Sang and F. D. Meulder, “Introduction to the conll2003 shared task: Language-independent named entity recognition,”
2003, arXiv:1909.01315.
[34] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn:
Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020.
[35] “Sigma rule repository,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
SigmaHQ/sigma
[36] Y.-T. Huang, Y.-R. Guo, G.-W. Wong, and M. C. Chen, “A cascade
approach for apt campaign attribution in system event logs: Technique
hunting and subgraph matching,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.22602
[37] A. Virkud, M. A. Inam, A. Riddle, J. Liu, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “How
does endpoint detection use the {mitre}{att&ck} framework,” in Proc.
33rd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 3891–3908.
[38] A. D. Keromytis, “Transparent computing engagement 3 data release,”
2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/TransparentComputing/blob/master/README-E3.md
[39] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach
to generating insider threat data,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE Secur. Privacy
Workshops, 2013, pp. 98–104.

HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS

[40] G. Creech, “Developing a high-accuracy cross platform host-based intrusion detection system capable of reliably detecting zero-day attacks,”
Ph.D. dissertation, UNSW Sydney, 2014.
[41] S. Myneni et al., “Dapt 2020-constructing a benchmark dataset for advanced persistent threats,” in Proc. Deployable Mach. Learn. Secur. Defense: First Int. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 13–163.
[42] A. Berady, M. Jaume, V. V. T. Tong, and G. Guette, “PWNJUTSU: A
dataset and a semantics-driven approach to retrace attack campaigns,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5252–5264,
Dec. 2022.
[43] S. Myneni et al., “Unraveled—a semi-synthetic dataset for advanced
persistent threats,” Comput. Netw., vol. 227, 2023, Art. no. 109688.
[44] J. Gjerstad, F. Kadiric, G. Grov, E. Kjellstadli, and M. L. Asprusten,
“LADEMU: A modular & continuous approach for generating labelled
apt datasets from emulations,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
2022, pp. 2610–2619.
[45] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber
threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 489–506.
[46] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “Magic: Detecting
advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation learning,”
2023, arXiv:2310.09831.
[47] M. Sharif et al., “DrSec: Flexible distributed representations for efficient
endpoint security,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024,
pp. 145–145.
[48] J. Zeng, Z. L. Chua, Y. Chen, K. Ji, Z. Liang, and J. Mao, “WATSON:
Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via aggregation of contextual semantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021.
[49] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019,
pp. 1137–1152.
[50] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
[51] K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling, G. Quirchmayr, and A. M. Tjoa,
“Krystal: Knowledge graph-based framework for tactical attack discovery
in audit data,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, 2022, Art. no. 102828.
[52] “Sigma - generic signature format for siem systems,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
[53] B. Singer, K. Lucas, L. Adiga, M. Jain, L. Bauer, and V. Sekar, “On the
feasibility of using LLMS to autonomously execute multi-host network
attacks,” 2025, arXiv:2501.16466.

Yi-Ting Huang received the PhD degree in information management from National Taiwan University, in
2015. She is an assistant professor with the National
Taiwan University of Science and Technology. She
was a postdoctoral fellow at Academia Sinica. Her
primary research interests include malware analysis,
cyber threat intelligence analysis, deep learning, and
natural language processing.

Ying-Ren Guo is a research assistant in Academia
Sinica. His research interests include malware reverse
engineering and analysis, and cybersecurity.

3767

Yu-Sheng Yang is currently working toward the master’s degree in computer science with National Taiwan
University. His research focuses on large language
models (LLMs) and computer vision.

Guo-Wei Wong received the master’s degree in thermal and fluid science from the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, in 2017. He is
currently working towards the PhD degree of CSIE
with the National Taiwan University. His primary
research interests include deep learning in fluid dynamics and for complicated applications, including
malware analysis and PM2.5 prediction.

Yu-Zih Jheng is currently working toward the master’s degree in Information management with National Taiwan University. Her research interests include static and dynamic malware analysis, red teaming, and penetration testing.

Yeali S. Sun received the BS degree from the Computer Science and Information Engineering department of National Taiwan University, and the MS and
PhD degrees in computer science from the University
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). From 1988 to
1993, she was with Bell Communications Research
Inc. In August 1993, she joined National Taiwan University and is currently a professor of the Department
of Information Management. Her research interests
are in the areas of Internet security and forensics,
Quality of Service (QoS), cloud computing and services, and performance modeling and evaluation.

Jessemyn Modini is an IT leader and cyber security
researcher. Jess holds 5 master’s qualifications in Cybersecurity Operations, Systems Engineering, Space
Operations, Project Management and International
Relations (Security). Jess is currently undertaking a
doctorate in Cyber Security, focusing on applications
of epidemiology to cyber security (Cyber Epidemiology) for threat modelling and cyber herd immunity at scale. Jess is currently a senior Technologist
with Amazon Web Services where she drives global
technology strategy. Prior to AWS, Jess was the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) Engineering Manager. Jess is passionate
about security, global cyber threat intelligence sharing and multidisciplinary
approaches to resilience.

3768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Timothy Lynar received the PhD degree from the
University of Newcastle, Australia, in 2011. He is a
senior lecturer with UNSW Canberra. He worked at
IBM research for 7.5 years where he was a research
staff member and master inventor, before joining
UNSW, in 2019. Tim’s primary research focus is
the application of machine learning to Cyber security. Tim has a background in simulation, modelling
and distributed computing including cloud and IoT
systems.

Meng Chang Chen received the PhD degree in computer science from the University of California, Los
Angeles. He was with AT&T Bell Labs and is now a
research fellow/professor of research center for information technology innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan. His current research interests include computer
and network security, wireless network, deep learning
for complicated applications, data and knowledge
engineering.