IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

945

SD-RetinaNet: Topologically Constrained
Semi-Supervised Retinal Lesion and
Layer Segmentation in OCT
Botond Fazekas , Guilherme Aresta , Philipp Seeböck , Julia Mai , Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth ,
and Hrvoje Bogunović

Abstract— Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is
widely used for diagnosing and monitoring retinal diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
The segmentation of biomarkers such as layers and lesions
is essential for patient diagnosis and follow-up. Recently,
semi-supervised learning has shown promise in improving retinal segmentation performance. However, existing
methods often produce anatomically implausible segmentations, fail to effectively model layer-lesion interactions,
and lack guarantees on topological correctness. To address
these limitations, we propose a novel semi-supervised
model that introduces a fully differentiable biomarker topology engine to enforce anatomically correct segmentation
of lesions and layers. This enables joint learning with bidirectional influence between layers and lesions, leveraging
unlabeled and diverse partially labeled datasets. Our model
learns a disentangled representation, separating spatial
and style factors. This approach enables more realistic
layer segmentations and improves lesion segmentation,
while strictly enforcing lesion location in their anatomically plausible positions relative to the segmented layers.
We evaluate the proposed model on public and internal
datasets of OCT scans and show that it outperforms the
Received 18 August 2025; accepted 23 September 2025. Date of
publication 1 October 2025; date of current version 4 March 2026. This
work was supported in part by the Christian Doppler Research Association, in part by Austrian Federal Ministry of Economy, Energy and
Tourism, in part by the National Foundation for Research, Technology
and Development, and in part by Heidelberg Engineering. Recommended by Associate Editor Y. Zhao. (Corresponding author: Botond
Fazekas.)
Botond Fazekas, Guilherme Aresta, and Hrvoje Bogunović are
with the Christian Doppler Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in
Retina, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Center for Medical Data
Science, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria,
and also with the Comprehensive Center for AI in Medicine,
Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria (e-mail:
botond.fazekas@meduniwien.ac.at;
guilherme.moreiraaresta@
meduniwien.ac.at; hrvoje.bogunovic@meduniwien.ac.at).
Philipp Seeböck is with the Medical Anomaly Detection (MANO)
Group, Computational Imaging Research (CIR), Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna,
1090 Vienna, Austria, and also with the Comprehensive Center for AI
in Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria (e-mail:
philipp.seeboeck@meduniwien.ac.at).
Julia Mai and Ursula Schmidt-Erfurth are with the Department of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna,
Austria (e-mail: julia.mai@meduniwien.ac.at; ursula.schmidt-erfurth@
meduniwien.ac.at).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2025.3615240

current state-of-the-art in both lesion and layer segmentation, while demonstrating the ability to generalize layer
segmentation to pathological cases using partially annotated training data. Our results demonstrate the potential
of using anatomical constraints in semi-supervised learning for accurate, robust, and trustworthy retinal biomarker
segmentation.
Index Terms— OCT, disentangled representation,
anatomical priors, retinal biomarker segmentation.

I. I NTRODUCTION
PTICAL Coherence Tomography (OCT) is the gold
standard imaging modality for the monitoring of retinal
pathologies and the management of patients with eye diseases. OCT provides clinicians with a detailed cross-sectional
depiction of the retina, facilitating the assessment of diverse
imaging biomarkers, notably the thickness of the retinal layers
and volumes of retinal fluid compartment. These are crucial
indicators for identifying and monitoring retinal diseases and
guiding the treatment of pathologies such as diabetic macular
edema (DME) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD),
both prominent causes of global vision impairment [1]. In
particular, the manifestations of AMD in the eye include,
among others, intraretinal cystoid fluid (IRF), subretinal fluid
(SRF), subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM), and pigment epithelial detachment (PED) [2], [3].
Large amount of data accrued during routine clinical practice, in conjunction with the demanding clinical workflow,
makes manual quantification of retinal biomarkers unfeasible in clinical practice. To combat this, automated retinal
biomarker segmentation techniques have been developed,
along with the commercialization and widespread adoption of
OCT technology [4]. At the same time, the large variability
of pathological manifestations, their effect on the signal, as
well as the nature of OCT imaging, characterized by factors
such as speckle noise, intensity fluctuations, and shadowing
induced by biological tissues, presents a challenging task for
the segmentation of retinal layers.
Recent advancements in retinal biomarker segmentation
algorithms frequently rely on supervised deep learning
methodologies, necessitating extensive training datasets annotated with meticulous precision [5]. However, the acqui-

O

1558-254X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

sition of high-fidelity manual annotations for pathological
scenarios entails a multifaceted, labor-intensive, and resourcedemanding process. Therefore, automated solutions must
leverage prior anatomical knowledge. Specifically, while retinal layers maintain a consistent relative position and lesions
appear in well-defined locations, the presence of lesions
critically distorts layer morphology. This creates a complex
bidirectional influence: layer anatomy constrains plausible
lesion locations, while lesions, in turn, deform the layers.
Accurately modeling this intricate relationship, especially
while ensuring topological consistency, is a major challenge
not fully addressed by methods treating these segmentations
independently or sequentially [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
This challenge is compounded by the nature of available
data. Due to labor costs and specialized expertise, simultaneously annotating both layers and lesions across large datasets
is rare. Consequently, many public and clinical datasets are
partially annotated, with some containing only layer annotations, and others only lesion annotations. A prominent,
unsolved challenge is, therefore, how to effectively train a
single, robust model that leverages these diverse, partially
annotated sources while respecting the complex anatomical
relationships described above.
In this study, we propose a novel segmentation framework
for retinal OCT designed specifically to address these dual
challenges. Our approach’s core innovation is a differentiable
biomarker topology engine, which, for the first time, enables
joint learning with true bidirectional influence between layers
and lesions under strict anatomical constraints. To apply this
framework in a realistic data environment, we build upon a
disentangled representation [11], [12]. This supporting architecture is essential for our semi-supervised strategy, allowing
the model to effectively integrate and learn from diverse
sources of unlabeled and, crucially, partially annotated data.
The proposed approach was extensively evaluated on multiple
public and internal datasets, demonstrating state-of-the-art
performance and showing its unique ability to generalize layer
segmentation to pathological cases by synergistically learning
from disparate data sources.

of retinal layer and fluid segmentation was already realized
in [21] and a joint segmentation method for these tasks was
proposed, based on a dynamic programming algorithm.
However, these retinal biomarker segmentation methods rely
heavily on hand-crafted image features, leading to a potentially
degraded performance in the presence of noise, imaging artifacts or severe pathologies. As a hybrid approach, a machine
learning-based method was proposed in [6], which combined
unsupervised feature representation and heterogeneous spatial
context with a graph-theoretic surface segmentation, which
allowed a joint segmentation of layers and lesions.
With the rise of deep learning, several convolutional neural
network (CNN)-based retinal biomarker segmentation methods
have been introduced. These were predominantly built on
U-Net [22] and its variants. ReLayNet [23] predicts the pixelwise locations of nine retinal layers and potential fluid-filled
pockets. This was later extended to 3D and various types
of fluids in [5]. In the 2017 MICCAI Retinal OCT Fluid
Challenge (RETOUCH) [24], all participants employed CNNbased methods, primarily based on the U-Net architecture.
Subsequently, the self-configuring nnU-Net [25] established a
new state-of-the-art performance on this data.1 In [9] a dualbranch multitask model was introduced, with the first branch
outputting boundary labels while the second branch outputs
region segmentation labels. The two outputs are fused together,
providing constraints from region segmentation to layer surfaces, but not explicitly modeling the influence of layers on
lesions or the constraints imposed by lesion locations.
Convolutional operators inherently possess local properties and inductive biases, and thus have a limited field of
view. Consequently, transformers are increasingly adopted
as an alternative to CNN-based methods for medical image
segmentation, due to their global self-attention mechanism
[26]. Vision Transformers [26] have demonstrated state-ofthe-art performance on various benchmarks, though they
require a large volume of training data and substantial
computational resources. SwinUNETR [27] addressed these
limitations in medical image segmentation by introducing
a hierarchical vision transformer, utilizing a hybrid CNNtransformer architecture, achieving both higher accuracy and
improved computational efficiency. U-Mamba [28], which
inherits the self-configuring capability of nnU-Net, employs
Mamba blocks in conjunction with CNNs instead of transformers, thereby efficiently enhancing the global attention
mechanism of the models.
Building on the latest developments in hybrid CNNtransformer based methodologies, TCCT [29] introduces a
retinal layer segmentation model with a lightweight transformer module with cross-convolutional integration to increase
the receptive field of the CNN backbone. The model yields
pixel-level segmentation of an OCT scan with an optional subsequent edge-detection-like step converting the segmentation
into layer boundaries, thereby partially transforming the task
into a regression problem. However, this boundary conversion
cannot be used effectively when fluids are present [29], high-

A. Related Works
.

1) Retinal Biomarker Segmentation: Early retinal layer
segmentation algorithms typically involved extracting handcrafted features from B-scans (cross-sectional images of the
retina) and using graph-based techniques to infer the positions
of retinal surfaces. For instance, the Iowa Reference Algorithms [13], [14] transformed OCT data into a graph structure,
using graph-search algorithms to identify surface positions
while maintaining topological accuracy, layer thickness constraints, and smoothness. Subsequent enhancements to these
graph-based techniques were made in [15], [16], [17], and
[18].
Similarly, traditional lesion segmentation models also relied
on hand-crafted image features. In [19], they proposed an
anomaly detection model based on retinal texture for lesion
segmentation. Later, in [20], they proposed a 3D voxel classification model with a graph-cut approach. The interdependence

1 https://retouch.grand-challenge.org/Results/

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

lighting the difficulty of layer-only methods in pathological
regions.
The aforementioned methods still allow anatomically
implausible segmentations, such as multiple locations for
a layer boundary position in an A-scan (a column of a
B-scan). He et al. [8] proposed to improve the coherence of
retinal layer segmentation by predicting the positions of the
shallowest surface and then iteratively rectifying all deeper
surfaces to ensure that they have greater or equal depth. These
surfaces are obtained from a softmax mapping that encodes
the most probable location of the layer boundary. In a multitask setting, the system also predicts an independent pixel-wise
prediction of both retinal layers and lesions. However, it fails
to take advantage of the tight association between the different
retinal lesions with their respective, plausible positions in the
layers, and thus allowing for anatomically incoherent pathomorphological predictions. Furthermore, such approaches lack
mechanisms for true bidirectional influence, limiting the ability
of lesion information to refine layer segmentation in complex
pathological cases.
The above highlights the need for a unified framework
where layers and lesions are not treated as independent tasks
but are jointly optimized within a single, topologically-aware
system.
2) Semi-Supervised Training for Retinal Biomarker Segmentation: A primary motivation for our work is to address the

challenge of leveraging diverse, partially annotated datasets.
Semi-supervised learning provides a pathway to tackle this
issue, moving beyond standard supervised methods that
require complete annotations for every image. A prevalent
approach involves using a segmentation network to generate
initial segmentations (pseudolabels). This is followed by a
secondary network that evaluates the accuracy and realism
of these segmentations against labeled data. Through the
application of adversarial loss, the segmentation network is
incentivized to generate outputs that are more realistic and
aligned with the labeled data [30], [31], [32].
Further semi-supervised methods have been proposed, often
focusing on consistency regularization or contrastive learning. For instance, BE-SemiNet [33] focuses specifically on
semi-supervised retinal OCT layer segmentation. It enhances
boundary learning using an auxiliary distance map regression
task alongside consistency regularization techniques. While
effective for improving layer boundary delineation with scarce
labels, BE-SemiNet is limited to layer segmentation only and
does not support the joint segmentation of, or interaction
between, layers and lesions. Furthermore, its reliance on
distance maps may pose challenges in cases where layers are
missing or severely distorted by pathology.
Consistency regularization methods, often building upon the
Mean Teacher concept [34], enforce similar predictions for
perturbed versions of the same unlabeled input. Variants like
Uncertainty Guided Mean Teacher (UGMT) [35] refine this by
weighting the consistency loss based on model uncertainty,
while others enforce mutual consistency between different network predictions [36]. While effective at leveraging
unlabeled data, these methods typically do not incorporate

947

explicit anatomical topology constraints specific to retinal
structures.
Contrastive learning approaches learn discriminative representations by contrasting features from similar and dissimilar
regions. Methods like Pixel Contrast [37] and Cross-Patch
Dense Contrastive Learning [38], as well as state-of-the-art
frameworks such as ACTION++ [39] which uses adaptive
contrast to handle class imbalance, have proven effective.
However, these methods generally focus on feature discrimination rather than enforcing the global anatomical structure
and spatial relationships required for accurate and plausible
retinal OCT segmentation, nor are they typically designed for
datasets with disparate partial annotation types (e.g., layers
only vs. lesions only).
In a different approach, SD-LayerNet [12], which is a
retinal layer topology-aware extension of SD-Net [11], uses a
disentangled representation approach, separating the input 2D
OCT slice (B-scan) into spatial binarized spatial anatomical
factors corresponding to layers and noise, and non-spatial style
factors. Subsequently, the style factors are applied as an affine
transformation on the anatomical factors to reconstruct the
original image. The binarization of the anatomical factors,
and the application of style factors as an affine transformation, ensures that anatomical factors cannot contain style
information and vice versa. Through the retinal layer specific
constraints enforced on the spatial anatomical factors, the
network is forced to generate these structural building blocks
corresponding to the retinal layers for a correct reconstruction.
This allows the network to learn the structure of the retina even
from unlabeled scans. Although SD-LayerNet lacks the ability
to segment lesions, it could be extended similarly to [27] by an
extra segmentation head predicting pixel-wise classifications
for lesions. However, this would have the same limitations
as [27], i.e. lack of a mechanism to enforce topological
constraints on the lesions or to model the crucial bidirectional
synergy between layers and lesions, which is the central
contribution of our new framework
B. Contributions
.

In this study we propose an end-to-end trained retinal
OCT segmentation model, which addresses the challenges
of anatomical inconsistency, accurately modeling bidirectional
layer-lesion influence, and effectively utilizing partially labeled
data:
• We introduce a framework for joint layer and lesion
segmentation featuring a novel differentiable biomarker
topology engine. This engine enables bidirectional influence between layers and lesions, predicts anatomically
plausible segmentations, and guarantees the topological
consistency of retinal lesions relative to the layers.
• We introduce several anatomical priors encoded as loss
terms (particularly Llp ) that, within this joint learning
framework, allow the model to effectively leverage the
potential of partially labeled datasets (e.g., datasets containing only layer or only lesion annotations).
• We extensively evaluate our method via ablation and
baseline studies on real-world AMD cases from multiple
public datasets and on an independent external test set.

948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 1. A U-Net (anatomy module) creates a latent space representation from the input image. The convolutional heads conv-b and conv-l
generate the initial layer boundaries as a probability map, and the initial lesion segmentation, respectively. The biomarker topology engine ensures
the coherent position of the layers and lesions and generates a spatial representation of the layers. During training time, both layer and lesion
segmentations (2D spatial factors) and the input image are used to create the style factors (1D vectors), which encode the intensity values of
the spatial factors, and thus defines the general appearance of the input image. The decoder then produces a reconstructed image by creating a
weighted sum of the 2D spatial factors, where the weights for each spatial factor are derived from the 1D style factors. During inference, the style
factors and the reconstructions are not generated.

Importantly, since our work uses a boundary regression
approach [8], it is not susceptible to the common issue
of predicting multiple vertical positions for a boundary in
an A-scan. This regression-based approach also allows for
topological guarantees about the correct order of the layers.
The underlying disentangled representation framework [11],
[12], essential for our semi-supervised strategy, allows the
model to learn structural features from unlabeled images via
anatomical prior information and reconstruction. Crucially,
this framework, combined with our anatomically informed
joint learning process, also enables the effective integration
and use of diverse partially labeled datasets.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
Our proposed method, SD-RetinaNet, processes OCT
images in a two-stage manner within an end-to-end framework, as illustrated in Fig. 1. First, an Anatomy Module generates initial, unconstrained predictions for layer boundaries
and lesions. Second, our core contribution, a differentiable
Biomarker Topology Engine, refines these initial predictions

to enforce strict anatomical and topological consistency. This
entire process is supported by a disentangled representation
and reconstruction pathway, which enables the framework to
be trained semi-supervisedly using labeled, partially labeled,
and unlabeled data.
A. Anatomy Module: Initial Prediction
.

The initial predictions are generated by a U-Net [18] with
an EfficientNet-b4 encoder [40], and a four-stage decoder with
512, 256, 128, and 64 channels (Fig. 1 - Anatomy module).
Two separate convolutional heads are attached to the decoder’s
output:
1) Layer Boundary Regression: The conv-b head performs
initial layer boundary regression as described in [8] and [12],
predicting a probability mass function P(Y | i, b) for each
column (A-scan) i and surface boundary b, where Y is a
discrete random variable representing the vertical position (i.e.,
row index) within the A-scan. These probability mass function
encodes the likelihood of each potential vertical position being
the true location of boundary b. The final boundary position

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

pbi is then calculated
P as the expected value of this probability
distribution: pbi = r r · P(r|i, b), where the summation is over
all possible row indices r.
2) Lesion Segmentation: The output of conv-l are the lesion
segmentations, obtained via Softmax. These predictions are
binarized using a differentiable rounding function before being
further processed in the biomarker topology engine. This
function performs standard rounding to the nearest integer
during the forward pass, effectively converting the continuous
output to a binary segmentation (0 or 1). During the backward
pass, it acts as an identity function, allowing gradients to
pass through unchanged. This approach enables gradient-based
optimization while producing discrete segmentation outputs.
Each output channel Lk produced by conv-l is associated
with a lesion type k, while an additional channel Ln is
dedicated to detecting the background.
B. Biomarker Topology Engine
.

The initial predictions from the Anatomy Module can be
anatomically inconsistent. The Biomarker Topology Engine
is a novel, fully differentiable module designed to correct
these predictions by enforcing anatomical priors. Its operation
consists of three sequential steps:
1) Iterative Layer Correction: To enforce a strict layer topological order, we use an iterative process to correct the
boundary positions. Unlike previous approaches [8], [12], we
correct the positions bottom-up, since atrophy in the lower
layers can cause the upper layers to
[41].
ˇ shift downwards
ˇ
Specifically, we use p̂bi = pb+1
− ˇ pb+1
− pbi ˇ+ , where |·|+
i
i
represents the rectifier function. Here, p̂bi contains the rectified
positions for an OCT A-scan, and P̂b represents the collection
of p̂bi , containing the retinal layer positions for a B-scan.
2) Surface-to-Mask Conversion: The rectified boundary
positions of a B-scan P̂b are then converted to 2D surfaces C b
using a novel approach. In particular, C b = σ(A − P̂b ), where
σ is the sigmoid function and A ∈ RH×W , where Ai, j = i for
j = 1, 2, . . . , W is a row counter. C b is a 2D representation of
the boundary b, with values close to 0 above Pb and close to 1
below it. Finally, non-overlapping layer maps M s are obtained
iteratively through M s = C b − C b+1 . During the forward pass
only, M s are rounded to form binarized spatial factors.
Unlike [12], which predicted 2D surfaces from the cumulative sum of the probability distribution, our novel approach
operates directly on the coordinate space, facilitating possible
processing of the predicted boundaries prior to the lesion
segmentation.
3) Topological Lesion Correction: Finally, the predicted
lesionPsegmentations Lk are topologically corrected via L̂k =
Lk
M l l∈Sk , where the predefined S contains the indices of
the layers that may contain the lesion k, and denotes the
Hadamard product. This differentiable step ensures that in the
final output and spatial factors no lesions are predicted outside
their prespecified layer boundaries.
C. Disentangled Representation for Semi-Supervised
Learning
.

The overall image reconstruction procedure, including the
use of style and spatial factors, is adapted from [11] and [12].

949

The purpose of this component is to encourage the network to
learn segmentations (corresponding to the 2D spatial factors)
that, when combined with appropriate intensity values, can
accurately reconstruct the original input image. This indirectly
promotes the segmentation of regions with uniform intensities,
which typically correspond to the same anatomical structures
(layers or lesions). This approach leverages the inherent property that neighboring retinal structures have different intensity
values, and that individual layers and lesions generally exhibit
uniform intensity within their boundaries.
1) Style Factor Generation: The style factors (Ω) are 1D
vectors that encode the intensity values of the spatial factors.
The generation of style factors follows the modality factor
generation methodology of [11] and [12]. Specifically, a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) is employed to generate the style
factors, which are subsequently utilized in the reconstruction
stage by the image decoder.
2) Image Decoder: The image decoder procedure is adapted
from [11] and [12], where a combination of style, binarized
layer surfaces and lesions segmentations is used to generate
an image of the same size as the input. The fusion process is
carried out through a model that is conditioned using four
FiLM layers [42] to scale and offset the intensities of the
spatial factors without transmitting any spatial information via
the style factors.
D. Training Objectives and Loss Functions
.

The model is trained end-to-end using a multi-component
loss function that combines supervised signals with selfsupervised anatomical priors and reconstruction objectives.
1) Anatomical Prior Losses (Self-Supervised): These losses
are calculated on the initial predictions from the Anatomy
Module to guide the network towards plausible outputs, even
on unlabeled data.
• Topological ordering constraint (Lto ) To ensure the strict
ordering of retinal layers, we aim to reduce the occurrence
and magnitude of topological order
P violations
P b−1 across
− pbi |+ .
A-scans, similarly to [12]: Lto = W1
s
i |pi
• Boundary curvature constraint (Lbc ) We calculate the
second-order derivative (SoD) specifically on the predicted boundary positions, using finite differences. This
approach differs from [12], which constrained the boundary slope to a predefined range.
The SoD is invariant to B-scan inclination and approximates the boundary curvature, which is a more accurate
descriptor of a layer boundary than the slope. To determine the maximum expected curvature κ s per layer for
A-scans δ pixels apart (where δ is a hyperparameter),
we use the annotated training data. To remove outliers, for each layer we take the 0.999 percentile of
the calculated maximum expected curvatures for each
layer in the training. With this in mind, each inferred
surface curvature
greater than ˇκ s is penalized: Lbc =
ˇ
ˇ
P P ˇˇ |−pis−b 2δ c +2pis −pis+b 2δ c |
1
− κ s ˇˇ .
s
iˇ
W
δ
+
• Lesion position constraint (Llp ) To promote the correct location of lesion segmentations and to learn from

950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

as a loss term to encourage the network to learn the target
distribution. We calculate the Dice loss between each lesion
k
L̂k and the reference Lre
f , resulting in the supervised loss term:
Lsup = λ1 LKL + λ2 LL1 + λ3 Ldice
X
2
λ2 X s
T (r | i, s)
+
yi − µis
= λ1
T (r | i, s) ln
P (r | i, s) S · W s,i
s,r,i
X

λ3
k
+
1 − Dice L̂k , Lre
(1)
f
|k|
k

Fig. 2. Illustration of the lesion position constraint in various settings. A
PED (blue) is defined as being located between the BM and RPE (white
lines). When this condition is met in the prediction (first row), the lesion
position constraint (Llp ) does not influence the loss. In the presence
of lesion annotation but no layer annotation (second row), if there is
a discrepancy between the predicted layer and lesion segmentations,
Llp imposes a penalty on the incorrect layer segmentation. Conversely,
with available layer annotation (third row), a contradiction between
the predicted layer and lesion segmentations results in Llp penalizing
the incorrect lesion segmentation. In cases where no annotations are
available (fourth row) but inconsistencies exist between the layer and
lesion segmentations, both segmentations are penalized by Llp .

unannotated samples as well, we penalize predictions
k lying
 in Sk : kLlp =
P outside ofk the layers
P defined
1
l
−
log
1
−
L
1
−
M
l∈Sk , where L is the
k
W·H
initial segmentation prediction for lesion k. The effect of
this constraint is illustrated in Figure 2. This constraint
facilitates learning in scenarios even without complete
annotations. Even if there are no annotations present, it
encourages the network to predict topologically coherent
segmentations. If only lesion annotations are available for
a given image, and the network predicts layer boundaries
that would place the lesion in an anatomically impossible
location, the layer predictions are penalized via Llp , even
in the absence of explicit layer ground truth. This allows
the network to learn the distortions caused by lesions
to the layers from the lesion segmentation. Conversely,
if only layer annotations are present, incorrect lesion
predictions falling outside the allowed layer ranges are
penalized, even without lesion ground truth. This introduces a bidirectional influence between the layer and
lesion segmentations.
2) Supervised Losses: These losses are calculated on the
final, corrected outputs from the Biomarker Topology Engine
to ensure accuracy against ground truth annotations.

1) LKL , to describe the target distribution of P(Y | i, b),
2) LL1 , to penalize wrongly regressed layer boundary
locations with L1 loss and 3) Ldice , to penalize wrongly
segmented lesions.
In particular, to handle potential inaccuracies in pixel-level
annotations, we use a normal distribution to model P(Y | i, b)
in LKL . In this model, the mean of the distribution for each
A-scan i is the reference standard position µis of the surface,
and the standard deviation σ is a hyperparameter. During
training, we use the mean Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence

where T (Y | i, s) represents the target probability map,
constructed using Gaussian distributions with means µis and
standard deviation σ, one for each layer boundary on A-scan
i at surface s, r ∈ Y and |k| is the number of different lesion
types used in the training.
3) Reconstruction and Disentanglement Losses: We focus
on the reconstruction between the predicted Internal Limiting
Membrane (ILM) and Bruch’s membrane (BM) surfaces,
which are at the top and bottom of the retina, to avoid the
impact of noise or uncertainty outside the retina. For this
purpose, we use the reconstruction loss, Lrec , which measures
the mean absolute error (MAE) between the intensity values
of the original and reconstructed images within this specific
region.
During training, the loss function LzKL is employed to
minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of the estimated Gaussian distribution by the style-encoder VAE from
the standard Gaussian distribution.
4) Optional Triplet Loss for Forced Disentanglement: To
enhance the disentanglement of the spatial and style factors,
we propose a variant of our method with two additional
loss terms. This approach trains the network in a contrastive
manner, ensuring that variations in the overall appearance of
the scans are captured exclusively by the style factors, while
spatial changes are reflected exclusively in the spatial factors
(Figure 3).
Specifically, for each input B-scan I we generate a B-scan
Ia which has random affine transformations applied on, as
well as a B-scan I s on which random style transformations
are applied, including change in the contrast, noise level, blur.
We introduce a triplet loss for both the style factors (Ltriplet-s )
and for the spatial factors (Ltriplet-a ):


Ltriplet-s = |S C ΩI , ΩIa − S C ΩI , ΩIs |+
(2)
where S C denotes the cosine similarity function, and Ω denotes
the style factor vector,


Ltriplet-a = |MSE PI , PIs − MSE PI , PIa |+


+ |DL LI , LIs − DL LI , LIa |+
(3)
where MSE denotes the mean squared error, DL denotes the
Dice loss, P denotes the layer boundaries and L denotes
the predicted lesions. We sum the two triplet losses under
the common term:Ltriplet = Ltriplet-a + Ltriplet-s
5) Overall Cost Function: The overall cost function L for
the end-to-end training is a composition of the supervised
Lsup = λ1 LKL + λ2 Lmse + λ3 Ldice , the anatomical priors
Lprior = λ4 Lto + λ5 Lbc + λ6 Llp loss, the style encoder

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

Fig. 3. Illustration of the forced disentanglement process. For each
B-scan I in the batch, a randomly spatially transformed B-scan Ia and
a style-transformed B-scan Is are generated. Style latent space: A
triplet loss function ensures that the cosine distance margin between
the style factors of the original B-scan and the spatially transformed
B-scan remains smaller than the margin between the original and the
style-transformed B-scan. Spatial latent space: The layer and lesion
segmentations (i.e. spatial factors) should be consistent between the
style-transformed and the original B-scan, and must differ for the spatially transformed B-scan.

loss LzKL , the triplet losses Ltriplet and the reconstruction loss
Lrec :
L = λ7 LzKL + λ8 Lrec + λ9 Lsup + λ10 Ltriplet + Lprior
III. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
A. Datasets
.

1) Public Datasets: The HCMS dataset [8] comprises 14
healthy controls (HCs) and 21 individuals diagnosed with
multiple sclerosis (MS). Each participant’s data includes 49
B-scans obtained with a Spectralis (Heidelberg Engineering,
Germany) scanner, with nine surfaces manually annotated. The
scans measure 496 × 1024 in dimension and possess a lateral
resolution of 5.8µm, an axial resolution of 3.9µm, and a B-scan
interval of 123.6µm. As we do not validate/test our method in
this dataset, all of the scans are used for training.
The RETOUCH dataset includes 112 OCT volumes centered on the macula obtained from 112 patients diagnosed
with macular edema due to AMD or RVO. Each B-scan
was manually annotated pixel-wise for intraretinal fluid (IRF),
subretinal fluid (SRF), and pigment epithelial detachment
(PED). The training dataset comprises 70 OCT volumes,
while the test dataset contains 42 volumes, however we
did not utilize the latter. The OCT volumes were captured
using three different devices: Cirrus HD-OCT (Zeiss Meditec,
Germany), Spectralis (Heidelberg Engineering, Germany), and
T-1000/T-2000 (Topcon, Japan), with approximately equal
number of scans from each. All volumes encompass a macular
region measuring 6 × 6 mm2 . Depending on the experimental
setup, we either use all of the scans available for training
regardless of the vendors, or the Spectralis scans only.
As an independent external test set, we used the DukeDME
dataset [21]. It contains 10 Spectralis volumes with a resolution of 496 × 768 × 61 voxels from 10 patients with diabetic
macular edema (DME). Within each volume, 11 B-scans are
annotated by both a senior and a junior ophthalmologist for

951

8 retinal layers and macular edema. These 8 annotated layers
form a direct subset of the 9 layers annotated in the HCMS
dataset, lacking only the ELM annotation, thus ensuring
compatibility for evaluation when training on HCMS data.
Similar to [21], [23], [43], and [44], we used the 5 patients
(55 B-scans) of DukeDME with severe edema. However, as
we used this dataset as an external test set, we did not perform
training on it, thus the scans of the last 5 patients were not
utilized.
2) Internal Dataset: The dataset comprises 509 macula centered Spectralis (Heidelberg Engineering, Germany)
OCT volumes from 462 patients, with resolutions spanning
18-97 B-scans, each with a size of 512 − 1024 × 496 pixels.
The scans were taken during clinical routine check-ups in
neovascular AMD patients who underwent treatment, thus
representing a real-world clinical scenario. For 85 volumes, the
lesions were manually annotated by experts on every B-scan,
while 11 layers were manually annotated on 7 B-scans per
volume. From these, the number of volumes containing IRF,
SRF and SHRM is 42, 50 and 42 respectively. We performed
3-fold cross-validation on the 85 annotated volumes. Folds
were created using patient-wise, multi-label aware data stratification (∼28 volumes/fold) to ensure similar lesion distributions
and prevent subject overlap between training/validation and
test sets across iterations. In each iteration, 2 folds formed
the training/validation set, with the remaining fold used for
testing. This combined training/validation data was further
split patient-wise and stratified into 70% for internal training
and 30% for internal validation. This internal validation set
was used during each training run to monitor performance
and select the optimal model epoch (i.e., the specific model
weights) for final evaluation on the held-out test fold. The
387 unannotated scans were used alongside the respective
internal training data in each fold for semi-supervised training.
All scans were resampled to a uniform lateral resolution of
6.0 µm/px.
B. Evaluation Metrics and Statistical Analysis
.

To assess performance, we used distinct metrics tailored for
each segmentation task. For layer segmentation, we report the
Mean Absolute Distance (MAD) in micrometers (µm). MAD is
chosen as it directly measures the average boundary localization error in a clinically relevant scale and, unlike region-based
metrics like Dice, is not biased by the natural variation in layer
thickness across the retina. For lesion segmentation, we report
the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC), the standard metric
for evaluating the volumetric overlap of segmentation masks,
which is well-suited for these variably shaped regions.
To account for the interdependence of B-scans from the
same patient volume, we performed statistical analysis using
a linear mixed-effects model [45], with p < 0.05 considered
significant.
C. Experimental Scenarios
.

We designed four distinct experimental scenarios to comprehensively evaluate our method’s performance, robustness,
and generalization capabilities.

952

1) Main Performance Evaluation:
a) Baseline Studies: To evaluate the performance of our

proposed approach, we compared it with several segmentation
methods: ReLayNet [23], nnU-Net [25], U-Mamba [28], SwinUNETR [27], TCCT [29], and the layer boundary regression
method (LBRM) introduced by [8]. Additionally, we included
comparisons with two state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods: ACTION++ [39], a general medical image segmentation
model, and BE-SemiNet [33], designed for retinal OCT layer
segmentation.
For a fair and consistent comparison, several implementation details were necessary. We focused our evaluation on
these 2D-based methods as they are better suited to the
sparse, slice-wise annotation protocol common in clinical
datasets and addressed in our work. While 3D methods like
Liu et al. [46] exist, their reliance on inter-slice coherence
is challenged by the large, variable distances between the
few annotated B-scans in our data. Our preliminary evaluation of this representative 3D method confirmed it struggled
in this setting. Since TCCT, SD-LayerNet and BE-SemiNet
were originally designed for layer segmentation only, we
adapted their architectures by adding output channels for
lesion segmentation. For all pixel-based methods (ReLayNet,
nnU-Net, U-Mamba, SwinUNETR, ACTION++, and TCCT),
layer boundary positions were extracted in a post-processing
step, defined as the first occurrence of the corresponding layer
class in each A-scan. To handle erroneous predictions outside
the retina, only the largest connected component for each
layer was retained. Furthermore, for fairness, the backbones
of ReLayNet and LBRM were replaced with a U-Net with an
EfficientNet-b4 encoder to match our anatomy module.
b) Ablation Studies: To investigate the impact of the different modules of our model, we conducted several ablation
studies. To evaluate the effect of the semi-supervised lesion
position constraint Llp , we trained our network without this
loss term (SD-RetinaNet - Llp ). To assess the importance of the
topological constraint and the boundary curvature constraints,
we trained the network without these loss terms (SD-RetinaNet
- Lto and SD-RetinaNet - Lbc ). We assessed the performance
of our model when trained without disentanglement and
reconstruction (SD-RetinaNet - Lrec ). Also, we observed the
performance of the biomarker segmentation method of He et
al., with adding biomarker topology engine with the 1D-2D
conversion and the lesion position constraint Llp thus creating an additional semi-supervised baseline (He et al.+Llp ).
This corresponds to a configuration of our model without
reconstruction and the anatomical priors Lto and Lbc . We also
evaluated the effect of changing the U-Net + EfficientNet-b4
backbone to the proposed architecture of TCCT [29] (SDRetinaNet w. TCCT BB.).
2) Partial Annotation Generalization: Although numerous
public OCT segmentation datasets are available, only a few
include annotations for both retinal layers and lesions. To
assess the performance of our method with partially annotated
datasets, we trained our model using the HCMS dataset
[8], which provides layer segmentation annotations for both
healthy and multiple sclerosis (MS) scans, and the Spectralis
scans of the RETOUCH dataset, which includes annotations

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

for PED, SRF, and IRF in patients with AMD and RVO. To
evaluate the performance of our model trained on partially
labeled datasets on an independent external dataset, we use the
first 5 volumes of the DukeDME dataset as this is common
practice within the field [8], [21], [29]. For this evaluation, we
combined our model’s predictions for IRF and SRF to match
the “macular edema” annotation present in the DukeDME
dataset.
We were not able to test the non-semi-supervised methods under these experimental settings because none of them
yielded meaningful results after training. Instead, for the layer
segmentation performance, we trained these methods solely
on the HCMS dataset and evaluated their performance on the
first 5 volumes of the DukeDME dataset. Similarly, we trained
these methods on the RETOUCH dataset and evaluated the
lesion segmentation performance on the same volumes in the
DukeDME dataset. This approach also provides insight into
the impact of domain shift in this experimental setting.
3) Robustness to Limited Labeled Data: To further investigate the label efficiency and robustness of our semi-supervised
framework, especially relevant in clinical settings where
extensive annotations may be scarce, we conducted additional experiments using significantly reduced amounts of
labeled training data. The goal was to assess how effectively
our proposed methods, compared to other semi-supervised
approaches, could leverage anatomical priors and the reconstruction task when direct supervision is minimal.
These experiments were performed using the crossvalidation setup on our internal dataset. For each of the 3 folds,
we created smaller training subsets containing only 10% and
25% of the volumes available in that fold’s original training
split. These subsets were generated using the same patientwise, multi-label aware stratification method used for the main
split to maintain representative distributions of lesion types and
severities, even within these smaller subsets.
Recognizing that training outcomes can have higher
variability with smaller datasets, we performed multiple independent runs for these limited data conditions. Specifically,
for the 10% data setting, we generated 10 distinct subsets and
trained the models independently on each. For the 25% data
setting, we used 4 distinct subsets and corresponding training
runs. This repetition helps provide a more stable estimate of
performance under data scarcity.
We evaluated our proposed methods (SD-RetinaNet and
SD-RetinaNet + Ltriplet ) and the relevant semi-supervised
baseline methods (BE-SemiNet, ACTION++, LBRM + Llp ,
SD-LayerNet) under these 10% and 25% training data conditions. Models trained on each subset were evaluated on the
fixed test set corresponding to their respective cross-validation
fold.
4) Cross-Device Generalization: To investigate the effect
of our disentanglement framework on cross-device generalization, we designed a leave-one-out cross-vendor validation
using the multi-device RETOUCH dataset, which contains
scans from Spectralis, Topcon and Cirrus devices.
The first two scenarios evaluated generalization from a
mixed-vendor training set to a single unseen vendor:

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

• Models were trained on 50% of the Spectralis volumes
and 50% of the Cirrus volumes, and evaluated on all heldout Topcon volumes.
• Models were trained on 50% of the Spectralis volumes
and a corresponding number of Topcon volumes, and
evaluated on all held-out Cirrus volumes.
The third scenario was designed as a more demanding
generalization task, testing the ability to learn from a single
manufacturer and apply to multiple unseen ones:
• Models were trained using only the Spectralis volumes
from RETOUCH and HCMS, and evaluated on a combined test set of all Topcon and Cirrus volumes.
In all scenarios, the layer-annotated HCMS dataset was
included during training to provide layer supervision.
As the RETOUCH dataset only contains lesion annotations, performance for this experiment was evaluated
solely on lesion segmentation using the Dice Similarity
Coefficient.
5) Analysis of Disentangled Latent Space: In order to assess
the effect of the forced disentanglement process, we conducted
experiments with the forced disentanglement term added. To
achieve this, for each B-scan I, we generated a B-scan Ia , with
random rotation (between −30◦ and 30◦ ), random shearing
(between −0.2 and 0.2) and random scaling (from 0.9 to 1.1).
Additionally, we generated a B-scan I s , with random style
transformations, including change in the contrast, noise level
and blurring. (SD-RetinaNet + Ltriplet )
D. Experimental Settings
.

1) Training Details: All models were trained using the
AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4 . Training was
stabilized with gradient clipping using a maximum norm of
2 and lasted for 300 epochs. The model with the combined
lowest validation mean average distance (MAD) on the layers and lowest Dice loss on the lesions was selected. For
the forced disentanglement experiments the following affine
transformations were carried out on Ia with a probability
(p) of 1.0: rotation (Range: -0.2 - 0.2rad), shearing (vertical
and horizontal: -0.2 - 0.2), translation (x-axis: -0.3 - 0.3,
y-axis: 0), scaling: (x-axis: -0.1 - 0.1, y-axis: 0). On I s
the following style transformations were applied: random
gaussian noise (p = 0.1, µ = 0.0, σ = 0.1), random rician
noise (p = 0.1, µ = 0.0, σ = 1.0), random gaussian noise
(p = 0.1, µ = 0.0, σ = 0.1), random gaussian smoothing
(p = 0.1, σ x = 0.25 − 1.5, σy = 0.25 − 1.5), random gaussian
sharpening (p = 0.1, σ x = 0.5 − 1.0, σy = 0.5 − 1.0). The same
random transformations were applied as data augmentation
on the whole training dataset (both labeled and unlabeled
samples).
For experiments on the internal dataset (using 3-fold crossvalidation), semi-supervised training utilized a batch size of
40. Each batch consisted of 20 labeled samples drawn from
the respective internal training split of the current crossvalidation fold (derived from the 85 annotated volumes) and
20 unlabeled samples drawn from the separate set of 387 unannotated volumes. This 20/20 batch composition was applied
consistently to our proposed method, relevant ablation studies

953

involving semi-supervision, and the semi-supervised baseline
comparisons.
For the partial annotation experiments, the batch size was
also 40 but consisted entirely of labeled samples drawn
proportionally from the HCMS and RETOUCH training sets.
No unlabeled volumes were used in this specific experimental
setting. For these experiments, the model checkpoint after
150 training epochs was used for evaluation, as no combined
validation set was readily available.
The training was carried out in a mixed-precision environment on an Nvidia DGX server on a single A100 (40GB) GPU,
using Ubuntu 20.04, Python 3.8.12, and PyTorch 1.11.0. The
training took 4 hours on this setup. The source code for our
implementation can be found at http://github.com/ABotond/
SD-RetinaNet.
2) Hyperparameter Tuning: Owing to the disentangled
design of the proposed method and the incorporated anatomical priors, the model contains numerous hyperparameters for
the weights of the loss terms. To streamline the training
process, we used the SoftAdapt method [47]. This eliminates
the need for manual hyperparameter tuning of these weights,
by utilizing live statistics for multi-part loss functions, monitoring the performance and magnitude of each loss term
and adjusting their weights based on individual performance.
Consequently, this approach effectively reduces the hyperparameters λ1−10 into a single hyperparameter, β. This parameter
regulates whether SoftAdapt assigns more weight to the worstperforming component of the loss function (β > 0) or to the
best-performing ones (β < 0). We observed no statistically
significant performance differences for β within the range
[0.05, . . . , 0.5], and thus adopted the default value β = 0.1.
For the δ parameter in Lbc , all values within the range
[11, . . . , 21] resulted in similar performance, leading us to
select δ = 15. For LKL , we set σ = 0.5 without further tuning,
following the approach in [12].
IV. R ESULTS
A. Main Performance Evaluation
.

Based on the presented layer segmentation results, our
proposed models demonstrate statistically significant superior
performance compared to all of the baseline methods (Table I).
Specifically, the configuration without forced disentanglement,
‘SD-RetinaNet’, improves performance by 6% compared to
the overall best-performing baseline, while the second configuration, ‘SD-RetinaNet +Ltriplet ’ achieves 15% improvement.
The ablation study showed that both the lesion position
constraint Llp , as well as the reconstruction has a statistically significant positive effect on the performance. While
the addition of Llp to the He et al. lead to some improvements in the layer segmentation task, the results suggest
that this is more effective when combined with the other
semi-supervised factors. We found that using a state-of-theart hybrid transformer - CNN architecture (TCCT) instead of
the fully convolutional EfficientNet-b4 feature encoder lead to
an inferior layer segmentation performance.
In lesion segmentation, both of our proposed models demonstrate superior performance in the Dice score compared to all

954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

TABLE I
Q UANTITATIVE L AYER S EGMENTATION R ESULTS ON THE INTERNAL DATASET I NCLUDING THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS . T HE VALUES
C ORRESPOND TO THE M EAN A BSOLUTE D ISTANCE (MAD) M ETRIC IN T ERMS OF —M

Fig. 4. Qualitative results in the internal test set with the original B-scan, expert annotations, predictions of the two best baseline methods LBRM
[8], TCCT-BP [29] and ours. White: layer boundaries (not always available in the dataset); Green: SRF; Red: IRF; Orange: SHRM.

baselines and ablation study methods (Table II). In most cases,
these improvements were statistically significant, highlighting
the importance and benefits of incorporating topological and
anatomical constraints during the training process. The ablation study in the lesion segmentation task also showed, that the
removal of the Llp factor has lead to statistically significantly
worse performance in the SRF segmentation. Underlining our
findings in the layer segmentation tasks, using the TCCT
backbone instead of a fully convolutional encoder has lead
to a performance decrease in the lesion segmentation as
well.
The qualitative results in Figure 4 highlight the practical
impact of our biomarker topology engine by directly contrasting our method against baselines on challenging cases. For
instance, the LBRM baseline [8] frequently produces anatomically implausible segmentations, such as placing SHRM in an
incorrect location (first row) or SRF below the RPE (second

and third rows). In these same cases, our method correctly
confines the lesions to their valid topological positions, demonstrating the effectiveness of the enforced constraints. While
both of our proposed configurations perform well, the variant
with the forced disentanglement loss (Ltriplet ) appears to produce the most robust predictions. Finally, the last row presents
a representative failure case, where a subtle hyperreflective
signal leads our model to produce a false positive SHRM
prediction. While the segmentation is still localized in an
anatomically plausible area, this underscores the challenging
nature of this real-world clinical dataset.
B. Partial Annotation Generalization
.

The partial annotation experiments on the DukeDME dataset
(Table III) demonstrate that semi-supervised methods trained
on HCMS + RETOUCH Spectralis, have a distinct advantage

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

955

Fig. 5. Qualitative results on the DukeDME test set, showing the original B-scan, expert annotations, the result of our method and of two baseline
methods. TCCT-BP could not be trained with lesions only, so that example is not displayed. White: layer boundaries; Red: fluid.

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE L ESION S EGMENTATION R ESULTS ON THE INTERNAL
DATASET I NCLUDING THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS . T HE VALUES
C ORRESPOND TO THE VOLUME -W ISE D ICE M ETRIC

The qualitative examples (Fig. 5) on three hard cases
show that SD-RetinaNet +Ltriplet was able to create plausible
segmentations even in this challenging setting. For U-Mamba,
several layers are completely missing, while also large areas
with fluid were incorrectly segmented. LBRM was able to
identify more layer boundaries, however they are unstable
and often crossing each other. It is important to note that the
lower absolute Dice scores for all methods in this experiment
(Table III) reflect the extreme difficulty of the task. This
scenario involves a significant domain shift from the training
sources (HCMS, RETOUCH) to the test set (DukeDME) while
simultaneously learning from disparate, partially-labeled data.
The key finding is therefore the superior relative performance
of our framework under these challenging conditions.
C. Robustness to Limited Labeled Data
.

Figure 6 demonstrates the robustness of our methods
compared to semi-supervised baselines when trained with
reduced data (10%, 25%, 100%). While all methods degraded
with less data, our SD-RetinaNet variants consistently maintained a larger performance advantage in data-scarce settings. This was particularly evident for layer segmentation
(Figure 6, Top), where the MAD performance gap between
SD-RetinaNet+Ltriplet and the respective best baseline widened
from 0.75 µm (100% data) to 2.40 µm (10% data). A similar,
though less pronounced, trend favouring the robustness of our
methods was observed for lesion segmentation Dice scores
(Figure 6, Bottom). These results highlight the effectiveness
of our framework in leveraging anatomical priors and semisupervised signals when direct annotation is limited.
over baseline methods that do not utilize multiple sources
of partial labels simultaneously. All baseline methods faced
significant challenges with the inner layers, which were heavily distorted by the fluids present in DME cases. Ablation
studies indicate that both the reconstruction and lesion position
constraints significantly enhance our model’s performance.
Incorporating the forced disentanglement constraint Ltriplet
significantly improved layer segmentation performance in the
partial annotation experiments. This suggests that the contrastive separation of style and spatial factors aids the method
in image domain shift scenarios and when using multiple
datasets from different centers.

D. Cross-Device Generalization
.

The results of the cross-device generalization experiments are presented in Figure 7. Across all three scenarios,
our proposed SD-RetinaNet variants demonstrated superior
generalization to unseen device vendors compared to all semisupervised baselines, consistently achieving the highest Dice
scores when testing on the Topcon and Cirrus devices.
This advantage was most pronounced in the most challenging task where models were trained only on Spectralis
data. While all methods’ performance dropped, our framework
proved most robust, with SD-RetinaNet + Ltriplet achieving a
Dice score of 0.45, maintaining a clear margin over the more

956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE PARTIAL A NNOTATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE E XTERNAL D UKE DME DATASET, I NCLUDING THE A BLATION
E XPERIMENTS . T HE L AYER S EGMENTATION VALUES C ORRESPOND TO THE M EAN A BSOLUTE D ISTANCE (MAD) M ETRIC IN T ERMS OF —M , W HILE
THE F LUID S EGMENTATION R ESULTS A RE P RESENTED W ITH THE D ICE S CORE

Fig. 7. Cross-device generalization performance for lesion segmentation. Each group on the x-axis represents the held-out test vendor.
Models were trained on a combination of the other two vendors from
the RETOUCH dataset (for lesions) and the HCMS dataset (for layers).
Performance is measured by Dice score (higher is better). The proposed
SD-RetinaNet variants consistently outperform baseline methods when
generalizing to an unseen device.

Fig. 6.
Segmentation performance robustness to reduced (10%,
25%) and full (100%) training data for proposed methods versus semisupervised baselines. Top: Layer segmentation performance measured
by Total Mean Absolute Distance (MAD in —m, lower is better). Bottom:
Lesion segmentation performance measured by Total Dice score (higher
is better). Error bars indicate standard deviation over multiple runs
(10 runs for 10%, 4 runs for 25%). Results demonstrate superior
robustness of the proposed methods across both layer and lesion
segmentation tasks compared to baselines.

significantly degraded baseline methods. This provides strong
evidence that our disentanglement framework effectively separates device-specific style from anatomical content, leading

to enhanced cross-device robustness. Nevertheless, the overall
performance drop highlights that domain adaptation in this
context remains an unsolved problem.
E. Analysis of Disentangled Latent Space
.

To qualitatively support the cross-device generalization
results, we analyzed the style factor latent space (Figure 8).
The experiment demonstrates that training with the forced
disentanglement loss (Ltriplet ) leads to a more organized representation, where the model more effectively clusters style
factors based on their device vendor. This provides a visual
confirmation of the mechanism enabling the robust crossdevice performance shown in Figure 7.

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

Fig. 8. Effect of forced disentanglement (Ltriplet ) on the style factor (Ω)
latent space, visualized using 2D PCA projection. Each dot represents
the style factor of a single B-scan. Top row: Style factors from a model
trained without Ltriplet . Bottom row: Style factors from a model trained
with Ltriplet . Each column highlights scans from a specific vendor, with
other vendors greyed out. The bottom row demonstrates that adding
Ltriplet leads to a clearer separation of style factors based on the OCT
device vendor, particularly separating Spectralis scans. While Topcon
and Cirrus factors also show better separation, some overlap remains
due to their visual similarities. This indicates that forced disentanglement
enhances the style factors’ ability to capture device-specific appearance
characteristics.

Fig. 9. Analysis of training dynamics showing the interplay between
key loss component groups and their adaptive weights assigned by
SoftAdapt over training iterations. Top: Training loss values (log scale)
for the supervised (Lsup ), anatomical prior (Lprior ), and reconstruction
(Lrec ) groups. Bottom: Dynamic weights for each group as balanced
by SoftAdapt. The supervised group (Lsup ) is the sum of individual
supervised losses (LKL , LL 1 , Ldice ), and the plotted weight –sup is the
sum of their respective dynamic weights (–1−3 ). Likewise, the prior group
(Lprior ) sums the anatomical prior losses (Lto , Lbc , Llp ), and –prior sums
their weights (–4−6 ).

F. Analysis of Multi-Component Loss Optimization
.

To address the complexity of our multi-term loss function
and provide quantitative evidence of its stable optimization,
we analyzed the training dynamics of key loss components
and their corresponding weights assigned by the SoftAdapt
technique (Figure 9).

957

Figure 9 (Top) shows the values of the supervised (L sup ),
anatomical prior (L prior ), and reconstruction (Lrec ) loss
groups over 100 training epochs. All components consistently
decrease, indicating that they all actively contribute to the
learning process and none become stagnant.
Figure 9 (Bottom) visualizes the dynamic weights automatically assigned to these loss components by SoftAdapt.
The plot demonstrates the adaptive balancing in action: for
example, the weight for the anatomical prior loss may be
initially high while the network learns basic structural rules,
and then relatively decrease as the supervised loss becomes
more dominant in later epochs for fine-tuning. This dynamic
balancing ensures that all loss terms contribute meaningfully
throughout training, preventing any single component from
overwhelming the optimization process due to differences in
scale or learning speed. This analysis, combined with our
ablation studies (Section IV-A), provides strong evidence that
our multi-component loss framework is optimized effectively
and that each component plays a valuable role.
V. D ISCUSSION
The primary contribution of SD-RetinaNet is a novel framework tackling the significant challenge of joint, anatomicallyplausible segmentation of interacting retinal layers and lesions
in OCT. Modeling the inherent bidirectional influence – where
layers constrain lesions and lesions simultaneously deform layers – especially while leveraging partially annotated datasets,
represents a substantial advancement beyond prior layer-only
methods [12], [29], [33] or approaches treating these tasks
independently or sequentially [8]. This crucial capability is
enabled by our core innovations: a differentiable biomarker
topology engine combined with specific anatomical priors
encoded as loss terms (particularly Llp ) that facilitate this
interaction and enforce topological consistency. While this
framework is implemented using established network architectures, its novelty lies in these specialized components for joint,
constrained learning. The introduction of these constraints represents a significant advancement in the field of retinal lesion
and layer segmentation within OCT images. By enforcing
these constraints, the model ensures that the segmentation
of lesions adheres to the anatomical structure of the retina,
thereby reducing the occurrence of anatomically implausible
segmentations that have been a limitation of previous methods.
This is facilitated by the proposed framework where initial
segmentations from the Anatomy Module provide anatomical context, which is then actively refined. Semi-supervised
anatomical prior losses guide the initial segmentation towards
correctness by penalizing topological violations, while supervised losses calculated on the topologically corrected outputs
further refine accuracy and enable the crucial bidirectional
influence between layer and lesion predictions. The described
refinement process maintains overall anatomical plausibility by
accounting for all pixels throughout refinement. Notably, the
proposed joint learning approach, driven by the anatomicallyinformed losses, allows the model to accurately segment layer
boundaries distorted by pathology, even when layer training
data primarily originates from healthy scans, by leveraging
information from lesion segmentations.

958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

The impact of these topological constraints is evident in
the enhanced precision of lesion segmentation. Unlike traditional models that may produce topologically implausible
segmentations, our approach guarantees that the lesions are
segmented within their anatomically correct locations. This
not only improves the overall accuracy of the segmentation but
also provides a higher level of trust in the results, making it
a valuable tool for clinicians who rely on these segmentations
for critical decision-making. This advantage is particularly evident when compared against older, foundational architectures
like ReLayNet, whose lower performance in our evaluation
(Table II) is largely attributable to a high number of false
positive predictions in anatomically implausible locations,
which our topological framework is explicitly designed to
prevent.
The use of a multi-component loss function, incorporating
over ten distinct terms, raises questions regarding optimization
stability and the effective contribution of each component. The
employed SoftAdapt technique [47] automatically balances
the influence of these diverse terms based on their relative
performance during training, mitigating issues arising from
different scales or convergence rates. While concerns about
specific loss terms becoming inactive due to extreme weights
are valid for complex optimization landscapes, our empirical
results across multiple datasets and metrics, supported by
ablation studies showing the negative impact of removing key
components (Table I, Table II), indicate that the various losses
contributed effectively to the final anatomically plausible and
accurate segmentations. The effectiveness of leveraging these
diverse loss terms within our semi-supervised framework is
further highlighted by the label efficiency evaluation experiments (Section IV-C, Figure 6). These results demonstrated
superior robustness of our proposed methods compared to
baseline semi-supervised approaches when labeled training
data was significantly reduced, indicating that the anatomical priors and reconstruction task effectively compensate for
scarce supervision.
Furthermore, the value of the disentangled representation
was directly tested in the challenging cross-device generalization experiments (Section IV-D, Figure 7). While all methods
experienced a notable performance decrease when evaluated
on a previously unseen device vendor, our model consistently
outperformed the baseline methods, demonstrating greater
robustness to this domain shift. This supports the conclusion that our framework’s ability to separate device-specific
style from anatomical content provides a tangible advantage
for generalization, a critical capability for real-world clinical
applications where data from multiple device types is common.
Despite these advancements, there are still areas that require
further investigation. The model’s performance in more complex scenarios, such as cases involving multiple overlapping
lesions or unusual anatomical variations, remains an open
question. Analysis of the method’s failure cases (e.g., Figure 4,
last row) reveals that limitations are not systemic but typically
occur in the most challenging scenarios present in this realworld clinical dataset. Limitations were observed in cases
with extreme signal loss due to shadowing artifacts or with
subtle, rare pathological morphologies not well-represented

in the training data, which can lead to false positives (e.g.,
for SHRM) or missed detections. Additionally, the reliance
on topological constraints, while beneficial, may need to
be adapted for different types of retinal diseases where the
anatomical structure might differ significantly. Furthermore,
the current lesion position constraint (Llp ) relies on predefined
anatomical associations (Sk ) for known lesion types. Consequently, for novel or rare lesion types not included in Sk ,
this specific constraint would not apply, potentially leading to
such lesions being segmented as part of the retinal layers or
misclassified as known lesion types, although other loss terms
continue to guide the overall segmentation. Future work should
focus on generalizing these topological constraints to other
retinal conditions or developing methods to handle unknown
lesion types, and exploring the potential of integrating this
model with other imaging modalities to improve its robustness
and applicability.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Our novel approach incorporates joint segmentation of
layers and lesions, topological constraints, anatomical priors
and contrastive disentanglement to train more robust retinal
OCT biomarker representations, particularly in challenging
regions around retinal lesions. Our proposed method outperforms the state of the art by a statistically significant margin
in both layer and lesion segmentation tasks, while ensuring
topological consistency between retinal layers and lesions and
hence anatomical plausibility of the output. This provides a
promising solution tackling the lack of topological coherence
and spatial synergies between retinal layers and lesions in
previous methods, resulting in superior performance.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

N. M. Bressler, “Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause
of blindness,” Jama, vol. 291, no. 15, pp. 1900–1901, 2004.
U. Schmidt-Erfurth, S. Klimscha, S. M. Waldstein, and H. Bogunović,
“A view of the current and future role of optical coherence tomography
in the management of age-related macular degeneration,” Eye, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 26–44, Jan. 2017.
B. Liefers et al., “Quantification of key retinal features in early and late
age-related macular degeneration using deep learning,” Amer. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 226, pp. 1–12, Jun. 2021.
M. D. Abrámoff, M. K. Garvin, and M. Sonka, “Retinal imaging and
image analysis,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 169–208, 2010.
J. De Fauw et al., “Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and
referral in retinal disease,” Nature Med., vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 1342–1350,
Sep. 2018.
A. Montuoro, S. M. Waldstein, B. S. Gerendas, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
H. Bogunović, “Joint retinal layer and fluid segmentation in OCT scans
of eyes with severe macular edema using unsupervised representation
and auto-context,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1874–1888,
Mar. 2017.
T. Hassan, M. U. Akram, M. F. Masood, and U. Yasin, “Deep structure
tensor graph search framework for automated extraction and characterization of retinal layers and fluid pathology in retinal SD-OCT scans,”
Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 105, pp. 112–124, Feb. 2019.
Y. He et al., “Structured layer surface segmentation for retina OCT using
fully convolutional regression networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 68,
Feb. 2021, Art. no. 101856.
B. Wang, W. Wei, S. Qiu, S. Wang, D. Li, and H. He, “Boundary
aware U-Net for retinal layers segmentation in optical coherence
tomography images,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 25, no. 8,
pp. 3029–3040, Aug. 2021.

FAZEKAS et al.: SD-RetinaNet: TOPOLOGICALLY CONSTRAINED SEMI-SUPERVISED RETINAL LESION

[10] T. Melo, Â. Carneiro, A. Campilho, and A. M. Mendonça, “Retinal layer
and fluid segmentation in optical coherence tomography images using a
hierarchical framework,” J. Med. Imag., vol. 10, no. 1, Feb. 2023, Art.
no. 014006.
[11] A. Chartsias et al., “Disentangled representation learning in cardiac
image analysis,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 58, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 101535.
[12] B. Fazekas et al., “SD-LayerNet: Semi-supervised retinal layer segmentation in OCT using disentangled representation with anatomical
priors,” in Proc. MICCAI, in Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
L. Wang, Q. Dou, P. T. Fletcher, S. Speidel, and S. Li, Eds., 2022,
pp. 320–329.
[13] K. Li, X. Wu, D. Z. Chen, and M. Sonka, “Optimal surface segmentation in volumetric images—A graph-theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 119–134, Jan. 2006.
[14] L. Zhang, M. Sonka, J. C. Folk, S. R. Russell, and M. D. Abrámoff,
“Quantifying disrupted outer retinal-subretinal layer in SD-OCT images
in choroidal neovascularization,” Investigative Opthalmol. Vis. Sci.,
vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 2329–2335, Apr. 2014.
[15] S. J. Chiu, X. T. Li, P. Nicholas, C. A. Toth, J. A. Izatt, and S. Farsiu,
“Automatic segmentation of seven retinal layers in SDOCT images
congruent with expert manual segmentation,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, no. 18,
pp. 19413–19428, Aug. 2010.
[16] P. A. Dufour et al., “Graph-based multi-surface segmentation of OCT
data using trained hard and soft constraints,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 531–543, Mar. 2013.
[17] P. P. Srinivasan, S. J. Heflin, J. A. Izatt, V. Y. Arshavsky, and S. Farsiu,
“Automatic segmentation of up to ten layer boundaries in SD-OCT
images of the mouse retina with and without missing layers due to
pathology,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 348–365, Feb. 2014.
[18] Z. Chen et al., “Hybrid deep learning and optimal graph search method
for optical coherence tomography layer segmentation in diseases affecting the optic nerve,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3681–3698,
Jun. 2024.
[19] G. Quellec, K. Lee, M. Dolejsi, M. K. Garvin, M. D. Abramoff,
and M. Sonka, “Three-dimensional analysis of retinal layer texture:
Identification of fluid-filled regions in SD-OCT of the macula,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1321–1330, Jun. 2010.
[20] X. Chen, M. Niemeijer, L. Zhang, K. Lee, M. D. Abramoff, and
M. Sonka, “Three-dimensional segmentation of fluid-associated abnormalities in retinal OCT: Probability constrained graph-search-graph-cut,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 1521–1531, Aug. 2012.
[21] S. J. Chiu, M. J. Allingham, P. S. Mettu, S. W. Cousins, J. A. Izatt, and
S. Farsiu, “Kernel regression based segmentation of optical coherence
tomography images with diabetic macular edema,” Biomed. Opt. Exp.,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1172–1194, Apr. 2015.
[22] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 9351, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[23] A. G. Roy et al., “ReLayNet: Retinal layer and fluid segmentation
of macular optical coherence tomography using fully convolutional
networks,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 3627–3642, Aug. 2017.
[24] H. Bogunovic et al., “RETOUCH: The retinal OCT fluid detection
and segmentation benchmark and challenge,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1858–1874, Aug. 2019.
[25] F. Isensee, P. F. Jaeger, S. A. A. Kohl, J. Petersen, and K. H. Maier-Hein,
“NnU-Net: A self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation,” Nature Methods, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 203–211,
Feb. 2021.
[26] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
Jun. 2020, pp. 611–631.
[27] A. Hatamizadeh, V. Nath, Y. Tang, D. Yang, H. R. Roth, and D. Xu,
“Swin UNETR: Swin transformers for semantic segmentation of brain
tumors in MRI images,” in Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop,
A. Crimi and S. Bakas, Eds., 2022, pp. 272–284.

959

[28] J. Ma, F. Li, and B. Wang, “U-mamba: Enhancing long-range dependency for biomedical image segmentation,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04722.
[29] Y. Tan et al., “Retinal layer segmentation in OCT images with boundary
regression and feature polarization,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 43,
no. 2, pp. 686–700, Feb. 2024.
[30] X. Liu et al., “Semi-supervised automatic segmentation of layer and fluid
region in retinal optical coherence tomography images using adversarial
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 3046–3061, 2019.
[31] S. Sedai, B. Antony, D. Mahapatra, and R. Garnavi, “Joint segmentation
and uncertainty visualization of retinal layers in optical coherence
tomography images using Bayesian deep learning,” in Computational
Pathology and Ophthalmic Medical Image Analysis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2018, pp. 219–227.
[32] S. Sedai et al., “Uncertainty guided semi-supervised segmentation of
retinal layers in OCT images,” in Proc. MICCAI, 2021, pp. 282–290.
[33] Y. Lu, Y. Shen, X. Xing, C. Ye, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “Boundaryenhanced semi-supervised retinal layer segmentation in optical coherence tomography images using fewer labels,” Computerized Med. Imag.
Graph., vol. 105, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 102199.
[34] A. Tarvainen and H. Valpola, “Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep
learning results,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
pp. 1196–1205.
[35] K. Wang et al., “Semi-supervised medical image segmentation via
a tripled-uncertainty guided mean teacher model with contrastive
learning,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 79, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102447.
[36] Y. Wu et al., “Mutual consistency learning for semi-supervised medical
image segmentation,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 81, Oct. 2022, Art. no.
102530.
[37] J. Shi, T. Gong, C. Wang, and C. Li, “Semi-supervised pixel contrastive
learning framework for tissue segmentation in histopathological image,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 97–108, Jan. 2023.
[38] H. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Song, L. Yang, and J. Qin, “Cross-patch dense
contrastive learning for semi-supervised segmentation of cellular nuclei
in histopathologic images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 11656–11665.
[39] C. You, W. Dai, Y. Min, L. H. Staib, J. Sekhon, and J. S. Duncan,
“ACTION++: Improving semi-supervised medical image segmentation
with adaptive anatomical contrast,” in Proc. MICCAI, H. Greenspan,
A. Madabhushi, P. Mousavi, S. Salcudean, J. Duncan, T. SyedaMahmood, and R. Taylor, Eds., 2023, pp. 194–205.
[40] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for
convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2019, pp. 6105–6114.
[41] S. C. Cleland et al., “Quantification of geographic atrophy using spectral
domain OCT in age-related macular degeneration,” Ophthalmology
Retina, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 41–48, Jan. 2021.
[42] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. de Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “FiLM:
Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., Apr. 2018, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3942–3951.
[43] F. Rathke, M. Desana, and C. Schnörr, “Locally adaptive probabilistic
models for global segmentation of pathological OCT scans,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10433, 2017, pp. 177–184.
[44] S. P. K. Karri, D. Chakraborthi, and J. Chatterjee, “Learning layerspecific edges for segmenting retinal layers with large deformations,”
Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 2888–2901, Jul. 2016.
[45] D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker, “Fitting linear mixedeffects models using lme4,” 2014, arXiv:1406.5823.
[46] H. Liu, D. Wei, D. Lu, X. Tang, L. Wang, and Y. Zheng, “Simultaneous
alignment and surface regression using hybrid 2D–3D networks for 3D
coherent layer segmentation of retinal OCT images with full and sparse
annotations,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 91, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103019.
[47] A. Ali Heydari, C. A. Thompson, and A. Mehmood, “SoftAdapt:
Techniques for adaptive loss weighting of neural networks with multipart loss functions,” 2019, arXiv:1912.12355.