IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

4699

Self-Contrastive Learning to Boost Weakly
Supervised Anomaly Detection
Jingyou Chen , Zhangfa Wu , Yi Hua , Hongqi Li , Member, IEEE, Yilei Shi ,
and Hongping Gan , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Weakly supervised anomaly detection methods
(WADMs) can effectively utilize incomplete label data to address
the issue of imbalanced samples, thereby reducing the reliance
on the quantity of labeled data and demonstrating superior
anomaly detection capabilities in network and service management. However, when confronted with significant label noise
and missing labels, existing WADMs still struggle to adequately
extract the deep feature information of samples, leading to
a decline in model performance. To tackle this challenge, we
propose a self-contrastive enhanced weakly supervised anomaly
detection framework, called SEAD-Net, which enhances the
feature representation capability of data in the model’s feature space, thereby improving the accuracy and robustness of
anomaly detection. Specifically, we first design a personalized
data enhancement module that augments data representation by
applying various transformations to the raw data. Subsequently,
a self-contrastive enhanced learning module is introduced to
impose hybrid constraints on the augmented samples, constructing the overall distribution structure while learning deep sample
feature spaces under complex scenario disturbances. Finally, we
extract contrastive enhancement features within the deep sample
feature space and perform probabilistic generation to enable
effective decision-making via an anomaly probability generation
module. Experimental results on a series of public benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our SEAD-Net outperforms the secondbest WADM by 5.95% in average AUC-ROC and 16.28% in
average AUC-PR.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, data enhancement, self-contrastive learning.

A

I. I NTRODUCTION
NOMALY detection significantly enhances data quality and system reliability by enabling the timely

Received 12 October 2025; revised 30 January 2026 and 21 April 2026;
accepted 8 May 2026. Date of publication 20 May 2026; date of current
version 27 May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471395, in part by the Basic
Research Programs of Taicang under Grant TC2024JC17. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
T. Yu. (Corresponding author: Hongping Gan.)
Jingyou Chen is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical
University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China, and also with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China.
Zhangfa Wu is with the School of Electronic Information, Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China.
Yi Hua is with the College of Information and Artificial
Intelligence, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225127, China (e-mail:
yihua@mail.nwpu.edu.cn).
Hongqi Li and Yilei Shi are with the School of Software, Northwestern
Polytechnical University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China.
Hongping Gan is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical
University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China, and also with the Yangtze River Delta
Research Institute, NPU, Taicang 215400, China (e-mail: ganhongping@
nwpu.edu.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2026.3694683, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3694683

identification of potential anomalies, thus attracting extensive
research. As the complexity and scale of data continue to grow,
the application of advanced anomaly detection techniques
becomes crucial for ensuring the effectiveness of network and
service management systems [1], [2], [3]. This importance is
further highlighted in various engineering applications, such as
blockchain networks [4], mobile network management [5], the
Internet of Things (IoT) [6], [7], large-scale services [8], and
large-scale engineering collaboration projects [9]. In network
and service management, anomaly detection plays a vital
role in real-time monitoring and fault diagnosis, helping to
prevent network performance degradation and service quality
deterioration. Additionally, it enables real-time monitoring
and analysis of Quality of Service (QoS) parameters, thereby
ensuring the stability and efficiency of network services. As
a result, researchers propose numerous anomaly detection
methods, which not only enhance the performance of anomaly
detection but also significantly improve the response speed
to data anomalies, thereby reducing the costs associated with
managing and handling anomalous behaviors [10].
Traditional anomaly detection methods primarily determine
whether data deviates from a normal distribution by analyzing its statistical properties [11]. However, these methods
exhibit significant disadvantages when handling large-scale,
high-dimensional data. In contrast, Deep Learning (DL)-based
anomaly detection methods can model nonlinear data, automatically learn deep features, and uncover hidden distributions
in large-scale data, thereby improving anomaly detection
performance [12]. Recent application-oriented studies further
demonstrate the effectiveness of learning-based representations in related scenarios, such as encrypted industrial traffic
anomaly detection [13] and indoor localization of uncrewed
aerial vehicles [14]. Specifically, these data-driven methods
can be categorized into three groups: unsupervised, supervised,
and weakly supervised methods. Unsupervised methods identify anomalies by modeling normal samples and capturing the
overall structure and latent representations of the data [15],
[16], [17]. However, these methods have poor generalization
capabilities due to their difficulty in capturing complex data
relationships and their inability to utilize label information.
Supervised techniques involve training models with labeled
normal and anomalous samples, allowing them to adjust to
diverse data distributions and improve overall performance
[18], [19]. Nevertheless, these methods necessitate labels of
high integrity and precision. In scenarios where labels are
absent or corrupted, performance experiences a noticeable
decline due to the dependency of supervised methods on

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

accurate labels for maintaining correct associations between
inputs and outputs [20].
To address challenges such as label scarcity, contamination, and class imbalance, researchers have turned to Weakly
Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods (WADMs) [21],
[22]. These approaches utilize Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [23], Residual Networks (ResNets) [24], or Autoencoders (AEs) [25] to construct feature extractors that capture
essential information from samples and feed it into anomaly
detection classifiers. WADMs integrate the advantages of both
unsupervised and supervised methods, alleviating the poor
generalization capability of unsupervised methods while effectively utilizing incomplete label data to handle imbalanced
samples. Nevertheless, the existing WADMs still exhibit the
following limitations:
• Incomplete and inaccurate data annotation stems from the
difficulty and high cost of obtaining data labels, which
leads to a decrease in WADMs model performance.
• The scarcity of data annotation and insufficient model
learning capabilities limit WADM’s ability to fully extract
the complete distribution and deep feature information
of the data, adversely affecting its generalization performance and robustness.
Recently, the remarkable success of self-supervised pretraining demonstrates that instance-level contrastive learning
can become a powerful feature extractor even without manual
labels, thereby enhancing the ability to capture the complete
data distribution and deep feature representations. Pioneering
frameworks such as MoCo [16] and SimCLR [17] employ
memory queues, momentum-updated encoders, and aggressive
data augmentations to learn discriminative representations by
contrasting positive and negative pairs. Although these methods are originally designed for large-scale image recognition,
their core principles, namely dynamic dictionary maintenance
and robust augmentation invariance, provide valuable insights
for anomaly detection. Therefore, we migrate and adapt these
mechanisms to the WADM scenario by customizing the augmentation pool to accommodate streaming data characteristics
and incorporating the contrastive objective into the pretraining
stage. An effective balancing coefficient trades off between
preserving fine-grained details (reconstruction) and learning
separable latent structures (contrast), thereby leading to performance improvements on benchmark anomaly detection
datasets.
Consequently, we propose a Self-contrastive Enhanced
Weakly Supervised Anomaly Detection framework, termed
SEAD-Net. SEAD-Net extracts comprehensive data representations through a customized Data Enhancement Module
(DEM) and a Self-contrastive Enhancement Learning Module
(SCLM). Specifically, DEM is utilized to enrich and enhance
the robustness of input data. By applying various transformations to the raw data, it introduces real-world noise and
anomalies, effectively compensating for deficiencies in data
feature representation. Furthermore, existing anomaly detection models typically emphasize learning distinctions among
samples from different categories while overlooking the intrinsic relationships among samples within the same category.
However, our SCLM ensures comprehensive learning of all

category structures and enables SEAD-Net to autonomously
distinguish differences among samples by learning both surface and deep features. Importantly, these two modules are
complementary: DEM provides additional learnable information to SCLM, while SCLM amplifies the enhancement
benefits offered by DEM. Finally, an anomaly probability
generation module processes the features to obtain anomaly
probabilities, which guide the model’s decision-making. The
main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We propose a self-contrastive enhanced weakly supervised anomaly detection framework, called SEAD-Net,
which enhances the feature representation capability of
data in the model’s feature space, thereby improving the
accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection.
• We introduce a self-contrastive enhanced learning module
for SEAD-Net, which utilizes hybrid constraints to enable
the model to autonomously discern differences and similarities among normal data samples, encouraging deeper
feature learning.
• We conduct extensive experiments and analyses, demonstrating that our SEAD-Net achieves superior detection
performance compared to other methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II reviews the related work on anomaly detection
methods. Section III provides a detailed description of the proposed SEAD-Net. Sections IV and V analyze the experimental
results of SEAD-Net and provide corresponding discussions,
respectively. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection Approaches
Unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms have garnered
significant attention due to their advantages, including the
lack of reliance on expert-annotated sample data, adaptability
to changing environments, the ability to discover unknown
anomalies, and the capacity to handle rare events. Li et al. [26]
proposed COPOD, which models multivariate distributions
using empirical Copulas and quantifies data extremity via tail
probabilities for efficient detection. Li et al. [27] developed
ECOD, which estimates anomaly scores through empirical
cumulative distribution functions across dimensions. Liu et al.
[28] introduced an unsupervised anomaly detection method,
called “iForest”, which explicitly isolates anomalous samples
by constructing a collection of isolation trees. Xu et al. [29]
extended this concept to DIForest, leveraging deep neural networks to map data into nonlinear feature spaces for improved
isolation. Ahmed et al. [30] designed a graph-regularized
autoencoder that enhances anomaly detection and clustering
by preserving local neighborhood structures. Zong et al. [31]
proposed DAGMM, an unsupervised anomaly detection technique that uses a deep AE to extract latent representations
and reconstruction errors for each sample, optimizing the
parameters of both the AE and a Gaussian mixture model in an
end-to-end manner. Schlegl et al. [32] introduced AnoGAN, an
unsupervised deep convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) with an anomaly scoring scheme that maps from

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

image space to latent space, effectively capturing local anomalies and improving the recognition rate of abnormal images.
While unsupervised learning methods offer a cost-effective and
efficient training approach, overlapping distributions between
normal and anomalous samples, ambiguous class boundaries,
and the presence of substantial noise or contamination in the
observed data make reliable separation difficult.
B. Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods
These methods rely on labeled training data to identify
anomalies by learning the differences between normal and
abnormal samples. Compared with unsupervised methods,
supervised methods can generally achieve better stability and
performance when sufficient labels are available. For instance,
Liu et al. [33] proposed a quasi-periodic time-series anomaly
detection framework that combines an innovative segmentation
algorithm with a hybrid attention model to achieve high accuracy. Steinwart et al. [34] reformulated anomaly detection as a
binary classification problem and developed a support vector
machine (SVM)-based approach with a sampling strategy for
artificially labeled data. Sundarkumar et al. [35] developed a
hybrid model combining k-reverse nearest neighbors and oneclass SVM, and demonstrated high sensitivity in fraud-related
prediction tasks. Yang et al. [36] introduced an active learning
method for anomaly detection in the Internet of Things (IoT),
which improves labeling efficiency under data imbalance.
Ding et al. [37] proposed a multi-generator generative adversarial network (GAN) framework that integrates a classifier
and a feature extractor, and improves inter-class separability
for intrusion detection. Overall, supervised anomaly detection
performs well when labeled data are sufficient, task objectives
are clear, and sample classes are relatively balanced, but
its applicability remains limited when anomaly labels are
extremely scarce and expensive to obtain.
C. Weakly Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods
WADM is an anomaly detection paradigm that lies between
supervised and unsupervised learning methods. It addresses
the problem of data imbalance by leveraging a small amount
of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data to train
models. Starting with an illustration, Snell et al. [38] proposed
a prototype network, FSNet, to address few-shot learning
by classifying samples based on distances to learned class
prototypes, thereby achieving effective generalization under
limited supervision. Pang et al. [39] introduced REPEN, an
efficient weakly supervised anomaly detection method that
combines ranking-based representation learning with anomaly
detection. By exploiting a small amount of labeled data
as prior knowledge, REPEN learned more expressive and
task-relevant representations. Building on this line of work,
Pang et al. [40] developed DevNet, which leveraged a limited
number of labeled anomalies and prior probabilities to perform end-to-end anomaly score learning through neural bias
optimization, rather than focusing solely on feature extraction.
Zhou et al. [41] proposed an anomaly detection network,
FEWAE, which utilized a pre-trained model to pre-encode
and extract features from data. It effectively transformed

4701

latent information from deep autoencoders into crucial coding
elements, thereby enhancing detection performance. Ruff et al.
[42] proposed Deep-SAD, a deep semi-supervised anomaly
detection method that integrated a small number of labeled
anomalies and employed an information-theoretic loss to minimize the entropy of normal samples while maximizing that
of anomalous ones, thus improving class separability. Li et al.
[43] introduced Dual-MGAN, a GAN-based semi-supervised
anomaly detection method that trained two generators to model
the distribution of normal data for anomaly discrimination. It
incorporated distribution construction and data augmentation
modules to enhance weakly supervised learning across diverse
datasets. Mirzaei et al. [44] utilized only normal-class labels
and employed a text-image diffusion model to convert normal
samples into “pseudo anomalies” that were semantically and
pixel-wise close to real anomalies, enabling robust anomaly
detection without access to real anomalous data.
WADMs can effectively reduce the cost of obtaining data
labels and have a broader range of applications. However,
current WADMs primarily focus on learning shallow feature
representations and do not fundamentally address the issue of
insufficient deep structural feature capture caused by the complexity of the data itself. Compared with existing methods, our
proposed SEAD-Net first customizes specific data enhanced
representations for different data sources, making complex
data structures more amenable to be learned. Subsequently,
a self-contrastive enhanced learning module is introduced to
further explore the latent feature representations of the data,
effectively addressing the issue of insufficient model depth in
WADMs.
III. A RCHITECTURE OF SEAD-N ET
A. Overview of SEAD-Net
As shown in Fig. 1, SEAD-Net includes the three key modules: a Data Enhancement Module (DEM), a Self-Contrastive
Enhancement Learning Module (SCLM), and an Anomaly
Probability Generation Module (APM). Specifically, the customized DEM applies several augmentations to generate the
enhanced representation x0 of the input data x. Subsequently,
x0 passes through the SCLM to learn deep representations
of the samples. Note that the SCLM, within a traditional
deep autoencoder framework, combines reconstruction and
contrastive constraints to transform the input sample into more
meaningful enhanced representations f. Finally, APM utilizes
the obtained enhanced feature representation f, along with
other factors: the reconstruction error e and the reconstruction
residuals vector , to calculate the anomaly probability y 0 of
the original data x, which enables effective decision-making
on anomalous samples.
B. Data Enhancement Module
To address the issues of incomplete labels and noise contamination in the input data, we elaborately design a Data
Enhancement Module (DEM) to improve sample diversity
and robustness. Specifically, DEM applies a series of transformations and patterns to the original dataset T, including
representative operations such as Random Crop, Random

4702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. The proposed SEAD-Net architecture consists of the customized Data Enhancement Module (DEM), the Self-Contrastive Enhancement Learning
Module (SCLM), and the Anomaly Probability Generation Module (APM). Specifically, the DEM enhances the input data x, after which the SCLM extracts
enhanced features f1 , the reconstruction error e, and the reconstruction residuals vector  from the augmented inputs x01 and x02 . Finally, the APM generates
the anomaly probability y 0 based on the extracted features (f1 , e, ).

Fig. 2. An illustrative representation of DEM. The original input data x from
the dataset T undergoes a series of carefully designed augmentation operators:
Rc , Rt , Rf , Mi , generating a pair of augmented data x01 and x02 .

Translation, Random Flip, and Mirroring, as well as additional transformations from the augmentation library such
as Random ZeroReplace, Random Noise, Random Permuted,
Random Contrast, Random Scale, Random Brightness, Fixed
Scale, Opposite Time, and Random BlockAug, which better
simulate the complexity of real-world data. To better illustrate the enhancement process, we select four representative
transformations as examples. As shown in Fig. 2, DEM
transforms the samples x ∈ RM from T into augmented data
x0 ∈ RM through a series of augmentation processes, where
M represents the dimensionality of the sample. We denote this
series of augmentations by the augmentation operator ∇aug :
x0 = ∇aug (x) = Rc ◦ Rt ◦ Rf ◦ Mi (x),

(1)

where, ◦ denotes the sequential application of these processes;
and Rc , Rt , Rf , Mi are defined as:
Rc (x) = Random Cropping(x, crop dim);
Rt (x) = Random Translation(x, max shift);

(2)
(3)

Rf (x) = Random Flip(x, flip axis);

(4)

Mi (x) = Mirroring(x, mirror axis).

(5)

Additionally, the definitions of other augmentation methods in
the enhancement library are as follows:
Rn (x) = Random Noise(x, gaussian, noise level);

(6)

Ot (x) = Opposite Time(x, time axis);

(7)

Rp (x) = Random Permuted(x, block size);

(8)

Rz (x) = Random ZeroReplace(x, replace prob);

(9)

Rct (x) = Random Contrast(x, contrast range);
Rb (x) = Random Brightness(x, brightness range);

(10)
(11)

Rs (x) = Random Scale(x, scale factor range);

(12)

Fs (x) = Fixed Scale(x, scale factors);

(13)

Rba (x) = Random BlockAug(x, num slices, aug methods).
(14)
Here, Random Crop randomly selects a continuous segment of
length crop dim from the input data x and pads it with zeros
to match the original sequence length; Random Translation
cyclically shifts x along the temporal axis by a random offset
max shift; Random Flip flips the sequence x along the central
axis flip axis; Mirroring performs a reflection of x along the
axis mirror axis; Random Noise adds stochastic perturbations
of type gaussian with intensity noise level to x; Opposite
Time reverses x along the temporal axis time axis; Random
Permuted partitions x into fixed-size blocks block size and randomly permutes the first N −1 blocks; Random ZeroReplace
randomly replaces elements in x with zeros at a probability
replace prob; Random Contrast adjusts the contrast of x by
a factor within contrast range; Random Brightness modifies
the brightness of x by adding a random offset within brightness range; Random Scale rescales the amplitude of x using a
random scaling factor sampled from scale factor range; Fixed
Scale applies a fixed scaling factor randomly selected from a
predefined set scale factors; and Random BlockAug divides
x into num slices blocks, randomly rearranges the first N −1
blocks, and applies a specified set of augmentation methods
aug methods to each block.
For each original input data x, DEM introduces the two
parallel transformations:
(
x01 = ∇aug (x);
(15)
x02 = ∇aug (x),

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

where x01 and x02 are two corresponding augmented data. Due
to inherent randomness, the same augmentation steps applied
to x twice may yield different results. It is important to note
that we manually select different customized augmentation
steps for each dataset based on specific requirements to ensure
the effectiveness of the augmentation process. The necessity
and effectiveness of these dataset-specific customization strategies are further verified in the ablation study of Section V-B
and in Section S-V of the Supplementary Material.
C. Self-Contrastive Enhancement Learning Module
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the augmented data x01 and x02
undergo parallel dual-constraint branches for self-contrastive
enhancement learning: 1) Reconstruction branch, which is
used to construct the sample feature space (ϕ); 2) Contrastive
branch, which is used to enhance the sample feature space
(ψ). Here, the enhanced feature space, generated through
multi-constraint training, represents the intrinsic structure and
correlations of the input data.
1) Reconstruction Branch: Within the autoencoder Ae ,
samples are constructed into a more compact latent feature space. Specifically, Ae consists of an Encoder and a
Decoder:
• Encoder: The encoder is responsible for mapping the
input sample x0i ∈ RM to a lower-dimensional feature
space ϕ(x0 ), extracting the compressed representation
fi ∈ Rm . The encoding process is defined as ge (·; We ) :
X M → ϕ(x0 ), where X M is the original sample space of
x, with M denoting the dimensionality of x and m denoting the dimensionality of fi . We represents the encoder’s
weights, and ge (·) denotes the encoding function. Given
the input sample x0i , the compressed representation fi is
as follows:
fi = ge (x0i ; We ).
(16)
• Decoder: The decoder maps the compressed representation fi from the feature space ϕ(x0 ) back to the original
sample space X M , reconstructing the full representation.
The decoding process is defined as gd (·; Wd ) : ϕ(x0 ) →
X M , where Wd represents the decoder’s weights, and
gd (·) denotes the decoding function. Given the compressed representation fi , the reconstructed sample x̃i is
obtained as follows:
x̃i = gd (fi ; Wd ).

(17)

Finally, we obtain the compressed representation f encoded
by Ae and the reconstructed outputs x̃, which conforms to the
original data distribution, to construct the feature space ϕ(x0 )
for the original samples.
2) Contrastive Branch: The reconstruction process of Ae
facilitates the construction of global features for normal data;
however, it lacks the ability to capture fine-grained features
and establish local connections between normal samples.
Therefore, we design the following steps to address these
limitations.
First, x01 and x02 are encoded into latent compressed representations f1 and f2 by two separate encoders, denoted as

4703

Encoder1 and Encoder2 , respectively. The encoding process
is represented as:
(
f1 = ge1 (x01 ; We1 ),
(18)
f2 = ge2 (x02 ; We2 ),
where, ge1 and ge2 represent the encoding processes, with
We1 and We2 denoting the weights of the Encoder1 and
Encoder2 , respectively:
Next, the compressed representation f1 and f2 are further
compressed through an additional encoding step, resulting in
q1 and q2 :
(
q1 = H1 (f1 ; Wh1 ),
(19)
q2 = H2 (f2 ; Wh2 ).
Here, H1 and H2 represent the compression encoding processes, and Wh1 and Wh2 denote the weights of the
corresponding compression encoding layers. The compressed
features q1 and q2 are aligned with the dimensions of the
original data classes and are used as positive encoded pairs in
the subsequent feature self-contrastive strategy.
Specifically, the feature self-contrastive strategy computes
the similarity between positive encoding pairs qi1 and qi2 ,
and negative samples stored in a memory queue qt2 to qk2
(i ∈ [t ∼ k]). The similarity between qi1 and qt2 to qk2
is minimized, encouraging the Ae to differentiate features
in normal data and establish specific correlations. Simultaneously, the similarity between qi1 and qi2 is maximized
to ensure consistency of features for the same data across
different augmentation modes. It is noteworthy that at the
beginning of training, we initialize a memory queue to store
qi2 . Additionally, by imposing constraints on the deep encoded
features q1 and q2 , the strategy enhances the representational
capacity of the latent features f1 and f2 , thus improving the
discriminative ability between positive and negative samples.
The process of the feature self-contrastive strategy is concisely
presented in Algorithm 1.
Overall, this dual-branch optimization strategy not only
differentiates between positive and negative samples, but also
establishes constraint relationships among positive samples.
This approach helps in identifying anomalous data by leveraging the advantages of unsupervised learning in distinguishing
unknown data. At the same time, it mitigates the overfitting issue of labeled samples in supervised learning, thereby
improving the model’s generalization performance on unseen
data.
Finally, we extract several feature factors: the enhanced
compressed representation f 1 , the reconstruction error e, computed as the L2 norm of the difference between the input and
its reconstruction (e = kx0 − x̃k2 ), and the reconstruction
residual vector , which characterizes the directional component of the reconstruction error. These factors are combined to
form the feature set xcat = [f 1 , e, ]. This set xcat encapsulates
the essential representations of the data, thereby guiding the
model to effectively identify anomalies.
D. Anomaly Probability Generation Module
We integrate the APM and SCLM into a unified framework,
where the parameters of Ae are initialized with pre-trained

4704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Branch Training for Self-Contrastive
Enhancement Learning
Parallel branch 1: Reconstruction
Inputs: Augmented data x01 ∈ RM ×batch
Outputs: Compressed representations f 1 ∈ Rm , reconstruction outputs x̃1 , and reconstruction loss LRE
1: Randomly initialize query encoder ge1 and query decoder
gd1
2: for i = 1 to epoch1st do
3:
for each minibatch x01 do
4:
Encode input to compressed representations f 1
5:
Decode f 1 to reconstruction outputs x̃
6:
Compute reconstruction loss LRE between x01 and x̃
7:
Update encoder ge1 and decoder gd1 by backpropagation w.r.t. LRE
8:
end for
9: end for
10: Return: Compressed representations f 1 , reconstruction
outputs x̃, and reconstruction loss LRE
Parallel branch 2: Contrastive
Inputs: Augmented data x01 ∈ RM ×batch , x02 ∈ RM ×batch ,
query encoder ge1 , key encoder ge2 , memory queue Q
Outputs: Compressed representations f 1 ∈ Rm
1: Randomly initialize ge1 , ge2 , and memory queue Q
2: for i = 1 to epoch1st do
3:
for each minibatch (x01 , x02 ) do
4:
Encode input to compressed representations f 1 , f 2
5:
Encoding compressed features:
q1 ← H1 (f 1 ),

q2 ← H2 (f 2 )

Compute positive logit: l+ ← q1 · q2
Compute negative logits: l− ← q1 · Q
Compute InfoNCE loss LNCE from l+ and l−
Update query encoder ge1 by backpropagation w.r.t.
LNCE
10:
Momentum update key encoder ge2 from ge1
11:
Enqueue new key q2 into Q
12:
Dequeue the oldest key from Q to maintain its size
at K
13:
end for
14: end for
15: Return: Compressed representations f 1
6:
7:
8:
9:

weights. The APM consists of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
which transforms the feature set xcat into an anomaly probability y 0 . Specifically, the feature set xcat is fed into the first layer
of the MLP, z1 , to learn the weights between different feature
components. We adopt a feature-enhanced MLP architecture to
amplify the focus on low-dimensional feature e. Specifically,
the low-dimensional feature e is integrated into each layer of
the MLP, where the structure of each layer zj is described as
follows:
zj = MLP(wjz zj−1 + wje e + bj ),
(20)
where j is the layer index, wje and wjz represent the weights of
each layer, and bj is the bias, and z1 = (w1f f 1 +w1 +w1e e+
b1 ), where w1f and w1 are the weights as well. This enhanced

structure effectively balances the weights among different
factors, enabling the model to achieve better performance in
more complex tasks.
After a series of dimensionality reduction steps, the output
layer zout generates an anomaly probability y 0 . A value of y 0
close to 1 indicates a potential anomaly, while a value close
to 0 suggests that the sample is normal.
E. Training Procedure
The training process for SEAD-Net is divided into two
distinct stages, aiming to progressively optimize the model
in identifying anomalous elements. In the first training stage,
the SEAD-Net is pre-trained to simultaneously optimize two
branches, acquiring enhanced latent representations of the
data. In the second training stage, the SEAD-Net is trained
in an end-to-end manner to accurately calculate the anomaly
probability of the data.
1) The First Training Stage: In the reconstruction branch,
the encoding-decoding process of Ae is optimized by the
reconstruction error loss function LRE :
LRE = kx̃1 − x01 k2 .

(21)

Here, kx̃1 −x01 k2 represents the Euclidean distance between the
input sample x01 and the reconstructed sample x̃1 . A smaller
Euclidean distance indicates better reconstruction performance
of Ae .
In the contrastive branch, the similarity computation process
is optimized using the InfoNCE loss LNCE :
!
exp(qi1 · qi2 /τ )
,
(22)
LNCE = − log PK
j
i
j=0 exp(q1 · q2 /τ )
where τ is the temperature parameter, which controls the
sharpness of the learning process. When qi1 is similar to the
positive sample qi2 and dissimilar to all negative samples in
the memory queue qt2 ∼ qk2 , the loss is minimized, where
j ∈ [t, k]. Notably, we employ an exponential moving average
technique to smoothly update the parameters from A1e to A2e ,
which aids in learning more robust global representations.
The overall task objective for the first stage of the dualbranch training is as follows: 1) Maximize the fitting accuracy
in the positive sample feature space by minimizing the reconstruction error e when training Ae ; 2) Maximize the similarity
between positive encoding pairs, i.e., maximize the similarity
between qi1 and qi2 ; 3) Maximize the distinction between
positive samples by minimizing the similarity between the
positive sample encoding qi1 and the negative sample encoding
set qt2 ∼ qk2 . Combining Eqs. (21) and (22), the total loss
function for the first training stage, L1st , can be obtained as
follows:
L1st = λ · LRE + (1 − λ) · LNCE
= λ · kx̃i − x0i k2 − (1 − λ) · log

exp(qi1 · qi2 /τ )
PK

j
i
j=0 exp(q1 · q2 /τ )

!
,
(23)

where the hyperparameter λ balances the optimization weights
between the two tasks. This strategy ensures that the training

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE I
D ETAILED I NFORMATION A BOUT VARIOUS DATASETS

4705

samples are defined according to fixed anomaly criteria or
substantial deviations from the majority class, thereby ensuring
that the anomaly labels remain consistent with dataset-specific
semantics.
To improve cross-dataset comparability and training stability, we apply a unified preprocessing pipeline to all datasets,
including mean imputation for missing values, one-hot encoding for categorical attributes, and feature normalization.
B. Experimental Setup

process can be tailored to each dataset, thereby enhancing the
model’s effectiveness and applicability.
2) The Second Training Stage: In the second stage of training, we optimize the complete SEAD-Net using a conditional
loss function, with the objective as follows: 1) Cluster the
normal samples around a region centered at zero; 2) Push the
anomalous samples away from this central region. The secondstage training loss L2nd is defined as:
X
L2nd =
(1 − yi )(|F(xcat )| + ei )
i

+ yi (max(0, a0 − F(xcat )) + max(0, a0 − ei )).
(24)
Here, F(xcat ) represents the output of the APM, and yi denotes
the label of the data. It can be seen that the optimization
process effectively constrains the reconstruction error and
anomaly probability. When a sample is normal, i.e., yi =
0, the model optimizes the first part of the loss; when a
sample is anomalous, i.e., yi = 1, the model optimizes the
second part. a0 is a predefined constant that controls the
deviation of anomalous samples, preventing the model from
over-optimizing for anomalies. In essence, the first part of the
loss restricts the latent features and anomaly probabilities of
normal samples within a hypersphere centered at zero, while
the second part ensures that anomalous samples significantly
deviate from the distribution of normal data, maintaining a
reasonable distance.
In summary, the complete two-stage training procedure of
SEAD-Net is provided in Section S-I of the Supplementary
Material.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
This section first introduces the datasets and experimental
settings. Subsequently, we discuss the performance of SEADNet.
A. Dataset
We evaluate the performance of the proposed SEAD-Net on
multiple public datasets, which cover applications in network
security identification, financial service fraud detection, and
bank marketing detection. Detailed datasets’ information can
be found in Tab. I, where Ano denotes the percentage of
anomalous samples in the training data. Further details on
the individual datasets are provided in Section S-II-A of
the Supplementary Material. Across all datasets, anomalous

We evaluate the performance of the proposed SEAD-Net
against several state-of-the-art anomaly detection algorithms,
including Copod [26], Ecod [27], iForest [28], DIForest [29],
REPEN+ [39], FSNet+ [38], DevNet [40], FEWAE [41], DualMGAN [43], and Deep SAD [42]. Consistent with FEWAE,
we use 80% of the samples for training and 20% for testing,
while maintaining the same anomaly ratio in both sets, and
perform weakly supervised training with 30 anomalous samples. We adopt AUC-ROC and AUC-PR as evaluation metrics,
following the protocol in [45], and additionally report the F1score to further assess model reliability. For reproducibility,
models are saved using the optimal parameter settings.
Detailed hyperparameter settings and implementation details
are provided in Section S-II-B of the Supplementary Material. Moreover, the Supplementary Material and source code
are available at: https://github.com/pumpkinyouge/SEAD-Net.
C. Comparison Results
Tab. II shows the comparison of SEAD-Net with various
competitive methods in terms of AUC-PR and AUC-ROC
metrics. It is worth noting that FSNet+ and REPEN+ are
manually tuned versions of FSNet and REPEN, respectively.
The last row shows the average performance of different
competitive methods across all datasets.
According to Tab. II, we can see that SEAD-Net demonstrates significant performance improvements compared to
all competing methods. Specifically, for AUC-PR, SEADNet surpasses the competing methods by 34.35% (Copod),
34.23% (Ecod), 38.13% (iForest), 44.21% (DIForest), 24.34%
(REPEN), 19.81% (Dual-MGAN), 37.25% (FSNet), 16.47%
(Deep-SAD), 16.76% (DevNet), and 16.28% (FEWAE), on
average. Regarding AUC-ROC performance, SEAD-Net also
shows remarkable advantages, outperforming the competing methods by 17.36% (Copod), 16.42% (Ecod), 21.92%
(iForest), 26.49% (DIForest), 10.97% (REPEN), 8.85%
(Dual-MGAN), 18.50% (FSNet), 7.54% (Deep-SAD), 5.95%
(DevNet), and 5.96% (FEWAE), respectively.
Furthermore, we also compare the best results of all comparative algorithms on each dataset. In terms of AUC-PR values,
SEAD-Net demonstrates advantages over the best results, with
improvements of 1.26% (NSL-KDD), 1.57% (Shuttle), 7.49%
(Fraud), 12.50% (Bank), 6.19% (Census), 4.96% (CelebA),
45.92% (Thyroid), and 17.26% (Mammography). For
AUC-ROC values, SEAD-Net shows advantages over the best
results, with improvements of 1.18% (NSL-KDD), 0.09%
(Shuttle), 1.16% (Fraud), 6.84% (Bank), 5.55% (Census),
0.66% (CelebA), 14.45% (Thyroid), and 1.33% (Mammography). It is noteworthy that on datasets where AUC-PR values

4706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF THE AUC-PR AND AUC-ROC P ERFORMANCE OF SEAD-N ET W ITH VARIOUS C OMPETING M ETHODS . T HE B EST R ESULT I S
H IGHLIGHTED BY B OLDFACE AND U NDERLINING , W HILE THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULT I S U NDERLINED

are generally low such as Fraud, Bank, Census, CelebA,
Thyroid, and Mammography, SEAD-Net consistently achieves
improvements by double digits compared to the best results.
On NSL-KDD and Shuttle datasets, SEAD-Net also significantly enhances performance from high AUC-PR values of
0.9715 and 0.9745 to 0.9841 and 0.9902 respectively.
Furthermore, we present F1-score comparisons between our
approach and competing methods on the Bank, CelebA, Fraud,
and Mammography datasets in Section S-III of the Supplementary Material. Under the same experimental setup, these
results consistently validate that SEAD-Net achieves a clear
and consistent overall advantage over representative baselines.

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF SEAD-N ET AND
M ATCHING A LGORITHMS

D. Computational Complexity
To evaluate the practical applicability and deployment
feasibility of SEAD-Net, we conduct a comprehensive computational complexity analysis by comparing it with five
representative baseline models across multiple dimensions,
including floating-point operations (FLOPs), parameter count,
per-sample training time, per-sample inference time, and GPU
memory consumption. For a fair comparison, the computational costs of two-phase methods are aggregated. The
quantitative results are summarized in Tab. III.
As shown in Tab. III, SEAD-Net exhibits higher spatial complexity, measured in terms of parameter count and
memory usage, than most baselines, which is primarily
attributed to its dual-branch architecture. Despite this increase,
the peak GPU memory consumption of SEAD-Net remains
within the lightweight regime (below 190 MB), ensuring
compatibility with common resource-constrained deployment
scenarios. In addition, SEAD-Net demonstrates outstanding
temporal efficiency: it achieves the fastest per-sample training
time among all evaluated two-phase methods and maintains

microsecond-level inference latency, significantly outperforming DevNet and FEWAE.
V. D ISCUSSIONS
A. Sample Efficiency
To evaluate the sample efficiency of SEAD-Net, we vary
the number of labeled anomaly samples in the training set

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

4707

Fig. 3. Comparison of the AUC-PR performance of SEAD-Net and competing methods with different numbers of labeled anomaly samples. As shown in
the figure, SEAD-Net (red solid line with markers) achieves high-precision anomaly detection with extremely low labeling costs. It consistently outperforms
other methods across all labeling levels, demonstrating its superior sample efficiency.

from 5 to 120, while keeping all other experimental settings
unchanged. The AUC-PR performance under different labeling
budgets is reported in Fig. 3.
As shown in Fig. 3, SEAD-Net consistently outperforms
competing methods across all labeling regimes, particularly
under limited anomaly supervision, demonstrating strong
robustness and effective utilization of scarce anomaly samples. While most methods achieve their peak performance
when sufficient anomaly labels are available, their performance degrades noticeably as the number of labeled anomalies
decreases. In contrast, SEAD-Net maintains stable and superior detection capability even under low-label conditions.
More importantly, except for the Census dataset, SEAD-Net
trained with only 30 labeled anomaly samples achieves higher
AUC-PR performance than all competing methods trained
with 120 labeled anomalies, with improvements of 0.06%
(NSL-KDD), 2.04% (Shuttle), 9.48% (Fraud), 8.76% (Bank),
1.89% (CelebA), 14.63% (Thyroid), and 11.81% (Mammography). When only 15 labeled anomalies are available on
the Census dataset, SEAD-Net exhibits a notable performance drop, which may be attributed to noise introduced by
newly labeled anomalies or substantial distributional divergence among anomaly samples, thereby hindering effective
distribution fitting.
Overall, these results indicate that SEAD-Net can more
effectively exploit a limited number of anomaly samples,
leading to improved representation learning, stronger generalization performance, and enhanced robustness compared to
existing methods.
B. Ablation Study
1) Comparison of the Performance of Different SEAD-Net
Variants: We introduce the variant VSCLM , which contains
only the SCLM module, to examine the impact of removing
the customized DEM from SEAD-Net. To further assess

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF THE AUC-ROC AND AUC-PR P ERFORMANCE OF
SEAD-N ET AND I TS VARIANTS W ITH VARIOUS
C OMPETING M ETHODS

the joint reconstruction–contrastive dual-branch design within
SCLM, we construct additional variants by removing individual branches: Vrecon , which retains only the reconstruction
branch, and Vcontra , which retains only the contrastive branch.
In addition, by incorporating the customized DEM into Vrecon ,
we obtain Vrecon D to evaluate the effectiveness of DEM under
a baseline reconstruction setting. All variants are compared
with the full SEAD-Net, DevNet, and FEWAE under consistent experimental settings.
As reported in Tab. IV, Vrecon D outperforms Vrecon , achieving an average AUC-PR improvement of 0.51%, indicating
that DEM enhances representation learning by introducing
data diversity. Similarly, VSCLM outperforms Vrecon on most
datasets, with an average AUC-PR improvement of 0.12%,
validating the advantage of the dual-branch structure over

4708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 4. Comparison of the AUC-ROC performance of SEAD-Net with baseline methods under varying anomaly contamination rates (c ∈ [0.01, 0.99]).

single-branch reconstruction. Notably, SEAD-Net achieves the
largest overall gain, with an average AUC-PR improvement of
0.97%, exceeding the combined improvements of Vrecon D and
VSCLM , which indicates a strong synergistic effect between the
customized DEM and self-contrastive learning.
Moreover, across all datasets, Vrecon consistently outperforms Vcontra , suggesting that the reconstruction branch serves
as the primary driver of performance, while the contrastive
branch functions as an effective regularizer.
2) Robustness Analysis Against Anomaly Contamination:
We evaluate the robustness of SEAD-Net under label noise
using a controlled anomaly contamination setting. Synthetic
anomalies are generated via a Feature Swapping strategy with
a small swap ratio of 0.05 and injected into the training set
as normal samples, while the contamination rate varies from
0.01 to 0.99. Fig. 4 compares the AUC-ROC performance
of SEAD-Net with three baselines (Deep-SAD, DevNet, and
FEWAE) under increasing anomaly contamination.
As the contamination rate increases, the performance of all
methods degrades. Deep-SAD exhibits pronounced instability,
while DevNet and FEWAE deteriorate rapidly at moderate
contamination levels. In contrast, SEAD-Net shows a smoother
degradation trend and consistently maintains a clear performance margin, even under extreme contamination. These
results suggest that the self-contrastive learning mechanism
effectively regularizes the latent space, thereby enabling robust
anomaly detection in the presence of severe label noise.
3) Visualization of Dataset-Specific Enhancement Effects:
To analyze the effectiveness of the proposed enhancement
library, we define the Performance Gain (PG) as the performance difference between each enhancement setting and
the corresponding no-enhancement baseline. We then visualize
the PG values of individual enhancement methods across
five datasets to reduce heuristic dataset-specific augmentation
selection. The resulting heatmap uses warm and cool colors
to indicate positive and negative effects, respectively, with
datasets and enhancement methods arranged along the horizontal and vertical axes in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5, individual enhancements exhibit
dataset-dependent effectiveness and do not consistently benefit
all datasets. Nevertheless, each enhancement provides advantages on a subset of datasets, and every dataset benefits from

Fig. 5. Visualization of dataset-wise Performance Gain (PG) induced by
individual enhancement methods.

Fig. 6. Visualization of t-SNE projections of latent representations produced
by SEAD-Net and baseline methods.

multiple enhancement choices. These observations indicate
that, while individual augmentations have limited generality,
the proposed enhancement library provides broad coverage and
supports dataset-specific augmentation selection.
4) t-SNE Visualization of Latent Representations: To
further examine whether the final SEAD-Net preserves representational advantages over competing methods, we visualize
the learned latent representations using t-SNE. Unlike the
previous visualization, which analyzes internal SEAD-Net
variants, Fig. 6 compares the final SEAD-Net with three
baselines, namely Deep-SAD, DevNet, and FEWAE.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the latent representations produced
by Deep-SAD and DevNet exhibit poorly defined cluster
structures. FEWAE forms comparatively clearer class patterns; however, samples within the same class remain more
dispersed. In contrast, SEAD-Net generates noticeably more
compact intra-class representations while maintaining clear
inter-class separation. This observation is further supported by

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF SEAD-N ET P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT
E NHANCEMENT M ODULES

4709

that the progressive introduction of customized enhancement
and self-contrastive learning consistently improves representation quality and leads to clearer separation between normal
and anomalous samples.
VI. C ONCLUSION

quantitative clustering metrics: SEAD-Net achieves the highest
Silhouette Coefficient (Sil) and the lowest Davies–Bouldin
Index (DB), confirming superior intra-class compactness and
inter-class separation. Overall, these results indicate that
SEAD-Net preserves class separability while substantially
enhancing intra-class compactness, leading to more clearly
structured anomaly boundaries.
5) Comparison of DEM With State-of-the-Art Enhancement
Methods: This subsection evaluates the improved DEM module in SEAD-Net. Under identical experimental settings, we
compare it with two state-of-the-art enhancement approaches:
a GAN-based data augmentation method (TMG-GAN) [37]
and a diffusion-based data generation method (RODEO) [44].
The quantitative results are summarized in Tab. V.
From Tab. V, we observe that replacing DEM under
the same settings leads to a significant performance degradation for SEAD-Net. On average, SEAD-Net outperforms
diffusion-based models by 11.40% in AUC-PR and 5.32% in
AUC-ROC, and surpasses GAN-based models by 5.89% in
AUC-PR and 2.11% in AUC-ROC. This performance gap
may stem from the limited ability of diffusion-based models
to capture discriminative features in streaming data, as they
are primarily designed for image generation. For GAN-based
approaches, newly generated samples under extremely lowlabel conditions (e.g., 30 labeled samples) tend to distort
the original feature distribution, thereby degrading detection
performance.
Notably, both diffusion- and GAN-based methods exhibit
dataset-specific strengths: diffusion models perform better on
Shuttle and Thyroid, whereas GAN-based methods achieve
stronger results on NSL-KDD, Bank, Census, and CelebA.
Overall, the DEM module in SEAD-Net adopts customized
multi-dimensional stochastic augmentation strategies, including random cropping, flipping, shifting, and mirroring. These
strategies generate diverse, robust, yet faithful data variants
while preserving the original feature distribution, even under
extremely limited supervision.
Moreover, additional ablation evidence is provided in the
Supplementary Material. Section S-IV-A shows that SEADNet remains stable across a broad range of a0 values, with
a0 = 1.5 serving as an effective default choice, while Section
S-IV-B indicates that better performance is achieved when
λ ∈ [0, 10−4 ], highlighting the need to maintain a suitable
balance between reconstruction and contrastive optimization.
Section S-V-A further shows that appropriate pairwise augmentation combinations can yield additional gains, although
overly strong transformations may introduce feature distortion
on specific datasets. Finally, Section S-V-B presents the latent
feature-space visualization of SEAD-Net variants, confirming

This paper proposes SEAD-Net, a weakly supervised
anomaly detection framework based on self-contrastive learning, which enhances the feature representation capability of
data in the model’s feature space, thereby improving the
accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection. Specifically, we
enhance the representation ability of each sample through our
customized data augmentation module. Simultaneously, we
design a self-contrastive learning module to boost the model’s
ability to learn complex patterns within the data. Through
these complementary steps, SEAD-Net extracts features that
effectively represent critical information from the raw data,
thereby addressing the issues of inaccurate or insufficient
data features. Compared with other WADMs, our SEAD-Net
can significantly improve anomaly detection performance and
sample utilization efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate
that SEAD-Net outperforms other competing methods in both
performance and labeled sample utilization rate.
R EFERENCES
[1]

J. Qi et al., “LogEncoder: Log-based contrastive representation learning
for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20,
no. 2, pp. 1378–1391, Jun. 2023.
[2] C. Han, B. Guan, T. Li, D. Kang, J. Qin, and Y. Wu, “Few-shot log
anomaly detection based on matching networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2909–2925, Jun. 2024.
[3] W. Shao, Y. Wei, P. Rajapaksha, D. Li, Z. Luo, and N. Crespi, “Lowlatency dimensional expansion and anomaly detection empowered secure
IoT network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 3865–3879, Sep. 2023.
[4] Y. Song, F. Wei, K. Zhu, and Y. Zhu, “Anomaly detection as a service:
An outsourced anomaly detection scheme for blockchain in a privacypreserving manner,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 3794–3809, Dec. 2022.
[5] A. Dridi, C. Boucetta, S. E. Hammami, H. Afifi, and H. Moungla,
“STAD: Spatio-temporal anomaly detection mechanism for mobile network management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 894–906, Mar. 2021.
[6] J. Tang et al., “Anomaly detection in social-aware IoT networks,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3162–3176, Sep. 2023.
[7] J. Huang et al., “PhyFinAtt: An undetectable attack framework against
PHY layer fingerprint-based WiFi authentication,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7753–7770, Jul. 2024.
[8] R. Xiao, H. Chen, J. Lu, W. Li, and S. Jin, “AllInfoLog: Robust
diverse anomalies detection based on all log features,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2529–2543, Sep. 2023.
[9] X. Chen, Q. Shi, C. Xiao, D. Zhao, and K. Tang, “Unveiling and
evaluating the collaboration in engineering projects through a two-layer
information collaboration network model,” J. Manage. Eng., vol. 40,
no. 3, May 2024, Art. no. 04024014.
[10] W. T. Lunardi, M. A. Lopez, and J.-P. Giacalone, “ARCADE: Adversarially regularized convolutional autoencoder for network anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 1305–1318, Jun. 2023.
[11] N. Forti, L. M. Millefiori, P. Braca, and P. Willett, “Bayesian filtering for
dynamic anomaly detection and tracking,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1528–1544, Jun. 2022.
[12] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[13] Z. Wu, H. Li, Y. Hua, N. H. Tran, and H. Gan, “Frequency-domain
anomaly detection for encrypted traffic in industrial control systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 7859–7869, Oct. 2025.

4710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[14] C. Yin et al., “CiUAV: Scalable device-free indoor UAV localization
via multiobjective optimized network using channel state information,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 15297–15307, Apr. 2026.
[15] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[16] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[17] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[18] M. S. E. Sayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, M. A. Azer, and A. D. Jurcut, “A flowbased anomaly detection approach with feature selection method against
DDoS attacks in SDNs,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 1862–1880, Dec. 2022.
[19] Y. Zhao et al., “Generating visual spatial description via holistic 3D
scene understanding,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2023, pp. 7960–7977.
[20] C. Wang et al., “Limited-data SAR ATR causal method via dualinvariance intervention,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63,
Jan. 2025, Art. no. 5203319.
[21] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weaklysupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
[22] H. Gan, H. Zheng, Z. Wu, C. Ma, and J. Liu, “TFD-Net: Transformer
deviation network for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 941–954, Jan. 2024.
[23] H. Gan, H. Zheng, J. N. Selva, Y. Chen, Z. Wu, and F. Ullah, “TCADNet: Integrating transformer and convolution for weakly supervised
anomaly data discovery,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2,
pp. 5475–5488, May 2025.
[24] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering
aided weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 14085–14098, Oct. 2024.
[25] W. Guan, J. Cao, H. Zhao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “WAKE: A weakly
supervised business process anomaly detection framework via a pretrained autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 6,
pp. 2745–2758, Jun. 2024.
[26] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copulabased outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123.
[27] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. H. Chen,
“ECOD: Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative
distribution functions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12181–12193, Dec. 2023.
[28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly detection,”
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data (TKDD), vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 1–39, 2012.
[29] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023.
[30] I. Ahmed, T. Galoppo, X. Hu, and Y. Ding, “Graph regularized
autoencoder and its application in unsupervised anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4110–4124,
Aug. 2022.
[31] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for
unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2018,
pp. 1–19.
[Online].
Available:
https://openreview.net/
forum?id=BJJLHbb0[32] T. Schlegl, P. Seebóck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
Med. Imag., May 2017, pp. 146–157.
[33] F. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in quasi-periodic time series based on
automatic data segmentation and attentional LSTM-CNN,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2626–2640, Jun. 2022.
[34] I. Steinwart, D. Hush, and C. Scovel, “A classification framework for
anomaly detection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 211–232,
2005.
[35] G. G. Sundarkumar and V. Ravi, “A novel hybrid undersampling method
for mining unbalanced datasets in banking and insurance,” Eng. Appl.
Artif. Intell., vol. 37, pp. 368–377, Jan. 2015.
[36] K. Yang, J. Ren, Y. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Active learning for wireless IoT
intrusion detection,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 19–25,
Dec. 2018.

[37] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
[38] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for fewshot learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
pp. 1–16.
[39] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of
ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,”
in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Jul. 2018, pp. 2041–2050.
[40] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection
with deviation networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 353–362.
[41] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature
encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465,
Jun. 2022.
[42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019,
arXiv:1906.02694.
[43] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN:
An efficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few
identified anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data, vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 1–30, Dec. 2022.
[44] H. Mirzaei et al., “RODEO: Robust outlier detection via exposing adaptive out-of-distribution samples,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., Jul. 2025, pp. 35744–35778. [Online]. Available: https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mirzaei24a.html
[45] G. O. Campos et al., “On the evaluation of unsupervised outlier
detection: Measures, datasets, and an empirical study,” Data Mining
Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 891–927, Jul. 2016.

Jingyou Chen received the M.Eng. degree in
software engineering from the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in cyber science and engineering with
Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
interests include website fingerprinting and network
traffic anomaly detection.

Zhangfa Wu received the M.S. degree in electronic science and technology from the School of
Electronic Information Engineering, Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2020,
where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in electronic science and technology. He is supported by China Scholarship Council (CSC). He
is a Visiting Scholar with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, from September 2025
to September 2026. His research interests include
anomaly detection, network security, deep learning,
signal processing, and image processing.

Yi Hua received the Ph.D. degree in aerospace
science and technology from the School of Aeronautics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
China, in 2025. From 2023 to 2025, he was with
the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia, as a Visiting Scholar sponsored by
China Scholarship Council. He is currently with the
College of Information and Artificial Intelligence,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China. His research
interests include distributed signal processing, network security, image processing, graph signal estimation, and data fusion of
multiple aircraft.

CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

Hongqi Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an, China. He has authored refereed journal
articles in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YS TEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS ,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS PORTATION S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
AUTOMATION S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON B IOMEDICAL E NGINEERING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON H UMAN -M ACHINE S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NSTRUMEN TATION AND M EASUREMENT , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL S YS TEMS AND R EHABILITATION E NGINEERING , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
B IOMETRICS , B EHAVIOR , AND I DENTITY S CIENCE. His research interests
include biomechatronics, human–machine interaction (HMI), human–robot
collaboration, brain-actuated robots, system modeling and simulation, signal
processing, and deep learning.

Yilei Shi received the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from Auckland Bioengineering Institute, the
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand,
in 2021. From 2021 to 2022, he was a Senior
Research Engineer with the OPPO Research Institute. He is currently an Associate Professor and
a Master’s Supervisor with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an.
His research interests include artificial intelligence
(AI), 3-D computer vision, AI-generated content
(AIGC), and human–computer interaction (HCI),
among other related fields.

4711

Hongping Gan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in communication and information engineering from the State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 2020. From 2018 to
2019, he was with the School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, as a Visiting
Scholar sponsored by China Scholarship Council. He
is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
China. His current research interests include deep
learning, compressed sensing, image processing, and network security.