IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

1865

SPARSE: Semantic Tracking and Path Analysis for
Attack Investigation in Real-Time
Jie Ying , Tiantian Zhu , Member, IEEE, Wenrui Cheng , Qixuan Yuan , Mingjun Ma, Chunlin Xiong ,
Tieming Chen , Mingqi Lv , and Yan Chen , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—As Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) become more
complex and destructive, attack investigation has gained importance. Analysts use provenance graphs for causality analysis on
Point-Of-Interest (POI) events to capture critical events. However,
existing methods suffer from problems of high false positives, high
overhead, and high latency due to the vast size of the provenance
graph and the rarity of critical events. We propose SPARSE for
constructing critical component graphs (i.e., consisting of critical
events) from streaming logs in real time. Our approach is based on
two key observations: 1) Critical events exist in suspicious semantic
graphs (SSGs) composed of interaction flows between suspicious
entities, and 2) Information flows accomplishing the attacker’s
goal exist as paths. SPARSE uses a two-stage framework that first
constructs the SSG using a state-based mode with semantic transfer
rules and storage strategies. Then, it identifies suspicious flow
paths (SFPs) related to the POI event and quantifies each path’s
influence to filter irrelevant events. Evaluation on a large-scale
attack dataset shows our system generates a critical component
graph (∼113 edges) in 1.6 seconds, which is 2014 × smaller than the
backtracking graph (∼227,589 edges). It is also 25 × more effective
in filtering irrelevant edges compared to other state-of-the-art
techniques.
Index Terms—Advanced persistent threat, intrusion/anomaly
detection and investigation, data provenance.

Received 9 September 2024; revised 8 August 2025; accepted 11 October
2025. Date of publication 14 October 2025; date of current version 12 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U22B2028, Grant 62372410, and Grant 62002324,
in part by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant LQ21F020016 and Grant LZ23F020011, and in part by The Fundamental
Research Funds for the Provincial Universities of Zhejiang under Grant RFA2023009. (Corresponding author: Tiantian Zhu.)
Jie Ying, Tiantian Zhu, Wenrui Cheng, Qixuan Yuan, Mingjun Ma, and
Mingqi Lv are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: jieying@
zjut.edu.cn; ttzhu@zjut.edu.cn; zjutcwr@zjut.edu.cn; zjutyqx@zjut.edu.cn;
zjutmmj@zjut.edu.cn; mingqilv@zjut.edu.cn).
Chunlin Xiong is with China Unicom (Guangdong) Industrial Internet Company, Ltd., Guangzhou 510555, China (e-mail: chunlinxiong@gmail.com).
Tieming Chen is with the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China, and also with
the Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing,
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: tmchen@
zjut.edu.cn).
Yan Chen is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA (e-mail: ychen
@northwestern.edu).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3621434, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3621434

I. INTRODUCTION
S THE Internet has developed over time, APT attacks have
grown more sophisticated and destructive. APT attacks
target mainly large corporations such as Twitter [1], resulting in
significant financial losses and reputational damage. In addition,
APT attacks are executed in multiple stages, which include
initial access, persistence, lateral movement, collection, and
exfiltration [2].
While an intrusion may be noticed at any stage, detection
only uncovers isolated traces of the attack. As a result, analysts
must undertake causality analysis to capture the bigger picture
and obtain a sound understanding of the detected attack point.
Achieving a secure system recovery after a cyber attack requires
certain key steps. First, analysts must determine how the adversary infiltrated the system. Once the point of entry is identified,
then analysts need to assess the obvious and hidden damage
done to the system, such as installed payload, modified files,
and exfiltrated information. In short, analysts need to identify
the sequence of critical events leading up to the POI event
and reconstruct the critical component (subgraph consisting of
critical events), which is also called attack investigation.
With the improvement of kernel-level monitoring frameworks [3], [4], [5], more and more causality analysis systems
depend on a provenance graph consisting of entities (e.g., files,
processes, and sockets) and inter-entity interactions (e.g., processes reading and writing files). However, a provenance graph is
a gigantic [6], [7] and coarse-grained data format that cannot directly determine the specific dependencies between all relevant
events of an entity (e.g., a process has multiple read-in events
and write-out events) [8], which leads to a dependency explosion
problem and the poor performance of existing causality analysis
systems [9], [10], [11].
Previous Attack Investigation Techniques and Limitations:
Methodologically, causality analysis can be classified into three
categories: label propagation-based, anomaly score-based, and
machine learning-based. Specifically, the label propagationbased approach [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] sets entity labels
and transformation rules through heuristic rules but suffers
from a reliance on heavy manual effort and the incapacity to
address zero-day vulnerabilities. The anomaly score-based approach [17], [18], [19], [20] quantifies the suspiciousness of dependency between entities, but faces challenges such as relying
on historical statistics and the inability to adapt to complex enterprise production environments. Earlier machine learning-based

A

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1866

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

approaches [21], [22], [23], [24] attempted to learn directly
from attack samples using neural networks, but were limited
by insufficient sample size, poor generalization capability, and
high computational overhead. Recent studies [16], [25], [26],
[27], [28], [29] have employed self-supervised learning to model
normal system behavior and trigger alerts through anomaly
detection. However, in the field of attack investigation, these
approaches can only perform basic alert correlation, such as constructing reachable paths between alerts, yet fail to reconstruct
comprehensive attack scenarios. These issues make it difficult
for analysts to carry out comprehensive attack investigations in
the optimal time (10 minutes) [30]. In summary, a general, efficient, and cost-effective causality analysis system needs to meet
the following three requirements: 1) Reduced False Positives
to address dependency explosion, 2) Affordable Overhead to
reduce the cost of attack investigation, and 3) Minimal Latency
to prevent further losses caused by subsequent attacks.
To meet the above requirements, after researching hundreds
of APT attack descriptions [31] and analyzing numerous related
dependency graphs [17], [19], [21], [32], [33], [34], we have the
following two key observations. Firstly, suspicious semantics
are introduced externally and transferred to non-suspicious
entities via interaction. Based on this, we propose a set of
predefined semantic transfer rules to process streaming logs to
construct the suspicious semantic graph (SSG). The SSG consists of suspicious entities (e.g., a process visiting an unknown
website) and suspicious events (data and control flows initiated
by the suspicious entities) via utilizing transfer rules. We believe
that the SSG contains all critical events (i.e., critical events are
a subset of suspicious events) and is much smaller than the
subgraph obtained by backtracking [35] from the POI event.
As shown in Section V, the SSG (∼417 edges) is 545 × smaller
than the backtracking graph (∼227,589 edges).
Secondly, information flows that accomplish goals exist in
the form of paths. There are still many false positives in the
suspicious semantics graph. As shown in Section V, the SSG
(∼417 edges) is 3.7 times larger than the critical component
graph (∼113 edges). Therefore, we aim to filter out the events
that are contextually irrelevant to the POI event in the suspicious
semantics graph by performing path-level contextual analysis.
Based on this observation, we opine that evaluating whether to
filter an event cannot be done in isolation, but rather calls for a
comprehensive assessment of flow paths consisting of multiple
events. Consequently, we construct all suspicious flow paths
(SFPs) related to the POI event from SSG and quantify the degree
of influence based on the properties (i.e., data flow amount and
timestamp) of the POI event and path structural characteristics
to weed out irrelevant events. In summary, we achieve the attack
investigation through a two-stage step (i.e., SSG construction
and path-level contextual analysis).
This paper proposes SPARSE1 and makes the following
contributions:
r We propose a state-based framework that contains suspicious semantic transfer rule and suspicious event storage
1 SPARSE short for Semantic tracking and Path Analysis foR attack
inveStigation in real-timE

TABLE I
ATTRIBUTES OF SYSTEM EVENTS

strategy. The framework consumes events as streams in low
overhead without recording historical data. In addition, the
framework can output suspicious semantic graph related
to the POI event in real time. The graph consists of all
suspicious data flows and control flows that lead to the POI
event, and thus contains all attack-related critical events. It
is phase I of SPARSE for filtering semantic-irrelevant events.
r We propose a path-level contextual analysis mechanism
that incorporates suspicious flow path extraction and scoring. It utilizes an optimized BFS algorithm to extract all
suspicious flow paths (SFPs) from the SSG. Then the
mechanism combines the properties of the POI event and
characteristics of the path structure to quantify the impact
of each SFP on the POI event. Finally, it filters all events
that only exist in SFPs with low scores. It is phase II of
SPARSE for filtering impact-irrelevant events.
r We implemented SPARSE and evaluated all its components
in detail on a large-scale dataset with more than 150 million logs. Specifically, the dataset contains 10 simulated
attacks [17] (∼ 100 million logs) and 5 attacks from the
DARPA TC program [36], [37] (∼ 50 million logs). Experimental results show that SPARSE can generate the critical
component graph (∼113 edges) in 1.6s, which is 2014 ×
smaller than the dependency graph (∼227,589 edges). The
critical component graph (FP = 99) generated by SPARSE
is 25 × more effective than other state-of-the-art causality
analysis techniques (FP = 2,473) in filtering irrelevant
edges while preserving the attack sequences. In addition,
SPARSE can run for a long time while processing streaming
logs with a low memory overhead (30 MB).
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Dependency Graph
Recent literature has leveraged the concept of data provenance, i.e., instead of manually piecing together individual evidence from raw logs, provenance-based systems can construct
dependency graphs that explain the relationships between each
event, simplifying the attack investigation. Specifically, a dependency graph G(E, V ) is a heterogeneous graph consisting of
nodes V representing system entities and edges E representing
inter-entity events. The attributes of entities and events are carefully selected from raw audit logs, which are lean and critical. For
entities, we choose processes (P rocessN ame, P rocessID),
files (F ileN ame), and sockets (IP : P ort). For events,
we made selections as shown in Table I. For any edge e ∈ E,
there is e = (u, v, t), where u represents the subject, v represents
the object, and t represents the timestamp of the event. For

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

1867

Fig. 1. Partial dependency graph of one attack case Dataleak. The black dashed box indicates the backtracking graph (∼200,000 edges) constructed from the
POI event via backward propagation. The blue dashed box indicates the suspicious semantic graph (∼27 edges) constructed by SPARSE. The red dashed line box
indicates the critical component graph (∼22 edges) exported by SPARSE.

the two edges in the dependency graph, e1 = (u1 , v1 , t1 ), e2 =
(u2 , v2 , t2 ), we consider that there is a dependence (causality)
between e1 and e2 if v1 = u2 and t1 < t2 .
B. Attack Investigation
The goal of attack investigation using dependency
graphs [12], [13], [14], [15], [17], [18], [20], [22], [38] is to
identify all critical events and critical components related to the
POI event. A critical component is a subgraph of the dependency
graph that retains internal information critical to the attack
investigation and eliminates irrelevant system activity. Typically
this analysis includes tracing the flow of data through the graph to
identify potentially relevant events, and examining the properties
of nodes and edges to identify signs of compromise. The goal of
an attack investigation is to determine both the source and scope
of the attack, ascertain the extent of damage or disruption, and
develop remediation and prevention strategies.

suspicious semantic-related to the alert. The red dashed box
denotes the critical component graph obtained by analyzing
the path-level contextual semantics, which includes all events
attack-related to the alert.
Obviously, the number of attack-related critical events (∼22)
is a drop in the ocean compared to the number of causalrelated non-critical events (∼ 200,000). This turns the attack
investigation into a needle-in-a-haystack process, making it
challenging for analysts to complete the investigation in the
optimal time (600 s) [30]. However, existing techniques such
as DEPIMPACT [17], as shown in Section V, have exhibited
poor performance. It requires 6,464 s (600 s) to generate
dependency graphs with 2,473 false positives on average. In
addition, it needs to load raw audit logs, resulting in an endless memory overhead. Therefore, we need an attack investigation system with low false positives, low latency and low
overhead.
III. OVERVIEW

C. Motivating Example
As shown in Fig. 1, this is a typical data leakage attack.
The attacker exploited a vulnerability in apache2 and downloaded the malicious artifact gather.sh. After executing the
malware, the attacker collected sensitive data from the target host and saved it in the form of the file leaked.vm2.
After using gpg to compress leaked.vm2 into the file
leaked, the attacker transferred leaked to the C2 server
192.168.2.3:xx via process ssh.
In Fig. 1, the black dashed box denotes the backtracking
graph obtained by performing backward causality analysis [35],
which includes all events causal-related to the alert. The blue
dashed box denotes the suspicious semantic graph obtained by
using suspicious semantic transfer, which includes all events

A. Threat Model
First, we assume that the event logs and digital signatures are
credible, similar to previous work [13], [17], [18], [19], [33],
[35], [39], [40]. In addition, events related to the attack did not
occur before the logs were processed.
Second, we assume that the attacker is external to the system and carries out their attack remotely. This may involve
exploiting vulnerabilities within the system or employing social
engineering tactics to convince a user to download and run a
file containing malicious code. Therefore, we do not support
side-channel attacks and insider attacks where the attacker has
a legitimate way to access the machine without going through
them.

1868

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Architecture of SPARSE.

Third, we exclude mimicry attacks [41] from consideration in
our threat model. These attacks are designed to evade intrusion
detection systems by creating a seemingly benign chain of events
within an enterprise environment. Existing intrusion detection
systems [42], [43], [44] often rely on heuristics or analysis
of individual events, making them vulnerable to such attacks.
While detecting mimicry attacks is a limitation of current detection systems, it falls outside the scope of our work. Our
focus is on identifying relevant events of alert generated by the
detection system as contextual information to investigate the
attack.
B. Our Approach
In this section, we describe the architecture of SPARSE shown
in Fig. 2. Given a POI event, SPARSE can automatically identify
the critical component of the dependency graph. SPARSE consists of two phases: (I) suspicious semantic graph construction
(SSGC) and (II) path-level contextual analysis (PCA).
In Phase I, SPARSE makes use of mature auditing systems [4], [45], [46], [47], [48] to access kernel-level streaming logs and process them into specific data structures. Then
SPARSE proposes a suspicious semantic transfer rule and storage strategy to maintain the suspicious entity list and related
event table with low memory overhead. Given a POI event,
SPARSE can construct the suspicious semantic graph (SSG) in
real-time.
In Phase II, SPARSE first performs edge compaction on the
suspicious semantic graph. Then SPARSE proposes a suspicious
flow path extraction algorithm to identify possible propagation
paths of the data/control flow in the suspicious semantic graph
(i.e., suspicious flow paths). Next, SPARSE performs path-level
contextual analysis, scores each suspicious flow path, and determines how relevant the path is to the POI event. Finally, SPARSE
filters out all events that only exist in irrelevant paths from
suspicious semantic graph to generate the critical component
graph (CCG) as the output.
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
In this section, we describe the design details of each phase of
SPARSE. As shown in Fig. 2, SPARSE is a two-phase framework
(i.e., constructing suspicious semantic graph and performing
path-level contextual analysis) for mitigating the dependency
explosion problem.

A. Streaming Log Monitoring
SPARSE makes use of mature auditing systems [4], [45], [46],
[47], [48] to access kernel-level logs and obtain the required data.
At the entity level, SPARSE focuses on three entity types: file,
process, and socket. To differentiate, SPARSE needs to construct
unique identifiers for all entities. For the file, SPARSE records the
absolute path as the unique identifier. For the process, SPARSE
concatenates the PID and name as the unique identifier. For the
socket, SPARSE constructs the 4-tuple (<srcip, srcport, dstip,
dstport>) as the unique identifier. At the event level, SPARSE
focuses on three event types: process interactions, file IO events,
and network IO events. To the best of our knowledge, existing
auditing systems are rich in semantics and meet the data requirements of SPARSE.
B. Suspicious Semantic Transfer
The letter P in APT stands for persistence, which means that
an attacker can lurk for a long time until achieves the goal.
To support real-time investigation and long-term monitoring,
SPARSE utilizes a state-based structure and suspicious semantic
transfer rule to record state changes and associated events for
each entity. Next, we describe the specific data structure and
transfer rule in turn.
1) Data Structure: For any entity v ∈ V , SPARSE represents
it as a triple < U, Ty , S >. U is the unique identifier of the
entity, the construction of U is described in Section IV-A. Ty
denotes the type of the entity and S denotes the state of the
entity. When S is 0 it means that the entity is not suspicious, and
S is 1 it means that the entity is suspicious. Note that the file
and process have their S initialized to 0 when they are created,
and the socket has their S initialized to 1 when it is created,
i.e., we default to all sockets that are not in the whitelist being
suspicious.
For any event e ∈ E, SPARSE represents it as a quintuple
< Us , Uo , O, Ti , D >. Us and Uo are unique identifiers for the
subject and object of e, respectively. O denotes the type of e,
Ti denotes the time when e occurred, and D denotes the data
flow amount of e. Note that SPARSE is based on the direction of
the data flow and control flow to determine the location of the
subject and object. For example, when O = Read, the data flow
is from the file to the process, so the file is the subject and the
process is the object. When O = W rite, the data flow is from
the process to the file, so the process is the subject and the file
is the object.

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

1869

TABLE II
SUSPICIOUS SEMANTIC TRANSFER RULE

Fig. 3. An Example of Suspicious Semantic Transfer. The red solid line indicates that the entity carries suspicious semantic. SEL is short for Suspicious Entity
List and RET is short for Relevant Event Table.

2) Transfer Rule: Based on the idea of semantic transfer,
SPARSE constructs a set of predefined rules to process streaming
logs and identify entity states in real-time. As shown in Table II,
each rule is a quadruple: < O, Ts , To , D >. O is the type of
event, Ts and To are the entity types of the subject and object
respectively, and D is a description of the rule. From Table II we
can see that the subject can transfer suspicious semantics to the
object via a specific event, which is referred to as the ”suspicious
semantics transfer rule”. As shown in Fig. 3, T denotes the
moment, red entities denote suspicious entities, and red straight
arrows denote suspicious semantic transfer. When T = 3, a
suspicious process (process A) writes data to a file (f ile C),
which in turn carries the suspicious semantic. When T = 4, the
suspicious file is read by another process (process D), which
then carries the suspicious semantic. Conversely, if an entity
has no suspicious semantic, any event involving this entity as
a subject will not propagate suspicious semantic. For example,
when T = 2, a file (f ile B) is read by the suspicious entity
(process A), but there is no propagation of the suspicious
semantic.
As shown in lines 5 to 11 in Algorithm 1, SPARSE processes the
streaming logs, analyses data flows, and determines whether the
entity state transitions. First, SPARSE accesses the event e =<
Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > and constructs the subject and object u, v
corresponding to that event. Then, SPARSE determines whether
the subject u is a socket or exists in suspicious entity list (SEL,
see Section IV-B3 for detailed definition). Finally, as soon as
one of these two conditions is met, SPARSE will mark the object
v as suspicious and add it to SEL.
3) STORAGE STRATEGY: SPARSE designs two data structures
to enable efficient storage of relevant data and real-time

Algorithm 1: Suspicious Semantic Graph Construction.
Input:
1:
Streaming logs in chronological order;
2:
Suspicious Entity List (SEL);
3:
Related Event Table (RET);
4:
POI event p;
Output: Suspicious Semantic Graph (SSG) for POI event
p;
5:
for e ∈ Streaming logs do
6:
Construct u, v from e where uU = eUs , vU = eUo
7:
if uS == 0 and  uU ∈ SEL then
8:
continue;
9:
else
10:
vS = 1;
11:
if  vU ∈ SEL then
12:
SEL.append(vU );
13:
end if
14:
Add {vU : RET[uU ] + e} to RET;
15:
end if
16:
if ∃ pUo ∈ SEL then
17:
return graphConstruct(RET[pUo ])
18:
end if
19:
end for

construction of the suspicious semantic graph. Specifically,
SPARSE designs a Suspicious Entity List (SEL) and a Related
Event Table (RET), as defined below.
Suspicious Entity List: A list that maintains all entities with
suspicious semantics (possibly related to attacks). As shown in

1870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Algorithm 2: Suspicious Flow Path Extraction.
Input:
1:
(1) Suspicious Semantic Graph G;
2:
(2) POI Event p;
3:
(3) Q and V for the queue structure, T for the tree
structure;
Output: Suspicious flow paths;
4:
Q.add(p)
5:
T.creatN ode(p)
6:
while Q.num = 0 do
7:
e = Q.pop()
8:
V.add(e)
9:
for ie ∈ G.inEdges(eUs ) do
/ Q and ie ∈
/ V then
10:
if ieTi < eTi and ie ∈
11:
Q.add(ie)
12:
T.creatN ode(ie)
13:
T.creatEdge(e, ie)
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
end while
17:
return T.allP aths()

Fig. 3, when T = 1, the data flow passes from the suspicious
socket to process A (suspicious semantic transfer), so SPARSE
adds entity A to SEL. When T = 2, there is no suspicious
semantic transfer, so SEL is not changed. When T = 5, the data
flow passes from suspicious file C to process A, but entity A is
already in SEL, so SEL is not changed.
Related Event Table: A table that holds all the related events
corresponding to all suspicious entities. The related events of
a suspicious entity refer to the set of all data flows and control flows that lead to this entity’s semantic change. Specifically, SPARSE will maintain a separate set of related events
in RET for all suspicious entities. Whenever an event e =<
Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > that satisfies the suspicious semantic
transfer rule occurs, SPARSE will stitch the related events of Us
with event e and use it as the related events of Uo to update RET.
As shown in Section V-C, the size of the RET is much smaller
than the raw audit logs and the time of read in is negligible.
SPARSE can construct a suspicious semantic graph related to the
POI event in real-time.
As shown in Fig. 3, when T = 1, SPARSE adds to RET with
A : {1}, indicating that the related event of the suspicious entity
A is {1}. When T = 4, SPARSE adds to RET with D : {1, 3, 4},
stitched from the related events {1, 3} of subject C and the
current event {4}. When T = 5, SPARSE updates RET with
A : {1, 3, 5}, stitched from the related events {1, 3} of subject
C and the current event {5}.
In order to speed up the consumption of log streams, SPARSE
keeps the whole SEL in memory to determine the entity states
and save suspicious entities in real-time. In contrast, inspired
by the CPU architecture, SPARSE keeps only some of the
high-modification (frequent growth in a short period) RETs in
memory and stores other low-modification RETs in the hard
disk. According to our experimental results (see Section V-C for

detail), the memory overhead of SPARSE is 30 MB on average,
and there is no problem with high memory overhead. Note that
we default sockets to suspicious entities, so only entities of file
type and process type are saved in SEL.
In summary, SPARSE will use these two data structures to
enable efficient storage of the necessary data and real-time
construction of the suspicious semantic graph. As shown in lines
11 to 17 of Algorithm 1, SPARSE will add the object vU to the
SEL for any event e =< Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > that satisfies the
semantic transfer rule. In addition, SPARSE stitches the related
events of Us with event e and uses it as the related events of
Uo to update RET. Finally, for any given POI event, SPARSE is
able to extract all relevant events for the object of that POI event
from the RET in real-time. SPARSE then uses a simple graph
construction algorithm, which extracts entities from entities as
nodes and events as edges, to construct a suspicious semantic
graph associated with the POI event.
C. Edge Compaction
A suspicious semantic graph often contains multiple parallel
edges between two nodes. This is because operating systems
typically complete read/write tasks (e.g., file read/write) by
proportionally allocating data to multiple system calls. Inspired
by recent work for graph reduction [11], SPARSE merges the
edges between two nodes if the time difference between them
is less than a given threshold. We ultimately chose 10 seconds
as it demonstrates reasonable results in terms of various system
calls, such as file transfers and network connections.
D. Suspicious Flow Path Extraction
In order to perform path-level contextual analysis, it is
first necessary to identify possible propagation paths of the
data/control flow in the suspicious semantic graph (i.e., suspicious flow paths). SPARSE proposes a suspicious flow path
extraction algorithm that can efficiently handle complex graph
structures. In brief, as shown in Fig. 4, SPARSE transforms
the suspicious semantic graph into a multiway tree and then
traverses it to obtain all suspicious flow paths.
Specifically, as shown in lines 1 to 5 of Algorithm 2, Q and V
are the queue structures, where Q holds the events to be traversed
and V holds the events that have been traversed. T is the multiway tree structure, which holds the topological information. As
shown in lines 6 to 9 of Algorithm 2, SPARSE traverses event
e, identifying all incoming edge ies (ies = G.inEdges(eUs )).
As shown in lines 10-13 of Algorithm 2, SPARSE determines
that the incoming edge ie (ie ∈ ies) occurred earlier than event
e and has not been traversed (ie ∈
/ V ), then creates node ie in
the multiway tree T and the parent of that node is e. Finally,
SPARSE traverses the multiway tree T to obtain all paths from
the root node to the leaf nodes, which are output as suspicious
flow paths.
The suspicious flow path extraction algorithm takes into account the timeliness and directionality of the data/control flow
and is able to handle the complex graph structure efficiently, as
demonstrated in Section V-C, where SPARSE extracts over 140
suspicious flow paths in one second on average. Finally, it is

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

Fig. 4.

1871

Suspicious flow path extraction and path-level contextual scoring.

important to note that events exist as nodes in the multiway tree
and suspicious flow paths, as shown in Fig. 4.
E. Path-Level Contextual Scoring
To avoid confusion, it is important to clarify that events in the
suspicious semantic graph (Fig. 4(a) are represented as nodes
within both the multiway tree (Fig. 4(b) and the suspicious flow
paths (Fig. 4(c). SPARSE quantifies the degree of influence that
a suspicious flow path exerts on the POI event (i.e., Event 10 in
Fig. 4), which corresponds to the final node in the path.
Provenance graphs are coarse-grained by nature, making it
difficult to directly infer causal relationships between a process
node’s incoming and outgoing edges. Therefore, SPARSE adopts
the following intuitive assumptions: First, if the data volumes
of an incoming and outgoing edge are similar, it is more likely
that a causal relationship exists between them (e.g., a process
reads 526 bytes from the network and immediately writes 526
bytes to a file, suggesting the same content is being transferred).
Similarly, if the timestamps are similar, then there is a causal
relation between the events since we think that the exploitation is
automated and its steps quickly follow each other. Furthermore,
considering the neighborhood structure in the suspicious semantic graph, if a node has only one incoming edge and one outgoing
edge, we assume the incoming edge has a 100% influence on the
outgoing edge. When a node has multiple incoming edges and a
single outgoing edge, SPARSE applies a weighted calculation to
assess the contribution of each incoming edge to the outgoing
edge.
In summary, SPARSE estimates the degree of impact between
events is determined by the event attributes (i.e., data flow
amount and timestamp) and the neighboring relationships between events (i.e., multiple incoming and outgoing edges).
For each suspicious flow path p, SPARSE calculates the
P athScore using the following equation:
P athScore =

e


EventScore(e) / Len(p)

(1)

E

where e denotes an event and E denotes the set of all events
contained in the path (e ∈ E). EventScore denotes the degree
of impact of event e on the parent node, as defined later. Len(p)

denotes the number of events in the path and is used to normalize
the P athScore.
SPARSE calculates the EventScore using the following
equation:
Impact(e, f )
f = parent(e)
child(f ) Impact(s, f )
(2)

EventScore = α s

α=1+

len(child(f ) − 1)
C

(3)

where parent(e) denotes the parent node of event e, and
child(f ) denotes all the children of node f in the multiway tree.
Impact(e, f ) denotes the degree of impact that event e exerts on
event f , as defined later. α is an inflation factor designed to mitigate the issue of relative impact attenuation caused by fan-out,
where a parent node has multiple child nodes. The multiway tree
constructed from the suspicious semantic graph often contains
nodes with multiple outgoing edges. Without introducing this
inflation factor, the final PathScore would disproportionately
rely on the EventScore of nodes near the root (e.g., node 10
in Fig. 4(b), potentially leading to false negatives. As shown in
Equation (3), α is controlled by the super parameter C and the
number of child nodes. It is negatively correlated with C and
positively correlated with the number of child nodes.
SPARSE picks two features (i.e., data flow amount and time),
to calculate the Impact using the following equation:
Impact(e1, e2) = CS(N or(e1D , e1Ti ), N or(e2D , e2Ti ))
(4)
where e1 and e2 are two connected events(i.e., the object node
of e2 is the subject node of e1). eD and eT denote the data flow
and occurrence time of event e, respectively. N or(·) denotes
normalization, which removes differences in eD and eT on the
scale. CS(·) denotes the computation of cosine similarity.
SPARSE will iteratively calculate the scores of all suspicious
flow paths and consider the path whose score is below a threshold
T as an irrelevant path. Then, SPARSE filters out events that
only exist in the irrelevant path and outputs the retained
part as a critical component graph to help analysts in attack
investigation.

1872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE III
THE STATISTICS OF DEPENDENCY GRAPHS GENERATED FOR ALL THE 15
ATTACKS

V. EVALUATION
In this section, we first present the evaluation preparation, including the characteristics of the dataset, the obtaining of ground
truth, and the setting of evaluation metrics. We then evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of each component separately. In
summary, we aim to answer the following questions:
r RQ1: How effective is SPARSE in attack investigation?
r RQ2: How efficient is SPARSE in attack investigation?
r RQ3: How sensitive is SPARSE in parameter selection?
A. Evaluation Preparation
We deploy our implementation of SPARSE on a computer with
Intel (R) Core (TM) i9-10900 K CPU @ 3.70 GHz and 64 GB
memory. SPARSE processes streaming logs from the auditing
systems Sysdig [47] and SPADE [5], extracts information in the
format as described in Section II-A, and runs continuously in a
low-overhead state.
1) Attack Dataset: We evaluate the effectiveness of SPARSE
in revealing attack sequences on a dataset with over 150 million system audit logs. As shown in Table III, this dataset
contains 15 attack cases (10 simulated attacks and 5 DARPA
attacks), and is provided by DEPIMPACT [17]. The simulated
attacks consist of 7 (rows 2 to 8) single-host attacks based on
common exploits [11], [32], [34], [49] and 3 (rows 9 to 11)
multi-host attacks based on Cyber Kill Chain [50] and CVE
reports [49]. The simulated attacks utilized deployed hosts with
12 active users and hundreds of processes, daily tasks such as
file manipulation, text editing, and software development were
carried out to simulate real-world usage. We detail these 10
simulated attacks in Appendix A1 and A2. The DARPA dataset
contains 5 host attacks (rows 12 to 16), which was done by
two teams (FiveDirections and Theia), and differed in terms
of target systems (Windows, Linux) and vulnerability exploits
(pine backdoor, firefox backdoor, and browser extension).
Table III shows the statistics of the generated dependency
graphs for all attacks. Column “Attack” indicates the name of

the attack case. Columns “# V” and “# E” indicate the number
of nodes and edges of the backtracking graphs after performing
causality analysis [35] from POI events. Column “# CE” shows
the number of critical events (related to the attack), which we
explain in detail below.
2) Obtaining Ground Truth: In order to evaluate the performance of SPARSE, we need to specify the ground truth for all
attack cases (i.e., identify all critical events). Specifically, we
analyzed the targets of each attack case and determined the
corresponding POI events from massive logs. We then conducted
back-propagation [35] from POI events to obtain backtracking
graphs and searched for critical events within them. Finally, we
manually ascertained the critical events based on Indicators of
Compromise (e.g., file names and malware names) and attack
steps (e.g., download then execution), as shown in Appendix A.
Evaluation Metrics: First, we measure false positives (FP)
and false negatives (FN). False positives refer to those edges that
SPARSE identifies as critical but are not, while false negatives
refer to those edges that SPARSE identifies as irrelevant but
are critical. Then we compute the false positive rate F P R =
F P/Etotal and false negative rate F N R = F N/Ec , where
Etotal represents the number of edges and Ec represents the
number of critical edges, respectively. Finally, we also computed
the precision, recall, and F-score as comprehensive evaluation
metrics.
B. RQ1 : How Effective is SPARSE in Attack Investigation ?
There has been a lot of graph-based related work about attack
investigation [12], [13], [16], [17], [18], [23], [25], [26], [27],
[29], [51], [52]. However, HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [13]
rely solely on defined TTP-like (Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures) rules for detection and investigation. Such approaches
suffer from heavy reliance on manual efforts and cannot effectively address zero-day vulnerabilities. HERCULE [51] and
WATSON [23] address attack investigation problems by discovering communities (i.e., behavioral abstractions) on the provenance graph. Their purpose is to assist analysts in identifying
attack stages from a community perspective, enabling a quick
understanding of the purpose of a subgraph in the provenance
graph (e.g., file compilation and uploading). HERCULE and
WATSON (subgraph-level) differ in granularity from SPARSE
(event-level). KAIROS [26], FLASH [25], R-CAID [29], and
PROVG-SEARCHER [16] are intrusion detection systems that
leverage self-supervised learning to identify anomalous behaviors and incorporate attack investigation as a subcomponent.
However, these frameworks are highly integrated, with their
investigation modules tightly dependent on the outputs of the
detection components, making direct reuse challenging. Hence,
we do not compare our work with theirs.
Here, we compare the performance of SPARSE with 4 stateof-the-art approaches: SLEUTH [52], NODOZE [18], DISTDET [27], and DEPIMPACT [17], which are more relevant in
terms of methodology (anomaly-score based) and granularity
(event-level) for our evaluation. SLEUTH defines TTP-like rules
with the added constraint that these rules only fire when certain
confidentiality or integrity conditions are satisfied according to

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

1873

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF DEPENDENCY GRAPHS GENERATED BY DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES. PREC.: PRECISION; REC.: RECALL

a tag-based information flow propagation. NODOZE measures
the rarity of different events in the environment and, based on
this, assigns anomaly scores to each event in the dependency
graph. We use logs that only contain normal behavior (captured
outside of attack periods) as execution profiles (i.e., statistics of
events) to satisfy NODOZE. DISTDET is a distributed detection
system that detects anomalous events by training a hierarchical
system event tree (HST) model and generates alert summary
graphs (ASGs) as outputs for attack investigation. Specifically,
DISTDET first identifies the X-generation ancestors and Ygeneration descendants of the subject process. It then incorporates the top N outgoing edges of each type (process, file,
and network) from these identified nodes (i.e., the events they
initiated) to form the ASG. Accordingly, we produce ASGs
based on this heuristic rule and optimized hyperparameters
(X=12, Y=2, N=15). DEPIMPACT assigns anomaly scores
to edges based on several characteristics (including time, data
flow amount, and node access), and then aggregates the scores
to determine the entry points through a propagation algorithm.
DEPIMPACT then takes as output the overlap events of the
forward graph of the entry point and the backward graph of
the alert point.
Table IV shows the performance of attack investigation for
different techniques in all cases. Lower FP/FPR indicates a better
ability to filter irrelevant edges and lower FN/FNR indicate
a better ability to retain critical edges. The results show that
SPARSE performs the best. On average, the critical component
graph generated by SPARSE (∼113 edges) is 8849 × smaller than
the original dependency graph (∼1,000,000 edges), 22 × smaller
than the second-best result (i.e., DEPIMAPCT with ∼2,487
edges). SPARSE demonstrates the best capability in filtering
irrelevant edges while preserving the attack sequences (FP =
99, FPR = 0.043*10−2 ), 25 × more effective than DEPIMPACT
(FP = 2,473, FPR = 1.087*10−2 ). Moreover, SPARSE does not
miss any critical edges (i.e., FN = 0, FNR = 0).
SLEUTH investigates attack scenarios by defining confidentiality and integrity labels for label propagation. However, SLEUTH cannot ensure to cover all the attack-related
edges and therefore performed the worst in FNR (FN = 5.73,

FPR = 42.54*10−2 ), resulting in ineffective support for attack
investigation. NODOZE performed better than SLEUTH in
including critical edges but worse in FPR (FP = 16,682, FPR
= 7.329*10−2 ; FN = 2, FNR = 14.85*10−2 ), resulting in
the ineffective reduction of investigation cost for analysts. The
reason is that the performance of NODOZE relies on whether the
execution profile comprehensively covers all benign behaviors
but ignores information in the form of streams. DISTDET considers the ancestor process nodes up to X preceding generations
(X = 12), the descendant process nodes up to Y subsequent generations (Y = 2), and the top N (N = 15) outgoing nodes as part
of the ASG. This comprehensive inclusion enables DISTDET to
achieve optimal performance in terms of false negatives (FN =
0). However, due to the lack of further filtering mechanisms to
eliminate irrelevant events, DISTDET performs poorly in false
positive reduction (FP = 4052, FPR = 1.72*10−2 ). DEPIMPACT heuristically selects 3 entry points (one each for files,
processes, and sockets), which amplifies the attack surface.
DEPIMPACT directly takes the intersection between the forward graph of the entry points and the backward graph of the
alert point as output, which introduces massive attack-irrelevant
events (FP = 2,473, FPR = 1.087*10−2 ). Regarding the reduction results, SPARSE exhibits the best performance (FP = 99, FPR
= 0.043*10−2 ), we attribute the good performance of our system
to (1) SPARSE employs semantic transfer to construct a suspicious semantic graph related to the POI event that inherently
filters out a significant number of irrelevant events (FP = 403,
FPR = 0.177*10−2 ), and (2) SPARSE evaluates the relevance of
context to POI events at the path-level rather than in isolation.
Finally, SPARSE outperforms all comparative methods across
all comprehensive evaluation metrics (i.e., precision, recall,
and F-score), indicating that it effectively meets the practical
requirement for low false positives.
C. RQ2 : How Efficient is SPARSE in Attack Investigation ?
In this section, we evaluate the efficiency of SPARSE when
deployed in a real scenario. First, we evaluate SPARSE on the
real-time performance by comparing data generation rate and

1874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF DATA CONSUMPTION RATE AND DATA GENERATION RATE

increases overhead on the disk. In addition, the CPU overhead
of SPARSE is 4.5%, due to the simple yet intuitive and effective
algorithm.
In summary, we believe that SPARSE outperforms the latest
work DEPIMPACT in all aspects of overhead and can satisfy
the requirements of low overhead and latency in application
scenarios.
D. RQ3: How Sensitive is SPARSE in Parameter Selection?

data consumption rate. Table V shows that SPARSE can consume
events 15 × faster than the events generation rate of the host on
average, which shows the real-time of SPARSE is feasible. Then
we evaluate the overheads of each component of SPARSE on
time, memory, CPU, and disk, as shown in Table VI. In addition,
we conduct comparative experiments with the baseline method
DEPIMPACT.
Time and Memory: SPARSE can perform path-level contextual
analysis of the suspicious semantic graph and construct the
critical component graph in 2 s on average, which is 4091
× faster than DEPIMPACT (∼6,464s). DEPIMPACT uses an
impact propagation algorithm to identify entry points. However,
when the number of edges in the backtracking graph is high
(e.g., case “Hide File”), it takes an extremely long time to reach
global convergence (19,814s). In terms of memory overhead,
three causes are making SPARSE smaller than DEPIMAPCT: (1)
SPARSE only stores suspicious nodes in memory when processing streaming logs, so the memory overhead grows extremely
slowly and can be seen as constant in scale (i.e., 30 MB). (2) The
suspicious semantic graphs (∼403 edges) read in by SPARSE are
much smaller than the dependency graphs (∼one million edges)
read in by DEPIMPACT. (3) The suspicious flow path extraction
algorithm applied in PCA only traverses the graph structure once
(a complexity of O(E) ) and generates a smaller number of SFPs
(230 on average). For these reasons, the memory overhead of
PCA (132.82 MB) is 2.4 × smaller than that of DEPIMAPCT
(320.81 MB). Finally, it is important to emphasize that SPARSE
is real-time for suspicious semantic graph construction (SSGC),
so we do not perform a time overhead evaluation for this
component.
CPU and Disk: SPARSE stores the relevant event table (RET)
in the database when processing streaming logs. To evaluate the
overhead of SPARSE on the hard disk, we also perform the relevant experiments. As shown in Table VI, SPARSE requires only
21.03 MB of disk space, which is 9 × smaller than the original
logs (204.87 MB). This is because SPARSE only retains events of
suspicious semantic relevance, whereas other techniques [10],
[17], [18], [19], [34] require the whole logs, which significantly

As shown in Section IV-E, there are two super parameters in
SPARSE that need to be set: (1) the C affects the expansion factor,
(2) the T filters the paths. As shown in Equation (3), the larger C,
the smaller the expansion factor α, the lower the path score, and
the fewer events will be retained by SPARSE. Parameter T , on the
other hand, indicates the severity of SPARSE for path selection;
the larger T is, the fewer events will be retained by SPARSE.
We demonstrate the sensitivity of SPARSE in parameter selection by testing all combinations of the hyper-parameters C
and T through grid search methodology. Specifically, we set the
minimum value of C to be 1, the maximum value to be 9, and
the step size to be 1; set the minimum value of T to be 0.1, the
maximum value to be 0.9, and the step size to be 0.1; and test the
performance of SPARSE on the metrics FP/FN as shown in Fig. 5.
As parameter C increases, SPARSE reduces the path score and
retains fewer events, hence the FP decreases. At the same time,
SPARSE misses some critical events, causing FN to rise. As the
threshold T increases, SPARSE blocks more paths and preserves
fewer events, so FP falls while FN rises. As shown in Fig. 5(a),
FP decreases gradually from the upper left to the lower right; as
shown in Fig. 5(b), FN increases gradually from the upper left
to the lower right. The effects of these parameter changes on the
SPARSE are in line with our predictions.
Obviously, FP and FN are two evaluation metrics that we both
want to be as low as possible, but there is a trade-off between
their performance for a system (i.e., a rise in one leads to a fall in
the other). Finally, we choose C = 5 and T = 0.5 as the default
parameters for SPARSE. Of course, the manufacturer can adapt
these parameters to the specific scenario.
VI. DISCUSSION
Cooperation with existing techniques: There is a requirement
for defenders to be able to detect and handle real-world attacks
in real time. As an attack investigation system, SPARSE can be
combined with a variety of existing techniques to meet this
goal. By working with intrusion detection systems [12], [14],
[15], [53] that can provide real-time alerts and defenses, SPARSE
is able to investigate alerts for relevant events and provide a
brief critical component graph to analysts. By working with
compression systems [10], [11], [38], [54], [55] that can reduce
redundant information, SPARSE is able to reduce memory and
disk overheads, enabling years of relevant data storage. By
working with analysis systems [13], [18], [56] that automatically
determine the authenticity of alarms, SPARSE is able to provide
streamlined but sufficient relevant events to support the triage of
alarms.

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

1875

TABLE VI
OVERHEAD PERFORMANCE OF EACH COMPONENT OF SPARSE AND BASELINE APPROACH

Fig. 5.

Hyperparameter Matrices for System Performance with Different Parameters.

Evasion Attacks: Existing investigation techniques, such
as DEPIMAPCT, utilize weight computation and scorepropagation techniques to identify attack entry points. However,
this insight of independently calculating the weights of events
does not fit the situation where information flows between entities. As a result, an attacker can inject a payload by writing
multiple times and thus evade tracking. In contrast, SPARSE
mitigates the impact of this by performing contextual analysis
in path-level to synthesize the relevance between a path and an
alert. An attacker may evade investigation by going the long way
around (i.e., repeating nonsensical behavior) as in the attack case
“Hide File” where the attacker changes the file name multiple
times. As shown in Section IV-E, SPARSE is able to mitigate
this problem by performing relative score calculation and event
score inflation mechanisms.
Limitation: To implement attack investigation, SPARSE relies
on alerts initiated by Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)
placed on the host. SPARSE cannot perform attack investigation
if the detection system fails to launch alerts (identify suspicious
behavior). Recent approaches [57], [58] propose solutions to

improve the detection of anomalous system activity, and SPARSE
can work with these approaches to provide better defenses. If
the detection system initiates false positives frequently, SPARSE
can only identify relevant events but cannot filter these false
alerts. But SPARSE can work with alarm triage techniques [13],
[18], [54] to help them filter false alarms by providing a
streamlined critical component graph. In addition, as shown in
Section IV-B3, SPARSE needs to maintain a suspicious entity
list in memory and a related event table on disk. As the runtime
grows, there is redundant information in the related event table,
such as Event 10 being stored four times in Fig. 3. By working
with existing compression systems [10], [11], [38], [54], [55],
SPARSE can effectively mitigate this situation and enable long
deployment runs.
VII. RELATED WORK
The analysts need to perform threat alert validation and postmortem analysis of incidents. Currently, while auditing is by
no means the only form of forensic investigation, it is telling

1876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

that 75% of incident response specialists consider logs to be the
most valuable form of investigation artifact [59]. And in terms
of methodologies for attack investigation using logs, they can
be categorized into three categories: label propagation-based,
anomaly score-based, and machine learning-based.
Label Propagation-based: Labels are given to nodes and are
propagated to other nodes by system calls. When an alert arises,
the analyst can easily retrace the events associated with the
alert based on the label. Milajerdi et al. propose HOLMES [12],
which mitigates the dependency explosion problem by requiring
the aggregation of more labels to raise the detection threshold.
RapSheet [13] makes use of the tactical provenance graph
(TPG), which instead of encoding low-level system event dependencies, reasons about the causal relationships between threat
alerts. RapSheet proposes a threat scoring scheme that evaluates
the severity of each alert based on TPGs to enable effective
investigation of alerts. CONAN [14] iteratively performs malicious behavior determination with label passing and aggregation
through data provided by ETW, enabling real-time detection
and investigation. ProvG-Searcher [16] employs graph reduction
techniques to address the semantic gap between the query graph
and the provenance graph and simplify subgraph matching to
straightforward comparisons between a query and precomputed
subgraph representations by using order embeddings. These
label-based approaches rely on heuristic rules that cannot handle
all types of attacks and have a high level of false negatives in
attack investigation.
Anomaly Score-based: The essential view of these methods is
to quantify the suspiciousness of edges between pairs of nodes.
Pei et al. ’s HERCULE [51] system correlates multi-source
heterogeneous logs to construct a multi-dimensional weighted
graph and uses the unsupervised community detection algorithm Louvain [60] to discover attack-related paths from it.
NODOZE [18] and PRIOTRACKER [19], on the other hand,
perform statistics on historical data and assign anomaly scores
to events in the dependency graph. The score propagation algorithm is then used to find suspicious events. Both of these
methods rely on statistics of historical data and cannot be applied in complex and variable generative environments. DEPIMPACT [17] calculates dependency weights globally based on
multiple features (including time, data traffic amount, and node
access) and then aggregates the weights to nodes to determine
suspicious points of intrusion. The overlapping parts between
the forward graph of the entry point and the backward graph of
the alarm point are then considered attack-related events. These
score-based methods can cover all critical events. However,
there is no restriction on the variation of scores to solve the
dependency explosion problem, thus leading to higher false
positives. In addition, these methods require reading in all the
logs to build the dependency graph, which is very expensive in
terms of hard disk and memory.
Machine Learning-based: Some techniques use machine
learning methods to learn contextual and structural information from dependency graphs to identify the most relevant
abnormal events to alert. ATLAS [21] uses a novel combination of causal analysis, natural language processing, and machine learning to construct sequence-based models as a way to

establish critical patterns of attack and non-attack behavior in
the dependency graph. On the other hand, DEPCOMM [22]
proposes a novel graph summarization method by dividing the
large graph into process-centric subgraphs. DEPCOMM then extracts summaries from each subgraph, enabling the generation of
summary graphs from dependency graphs, thereby reducing the
difficulty of investigation for analysts. ConGraph [24] integrates
provenance graphs with multi-process contextual information
and employs a CNN-BiLSTM model to detect anomalous nodes.
These supervised learning-based approaches suffer from inadequate training samples, poor generalization capabilities, and
high computational costs. Therefore, some studies leverage selfsupervised learning to model normal system behavior, enabling
the generation of alerts upon detecting anomalies. These alerts
are subsequently correlated to produce the final output for attack
investigation. DISTDET [27] is a distributed detection system
that detects anomalous events by training a hierarchical system event tree (HST) model. Then, DISTDET marks detected
anomalous events as alerts and generates alarm summary graphs
(ASGs). KAIROS [26] trains an anomaly detection model with
an encoder and decoder architecture and reconstructs the attack
through community discovery algorithms [60] to help security
analysts quickly understand the full attack scene. FLASH [25]
incorporates a novel adaptation of a GNN-based contextual encoder to efficiently encode both local and global graph structures
into expressive node embeddings. Similarly, Flash implements
attack investigation at the end through the construction of an
attack evolution graph. MAGIC [28] uses masked graph representation learning to model benign system entities and behaviors, but without an explicit attack investigation component.
R-CAID [29] precomputes the root cause of each node during the
graph construction phase and directly links each node to its root
during the embedding process, thereby preventing adversaries
from masquerading as legitimate processes. Finally, R-CAID
includes all root cause nodes of the anomalous nodes as part
of the attack investigation output. However, the investigation
components in the aforementioned works typically rely on simple correlation of multiple alerts and exhibit a high degree of
integration, making them heavily dependent on the outputs of
preceding detection components.
In contrast to previous work, SPARSE employs a hybrid
method in the specific domain of causality tracking. SPARSE
first uses suspicious semantic delivery rule to construct suspicious semantic graph. Then SPARSE uses path-level contextual
analysis to extract a streamlined critical component graph.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We propose SPARSE, a system that processes streaming logs
and outputs critical events (attack-related events) according to
alert in real-time. Specifically, SPARSE constructs a suspicious
semantic graph related to the POI event by suspicious semantic
transfer rule and storage strategy. Then SPARSE uses a suspicious flow path extraction algorithm to extract all reachable
flow paths from the suspicious semantic graph. Finally, SPARSE
uses path-level contextual analysis to score all paths and filters
irrelevant events to obtain the final critical component graph.

YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME

Our evaluation of real attacks demonstrates that SPARSE achieves
low false positives (FP = 99), low overhead (30 MB for memory
and 21.03 MB for hard disk), and low latency (1.58 s for attack
investigation).
REFERENCES
[1] “What Twitter’s 200 million-user email leak actually means,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/story/twitter-leak-200-millionuser-email-addresses/
[2] “Mitre att&ck,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/
[3] “System administration utilities,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/6/
html/security_guide/chap-system_auditing
[4] “About event tracing,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/windows/win32/etw/about-event-tracing
[5] A. Gehani and D. Tariq, “Spade: Support for Provenance Auditing in
Distributed Environments,” in Proc. ACM/IFIP/USENIX Int. Middleware
Conf., 2012, pp. 101–120.
[6] S. Ma et al., “Kernel-supported cost-effective audit logging for causality tracking,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Usenix Annu. Tech. Conf., 2018,
pp. 241–254.
[7] A. Bates et al., “Trustworthy whole-system provenance for the Linux
kernel,” in Proc. 24th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2015, pp. 319–334.
[8] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing
the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
2022, pp. 307–325.
[9] K. H. Lee et al., “High accuracy attack provenance via binary-based
execution partition,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2013, vol. 16,
pp. 1–16.
[10] Y. Tang et al., “NodeMerge: Template based efficient data reduction
for big-data causality analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun Secur., 2018, pp. 1324–1337.
[11] Z. Xu et al., “High fidelity data reduction for Big Data security dependency
analyses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2016,
pp. 504–516.
[12] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019,
pp. 1137–1152.
[13] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis
for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189.
[14] C. Xiong et al., “Conan: A practical real-time APT detection system with
high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan./Feb. 2020.
[15] T. Zhu et al., “APTSHIELD: A stable, efficient and real-time APT detection
system for linux hosts,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 5247–5264, Nov/-Dec. 2023.
[16] E. Altinisik, F. Deniz, and H. T. Sencar, “ProvG-searcher: A graph representation learning approach for efficient provenance graph search,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 2247–2261.
[17] P. Fang et al., “Back-propagating system dependency impact for attack
investigation,” in Proc. 31th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2461–2478.
[18] W. U. Hassan et al., “Nodoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
2019, pp. 1–15.
[19] Y. Liu et al., “Towards a timely causality analysis for enterprise security,”
in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[20] Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache nice things: Lightning-fast
threat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical storage,” in Proc. 36th
Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 165–178.
[21] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3005–3022.
[22] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM:
Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 540–557.
[23] J. Zeng et al., “WATSON: Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via
aggregation of contextual semantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
2021, pp. 1–18.
[24] L. Li and W. Chen, “Congraph: Advanced persistent threat detection
method based on provenance graph combined with process context in

1877

cyber-physical system environment,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 5, 2024,
Art. no. 945.
[25] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3552–3570.
[26] Z. Cheng et al., “KAIROS: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
2024, pp. 3533–3551.
[27] F. Dong et al., “{DISTDET }: A { Cost-Effective} distributed cyber
threat detection system,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
vol. 23,pp. 6575–6592.
[28] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “{MAGIC}: Detecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation learning,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2024, vol. 24, pp. 5197–5214.
[29] A. Goyal, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “R-CAID: Embedding root cause
analysis within provenance-based intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3515–3532.
[30] “Lateral movement,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.
com/cybersecurity-101/lateral-movement/
[31] “Apt notes,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/aptnotes/data/
[32] Y. Kwon et al., “MCI: Modeling-based causality inference in audit logging
for attack investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, vol. 2,
pp. 1–14.
[33] P. Gao et al., “{AIQL}: Enabling efficient attack investigation from system
monitoring data,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Usenix Annu. Tech. Conf., 2018,
pp. 113–126.
[34] S. Ma et al., “ProTracer: Towards practical provenance tracing by alternating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
2016, vol. 2, pp. 1–15.
[35] S. T. King and P. M. Chen, “Backtracking intrusions,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Syst. Rev., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 223–236, 2003.
[36] “Darpa,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.darpa.mil/program/
transparent-computing
[37] “Darap3 transparent engagement 3,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QlbUFWAGq3Hpl8wVdzOdIoZLFxkII
4EK
[38] T. Zhu et al., “General, efficient, and real-time data compaction strategy
for APT forensic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
pp. 3312–3325, 2021.
[39] P. Gao et al., “Enabling efficient cyber threat hunting with cyber threat
intelligence,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2021, pp. 193–204.
[40] Gao et al., “{SAQL}: A stream-based query system for real-time abnormal
system behavior detection,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp.,
2018, pp. 639–656.
[41] D. Wagner and P. Soto, “Mimicry attacks on host-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 9th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2002,
pp. 255–264.
[42] M. Bishop et al., Introduction to Computer Security, vol. 50. Reading,
MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[43] C. Kruegel et al., Intrusion Detection and Correlation: Challenges and
Solutions, vol. 14. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2004.
[44] “Insider threat monitoring software,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
www.netwrix.com/insider_threat_detection.html
[45] “Auditd,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd
[46] “Lttng,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://lttng.org
[47] “Sysdig,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/draios/sysdig
[48] “Redhat,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/linux-audit/
[49] “Exploit database,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.exploit-db.
com/
[50] “Cyber kill chain,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html
[51] K. Pei et al., “HERCULE: Attack story reconstruction via community
discovery on correlated log graph,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput.
Secur. Appl., 2016, pp. 583–595.
[52] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
from cots audit data,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2017,
pp. 487–504.
[53] T. Kim et al., “Intrusion recovery using selective re-execution,” in Proc. 9th
USENIX Conf. Operating Syst. Des. Implementation, 2010, pp. 89–104.
[54] M. N. Hossain et al., “Dependence-preserving data compaction for scalable forensic analysis,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2018,
pp. 1723–1740.
[55] N. Michael et al., “On the forensic validity of approximated audit logs,”
in Proc. 36th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 189–202.

1878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[56] W. U. Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache nice things: Lightning-fast
threat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical storage,” in Proc. 36th
Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 165–178.
[57] S. Wang et al., “Heterogeneous graph matching networks for unknown
malware detection,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019,
pp. 3762–3770.
[58] X. Han et al., “Unicorn: Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced
persistent threats,” Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., pp. 1–18, 2020.
[59] “Carbon black,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.carbonblack.com/
global-incident-response-threatreport/november-2018/
[60] V. D. Blondel et al., “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks,” J.
Stat. Mech.: Theory Experiment, vol. 2008, no. 10, 2008, Art. no. P10008.
[61] Vpnfilter, New router malware with destructive capabilities,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://symc.ly/2IPGGVE
[62] Ebay, “Ebay Inc. to ask Ebay users to change pass-words” 2014. [Online]. Available: http://blog.ebay.com/ebay-inc-ask-ebay-users-changepasswords/
[63] “Schneier security: Router vulnerability the vpnfilter botnet,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2018/06/
router_vulnerab.html

Jie Ying received the BE degree in digital media from
the Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou,
China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
PhD degree in computer science the Zhejiang University of Technology. His research interests include
APT and cyber threat Intelligence.

Tiantian Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in computer science from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2019. He is currently an associate professor with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology,
China. His research interests include system security
and artificial intelligence.

Mingjun Ma received the BE degree in computer science from Zhejiang ShuRen University, HangZhou,
China, in 2023. He is currently working toward
the MD degree in computer science with the Zhejiang University of Technology. His research interests include APT and cyber intelligence and mobile
authentication.

Chunlin Xiong received the PhD degree on cybersecurity from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
in 2021. He is currently the chief security expert
of China Unicom (Guangdong) Industrial Internet
Company, Ltd., responsible for the construction of
SOC and large models in the security field.

Tieming Chen received the PhD degree in computer software and theory from BeiHang University,
Beijing, China, in 2011. He is currently a professor
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou,
China. His research interests include cyberspace security and intelligence security. He is also a member
of ACM.

Mingqi Lv received the PhD degree in computer
science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
in 2012. His research interests include spatiotemporal
data mining and ubiquitous computing.
Wenrui Cheng received the BE degree in computer
science and technology from Huzhou University,
Huzhou, China, in 2022. She is currently working
toward the PhD degree in computer science with
Zhejiang University of Technology. Her current research interests include knowledge driven APT attack
sample generation and detection.

Qixuan Yuan received the BE degree in computer
science and technology from ShanDong Normal University, Jinan, China, in 2022. She is currently working toward the PhD degree in computer science with
Zhejiang University of Technology. Her research interests include APT detection and cyber threat intelligence analysis.

Yan Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in computer science from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2003. He is currently a
professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL, USA. His research interests include
network security, measurement, and diagnosis for
large-scale networks and distributed systems.