5486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

SRViT: A Robust Online Encrypted Traffic
Classification Based on Vision Transformer
Chang Liu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Lei Han , Zulong Diao, Zheng Wu , Xin He , Member, IEEE,
Weibei Fan , Member, IEEE, and Fu Xiao , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The dramatic rise in encrypted traffic brings huge
challenges to traditional traffic classification methods. Deep
learning-based traffic classification methods have been demonstrated to significantly improve performance. However, the
following limitations remain: i) It is challenging to concurrently
focus on both global and local information in traffic flows,
resulting in the absence of important information. ii) The
existing methods relying on temporal information suffer from
low robustness in case of packet disordering or loss. iii) The use
of multi-layer encryption and random routing in Tor technology
poses more challenges for traffic identification. In this paper, we
propose a novel ViT-based model for more accurate encrypted
traffic classification, called SRViT to overcome the above challenges. Firstly, SRViT proposes a novel mechanism of multi-size
patch division to learn comprehensive hidden knowledge and
dependencies between packets. Secondly, we propose a selfattention operation with a relative position bias to learn the
relative position relationship. After that, an incremental update
mechanism is proposed to adapt to dynamic changes in the
real traffic environment. At last, the comprehensive experiments
on 5 real-world encrypted traffic datasets are carried out. The
experimental results indicate that SRViT outperforms the stateof-the-art methods with an average accuracy improvement of
24.62% while keeping higher robustness and execution efficiency.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, vision transformer, Tor traffic.

N

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification is an important task of
applications or Web services identifying in network

Received 4 September 2024; revised 29 May 2025 and 22 September 2025;
accepted 28 May 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK ING Editor D. Pei. Date of publication 3 June 2026; date of current version
9 June 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Major Science
and Technology Program of China under Grant 2026ZD1307700; in part by
the Major Scientific Instruments and Equipment Development Project of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62427809; in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62572187,
Grant 62472168, Grant 62402234, Grant 62202237, and Grant NY223168;
in part by the Key Program of Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province under Grant BK20243053; in part by the Research Foundation of
Education Bureau of Hunan Province, China, under Grant 25B0452; in part
by the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture under
Grant HLW2025MS24; and in part by the State Key Lab of Processors,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under
Grant CLQ202506. (Corresponding author: Fu Xiao.)
Chang Liu, Lei Han, Zheng Wu, Xin He, Weibei Fan, and Fu
Xiao are with the College of Computer, Nanjing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail:
2023040503@njupt.edu.cn;
hanlei@njupt.edu.cn;
zwu@njupt.edu.cn;
xhe@njupt.edu.cn; wbfan@njupt.edu.cn; xiaof@njupt.edu.cn).
Zulong Diao is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China
(e-mail: diaozulong@hnust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3699540

management and cyberspace security. In network management,
traffic priority classification can help ensure the differentiated
Service-Level Agreement (SLA) requirements [1], [2], [3], [4].
In cyberspace security, accurate traffic identification can prevent the spreading of a significant variety of malicious attacks
[5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Nowadays, with the widespread adoption
of encryption for privacy protection, encrypted traffic has risen
dramatically and occupies a large share of network traffic [10],
[11], [12]. Therefore, encrypted flow classification has become
a topical issue and has attracted extensive attention from both
industry and academia. How to capture the robust patterns
implied in diverse encrypted traffic and support accurate and
generalized traffic classification is crucial for achieving high
network security and effective network management.
However, malware traffic and cybercriminals can consequently evade monitoring systems through privacy-enhancing
encryption techniques such as Tor, VPN, etc., which lead
to the ineffectiveness of traditional rule/DPI-based classification approaches due to the randomized communication
contents [13]. Some studies [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] combine
machine learning algorithms with statistical features manually
extracted from raw traffic to handle encrypted traffic. And,
Lichy et al. [19] demonstrated that, in some cases, classical
machine learning models (e.g., random forests) perform better
in malware traffic classification tasks. However, these methods
are highly dependent on expert-designed features and have
limited generalization capabilities. Recently, deep learning
methods automatically learn complex patterns from raw traffic and achieve significant performance improvements. Some
methods [20], [21], [22], [23] extract information, such as
packet size or packet intervals sequence, from a temporal perspective. However, these approaches may suffer from a drastic
drop in performance under packet disorder and packet loss.
Some researchers [24], [25], [26] take the encrypted traffic
classification as a computer vision task through transforming
encrypted traffic flows to images. These methods focus on
local information extraction of each traffic flow while ignoring
the global and contextual information understanding. However,
fixed convolution kernels can’t adapt to dynamic changes in
encrypted traffic patterns.
Unlike CNNs, a Transformer [27] based on the self-attention
mechanism can take into account both local interactions
and long-distance dependencies through the dynamic computation of attention scores with appropriate generalization
biases according to different task goals. ET-BERT [28] introduces a Transformer-based large model into encrypted traffic

2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

Fig. 1. Tor system structure.

Fig. 2. The visualization results of Tor-encrypted traffic compared to nonTor-encrypted traffic.

classification tasks for performance improvement. NetGPT
[29] proposes a generative pre-trained transformer for network
traffic. YaTC [30] introduces a masked autoencoder (MAE)
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation
for traffic classification. However, most of these methods
inevitably incur high computational complexity in the flow
representations learning, pre-training, and fine-tuning process.
With increasing traffic arrival rates, excessive computational complexity would impede the deployment of traffic
identification methods. In this paper, we aim to propose
a transformer-based traffic classification method to utilize
both temporal and 2-dimensional spatial information while
requiring substantially fewer computational resources. ViT
(Vision Transformer) [31] is a natural choice. It applies a pure
transformer directly to sequences of image patches and attains
excellent classifying results [32].
However, there exist some compatibility problems when
directly introducing ViT into traffic classification tasks, especially for Tor traffic identification [7]. The Tor [33] system’s
architecture is shown in Fig. 1. The user randomly selects three
onion routes and establishes a circuit with these nodes. Mutiplexing multiple circuits per connection. The client encrypts
the packets in three layers and decrypts them sequentially
by each relay node. The path randomization and multi-layer
encryption mechanisms may result in different numbers of
encryption layers in received packets of varying traffic flows or
applications for an onion router. Fig. 2 shows the visualization
results of Tor-encrypted traffic compared to non-Tor-encrypted
traffic. The figure clearly shows that there is an obvious
difference in the visualization of traffic between the different types of traffic. However, the difference between traffic
encrypted with Tor seems to be much weaker than the traffic
without using Tor encryption. These characteristics of multilayer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads, random routing,
and traffic pattern uncertainty impair the effectiveness of fixed
patch-wise interaction learning in ViT.
To address the above challenges, we propose SRViT (multisize relative ViT), a novel ViT-based model for more accurate

5487

encrypted traffic classification. To be specific, we introduce
a multi-size patch overlapping division mechanism to enable
the model to more comprehensively learn the characteristics of
encrypted traffic. In addition, we add relative position bias to
the self-attention mechanism in the encoding layer to learn the
relative position relationship of encrypted traffic. Finally, we
also incorporate an incremental update mechanism to enable
the model to adapt the dynamically changing traffic quickly.
Compared with methods, our paper makes the following
contributions:
• We introduce ViT into encrypted traffic classification
tasks and propose a novel end-to-end identification model,
which transforms traffic flows into image patches and
dynamically learns the local/global dependencies between
packets.
• We propose a novel multi-size patch mechanism to further
comprehensively learn the hidden features and resolve
the multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads,
random routing, and traffic pattern uncertainty problems.
In addition, we propose a self-attention operation with
a novel relative position bias, which can dynamically
adjust the attention scores and learn the relative position
relationship.
• We design a novel incremental update to adapt to the
dynamically changed traffic by only updating a small proportion of parameters when a sharp drop in identification
accuracy occurs.
• We conduct a series of experiments over 5 real-world
encrypted traffic datasets. Compared with the state-ofthe-art methods, SRViT achieves the highest classification
accuracy, with an average improvement of 25.04% in
accuracy, while keeping higher robustness and execution
efficiency.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We
first summarize the related work of traffic classification in
Section II and introduce the preliminary work in Section III.
We then present the technical details of our novel SRViT
framework in Section IV. After that, we evaluate the performance of our proposed model by conducting experiments on
real-world datasets in Section V. Finally, we present a detailed
discussion of SRViT in Section VI and conclude this paper in
Section VII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we briefly introduce these related works and
classify them according to conventional traffic classification,
machine learning-based methods, and deep learning-based
methods as follows.
A. Conventional Traffic Classification
Traffic classification primarily involves port-based methods
and deep packet inspection (DPI)-based methods. The portbased approach [34] is used to identify the application type
by a given list of ports provided by the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority (IANA). However, this method fails in
cases of dynamic port allocation and the use of generic
communication protocol ports [35]. The port allocation and

5488

port masquerading make it no longer applicable in traffic
classification.
The payload-based approaches exploit the specific signature
in the payload for matching. Roughan et al. [36] used statistical signatures to classify P2P application traffic. Meanwhile,
Keralapura et al. [37] provided a self-learning traffic classifier for identifying P2P traffic in high-speed networks with
application payload signatures.
However, due to the emergence of traffic encryption and
encapsulation, and the concern of privacy protection in recent
years, most payload methods become inapplicable anymore.
Thus the advent of encrypted traffic makes network traffic
classification more challenging.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

knowledge from traffic sequences for the first time. Specifically, it uses the sequence of message type to construct a
first-order Markov model with MGP (maximum generation
probability). Building on this work, Shen et al. improve the
classification performance under the second-order Markov
model [41], [42]. In addition, FU et al. [43] extract packet
length and time delay sequences to construct a Hidden Markov
Model. Due to inefficiency in capturing long-term relationships for lower-order Markov models and high computing
complexity for higher models, these methods are likely to
be unsuitable for complex networks such as those with high
throughput. These methods are incapable of capturing longterm relationships and at the same time segmenting the feature
learning and classification process.

B. Encrypted Traffic Classification With Machine Learning
Different from the packet inspection method under plain text
traffic, which fails when the traffic is encrypted, some research
suggests using unencrypted protocol field information. For
example, FlowPrint [15] extracts the device, certificate, size,
and temporal features from the header field of each packet
to make the representation of each flow and then constructs
a fingerprint database. Finally, through the techniques of
clustering and cross-correlating, the identification of each type
of flow is achieved. However, these fingerprints are more
likely susceptible to the noise from the network environment,
leading to the loss of useful knowledge especially in virtual
communication networks.
With the advent of machine learning techniques, recent
research has employed machine learning techniques to deal
with encrypted traffic classification. Researchers have mainly
worked on the extraction of effective and stable information
from the packet header. Namely, considering how to construct
enough valid features rather than extracting signatures from
packet payload. There are two types of features commonly
used in encrypted traffic classification: statistical features and
sequential features.
Statistical Features: Combining with various traditional
machine learning algorithms, most encrypted traffic classification problems are addressed using statistical features.
Examples include logistic regression, random forest, and support vector machine. For instance, AppScanner [38] extracts
statistical features based on packet length and uses a random
forest classifier. Through the analysis of encrypted network
traffic, it proposes a robust method for identifying smartphone
applications with the concept of burst and traffic statistics
features. STM-DT [18] is a method for classifying network
attacking traffic based on the decision tree. HyperVision [6]
is a machine learning-based method for detecting unknown
patterns in encrypted malicious traffic using an in-memory
graph. NetBeacon [39] deploys machine learning models in
the Intelligent Data Plane (IDP) for malicious traffic detection.
However, these methods often rely on much expertise and specialized knowledge, resulting in the difficulty in generalizing to
the flows from constantly emerging applications and the traffic
in complex network environments such as packet disorder and
packet loss.
Sequential Features: The work [40] proposes to use
the Markov transformation matrices to learn the temporal

C. Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on Deep Learning
Deep learning has been well used in the fields of image
processing and natural language processing, and researchers
have made multiple attempts to apply them in encrypted traffic.
The use of supervised deep learning for encrypted traffic
classification has become a popular approach. Beauty [44] and
DF [24] are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
An autonomous model updating framework [26] is proposed
to perform accurate traffic classification using improved CNN
classifiers. FS-Net [20] uses recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
to automatically extract representations from the raw data
packets of encrypted traffic. Deeppacket [25] employs stacked
autoencoder and 1D convolutional neural networks to achieve
end-to-end traffic classification. GraphDApp [45] introduces
Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIGs) to represent each individual
encrypted flow, serving as a method for DApp fingerprinting
using graph neural networks (GNNs). ET-BERT [28] proposes
a pre-training framework where the downstream task uses
a transformer model for encrypted traffic classification. In
addition, the work [46] proposes Mini-FlowPic, using augmentations for few sample traffic classification, which utilizes
CNN and comparative learning techniques to achieve efficient
and accurate cryptographic traffic classification with limited
labeled data. EC-GCN [47] classifies encrypted traffic flows
based on multi-scale graph convolutional neural networks.
DMSTG [48] employs a dynamic learning module to timely
estimate the graph Laplacian for GCN and a self-attention
module to adaptively weight traffic data, enabling the effective fusion of multi-view spatio-temporal features to capture
dynamic changes in traffic patterns. RBLJAN [49] proposes
Robust Byte-Labeled Joint Attention Network, which is an
efficient and robust deep learning-based framework for both
packet-level and flow-level encrypted network traffic classification. RBLJAN shows superior performance in terms of
detection speed and robustness.
Our approach mainly differs from existing ones in the
following aspects: Firstly, we introduce ViT into encrypted
traffic classification tasks and an overlapping multi-size patch
division mechanism that allows the model to learn the features
of encrypted traffic more comprehensively and improves the
efficiency of Tor-encrypted traffic classification. In addition,
we add relative position bias to the self-attention mechanism
in the encoding layer to adjust the self-attention score and

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

learn the relative position relationship of encrypted traffic
dynamically to enhance the robustness of the model. Finally,
we incorporate an incremental update mechanism that updates
only a small number of parameters when the model’s recognition accuracy suffers a large degradation, allowing the model to
quickly adapt to dynamically changing traffic reaching online
classification.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Tor and Traffic Analysis
Tor [33], also known as The Onion Router, is an
open-source network designed to facilitate anonymous communication over the Internet. Its primary goal is to obscure
the user’s real IP address and the content of their communication by routing and encrypting the user’s data over the
Internet. Tor system consists of users, onion proxies, onion
routers, directory servers, and target application servers. The
architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
The Tor network includes thousands of relay nodes (onion
router, OR) operated by volunteers worldwide, using a multihop proxy mechanism for user communication privacy. The
client runs an Onion Proxy to randomly select onion routers
from the directory server and establish a path that we call
a circuit. Typically, this circuit consists of three ORs: Entry
Node (or Guard Node), Middle Node, and Exit Node, and then
the user establishes a circuit with these nodes hop by hop.
During data transmission, OP encrypts user data in multiple
layers and decrypts it sequentially by each relay node. Onion
router uses public keys to establish TCP connections secured
by TLS, multiplexing multiple circuits per connection. When
a client accesses different target servers, a new circuit is built
in real-time. In addition, the client OP re-selects a new circuit
every 10 minutes. Therefore, the same node may appear in
different locations on multiple circuits simultaneously and the
packets through it may vary in the number of encrypted layers.
Through providing sender privacy for internet services to its
users, Tor has become a popular and low-latency anonymity
network. The characteristics in the Tor network can be summarized into the following three aspects:
• Multi-layer Encryption (Onion-like encryption): Each
OR decrypts only one layer of encryption corresponding
to it to reveal the next relay node in the path and forwards
the remaining encrypted data to it.
• Fixed-size Cells: Tor divides data into fixed-sized onionencrypted units called cells (typically 512 bytes) before
transmission. This standardization helps to obfuscate the
actual size and structure of the data, making it harder to
analyze and correlate by size alone.
• Random Routing: The circuit through which data travels
is randomly selected for each session, and it changes periodically. This dynamic and unpredictable routing makes
it difficult for adversaries to track users’ activities or
correlate traffic between relays.
Although encryption makes the payload look cluttered and
unsemantic, Sengupta et al. [50] exploit the randomness
difference between different ciphertexts to distinguish different applications, which suggests that the encrypted traffic

5489

is not perfectly random and implicit patterns exist. Therefore, deep learning methods can be used to extract the
implicit deep information in raw traffic. Even in encrypted
and anonymized environments like Tor, deep learning models,
especially those designed for sequence analysis like Transformer, can learn to extract and identify correlations in these
subtle packet sequences that are not immediately apparent to
human analysts, and identify traffic when traditional methods
fail.
B. Vision Transformer
Transformer based on self-attention mechanism has made a
great success in the field of NLP. Although the Transformer
structure has become a standard in the NLP, its application
in the computer vision field is still very limited. ViT (vision
transformer) is a model that directly applies the Transformer
to image classification and achieves good performance.
Transformer consists of multi-head self-attention layers and
feed-forward neural network layers. The self-attention layer
is used to encode the sequence and the feed-forward neural
network layer is used to process the features at each position
in the sequence. The self-attention mechanism calculates the
attention scores between each pair of tokens in the input data,
thus enabling the model to capture complex dependencies
regardless of their distance in the sequence. Transformer
uses the self-attention mechanism for greater parallelism and
computational efficiency when dealing with long sequences
and large-scale data. Multi-head attention splits the input
into multiple subsets and computes the attention scores for
each subset independently, which allows the model to learn
information in multiple subspaces and enhances the model’s
sensitivity to different locations, thus enabling the model to
capture different types of relationships and patterns in the data
simultaneously.
ViT divides the input image into a sequence of nonoverlapping patches, and then the sequence of patches is
treated as tokens, which can be fed into the original Transformer to accomplish the classification task. Since the latent
feature extraction of encrypted traffic packets is more suitable as a CV task [30]. ViT can utilize both temporal and
2-dimensional spatial information, the model is simple, effective and highly scalable. Therefore, this paper makes ViT the
backbone network but devises a dedicated ViT structure to
make it more suitable for Tor-encrypted traffic classification.
First, we design an overlapping multi-size patch mechanism
to learn the features of Tor encrypted traffic flows more
comprehensively. Second, we propose a relative position bias
in the multi-headed self-attention mechanism to dynamically
adjust the attention score and learn the relative position
relationship in each encrypted traffic flow. As detailed in
Section IV.
IV. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND M ODEL
In this section, we introduce the encrypted traffic classification problem and the basic framework of our proposed model.
After that, we describe our flow representation and classifier
structure in detail.

5490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE I
L IST OF N OTATIONS

A. Problem Definition
Our paper focuses on building an end-to-end encrypted
traffic identification model to accurately categorize malicious
encrypted traffic by taking each traffic flow as input. To
maintain consistency in input length, we only select the first n
bytes of each flow and formulate it as (x1 , x2 , . . . , x p ) after
patch splitting, where p is the number of patches and xi
denotes the ith patch token. The output is a vector Y ∈ RZ ,
where Z denotes the number of categories. If a traffic flow
belongs to the jth class, then Y j = 1, otherwise Y j = 0. The
notations used in this paper are shown in Table I.

• Q2: How to maintain the high robustness of Tor traffic flow classification when facing disorders and packet
losses in the network?
• Q3: How to keep the high identification accuracy under
dynamic changes in network traffic data?
Considering the above problems, we convert the problem
of encrypted traffic identification into an image recognition
problem in computer vision and propose our novel framework
SRViT, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Our framework mainly consists
of a preprocessing module, an embedding layer with a multisize patch mechanism, an encoding layer containing a Bias
Unit, and an output layer. To address the first problem, we
design an overlapping multi-size patch mechanism in the
embedding layer to learn the features of encrypted traffic flows
more comprehensively. By analyzing patches of multiple sizes,
the multi-size patch mechanism ensures that both features at
different granularity levels, including fine details and overarching patterns, are captured simultaneously, thus providing richer
feature sets for the model to improve classification accuracy
and robustness. In addition, to solve the problem of Tor’s
random routing or packet disorder when the network condition
is poor, we propose a novel self-attention operation in the
encoding layer to dynamically adjust the attention score and
learn the relative position relationship in each encrypted traffic
flow. Finally, we design an incremental update mechanism to
quickly adapt our framework to the dynamic network environment by updating only a small proportion of parameters when
the framework suffers from a large degradation in classification
accuracy.

B. Overview of The Model

C. Preprocessing Module

Encryption typically makes traffic appear more random and
less predictable. Multi-layer encryption aggravates this effect,
with each encryption layer changing the statistical properties of the traffic, and patterns recognizable in single-layer
encrypted traffic are further obscured in multi-layer encrypted
traffic. Because of the characteristics of multi-layer encryption,
highly obfuscated payloads, and random routing, the similarity
between the same category of Tor traffic flows is nearly weak
and the difference between different categories is not obvious,
which makes traditional encrypted traffic identification algorithms have not performed optimally in Tor encrypted traffic
identification.
Furthermore, with the explosive growth of massive Internet traffic, the number of packets required to be analyzed
is constantly increasing. As a result, the performance of
traditional identification algorithms on large scale training
samples and features is far from satisfactory. Although the
model based on Transformer has achieved great improvement
in Tor traffic identification accuracy, its high computational
complexity incurred during traffic representation learning, pretraining, and fine-tuning impedes the practical deployment and
application of the model. This poses more problems for the
encrypted traffic identification task.
• Q1: How to design a mechanism to help the model
automatically extract long-term stable features for Tor
traffic flows encrypted at multiple layers while reducing
the required computational resources?

This module is mainly responsible for transforming the realtime traffic in the format of pcap into the input data that meets
requirements. We intercept the information from the raw flow
data to form a two-dimensional matrix, which is processed
as an image and categorized by the vision transformer algorithm. Different layers of encryption may affect the traffic
differently, creating complex multi-dimensional challenges for
feature extraction and analysis. The reason for representing the
flow as a two-dimensional matrix rather than one-dimensional
is to utilize the second dimension to depict the multilevel
information of the Tor flow [30]. Encrypted network traffic
often exhibits temporal patterns. ViT can capture these patterns
and correlate them with spatial patterns in images.
For encrypted traffic data, a lot of useful information is
lost if only the packet size sequence is utilized. Especially
for the Tor encrypted traffic, the characteristic of fixed-size
cells impairs the effectiveness of the methods that use only
packet sizes. During TLS communication, the client and server
exchange handshake plaintext data to negotiate the parameters
used in subsequent encrypted connections, such as version,
cipher suite, extensions, and certificates. Previous research
has shown that this information is very effective in encrypted
traffic recognition [51]. We convert the bytes of the encrypted
network flows into images, with one byte corresponding
to one pixel of the image. Although encryption makes the
payload more randomized, most of the original information in
the network traffic can be retained since the image features

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

5491

Fig. 3. Overview of our method SRViT.

are extracted from the raw data of the encrypted traffic.
As a result, the image features have received widespread
attention and utilization in encrypted traffic identification
research.
However, encryption would introduce noise in the image
converted by the traffic, so choosing an appropriate image size
is particularly important in the feature extraction process of the
image. If the size chosen is too small, the image will not be
able to fully describe the information of the encrypted traffic
and if the size chosen is too large, the information redundancy
will affect the accuracy and efficiency of the identification
model. In order to keep the information of the encrypted traffic
completely and also ensure high accuracy and efficiency, we
select the first 784 bytes of the original encrypted traffic to
be converted into a grayscale image for identification after
sufficient experiments [52].
We recognize packets with the same IP address, port number, and protocol type as the same flow and only keep the first
n bytes of each flow. Then, we format the byte sequence into
an image of size H × W × C through a reshaping operation,
where H, W, C denote the height, width, and number of
channels of the image, respectively. In this paper, n is taken
as 784, and the intercepted encrypted traffic flow is converted
to a grayscale map with a size of 28 × 28 × 1. Fig. 2 displays
some visual results of preprocessed network flows belonging
to different types. From the visualizations, we conclude that
the different classes of traffic are obviously discriminated from
each other and have a high consistency across each class,
so it is reasonable to assume that good performance can be
obtained with our approach. At the same time, the differences
between the traffic with Tor encryption seem to be much
smaller compared to the traffic without Tor encryption, which
impairs the effectiveness of directly using computer vision
algorithms such as CNN, ViT, etc.

D. Multi-Size Patch Division
Multiple encryption layers obscure traffic patterns, making
it difficult to analyze or classify traffic based on traditional
feature extraction methods. Vision Transformer (ViT) processes input images by dividing them into a spatially regular
grid of equal-size patches without overlapping. It hinders the
application of ViT in network traffic identification and may
lead to some information loss in feature extraction, especially
for encrypted Tor traffic. Thus we propose a novel patch
dividing mechanism by multi-size division with overlapping
to complement the extracted features of the flow.
Image features are discrete, while network traffic features
are continuous. This makes it possible that the direct application of ViT may miss key features of the traffic, especially
for Tor traffic flows encrypted at multiple layers, potentially
leading to decreased recognition accuracy. To solve the above
problem, we design a simple multi-size patch mechanism that
can well capture the features of Tor traffic, characterized by
multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payload, and random
routing. Multi-layer encryption can impact traffic features
at various scales. Smaller patches in the multi-size patch
mechanism might capture fine-grained, localized details that
larger patches might miss, while larger patches can capture
broader, more global patterns.
As shown in Fig. 4, the input image x ∈ RH×W is first
split into overlapping 2D patches of size P × P with a total
number of p. We use two layers with two different patch
sizes P1 , P2 along with two different stride lengths S 1 , S 2
to extract different feature information from the input data.
These features are represented as X00 = [x1p1 ; x2p1 ; . . . ; xNp1 ], X01 =
[x1p2 ; x2p2 ; . . . ; x M
p2 ]. The numbers of patches generated by each
of the two layers are denoted as N = HW/S 12 , M = HW/S 22 ,
2
2
and patches are represented as x p1 ∈ RN×P1 , x p2 ∈ R M×P2 . The

5492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

with each other based on the relevance of different heads
Concat(head1 , . . . , headh ), and each head is computed by the
attention function:


Q · KT
MS AB = so f tmax
+ BRPB · V,
√
d
Q = xl W Q , K = xl W K , V = xl W V ,
(2)

Fig. 4. The schematic illustration of multi-size patch division.

patches are then mapped to d-dimensional vectors by a linear
layer as patch embeddings.
The patch size and stride length need to be set reasonably. If
they are too large, they cannot capture the local information of
the multi-layer encryption of Tor traffic effectively; if they are
too small, they cannot learn the global information effectively,
and this will lead to excessively long model training times.
According to the characteristics of Tor traffic, we experimented
with several sets of parameters, setting P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 to 3, 2, 7,
and 4 respectively. This configuration allows our model to
capture the multi-layer encryption information of Tor traffic
while maintaining short classification times.
Meanwhile, since traffic data transmission is highly related
to sequential order, the position embeddings are added to the
patch embeddings as the input to the traffic encoder to maintain the crucial position information. With fixed localization
of packets, coupled with position embedding, our approach
transcends location limitations to capture long-term stable
dependencies in traffic. Additionally, similar to the [class]
token in BERT, a learnable embedding also needs to be
prepended to the sequence of embedded patches (X00 = xclass ).
The equation for this step is shown in Eq. (1):
N+M
E] + E pos . (1)
X0 = [xclass ; x1p1 E; . . . ; xNp1 E; xN+1
p2 E; . . . ; x p2

E. RPB Attention Module
Traffic data is highly related to order, especially since Torencrypted traffic is characterized by random routing, so the
order between packets is particularly important. ViT only adds
positional embeddings to the embedding layer to represent
absolute positions, which is insufficient in many cases for Torencrypted traffic. In encrypted traffic, especially in the case
of disorder and packet loss, the relative distances between
different packet patches are obviously different. Thus position
information with different relative distance values also needs
to be assigned to different patches. Therefore, we propose to
add a relative position bias to solve this problem.
However, if the relative position embedding is added
directly to the embedding layer, after a series of matrix
operations in self-attention, the relative position information is
still lost and only the absolute position information remains.
A natural idea is to add the relative position information back
into the attention bias computation. Therefore, we introduce
a relative position bias unit BRPB in the multi-headed selfattention mechanism, in which patches can effectively interact

where Q, K, V stand for Query, Key, and Value, respectively,
and they are all matrices. W Q , W K , W V ∈ Rd×d are learnable
parameters. d is the embedding dimension, which is used for
normalization. Note that the bias unit is a trainable parameter.
BRPB needs to be calculated according to Equation Eq. (5) in
the next section. It can be seen that BRPB serves to add a value
to each element of Q· K T , the essence of which is that it wants
self-attention to be further biased. The relative position does
not completely model the position information of each input,
but the relative distance between the current position and the
position that is being attended is considered when counting
attention score, which can be used to adjust the scores of the
attention between the different positions in the self-attention
computation and make the model learn the relative position
relationship.
Finally, the encoding layer consists of the RPB self-attention
module and MLP block stacked in L layers. The mathematical
format is shown in Eq. (3) and Eq. (4). To enhance the
robustness and convergence speed of the model, layer normalization (LN) is applied before every block, and residual
connections are applied after every block. The MLP Block
includes the Fully Connected Layer and the GELU Activation
Function.
Xl0 = MS AB (LN(xl−1 )) + xl−1 ,

l = 1 . . . L,

(3)

Xl = MLP(LN(xl0 )) + xl0 ,

l = 1 . . . L.

(4)

F. RPB Unit
To address the challenge of traffic identification posed by
the random routing characteristics of Tor traffic, we add
relative position bias to the self-attention mechanism. Relative
position bias makes it possible to discriminate the relative
positions between different tokens by fine-tuning the selfattention arithmetic process. The aim is to make the position
vectors of the same dimension at different positions contain
the relative position information between them, which can
be realized by the periodicity of the function. Therefore,
trigonometric functions can be utilized to represent the relative
position information, which is essentially the use of sine/cosine
formulas with different frequencies for different dimensions
thus generating high-dimensional position vectors for different
locations. It is calculated by the following equation Eq. (5):
(
sin(ωk pos), i = 2k
(i)
PE pos =
cos(ωk pos), i = 2k + 1
1
,
(5)
ωk =
100002k/dmodel
where the resulting PE is computed as a 2-dimensional
matrix with pos corresponding to each input position and i
representing the ith position of each position vector. dmodel is

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

the vector dimension such that each position has an encoding
that matches the dmodel dimension. Note that in this paper the
position vectors are summed with the results of the previous
vectors and therefore the value is taken as the length of the
sequence. The equation shows that different dimensions use
sine/cosine functions with different frequencies to generate
high-dimensional position vectors for different positions that
express relative position information. The advantage of using
trigonometric design in this way is that: firstly, the positional
encoding at position i can be linearly represented by the
positional encoding at position i + k, reflecting the relative
positional relationship between the two positions. Secondly,
the inner product of the positional encoding at positions i
and i + k decreases as the relative position increases, thus
characterizing the relative distance of the positions. Finally, it
ensures that the position encoding of each token is unique and
regular, with small differences between neighboring positions
and larger differences between positions that are farther away.
Moreover, it ensures that the relative positions are bounded
and located in a continuous space.
Algorithm 1 Soft Relative Vision Transformer (SRViT)
1: Input: Image X with dimensions H × W × C
2: Output: Class predictions Y
3: Initialization:
4: Embedding dimension d, Number of attention heads h,
Number of transformer layers L, Patch size p1 , p2 .
5: Multi-size Patch Division:
6: Divide the image into overlapping patches, linearly project
patch vectors to d-dimensional space and add positional
encoding and class token as section IV-D.
N+M
N+1
E] + E pos
7: X0 = [xclass ; x1p1 E; . . . ; xN
p1 E; x p2 E; . . . ; x p2
8: RPB Attention Module:
9:
RPB Unit:
pos 
10:
PE (2k) = sin 10000
2k/d
pos 
11:
PE (2k+1) = cos 10000
2k/d
12: for l = 1 to L do
13:
for i = 1 to h do
 T

√ + BRPB · V
14:
MS ABi = softmax Q·K
d
15:
end for
16:
Xi0 = LN(Xi−1 )Xi−1
17:
Xi = MLP(LN(Xi0 )) + Xi0
18: end for
19: Output Layer:
20:
return Y = LN(XL0 )
G. Output Layer
Since the task of this paper is to classify the encrypted
traffic, the role of this module is to extract the corresponding [class] token to output classification results. The shape
of the output tensor after passing through the Transformer
Encoder remains the same as the input tensor. The output
layer in Vision Transformer is composed of a fully connected layer and GELU activation and a fully connected
layer. The detailed calculated formulation is as follows
(Eq. (6)),
Y = LN(XL0 ).
(6)

5493

Fig. 5. The schematic diagram of the Incremental Update Mechanism.

H. The Incremental Update
Since Tor traffic is characterized by uncertain traffic patterns
and the nature of Internet traffic flow is dynamic over time,
therefore we design the process of an incremental update to
adapt to the changing characteristics. When a significant drop
in the accuracy of traffic recognition is monitored, our model
determines that there is an obvious change in flow representations, indicating the current model parameters are no longer
applicable. However, retraining the model is expensive, the
incremental update mechanism updates the specific parameters
of the model to achieve accurate online traffic classification
without retraining the whole model.
Layers closer to the bottom encode generic reusable features, whereas encoding layers closer to the top may focus
additionally on task-specific context and semantics, so the
top layers capture more abstract features and encode more
specialized features that are better adapted to the specific task.
Updating these specialized features is more useful. Specifically
speaking, we freeze most of the parameters of the model and
update only the parameters of the MLP layer for each Transformer encoder layer. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the other parts of
the model (depicted as blue blocks in Fig. 5) are loaded with
weights from the original model, and the parameters are kept
frozen. The MLP layer parameters (depicted as red blocks
in Fig. 5) are updated on a new task-specific data domain
containing task-specific losses.
In this paper, we detect the output probability distribution
when the model classifies the current traffic, which usually
reflects the model’s confidence that the traffic is classified into
the current category. We set the threshold of the maximum
output probability to 0.9, which means that the incremental update mechanism is triggered when the average of the
model’s maximum classification probability for the current
batch of data is detected to be below 0.9. A decrease in the
output probability when the model classifies may suggest a
decrease in the model’s confidence in classifying the current
traffic data, so we train the original model with incremental
updates using newly arrived traffic.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we perform four encrypted flow classification
tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of the SRViT model

5494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE II
DATASETS

in solving different encryption scenarios and data distribution imbalance problems. In addition, we perform ablation
experiments to verify the effects of our key designs in SRViT.
We also compare our model with the state-of-the-art models
in terms of robustness, online classification performance and
execution effectiveness.
A. Experiment Setup
1) Datasets and Classification Tasks: To assess the effectiveness and generalization of SRViT, we conducted experiments on encrypted traffic classification tasks using five
different types of public datasets. The corresponding datasets
are presented in Table II.
Dataset 1: The USTC-TFC dataset [53] comprises encrypted
traffic samples consisting of both malicious software and
benign applications. It is utilized for the task of encrypted
malicious traffic classification, consisting of a total of
20 categories, including 10 benign and 10 malignant traffic
types. The size of the USTC-TFC dataset is 3.71 GB.
Dataset 2: The ISCX-VPN dataset [54] is composed of
6 communication applications in both VPN and non-VPN
scenarios captured by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity.
It is designated to classify encrypted traffic that uses Virtual
Private Networks (VPNs) for network communication. The
dataset contains 14 types of raw traffic data, consisting of
7 types of non-VPN and VPN traffic respectively.
Dataset 3: The ISCX-Tor dataset [55] is a labeled dataset
of Tor traffic published by the University of New Brunswick
(UNB). It aims to classify encrypted traffic that uses an
Onion Router (Tor) to enhance communication privacy. The
dataset contains 16 traffic classes, 8 categories of Tor traffic,
and 8 categories of non-Tor traffic. This traffic obfuscates
the communication between senders and receivers through a
distributed routing network, further obscuring the behavior
of the traffic, and thus enhancing the difficulty of traffic
classification.
Dataset 4: The CIC-IoT2022 dataset [56] is a multi-purpose
academic IoT dataset for profiling, behavioral analysis, and
vulnerability testing of different IoT devices. We selected realistic traffic flows captured in interaction experiments, including
4 different interaction methods for 28 devices. Categorizing by
device type generates the dataset containing 4 different device
types.
Dataset 5: The VNAT dataset [57] is a VPN/non-VPN
network application traffic dataset provided by MIT Lincoln Laboratory, which primarily contains labeled PCAP data
files covering encrypted and non-encrypted traffic data for

10 applications across 5 traffic categories. The dataset is
divided into 10 categories, containing 5 categories of VPN
and 5 categories of non-VPN traffic data.
Dataset 6: The Gotham2025 dataset [58] is a large-scale IoT
network traffic dataset based on the Gotham testing platform.
It contains traffic generated by 78 simulated IoT devices,
covering protocols such as MQTT, CoAP, and RTSP. The
dataset includes 1 category of benign and five distinct types
of malicious traffic.
2) Data Pre-Processing: In this paper, the data preprocessing is carried out according to Section IV-C to convert
flows into grayscale images. The datasets are split by the
five-fold cross-validation to guarantee the credibility of the
experimental results.
3) Evaluation Metrics: Generally four evaluation metrics:
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 are used to evaluate and
compare the performance of the models. Accuracy is used to
evaluate the overall performance of the classifiers. In the case
of class imbalance, precision and recall need to be considered,
while the F1 score balances the relationship between precision
and recall, therefore making it more robust compared to
accuracy. T P represents the number of correctly classified
positive samples, T N represents the number of correctly classified negative samples, FP represents the number of instances
incorrectly classified positive samples, and FN represents the
number of instances incorrectly classified negative samples.
The formulas are as follows:
TP + TN
,
T P + FP + FN + T N
TP
Precision =
,
T P + FP
TP
Recall =
,
T P + FN
Precision × Recall
F1 = 2 ·
.
Precision + Recall
Accuracy =

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

4) Implementation Details: For the training phase, we use
the Adam optimizer for 100 epochs with the base learning rate
set to 1 × 10−3 and a batch size of 32. The batch size is 64 for
testing. We implemented the proposed method using PyTorch
2.1.1 and trained it on the GPU environment of NVIDIA
GeForce GTX3090.
In time performance experiments, we compare and analyze
the time performance of the ET-BERT algorithm and our
algorithm respectively in a GPU environment, which is an
NVIDIA GeForce GTX3090.
B. 7 State-of-the-Art Models
We compare SRViT with 7 various state-of-the-art models,
including:
• ET-BERT [28] treats traffic representation extraction as an
NLP task for pre-training and then fine-tunes the classifier
with limited labeled data. It’s important to note that the
ET-BERT model requires pre-training. In reproducing the
experiments, we directly downloaded the pre-training files
provided by the original authors and trained only in the
fine-tuning phase.

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

Fig. 6. The results of accuracy comparison.

Fig. 7. Performance comparison on 6 datasets.

• FS-Net [20], Deep Fingerprinting (DF) [24], GraphDApp
[45], Beauty [44], and 2D-CNN [52] are DL-based traffic
analysis methods, which is training by the supervised way
using raw packet information.
C. Accuracy Comparison
The experimental results of accuracy performance are
shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7.
Encrypted malicious traffic: The results for USTC-TFC
indicate that our model outperforms all other methods on four
metrics, with our model achieving an accuracy of 99.99%.
The malicious traffic in this dataset contains application-layer
unencrypted data, which makes it easier for other models to
utilize such plaintexts for classification.
VPN encrypted traffic classification: The VPN encrypted
traffic classification contains two datasets. On the ISCX-VPN
dataset, our method outperforms other models for all metrics,
and we achieve the best performance on F1, which can
reach 98.61%. In addition, this dataset poses the challenge of
data imbalance to classification algorithms. The experimental
results suggest that our model exhibits better performances
in identifying obfuscated traffic even in the presence of data
imbalance. Meanwhile, the accuracy of our algorithm can still
reach 99.74% on the VNAT dataset. As can be seen from the
figure, our algorithm has the best results on all metrics.
Tor encrypted traffic classification: The results on ISCXTor show that our algorithm results in a 45.17% accuracy
improvement over the ET-BERT model, which holds the best
performance among the models we compared. Our method can
achieve 99.96% accuracy, 99.89% recall, 99.91% precision,
99.90% F1. Moreover, on this dataset, our method achieves an
average improvement of 22.31% accuracy, 63.89% precision,
67.91% recall, and 68.33% F1 over the previous algorithms,

5495

respectively. Furthermore, we observe that DL-based methods
perform poorly, whether using sequence features or payloads
as inputs. The reason is more likely that the initial traffic in
Tor is not only encrypted with multiple layers, but also carried
out antagonistic obfuscation, making it difficult to analyze the
payload directly, and the sequence features hardly work on
limited captured packets. Meanwhile, Tor traffic is characterized by variable packet lengths the use of intercepting raw
bytes does not help discriminate each type of traffic encrypted
with Tor and cannot differentiate the traffic information, while
our multi-size patch mechanism can solve this problem by
extracting features in multiple layers.
IoT traffic classification: As shown in the results, our
method outperforms all previous models in all metrics, including ET-BERT. ET-BERT achieves similarly excellent results to
our model on the first three datasets. This is because ET-BERT
needs to be pre-trained with a large amount of data, and the
traffic of the first three datasets is included in the pre-training
of the ET-BERT model. However, the traffic of this dataset is
not included in the pre-training, so ET-BERT does not have
the related knowledge of the IoT traffic. Our model does not
need the pre-training process and still obtains 99.63% accuracy
on the CIC-IoT2022 dataset and 99.62% on the Gotham2025
dataset.
D. Robustness Study
In real deployments, the data acquisition end often has the
situation of out-of-order and packet loss, which will affect
the identification method of encrypted traffic negatively. In
this experiment, we randomly modified some of the traffic
packets to explore the robustness of the algorithms in harsh and
high-noise conditions. We conducted two sets of experiments:
(1) packet disordering: randomly selected part of the packets
to disrupt the order, and (2) packet loss: randomly selected
part of the packets to be discarded. We set the ratio range of
noise labeling from 0.2 to 0.8.
Both FS-Net and CNN are classical DL-based traffic classification algorithms, CNN leverages the spatial features of
the traffic while FS-Net uses RNN which can focus on the
temporal features of the traffic, therefore we select these two
methods as the representatives and compare our approach with
them. We demonstrate the results obtained by our method, the
CNN model, and FS-Net on the Tor dataset in the presence of
noise, and similar results are obtained on other datasets.
In Fig. 8, the first and last four plots show the experimental
results of packet disordering and packet loss, respectively.
The experimental results indicate that each model shows a
different degree of degradation in the robustness experiments.
Compared with the previous traffic classification model, our
model is more fault-tolerant with an average improvement of
13.68% in accuracy, 54.83% in precision, 56.91% in recall,
and 55.83% in F1 at a noise ratio of 0.8 in the case of packet
disordering. Even when the noise rate reaches 0.8, SRViT still
has strong classification capability.
We can observe that the performance of our model decreases
the least in the case of equal noise. It is because at first, the
mechanism of multiple layers of patches with different sizes
is used to minimize the impact by dividing the packets into

5496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 8. Performances on robustness.

Fig. 9. Performance of ablation experiments and incremental update.

the same patch even when they are disordered. Secondly, we
introduce the relative position bias into the model, making
the classification performance more stable, while the absolute
position instead brings about adverse impacts in case of
disorder or packet loss.
E. Ablation Study
To verify the contribution of the multi-size patch mechanism
and relative position bias in solving the problems of multilayer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads, random routing,
and traffic pattern uncertainty for Tor-encrypted traffic, we
show the results of the ablation experiments in Fig. 9(a).
ViT denotes the algorithm that utilizes the Vision Transformer
model directly. SViT refers to the algorithm that incorporates multi-size overlapping patches on top of the Vision
Transformer model. Then, RViT denotes the algorithm that
introduces relative position bias to the Vision Transformer
model. Furthermore, SRViT (embedding) combines multi-size
overlapping patches and directly includes a relative position
embedding in the Vision Transformer model. Lastly, SRViT
(Bias) adds multi-size overlapping patches and includes a
relative position bias in the Vision Transformer model.
We observe that the highest performance of the model is
achieved after combining the two mechanisms introduced.
First, the accuracy of our model increases to 97.52% after

the introduction of the multi-size patch mechanism. Second,
from the results, we can see that the accuracy of SRViT
(embedding) is the same as that of SViT, which can also prove
that by adding relative position embedding directly, the relative
position information is still lost in the calculation of attention
scores, and thus the performance is not significantly improved.
However, the performance of the classifier improves when
relative position bias is introduced. In conclusion, the two
mechanisms we introduce can extract deeper long-term stable
features of encrypted traffic as well as inter-packet position
information to improve the classification performance of the
model.
F. Online Classification Performance
In this section, the results of the incremental updating
experiments are shown to verify the effectiveness of our online
performances. We first train the SRViT model using the VPN
dataset with 100 epochs and test it, and then test it using
the other datasets to simulate the long-term change of traffic.
Through the proposed mechanism of incremental update, our
model could adapt to these dynamic changes and keep a stable
performance, compared with other methods. Fig. 9(b) shows
the results of the last 10 tests and the results of 5 tests after
using the incremental update. During online classification, we
test the output probability of the model. In our experiments,
we use labeled datasets and show the accuracy as a comparison. As can be seen from Fig. 9(b), the output maximum
probability of the model suffers a large drop when traffic
arrives from a new dataset, and the accuracy rate drops dramatically at that time. Therefore, we may determine whether
the model needs to be an incremental update by detecting
the maximum output probability. After this, the incremental
update can quickly recover the model’s classification accuracy,
and the output probability also gradually recovers in the
same trend as the accuracy. Similar results were found on
other datasets. Furthermore, to validate the robustness of the

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

5497

TABLE V
TABLE III
N UMBER OF PARAMETERS & FLOP S OF THE T WO M ETHODS

T RAINING T IME ON GPU

TABLE IV

T ESTING T IME ON GPU

TABLE VI
T HE GPU E NERGY C ONSUMPTION

confidence-based update mechanism, we conducted experiments following the robustness test setup described in
Section V-C. Results demonstrate that even under packet
loss or out-of-order conditions, our method maintains high
confidence above the trigger threshold.
G. Time Consumption Comparison
The goal of this paper is to propose a transformer-based
traffic classification method to maintain the model classification performance while substantially reducing the required
computational resources. Therefore, we compare the time
performance energy consumption with the transformer-based
model ET-BERT. In this section, we display the results of the
time performance on the ISCX-VPN dataset, and the same
results are obtained on the other datasets.
1) The Number of Parameters: FLOPs is the number of
floating point operations, a measure of the computational
complexity of a model/algorithm. The larger the FLOPs, the
higher the computational complexity of the model. Therefore,
we compared the number of training parameters and FLOPs
of our model and ET-BERT. Our model has a total parameter
count of 1.16 × 106 , with all of them being trainable, while
the total number of parameters and the number of trainable
parameters of the ET-BERT model is 1.32×108 . Moreover, our
model has FLOPs of 3G, while ET-BERT has FLOPs of 348G,
indicating that our model is more lightweight and convenient
to deploy. Comparison results are shown in the Table III.
Although FLOPs is a commonly used evaluation metric for
measuring algorithms today, FLOPs does not take into account
MAC (Memory Access Cost) and parallelism, etc., so it may
not fully represent the model speed and energy consumption.
We also conducted the following experiments.
2) The GPU Energy Consumption: We compare the energy
consumption of the two models deployed on the same GPU.
The experimental results in the Table IV demonstrate that our
results outperform ET-BERT in all metrics, where the average
GPU power, SRViT, is 30.59% lower than ET-BERT, and the
average GPU memory is 79.85% lower. This indicates that our
algorithm can reduce the resource consumption more while
maintaining a higher performance.
3) Training Time: The total training time of the model
refers to the total time spent from feeding data into the model

Fig. 10. Influence of number of bytes, patch size and stride length.

until after completing model convergence, and the time per
epoch is the average of the time it takes for the model to train
one epoch.
In the ET-BERT experiments, the total training time does
not include the time spent in the pre-training phase, but only
the time spent in the fine-tuning phase using the transformer
model to classify the encrypted traffic. The experimental
results are shown in Table V, which indicates that the training
time of our model is much shorter than that of ET-BERT if
pre-training is included. The last column in the table represents
the percentage reduction in time.
4) Testing Time: The testing time means the time it takes
to output the classification results of the encrypted flows on
the test set. We divide the total time by the number of flows
contained in the test set to get the time to classify each flow.
As can be seen from Table VI, the classification time of
ET-BERT is approximately twice as slow as that of our
method.
H. Influence of First n Bytes
To select the appropriate number of the first n bytes, we
have chosen different n for the experiments. Fig. 10(a) shows
the experimental results on the Tor dataset.
We randomly selected half of the traffic in the Tor encrypted
traffic dataset for our experiments. From the Fig. 10(a), we
can observe that the accuracy can achieve 98.44% when n is
taken 784. Moreover, optimal results are achieved on the other
three metrics, with average improvements of 5.42% on recall,
7.26% on precision, and 7.47% on F1 compared to taking
other byte numbers. According to the experimental results,
with n set at 784, each metric reaches or closely approaches
its optimal value, and a balance can be achieved among
the metrics. We achieve similar comparison results on other

5498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

3 datasets. Therefore, we can confirm that setting n to 784 is
suitable to reach optimal values of metrics while maintaining
high efficiency.
I. Influence of Patch Size and Stride Length
In order to select the appropriate patch size and stride
length, we perform comparative experiments by selecting
different groups of patch sizes and stride lengths, respectively.
The stride length varies with the patch size. Fig. 10(b) shows
the experimental results on the VPN dataset.
The Fig. 10(b) illustrates that when P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 take the
values of 3, 2, 7, and 4, better results can be achieved for all
the metrics. Among them, the accuracy can reach 98.21%. We
obtained similar results on other datasets. This is because the
convolution can extract more local features and improve the
identification accuracy when the value of patch size is taken
smaller. Therefore, we confirm that setting P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 to
3, 2, 7, and 4 respectively is appropriate to achieve the optimal
values for each metric.

addition, we propose a self-attention operation with a novel
relative position bias, which can dynamically adjust the attention scores and learn the relative position relationship. After
that, we design a novel incremental update to adapt quickly to
the dynamically changed traffic. At last, the comprehensive
experiments on 5 real-world encrypted traffic datasets are
carried out. The experimental results indicate that our SRViT
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with an average accuracy improvement of 24.62% while keeping higher robustness
and execution efficiency. Furthermore, the effectiveness of
our proposed key designs for classifying encrypted traffic is
demonstrated in ablation experiments.
However, there are still some issues to be further investigated in this work, such as the deployment of SRViT and
security performance, adaptive parameter selection, and more
robust training techniques. In future work, we will further
investigate the ability of SRViT to resist attacks, as well as
few-shot learning or unsupervised learning methods.
R EFERENCES

VI. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the limitations of this work, as
well as further research efforts in this area. We convert the
problem of encrypted traffic flow recognition into an image
recognition problem in computer vision and propose a novel
end-to-end recognition model SRViT. We propose a novel
multi-size patch division mechanism, a relative position bias
and an incremental update mechanism. However, there are still
some issues to be further investigated in this work. Firstly,
since different classes of encrypted traffic have different types
of packets, the more appropriate byte number, patch size,
and stride length still need to be further investigated. One
future work is to explore an adaptive or data-driven selection
of these parameters. For example, different types of traffic
or different applications might benefit from different image
sizes (larger image for flows that carry more data, or smaller
for flows with less data). Secondly, while SRViT has good
robustness in various encrypted traffic scenarios, it relies on
clean pre-training data. The attacker can intentionally add
low-frequency mislabeled traffic data to carry out a poisoning
attack against the model, and the decision boundaries of the
model will be modified, thus spoofing the model used for a
specific classification task and leading to a degradation of
the accuracy. In addition, newly arriving traffic data in the
incremental update mechanism may also cause the model to
have odd shifts or catastrophic forgetting, thus we need to
focus further on more robust training techniques.
VII. C ONCLUSION
We introduce ViT into the encrypted traffic classification
task and propose SRViT, a novel end-to-end identification
model that transforms traffic flows into image patches and
dynamically learns local/global dependencies between packets.
We propose a novel multi-size patch division mechanism
to further comprehensively learn the hidden features and
resolve the multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads,
random routing, and traffic pattern uncertainty problems. In

[1]

E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2021.
[2] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MTFlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic
classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2576–2584.
[3] K. Xie, X. Ruotian, X. Wang, G. Xie, D. Zhang, and J. Wen, “NMMFstream: A fast and accurate stream-processing scheme for network
monitoring data recovery,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May
2022, pp. 2218–2227.
[4] J. Fan, C. Guan, K. Ren, and C. Qiao, “Middlebox-based packetlevel redundancy elimination over encrypted network traffic,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1742–1753, Aug. 2018.
[5] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[6] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[7] P. Dodia, M. AlSabah, O. Alrawi, and T. Wang, “Exposing the rat in the
tunnel: Using traffic analysis for tor-based malware detection,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2022, pp. 875–889.
[8] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[9] C. Duan et al., “IoTa: Fine-grained traffic monitoring for IoT devices via
fully packet-level models,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2024.
[10] J. Liu, Y. Fu, J. Ming, Y. Ren, L. Sun, and H. Xiong, “Effective and
real-time in-app activity analysis in encrypted internet traffic streams,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2017, pp. 335–344.
[11] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted
TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023.
[12] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[13] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
[14] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in
Proc. 23rd Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), Feb. 2016,
pp. 1–15.
[15] T. V. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.
(NDSS), 2020.

LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT

[16] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust
smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78,
Jan. 2018.
[17] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
[18] Y. Hou, S. G. Teo, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and T. Truong-Huu,
“Handling labeled data insufficiency: Semi-supervised learning with
self-training mixup decision tree for classification of network attacking
traffic,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Aug. 1,
2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3195534.
[19] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF
beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and
classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic
classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 124, Jan. 2023.
[20] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[21] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no.
107974.
[22] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
“EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
[23] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023, doi: 10.1109/
TDSC.2023.3245411.
[24] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[25] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
[26] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
[27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[28] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst.
Secur. Privacy, Apr. 2022, pp. 633–642.
[29] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative
pretrained transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513.
[30] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 1–14, Jun. 2024.
[31] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), 2021.
[32] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct.
2021, pp. 9630–9640.
[33] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: The secondgeneration onion router,” in Proc. 13th USENIX Secur. Symp. (SSYM),
Aug. 2004, pp. 303–320.
[34] Y. Qi, L. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Xue, and J. Li, “Packet classification
algorithms: From theory to practice,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr.
2009, pp. 648–656.
[35] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, and C. Williamson, “Identifying and
discriminating between Web and peer-to-peer traffic in the network
core,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2007, pp. 883–892.
[36] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service
mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic
classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2004,
pp. 135–148.
[37] R. Keralapura, A. Nucci, and C.-N. Chuah, “Self-learning peer-to-peer
traffic classifier,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.,
Aug. 2009, pp. 1–8.

5499

[38] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[39] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
2023, pp. 6203–6220.
[40] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM - IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[41] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[42] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
pp. 1–10.
[43] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service usage
classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging
apps,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–2864,
Nov. 2016.
[44] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer, “Beauty and the
burst: Remote identification of encrypted video streams,” in Proc.
26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur. 17), Aug. 2017,
pp. 1357–1374.
[45] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[46] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
[47] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614.
[48] Z. Diao et al., “DMSTG: Dynamic multiview spatio-temporal networks
for traffic forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 6,
pp. 6865–6880, Jun. 2024.
[49] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1–18, May 2025.
[50] S. Sengupta, N. Ganguly, P. De, and S. Chakraborty, “Exploiting
diversity in Android TLS implementations for mobile app traffic classification,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., May 2019,
pp. 1657–1668.
[51] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
[52] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform. (ISI), Jul. 2017,
pp. 43–48.
[53] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[54] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[55] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017,
pp. 253–262.
[56] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11.
[57] S. Jorgensen et al., “Extensible machine learning for
encrypted network traffic application labeling via uncertainty
quantification,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 420–433,
Jan. 2024.
[58] O. Belarbi, T. Spyridopoulos, E. Anthi, O. Rana, P. Carnelli, and
A. Khan, “Gotham dataset 2025: A reproducible large-scale IoT network dataset for intrusion detection and security research,” 2025,
arxiv:2502.03134.

5500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Chang Liu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.E. degree from Nanjing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China,
in 2022, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the School of Computer. Her research
interests include machine learning, network security,
and traffic analysis.

Lei Han is currently a Professor at the School
of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications. He has created patents which
are authorized by China, U.S., U.K., Japan, South
Korea, and Germany. He has authored papers
in research related international conferences and
journals, such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PARAL LEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS , GLOBECOM,
MOBISYS, and ICCN. His research interests include
computer networks and datacenter systems.

Zulong Diao received the Ph.D. degree in software engineering from Hunan University, Changsha,
China, in 2019. He is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan, China. His research interests
include machine learning, traffic analysis, and network measurement.

Zheng Wu received the Ph.D. degree from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(NUPT). He is currently a Lecturer with the College
of Computer, NUPT. Prior to that, he worked as a
Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Computer Network
Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
His research interests include routing security, network traffic identification, and anomaly detection.

Xin He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
from the Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Nanjing University, China, in 2021.
He is currently a Lecturer at the School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China. His research papers
have been published in many prestigious conferences and journals, such as IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE
ICDCS, IEEE ICWS, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
ON N ETWORKING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PAR ALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS , and IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS. His research interests are in the
areas of data center networks, SDN, and edge computing. He is a member of
ACM.

Weibei Fan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Soochow University in 2019. He is currently an Associate
Professor at the School of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. He has
authored papers in research related international
journals and conferences, such as IEEE T RANSAC TIONS ON C OMPUTERS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED
S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON R ELIABIL ITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING ,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON E MERGING T OPICS IN C OMPUTATIONAL I NTELLI GENCE, IEEE Communications Magazine, JPDC, and IEEE ISPA, FUZZIEEE, ICPADS, PDCAT. His research interests include data center networks,
parallel and distributed systems, and interconnection architectures. He is a
member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Association for Computing
Machinery.

Fu Xiao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
from Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2007. He is currently a
Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School
of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and
Telecommunications. He has authored papers in
research related international conferences, including
INFOCOM, ICC, and IPCCC. He has authored
IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OM MUNICATIONS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , ACM
Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY . His main research interests include computer
networks. He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Association
for Computing Machinery.