IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

4433

Take Attention as Gate: An Associative Recurrent
Network-Based Intrusion Detection Method for
Industrial Control Network
Ziyi Liu , Dengpan Ye , Member, IEEE, Changsong Yang , Yong Ding, Yueling Liu, Long Tang ,
and Chuanxi Chen
Abstract—The Industrial Control Network (ICN), which is
characterized by real-time responsiveness and reliability, plays
a key role in increasing production speed, ensuring efficient processing, and managing industrial processes. Despite tremendous
advantages, ICN inevitably struggles with some challenges, such
as malicious user intrusion and hacker attacks. To detect malicious intrusions in ICN, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have
been deployed. However, network traffic in ICN often exhibits
significant temporal periodicity, and computational resources
are limited on edge nodes and infrastructure gateway devices.
These characteristics pose significant challenges to the design and
performance of IDS. To properly solve these problems, we design
a new intrusion detection method for ICN. Specifically, we first
design a novel neural network model called Associative Recurrent
Network (ARN), which can properly handle the relationship
between previous hidden state and current input. Then, we
construct a novel intrusion detection method based on the ARN,
which avoids gating conflicts in traditional Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), effectively captures the temporal characteristics
of ICN traffic, and maintains slightly higher computational
overhead than GRU, thus demonstrating good adaptability to
industrial control networks. Subsequently, through theoretical
analysis of computational complexity, we demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves high computational efficiency, comparable to mainstream RNN methods and superior to Transformer
methods. Finally, we implement a prototype system to evaluate
detection accuracy. Experimental results show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the industrial control
systems datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional network dataset (UNSW-NB15), with average accuracies of 98.93%,
95.57%, and 98.27%, respectively.
Index Terms—Network security, industrial control network,
intrusion detection, associative recurrent network.

Received 28 October 2025; revised 28 January 2026 and 30 March 2026;
accepted 24 April 2026. Date of current version 6 May 2026. This research
was supported by New Generation Artificial Intelligence-National Science and
Technology Major Project (2025ZD0123603), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China NSFC (No.62472325 and No.62562021) and the Hubei
Provincial Key R&D Program, China (Grant No.2025BAB021). The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was F. Paganelli. (Corresponding author: Dengpan Ye.)
Ziyi Liu, Dengpan Ye, Long Tang, and Chuanxi Chen are with the Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry
of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: ziyi liu@whu.edu.cn; yedp@whu.edu.cn;
l tang@whu.edu.cn; chencx@whu.edu.cn).
Changsong Yang, Yong Ding, and Yueling Liu are with the Computer
Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China, and also with Guangxi Engineering Research
Center of Industrial Internet Security and Blockchain, Guilin University of
Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China (e-mail: csyang@guet.edu.cn;
stone dingy@guet.edu.cn; ylliu@guet.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3688982

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the rapid development and integration of industrial
informatization and automation, the Industrial Control
System (ICS) has been widely applied, connecting numerous industrial infrastructures and devices through Industrial
Control Network (ICN) [1]. Generally, ICN is characterized
by real-time responsiveness and reliability, which plays a
key role in production acceleration and production process
management. Recently, due to the widespread adoption of
5G wireless networks [2], [3] and artificial intelligence, ICN
has been widely used in natural gas pipeline systems, power
transmission systems, industrial power generation systems, etc.
As a result, both governments and enterprises have attached
growing importance to the security and stability of ICN.
Despite tremendous advantages, ICN inevitably struggles
with some security and technical challenges, such as network
security protection. In the ICN, there are a large number of distributed industrial infrastructures and devices [4]. However, the
security of ICN physical isolation is broken due to the fusion
and development of information technology [5], thus bringing
a series of new security problems. Meanwhile, ICN might be
frequently invaded by malicious users and hackers, which not
only causes damage to ICN but also poses a threat to the entire
ICS. Therefore, the security protection of ICN is particularly
important. However, most of the traditional network security
defense methods, such as firewalls and vulnerability scanning,
can only achieve passive defense.
To achieve active defense in the ICN, intrusion detection [6] technologies have been widely applied. Intrusion
detection is a typical active defense technology that aims to
detect network intrusions by analyzing network traffic data,
such as user behavior data, behavior logs and audit data.
By deploying intrusion detection systems, network security
managers can monitor the entire ICN without affecting the
network performance, thereby providing ICN devices and
systems with real-time security protection. Therefore, intrusion detection attracts lots of attention, and has produced a
large number of theoretical and engineering results. Roughly,
the existing intrusion detection methods can be divided into
three categories: statistics-analysis-based intrusion detection,
time-series-based intrusion detection and deep-learning-based
intrusion detection.
Although plenty of intrusion detection methods have been
proposed, there are still some internal deficiencies when they
are directly applied to the ICN. Unlike traditional enterprise

W

1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

network traffic, which typically exhibits diverse characteristics
and a wide variety of protocols [7], the traffic generated by
ICN exhibits significant differences in communication structure, protocol characteristics, and security constraints. Specifically, ICN communications are typically based on industrial
protocols such as Modbus, DNP3, and IEC-104, and are characterized by strong periodicity and clear protocol semantics
[8]. Moreover, ICNs often operate in critical infrastructure
such as electrical networks, transportation, and petrochemicals,
placing higher real-time requirements and stricter computing
resource constraints on intrusion detection security mechanisms [9]. These differences make it difficult for traditional
intrusion detection methods to be directly applied to the actual
ICN environment. In particular, the strong periodicity of ICN
traffic places higher demands on the temporal learning capabilities of the detection model, requiring the model to effectively
capture and characterize periodic behavior. However, existing
intrusion detection methods still face the following limitations: On the one hand, traditional statistics-analysis-based
intrusion detection methods require substantial computational
overhead when handling large-scale data, while time-seriesbased intrusion detection methods (excluding deep learning
methods) mainly focus on temporal dependencies within the
data and often overlook the integration of other relevant
features for comprehensive analysis. On the other hand, deep
learning-based recurrent neural networks [10] (such as Gated
Recurrent Unit [11] and Long Short-Term Memory [12]) have
demonstrated a certain ability to model temporal structures
and have been applied in ICN scenarios. However, when
integrating previous hidden state with current input, these
models often suffer from information competition between
gating mechanisms-commonly referred to as gating conflictswhich can degrade overall performance [13], [14]. Although
Transformer models exhibit superior temporal modeling capabilities and can capture the periodic patterns inherent in ICN
traffic, their complex architecture and high computational
overhead have, to some extent, hindered their widespread
adoption on resource-constrained edge nodes and gateway
devices within ICN environments. Therefore, designing an
intrusion detection approach that balances effective temporal
learning capabilities with low computational overhead has
become a critical challenge in the security protection of ICN.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
a novel network structure called the Associative Recurrent
Network (ARN). ARN is designed to achieve efficient representation learning of ICN traffic with computational resource
overhead comparable to that of the Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU), thereby enhancing intrusion detection performance in
ICN. Considering that ICN traffic often exhibits pronounced
temporal periodicity, there is usually a strong correlation
between the previous hidden state and the current input, where
the former provides essential cues for determining whether
the current data instance is anomalous. In our approach,
ARN employs a Single Attention (S-ATT) mechanism to learn
the correlation between previous hidden state and current
input, avoiding the gating conflicts that may occur in traditional recurrent neural networks. Meanwhile, ARN has low
model complexity, and its computational overhead is only

slightly higher than that of GRU, thereby balancing gatingconflict mitigation with computational efficiency. Benefiting
from these two design aspects, ARN can effectively detect
traffic in resource-constrained ICN environments, providing
a new solution that combines performance and practicality
for ICN intrusion detection. It also offers new insights for
subsequent ICN intrusion detection research.
A. Contributions
In this paper, we investigate a fundamental but challenging
issue, i.e., how to improve the performance of intrusion
detection in the ICN. Specifically, we design a novel RNN
model, namely, Associative Recurrent Network (ARN). Then,
we adopt ARN to propose a new intrusion detection method
for ICN. Therefore, the main contributions of this paper can
be summarized as the following three folds.
• We design a new recurrent neural network called ARN
for intrusion detection in industrial control networks,
which does not rely on gating units for effective temporal
learning. Compared with other types of RNN models,
ARN eliminates the conflict risk between gated units
and can better characterize the long-term and short-term
dependencies of data.
• We design a Single Attention (S-ATT) mechanism to
retain important historical information in the ARN.
S-ATT uses the attention mechanism to directly learn
the correlation between the previous hidden state and the
current input, allowing ARN to abandon the traditional
gated unit structure and more reasonably preserve previous hidden state.
• We compare the ARN method with mainstream RNN and
Transformer methods in terms of theoretical computational complexity. The results show that ARN achieves
the same time complexity as mainstream RNN methods while outperforming Transformers. Furthermore, we
develop a prototype system and conduct simulations to
evaluate its performance. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves accuracy of 98.93%,
95.57%, and 98.27% on the ICS-ADD, SWaT, and
UNSW-NB15 datasets, respectively.
B. Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section III,
we provide a detailed introduction to GRU and Single Attention (S-ATT). Subsequently, in Section IV and Section V,
we present the structure of ARN and design an ARN-based
intrusion detection method, respectively. Then, in Section VI,
we provide a theoretical computational complexity comparison
of the ARN-based intrusion detection method and GRU-based
intrusion detection method. Next, we develop a prototype
implementation for our proposed method and present the
performance evaluation in Section VII. Finally, we provide
a brief conclusion in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Generally, existing intrusion detection methods can be
roughly summarized into three categories: statistics-analysisbased intrusion detection method [15], time-series-based

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

intrusion detection method [16] and deep-learning-based intrusion detection method [17].
A. Statistics-Analysis-Based Intrusion Detection Method
Wu et al. [18] proposed an information entropy Intrusion
Detection System (IDS) based on improved sliding window strategy. By improving the optimizing conditions of the
decision and sliding window strategy, their method could
enhance the IDS accuracy. To detect invisible attacks in ICS,
Hu et al. [19] represented the ordered content in the residual
by Permutation Entropy (PE). According to certain rules
presented by sensor measurement values Zhou et al. [20]
proposed an industrial information system attack detection
scheme based on permutation entropy. Liao et al. [21] designed
a gray-entropy-based IDS, which could analyze and cluster the
traffic gray level. Meanwhile, their designed system had higher
intrusion detection accuracy for both known and unknown
traffic attacks. However, the aforementioned intrusion detection methods are limited by entropy and relative uncertainty
measures, resulting in exponential time complexity [22]. When
there is a lot of noise in industrial network traffic and the traffic
scale is large, they are difficult to detect attack traffic.
Liang et al. [23] divided the data weighted distance and
safety factor of each node in the network according to the
priority threshold of data attribute characteristics, and designed
an ICN intrusion detection method based on multi-feature
data clustering optimization model. Zhang et al. [25] combined traffic Similarity metrics with Density-Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise (SDBSCAN) methods
to construct a new network intrusion detection framework.
Mittal et al. [24] implemented a new clustering method using
a new variant of the gravitational search algorithm and used
it for detection in the industrial Internet of Things (IoT).
However, clustering algorithms usually require a lot of computational overhead and memory usage overhead when facing
large-scale data. Therefore, when facing large-scale industrial
network data, clustering-algorithm-based intrusion detection
methods are difficult to meet the defense needs of the industry.
In summary, we can see that statistics-analysis-based intrusion detection methods require many mathematical calculations and analyses, resulting in a heavy computational burden.
Meanwhile, while processing high-dimensional and irregularity data, the accuracy of the above methods is insufficient.
B. Time-Series-Based Intrusion Detection Method
Bozdal et al. [26] presented a wavelet-based ingress method
for the Controller Area Network (CAN). By analyzing changes
in network traffic data, their proposed method could precisely
determine attack patterns. To describe the intrusion attacks,
Miao et al. [27] studied attack signals in ICS intrusions.
Through frequency-domain analysis of network traffic, they
proposed linear and nonlinear attack signal estimators (LASE
and NASE) and analyzed the impact of frequency-domain
attack signals on LASE performance. Fouladi et al. [28]
adopted frequency-based discrete wavelet transform and discrete Fourier transform to design a naive Bayesian classifier,
which could exactly distinguish attack traffic data from normal traffic data. However, the above wavelet-based detection

4435

methods are limited by noise interference and the selection of
characteristic signals, resulting in detection deviation.
Ye et al. [29] adopted Hurst parameter estimation to
design a Fractional Fourier Transform (FRFT)-based intrusion
detection method. Meanwhile, they developed a prototype
implementation to test the performance. Experimental results
showed that their proposed method was not affected by nonstationary time series in Hurst estimation. Huang et al. [30]
simultaneously extracted time-domain and frequency-domain
features from the sensor measurement data required for closedloop control of ICS, and used these features to establish
a hidden Markov model to implement intrusion detection.
Zhang et al. [31] developed a method for predicting dynamic
power system intent that combined attribute selection and
clustering with a Dynamic Hidden Markov Model (DHMM) to
capture the evolving nature of cyberattack behavior. However,
the Fourier-transform-based detection methods are susceptible
to boundary effects and the hidden Markov transform is limited
by the dependence on the previous. Therefore, it is difficult to
achieve accurate industrial network intrusion detection.
In addition, time-series-based (non-deep learning) intrusion
detection methods typically focus on temporal dependencies
in data, while rarely incorporating other data features for
comprehensive analysis. This limitation significantly restricts
their applicability in intrusion detection.
C. Deep-Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Method
Li et al. [32] used a multi-Convolutional Neural Network
(multi-CNN) fusion method to perform intrusion detection
on industrial IoT traffic. Abdelaty et al. [33] constructed a
deep learning anomaly detection in ICS using a 2-branch
Deep Neural Network (DNN). Their method learned the
changes in the behavior of ICS through a few data samples
and gradient updates, thus effectively improving the accuracy and robustness of intrusion detection. Yang et al. [34]
combined Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) and Back Propagation
Neural Network (BPNN) to present a new IDS. In their
proposed method, LM was utilized to optimize the weights
of BPNN, thus improving accuracy. Sood et al. [35] proposed
a two-stage IDS, which could achieve data dimensionality
reduction, and was compatible with the ETSI-NFV standard
5G architecture. Experimental results showed that their method
has higher accuracy in traffic detection. However, these deep
learning methods fail to leverage the temporal sequences of
network traffic, limiting their ability to detect time-sensitive
attacks.
Jadidi et al. [36] proposed a two-stage causal anomaly
detection method for ICS. It first performed attack detection
using an LSTM-based classifier, and then analyzed causal
relationships among ICS logs to diagnose the potential future
impact of attacks. Xu et al. [37] utilized GRU, MuLtilayer Perceptron (MLP) and softmax layer to design a new
IDS. To address the curse of dimensionality and the tradeoff between low false alarm rate and high detection rate,
Mushtaq et al. [38] proposed a two-stage detection model, AELSTM, which first performed feature dimensionality reduction
using an AutoEncoder (AE) and then conducted classification

4436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF R ELATED R ESEARCH ON I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS BASED ON D EEP L EARNING
AND PARTIALLY N ON -D EEP L EARNING

TABLE II
L IST OF I MPORTANT S YMBOL D ESCRIPTIONS . T HE S YMBOLS IN THE TABLE A RE L ISTED IN THE O RDER T HEY A PPEAR IN THE E QUATIONS :
F IRST F ROM T OP TO B OTTOM IN THE L EFT C OLUMN , T HEN F ROM T OP TO B OTTOM IN THE R IGHT C OLUMN

through an LSTM. Experimental results demonstrated that AELSTM outperforms AE-BiLSTM and other related methods.
Zhang et al. [39] combined multi-scale periodicity extraction with spatiotemporal Graph Attention Networks (GAT)
to address the difficulty of traditional methods in capturing
spatiotemporal correlations and periodicity in system data.
Ullah [40] developed a Transformer Neural Network (TNN)based intrusion detection system tailored to mitigate the
detection limitations caused by imbalanced data. However,
most of the RNN-based intrusion detection methods have
mutual influence between gating units, which makes it difficult to effectively manage the potential connections between
long-term and short-term dependencies of data, limiting the
accuracy of intrusion detection. Although Transformer-based
intrusion detection methods can avoid the problem of gating conflicts, their high memory and time overhead during
operation significantly increase the deployment cost in ICS
environments, thereby limiting their practical applicability.
In summary, although deep learning-based intrusion detection methods can effectively represent large-scale network
traffic data, there is still an urgent need for a new approach
that can avoid gating conflicts, fully exploit the temporal
dependencies of network traffic for representation learning,
and maintain memory and computational costs comparable to traditional recurrent neural networks (such as GRU),
in order to further enhance intrusion detection performance in ICS environments. To this end, we will conduct
in-depth research on this issue and propose a new deeplearning-based intrusion detection method. We select two
representative methods from statistics-analysis-based intrusion
detection methods, two from time-series-based intrusion detection methods, and together with deep-learning-based intrusion

detection methods, constructed Table I to compare the different
methods.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce some preliminaries for
developing the new intrusion detection method, including
GRU and our newly designed S-ATT. The GRU is a type
of recurrent neural network that efficiently captures longterm dependencies in sequences through gating mechanisms.
S-ATT is a single attention mechanism inspired by selfattention, which learns the relationship between the previous
hidden state and the current input to construct a supplementary
matrix, thereby enhancing the models ability to retain key
information. Moreover, We summarize the important symbols
used in this paper in Table II.
A. Gated Recurrent Unit
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is an improved model of RNN
that can effectively transmit long-term dependency information. In contrast to Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which
is equipped with three gate structures, GRU only contains
two gates: the reset gate and the update gate, as illustrated
in Figure 1. As a result, GRU requires fewer parameters and
can reduce the risk of overfitting during training. In GRU,
the reset gate is utilized to decide the proportion of hidden
state that flows into the current candidate set at the previous.
Meanwhile, the update gate has two functions. On the one
hand, it is utilized to control the proportion of the content that
should be discarded at the previous. On the other hand, it can
also determine the proportion of the content that needs to be
retained in the current candidate set.

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

Fig. 1. The structure of the GRU, where the update gate and reset gate jointly
regulate the preservation and update of hidden states, enabling the model to
capture long-term dependencies in sequential data.

4437

Fig. 2. The structure of the S-ATT mechanism, which learns the dependency
between the previous hidden state ht−1 and the current input xt to generate
a supplementary matrix h0t−1 .

As shown in Figure 1, the related formulas for calculating
GRU are as follows.
Firstly, Rt and Zt must be initialized according to Formula
(1) and Formula (2) as follows:
Rt = σ([ht−1 , xt ] · WR )
Zt = σ([ht−1 , xt ] · WZ )

(1)
(2)

Secondly, h˜t of GRU is controlled by Rt . Meanwhile, h˜t
can be described by Formula (3) as follows:
h˜t = tanh(Wh̃ · [xt , Rt × ht−1 ])

(3)

Finally, GRU updates ht according to Formula (4):
ht = Zt × h˜t + (1 − Zt ) × ht−1

(4)

From the above formulas and Figure 1, we find that the Zt
and the Rt conflict in the retention proportion of the hidden
state in the previous. Specifically, the reset of the current
hidden state in GRU is provided by the Rt and Zt . The role of
the Rt is to determine the proportion of the previous hidden
state retained in the current candidate set. However, the Zt
can ignore part of the previous hidden state that the Rt has
determined to retain. Additionally, the Zt arbitrarily retains
the previous hidden state in the process of resetting the current
hidden state. Therefore, there is a certain conflict between the
Zt and the Rt , making it difficult to effectively manage the
retention relationship between the previous hidden state and
the current input.

Fig. 3. The structure of ARN, which utilizes S-ATT to learn dependencies
between the previous hidden state and the current input, thereby effectively
capturing the temporal characteristics of the data.

Then, we calculate the correlation between ht−1 and xt ,
and get the corresponding weight matrices ah and ax .
q1 · k1
q1 · k2
√ , ax = √
d
d
b
ah , b
ax = sof tmax(ah , ax )
ah =

(8)
(9)

Finally, we calculate and fuse it into a new supplementary
matrix h0t−1 based on the proportion of weights.
h0t−1 = b
ah v 1 + b
ax v 2

(10)

IV. A SSOCIATIVE R ECURRENT N ETWORK
B. Single Attention
To effectively solve the problem of how to determine the
retention relation between the hidden state of the previous and
the input of the current, we use the idea of Self-attention [41]
to propose a one-way self-attention mechanism solution called
Single Attention (S-ATT). S-ATT can effectively manage the
retention relationship between the ht−1 and the xt . The
implementation of the S-ATT module is illustrated in Figure. 2.
First, we initialize q n , k n , v n (n= 2) to facilitate subsequent
calculations.
q 1 = W q ht−1 , q 2 = W q xt

(5)

1

k

2

k

(6)

1

v

2

v

(7)

k = W ht−1 , k = W xt
v = W ht−1 , v = W xt

To address the problems of GRU that described in Section III-A, we propose a new RNN method called ARN.
ARN utilizes the S-ATT module to unidirectionally learn
the relationship between the previous hidden state and the
current input, thereby constructing a supplementary matrix to
supplement the current input and reset the current hidden state.
The reset current hidden state contains important historical
information unknown to the current input and highlights the
important parts of information in the current input. Therefore,
ARN can better manage the information retention relationship
between the previous hidden state and the current input,
thereby avoiding the gate conflict problem in GRU and
enabling more efficient intrusion detection for ICN traffic. The
overall structure of ARN is illustrated in Figure 3.

4438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Firstly, we require to initialize xt and ht−1 with W x and
W ht−1 while making xt and ht−1 have the same matrix
dimensions, which is convenient for subsequent correlation
calculation. Then, xt and ht−1 can be initialized as Formula
(11) and Formula (12), respectively.
xt = W x xt
ht−1 = W

ht−1

(11)
ht−1

(12)

Secondly, we use cats to concatenate ht−1 and xt together,
and construct the S-ATT input through the activation function
GELU, as shown in Formula (13).
hcat = GELU (cat(ht−1 , xt ))

(13)

Subsequently, we utilize S-ATT to learn the relationship
between ht−1 and xt , thus constructing a new supplementary
matrix h0t−1 . The matrix h0t−1 contains part of the important
content in the current input (i.e., the portion of xt that is related
to ht−1 .), and the information in the previous hidden state that
is unknown to the current input, as shown in Formula (14).
h0t−1 = S-ATT(hcat )

(14)

h0t−1

Finally, we supplement
to xt to achieve the reset
of ht . The reset ht contains previous hidden state that is
unknow in the input xt at the current time and highlight the
important content in the current input, so as to better manage
the retention relationship between previous hidden state and
current input. Then, ht is computed as in (15).
ht = h0t−1 + xt

(15)

In summary, ARN can effectively learn the highlighted
important parts of the current content in feature learning by
constructing a supplementary matrix and fully consider the
impact of the unknown previous hidden state on the current.
V. ARN-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHOD
In this section, we utilize ARN to build a new intrusion
detection method for ICN.
A. System Model
In this paper, we focuses on the development of intrusion
detection methods for Industrial Control Networks (ICNs).
With the rapid expansion of ICNs, their applications and
adoption continue to grow. Notably, ICN network traffic
is characterized by large scale, pronounced periodicity, and
well-defined protocol semantics. Moreover, computational
resources on edge nodes and gateway devices remain limited.
These characteristics present significant challenges to the
generalizability and accuracy of intrusion detection methods.
To address the above problems, we propose a new intrusion
detection method, as illustrated in Figure 4. Specifically, a
novel RNN model called ARN is proposed. Compared with
other DNN models, ARN can not only learn and characterize
network traffic data through time series but also better handle
the retention relationship between previous hidden state data
and current input. Subsequently, we utilize ARN to build a new
intrusion detection method for ICN. By taking the advantage
of ARN, our novel proposed method can greatly enhance the
intrusion detection accuracy.

Fig. 4. The system model. In the ICN, the collected traffic is first preprocessed
and then fed into the trained ARN intrusion detection model for detection. If
the traffic is classified as normal, it is allowed to continue flowing within the
system; if deemed anomalous, an alert is triggered.

B. The Proposed Method
In this section, we introduce the implementation of ARNbased intrusion detection method for ICN in detail.
Algorithm 1 ARN-Based Intrusion Detection Method
Require: Raw ICS dataset D, real-time ICS data Xreal , number
of runs n
Ensure: Detection result S
Model Training and Evaluation
1: D 0 ← PREPROCESS(D)
2: (Xtrain , Xval , Xtest ) ← SPLIT(D 0 )
3: for i = 1 to n do
4:
ARNi ← TRAIN(Xtrain )
5:
Ri ← EVALUATE(ARNi , Xval )
6: end for
7: ARN ← SELECTBEST({ARNi }n
i=1 )
8: R ← EVALUATE(ARN, Xtest )
Intrusion Detection
0
9: Xreal
← PREPROCESS(Xreal )
0
10: S ← ARN(Xreal
)
11: if S is normal then
12:
return pass
13: else
14:
return attack
15: end if
To describe the proposed method more clearly, we first
define the main symbols and operators used in Algorithm 1.
Specifically, the training, validation, test, and real-time traffic datasets are denoted by Xtrain , Xval , Xtest , and Xreal ,
respectively. The intrusion detection result is denoted by
S, the raw ICS dataset is D, and the number of runs is
denoted by n. In addition, PREPROCESS(·) denotes the
data preprocessing operation, SPLIT(·) denotes the dataset
partition operation, TRAIN(·) denotes the model training
operation, EVALUATE(·) denotes the performance evaluation
operation, and SELECTBEST(·) denotes the model selection
operation. The corresponding evaluation result is denoted
by R. Based on these symbols and operators, the proposed
intrusion detection method is described in Algorithm 1.

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF FLOP S AND T IME C OMPLEXITY OF ARN,
GRU, LSTM AND T RANSFORMER

As shown in Algorithm 1, the proposed ARN-based intrusion detection method consists of two stages: model training
and evaluation, and intrusion detection.
Model training and evaluation, the ICS dataset used for
model training and evaluation is first collected and preprocessed, including feature vectorization and data normalization.
Here, feature vectorization refers to converting categorical
fields in network traffic data, such as protocol type, function
code, and status flag, into fixed-dimensional numerical vectors.
The processed data are then divided into the training set Xtrain ,
validation set Xval , and test set Xtest . After that, the training set
is used to train the intrusion detection model, the validation set
is used to assist model selection and hyperparameter tuning,
and the test set is used to evaluate the final detection performance of the trained model. The ARN proposed in this paper
serves as the core component of the intrusion detection model
and is designed to effectively perform intrusion detection on
ICN traffic. Specifically, when the current traffic input xt is fed
into ARN, the relationship between the previous hidden state
ht−1 and the current input xt is learned through the S-ATT
mechanism. In this way, the model can extract the important
information in the current input xt that is closely related to
the previous hidden state ht−1 , and combine it with the key
information in the previous hidden state ht−1 that is unknown
to the current input xt , thereby forming the supplementary
matrix h0t−1 . By adding the supplementary matrix h0t−1 to
the current input xt , ARN forms the current hidden state ht ,
which both highlights the important information in the current
input and incorporates historical information from the previous
hidden state that is unknown to the current input.
Intrusion detection, real-time ICS traffic is collected and
preprocessed in the same manner as in the model training and
evaluation stage, and then fed into the trained ARN model for
analysis. If the detection result is normal, the communication is
allowed to continue; otherwise, the malicious traffic is isolated
and an alarm is triggered.
VI. C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS
In this section, we compare the theoretical computational
complexity of the proposed ARN method with those of GRU,
LSTM, and Transformer, as summarized in Table X. It should
be noted that the computational complexity of the Transformer
in this study is calculated based on the Transformer used in the
TNN [40] model, while that of the LSTM is calculated based
on the LSTM used in the ICS-CAD [36] model. The formulas
for computing ARN and GRU can be found in Sections III-A
and Section IV, respectively, whereas the computation formulas for LSTM [36] and Transformer [40] can be referred to in
the corresponding literature implementations.

4439

For ARN, we assume that the input sequence has a length of
T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer dimension
is H. At each time step, the computational cost mainly comes
from the linear transformations and the S-ATT module. The
FLOPs for linear mappings are 2Din H and 2H 2 , respectively.
Assuming the S-ATT operates on the concatenated vector of h
and x with sequence length 2, the S-ATT module contributes
approximately 18H 2 FLOPs. Therefore, the per-step computational cost is 2Din H + 20H 2 . For the entire sequence, the
total recurrent computation is T · (2Din H + 20H 2 ). It can be
seen that the time complexity of ARN is O(T ·(Din H +H 2 )).
For GRU, we assume that the input sequence has a length of
T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer dimension
is H. The primary computational cost at a single time step
arises from matrix multiplication operations, including the
computations for the update gate, reset gate, and candidate
hidden state. According to the formula for the floating-point
operations of matrix multiplication, the computational cost at
a single time step can be expressed as 6Din H + 6H 2 . For
the forward pass over the entire sequence, the total number of
FLOPs for GRU is T · (6Din H + 6H 2 ). It can be seen that
the time complexity of GRU is O(T · (Din H + H 2 )).
For LSTM, we assume that the input sequence has a length
of T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer
dimension is H. The main computation at each time step
comes from the linear mapping of the four gates (forget gate,
input gate, candidate memory gate, and output gate). The
FLOPs for each gate are 2Din H + 2H 2 , and the total FLOPs
for all four gates are 8Din H + 8H 2 . For the entire sequence,
the total FLOPs are T · (8Din H + 8H 2 ). It can be seen that
the time complexity of LSTM is O(T · (Din H + H 2 )).
For Transformer Encoder with embedding dimension D,
sequence length T , convolution output channels Cout , and convolution kernel size K, the computational cost mainly comes
from three parts: the multi-head attention module, the convolutional sublayer, and the final fully connected layer. Since
the ARN, GRU, and LSTM modules only consider the computational cost of the core model itself and do not include the
task-specific fully connected layers used for classification, this
fully connected part is also excluded from the calculation. The
FLOPs of the multi-head attention module are 8D2 + 4T 2 D.
The FLOPs of the convolutional sublayer are 4KT DCout .
Therefore, the total FLOPs of the Transformer core module
are 8D2 + 4T 2 D + 4KT DCout . It can be seen that the time
complexity of Transformer is O(T 2 D + KT DCout + D2 ).
From the perspective of theoretical computational complexity, the main computation at each time step of LSTM,
GRU, and ARN comes from the linear mappings between
the input and the hidden state, with a computational cost of
O(Din H + H 2 ) per step. For the entire sequence, the total
computational complexity is O(T ·(Din H+H 2 )), which grows
linearly with the sequence length. In contrast, Transformer, in
addition to linear projections O(D2 ), requires multi-head selfattention computation, which involves pairwise correlations
between sequence elements and contributes an additional
O(T 2 D). Moreover, the convolutional sublayer further adds
O(KT DCout ). When the sequence length T is large, the T 2 D
term from attention computation quickly dominates over the

4440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE IV
F EATURES U SED IN THE SWAT DATASET AND UNSW-NB15 DATASET IN THE E XPERIMENT. T HE M EANING OF T HESE F EATURES C AN B E F OUND IN
THE L ITERATURE C ITED IN THE SWAT DATASET [43] AND THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET [44]

TABLE V
F EATURES U SED IN THE ICS-ADD DATASET AND T HEIR D ESCRIPTIONS

T H 2 term of recurrent networks, making the overall computational cost and time complexity of Transformer significantly
higher than that of LSTM, GRU, and ARN. In summary,
although ARN has slightly higher per-step computation than
LSTM and GRU, its overall time complexity is comparable to
theirs, whereas the computational overhead of Transformer is
significantly higher than the aforementioned networks.
VII. S CHEME I MPLEMENTATION
In this section, we first explicitly describe the experimental
environment, datasets and evaluation criteria in detail. Subsequently, we provide the experimental results and analysis.
A. Experimental Environment, Datasets, and Criteria
1) Experimental Environment: In this paper, all of the simulation experiments are carried out on a desktop equipped with
a CUDA12.1 driver, cuDNN8.8.0.1 driver and Windows 10
operating system. The desktop is equipped with 32 GB main
memory, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4070 graphics card and
a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-13600KF CPU that runs
at 3.50 GHz. In addition, the experimental results of our
proposed solution and comparative experiment are obtained
by running in our experimental environment, the framework
used in this experiment is based on pytorch2.1.0. To adapt to
different datasets, distinct optimization strategies are applied:
for the UNSW-NB15 and ICS-ADD datasets, we use the Adam
optimizer with learning rates of 0.001 and 0.0001, respectively,
whereas for the SWaT dataset, we use the SGD optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.012. The ARN model is configured with
a single-layer network structure and trained for 200 epochs,
and the best-performing result during training is selected as
the final experimental outcome.
2) Experimental Datasets: In the simulation experiments,
we evaluate the proposed ARN method on ICS datasets
(ICS-ADD and SWaT) to assess its applicability in industrial

control environments, and on the conventional network dataset
UNSW-NB15 to further verify the generalizability of ARN.
ICS-ADD is a public anomaly detection dataset for industrial control system security research [42]. It records the
system’s behavior under various simulated attacks (e.g., The
raw network traffic under DoS, MITM, malware intrusion,
etc.) After preprocessing, we obtained a total of 23,023
samples, of which 9,264 were attack samples.
SWaT is a public security dataset for industrial water
treatment platforms, built by iTrust, Centre for Research
in Cyber Security, Singapore University of Technology and
Design. Reference [43]. We chose the officially labeled “SWaT
Dec 2015” for the experiments. SWaT dataset consists of two
labels: “normal” and “attack”, with a total of 449,919 pieces
of data, of which 54,621 pieces are attack data.
UNSW-NB15 is a public conventional network intrusion
detection dataset [45], [44], which contains a total of 2,540,044
pieces of data, including 300,000 pieces of attack data, with 9
type attacks, i.e., analysis, backdoors, DoS, exploits, fuzzers,
generic, reconnaissance and shellcode.
Table IV presents the features used in the SWaT and UNSWNB15 datasets (52 features for SWaT and 43 features for
UNSW-NB15), while Table V lists the features extracted from
the ICS-ADD dataset along with their descriptions (15 features for ICS-ADD). Unlike SWaT and UNSW-NB15, which
provide official flow-level CSV files with well-documented
feature definitions [43], [44], the ICS-ADD dataset is provided
only in raw PCAP format [42]. Following the official instructions, we converted these PCAP files into flow-level CSV files
and provided detailed descriptions for each extracted feature.
It is worth noting that in our experiments, the UNSW-NB15
dataset had the IP features as well as the start time (Stime)
and last time (Ltime) features removed. This is because these
features could lead the model to memorize that certain attacks
occur between specific IPs or during particular time periods,
resulting in data leakage and negatively affecting the models
generalization ability.
In the simulation experiment, we use an 8:2 ratio for the
ICS-ADD dataset to determine the training and test sets. This
is because the overall data size of ICS-ADD is relatively
small, and sufficient test data is required to validate the
effectiveness of our solution. For the SWaT dataset, we divide
the selected SWaT data into a training set and a test set
according to 8:2. This is because the sample distribution of
the SWaT data set is uneven, and we need to include the
corresponding attack data in the test set, so the selected test
set has a large amount of data. Meanwhile, due to the large
amount of UNSW-NB15 data, to facilitate the experiment,

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

4441

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE ICS-ADD, SWAT AND UNSW-NB15 DATASETS . ARN A PPLIES A O NE TAILED W ILCOXON S IGNED -R ANK T EST TO E ACH C OMPARATIVE M ETHOD IN THE TABLE . A LL O BTAINED P -VALUES A RE p = 0.03125 < 0.05,
I NDICATING T HAT THE P ERFORMANCE I MPROVEMENT I S S TATISTICALLY S IGNIFICANT; M OREOVER , S INCE THE p-VALUE I S C OMPUTED
BASED ON F IVE PAIRED VALIDATION R ESULTS , p = 0.03125 I S THE S MALLEST P -VALUE ATTAINABLE BY THE T EST AT T HIS
S AMPLE S IZE . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

we randomly and sequentially selected 25% of the UNSWNB15 dataset as experimental data, with a ratio of 10:1 for
the training set and test set. In addition, to ensure the reliability
of the experimental results, a cross-validation strategy is
adopted during the experiments. Specifically, in each round,
10% of normal samples and 10% of abnormal samples are
randomly selected in chronological order from the training set
to construct the validation set, while the remaining data are
used for training. For each round, the model is independently
trained on a different training subset, with the corresponding
validation set used to assist the training. The optimal model
from each round is then evaluated on the test set, and the final
result is reported as the average performance and standard
deviation of the five models. This validation strategy is adopted
because attack samples in industrial control datasets are often
concentrated within specific time intervals. Using conventional
cross-validation methods such as K-fold cross-validation may
disrupt the temporal order if the data are shuffled before
splitting, or result in training sets containing only a single class
if the data are split sequentially. Both situations hinder the
proper validation of the models effectiveness. The ICS-ADD,
SWaT, and UNSW-NB15 datasets are all publicly available
and can be obtained through official sources.
Finally, the final dataset splits are as follows: the UNSWNB15 dataset contains 449,996 training samples, 50,004
validation samples, and 50,000 test samples, the SWaT dataset
contains 323,942 training samples, 35,994 validation samples,
and 89,983 test samples, and the ICS-ADD dataset contains
16,644 training samples, 1,850 validation samples, and 4,529
test samples. It should be noted that in the above datasets, flow
records in ICS-ADD, SWaT, and UNSW-NB15 are arranged
in chronological order by timestamps. We construct sequence
samples of length T= 8, i.e., we extract 8 consecutive flow
records from the time-ordered data to form an input sequence,
which is used as the temporal modeling input to ARN.
3) Experimental Datasets: In the simulation experiments,
we use Accuracy, P recision, Recall, and F 1 score as
experimental evaluation criteria to confirm the effectiveness
of our proposed ARN-based intrusion detection method. We
also use memory usage, detection time, and Floating Point
Operations per Second (FLOPs) as evaluation metrics to test
the efficiency of ARN.
B. Experimental Results and Analysis
In this part, we develop a prototype implementation to verify
the effectiveness of our proposed method. Specifically, we

compare our ARN-based intrusion detection method with the
SDBSCAN-based intrusion detection method [25], DHMMbased intrusion detection method [31], GRU-based intrusion
detection method [37], AE-LSTM-based intrusion detection method [38], DR-AD-based intrusion detection method
[35], BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection method [46], ICSCAD-based intrusion detection method [36] and TNN-based
intrusion detection method [40].
1) Quantitative Performance: We conduct the effectiveness
verification of the proposed detection method based on the
ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and conventional network
datasets (UNSW-NB15), according to the experimental criteria
defined in Section VII-A.3. The experimental results are shown
in Table VI. It can be seen that the proposed ARN-based
intrusion detection method achieves strong performance on
both ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional
network dataset (UNSW-NB15), significantly outperforming
other comparative methods overall.
a) On the ICS dataset ICS-ADD: Traditional statisticsanalysis methods such as SDBSCAN and time-series methods
such as DHMM perform relatively poorly on ICS-ADD mainly
because many attack stages in ICS-ADD are short, sparse, and
stealthy under flow-level representations. Specifically, several
attacks (e.g., Modbus scanning) primarily involve protocollevel manipulations and do not necessarily induce pronounced
deviations in flow-level statistics, making them overlap with
highly periodic benign Modbus polling traffic. As a result,
SDBSCAN may absorb attack samples into the dominant
benign high-density region, and DHMM becomes less discriminative due to weakened separability of the observation
sequence, thus leading to more false negatives and consequently lower detection performance.
In deep learning solutions, the ARN-based intrusion detection method proposed in this paper achieves good performance
across all evaluation metrics. This is because GRU-based
intrusion detection method suffer from gate unit conflicts,
making it difficult to effectively capture previous hidden state
and consequently leading to decreased detection performance.
The AE-LSTM-based intrusion detection method first extracts
features through an autoencoder and then performs detection
using an LSTM, its accuracy is affected not only by the quality
of feature extraction in the AE but also by the gate conflict
and feature forgetting issues inherent in the LSTM. The DRAD-based intrusion detection method also requires feature
extraction before detection, and its results are influenced by
the quality of this feature extraction. Moreover, the DR-AD

4442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

model structure cannot exploit the temporal characteristics of
network traffic for feature representation and learning, resulting in relatively lower overall detection metrics. Although the
BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection method can model temporal features using a bidirectional structure, its performance
is still affected by the inherent limitations of the LSTM architecture. Additionally, since attacks in industrial traffic typically
follow a unidirectional temporal evolution, bidirectional modeling may dilute potential attack features, thereby weakening
detection effectiveness. The main structure of the ICS-CADbased intrusion detection method is still based on LSTM, and
thus it is similarly constrained by gate mechanism issues,
making it difficult to further improve detection accuracy. For
the TNN-based intrusion detection method, although its core is
composed of Transformers and can represent industrial control
traffic features from a global dependency perspective through
the attention mechanism, in ICN, most anomalies occur only
within a limited time window, manifesting as local changes
in packet frequency, latency, or control commands. Moreover,
attack behaviors often exhibit unidirectional temporal evolution, so the global attention mechanism of the Transformer
may introduce redundant dependencies, reducing the models sensitivity to local anomalous features and consequently
affecting detection accuracy. In contrast, the ARN-based intrusion detection method effectively alleviates conflicts among
gate units and can more reasonably manage the relationship
between previous hidden state and the retention of current
input, thus more accurately representing the unidirectional
temporal evolution in traffic. Therefore, compared with other
existing methods, the proposed method achieves the best
intrusion detection performance.
We also observe that the DR-AD-based intrusion detection
method and BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection methods
exhibit relatively high standard deviations on the ICS-ADD
dataset. We speculate that this is mainly related to the fact
that attack behaviors in ICS-ADD are concentrated within
specific time periods. In other words, attack samples occur
continuously only within certain time windows, and random cross-validation may allocate part of these periods to
the validation set, resulting in incomplete attack sequences
during training. such missing samples can be partially compensated through temporal modeling mechanisms. However,
the DR-AD approach fails to effectively capture temporal
dependencies, and since attacks in industrial datasets typically
follow a unidirectional temporal evolution, the bidirectional
modeling of BiLSTM may dilute the attack features.Moreover,
the high expressive capacity of deep learning methods makes
them sensitive to the division of the training set, leading
to larger performance fluctuations under different splits and,
consequently, relatively higher standard deviations.
b) On the ICS dataset SWaT: The SWaT dataset is highly
imbalanced, which increases the difficulty of distinguishing
between certain normal and abnormal traffic, resulting in
overall performance of various detection methods being relatively close. Nevertheless, according to the evaluation metrics
described in Section VII-A3, our ARN-based intrusion detection method still achieves the best performance across all
metrics. We can also be observed that the SDBSCAN-based

intrusion detection method outperforms some deep learning
methods. This is mainly because SDBSCAN relies on the
distribution of samples in the feature space, and the highdimensional feature space of SWaT allows attack samples to
form distinguishable clusters. Even when the number of attack
samples is small, statistics-analysis methods are less affected.
In contrast, deep learning methods trained on imbalanced
samples are more susceptible to distribution shifts caused
by a small number of attack samples, leading to unstable
model fitting. Therefore, on SWaT, statistics-analysis methods
achieve better performance compared to some deep learning
methods. The performance analysis of other methods aligns
closely with the observations made on the ICS-ADD dataset.
c) On the conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15:
The UNSW-NB15 is a public dataset focused on conventional
network traffic. Experimental results on this dataset show
that even when dealing with regular network traffic, our
proposed ARN-based intrusion detection method outperforms
other comparative methods. It can also be observed that, in
this case, the time-series intrusion detection method based on
DHMM achieves better performance than some deep learning
approaches. This is mainly because the UNSW-NB15 dataset
consists of conventional network traffic, where temporal
dependencies primarily manifest as continuous communication records within individual sessions, exhibiting locally
continuous time series characteristics. Such local continuity
aligns well with the Markov assumption, enabling DHMM to
more effectively capture state transition patterns and achieve
superior detection performance. In contrast, the DR-AD-based
intrusion detection method fails to effectively learn temporal dependencies, the GRU-based intrusion detection method
may be affected by gate conflicts when capturing temporal
relationships, and the BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection
method is constrained by the gate conflicts inherent in
LSTM, and its bidirectional modeling mechanism may dilute
abnormal attack features when learning network data with
unidirectional temporal characteristics, resulting in a slight
performance degradation. Moreover, the local continuity of
the UNSW-NB15 dataset also limits the learning effectiveness
of Transformers. Since Transformers emphasize global dependencies, modeling locally continuous sequences can introduce
redundant features, thereby reducing the accuracy of TNNbased intrusion detection method. The performance analysis
of other methods is largely consistent with our observations
on the ICS-ADD dataset.
Overall, the results show that the ARN-based intrusion
detection method achieves strong performance on both industrial control network traffic and conventional network traffic.
In particular, the high detection accuracy on the ICS-ADD and
UNSW-NB15 datasets mainly stems from the synergy between
the dataset characteristics and the design of ARN. The ICSADD dataset contains highly periodic industrial traffic, while
the UNSW-NB15 dataset still preserves locally continuous
session-level temporal structures under the adopted flow-level
representation. With the aid of the S-ATT mechanism, ARN
can explicitly model the relationship between the previous
hidden state and the current input, thereby more effectively
extracting temporal features from the traffic and identifying

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

TABLE VII
A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF THE S-ATT M ODULE IN ARN, W HERE
W / O (S-ATT) R EPRESENTS THE M ODEL W ITHOUT THE S-ATT
M ODULE . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY BY R EMOVING C ERTAIN M ETADATA F EATURES ,
W HERE W / O (·) D ENOTES R EMOVING THE M ETADATA F EATURES
S PECIFIED IN THE PARENTHESES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE
E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

TABLE IX
H YPERPARAMETER A NALYSIS WAS P ERFORMED ON THE S EQUENCE
L ENGTH T. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

anomalous deviations, while also avoiding the gating conflict
problem commonly found in traditional recurrent models. As
a result, high detection accuracy is achieved on these two
datasets. In contrast, although the SWaT dataset shares certain
similarities with ICS-ADD in terms of industrial traffic characteristics, its severe class imbalance increases the difficulty
of distinguishing some normal flows from anomalous flows,
thereby leading to relatively lower detection accuracy on this
dataset.
2) Ablation Study: In this section, we conduct an ablation
study on S-ATT, the core module of the ARN method, and
the port/service metadata features that may lead to data contamination. We also perform a hyperparameter analysis on the
sequence length T.
a) w/o(S-ATT): The experimental results are shown in
Table VII. It can be seen that when the S-ATT module is
removed, and the previous hidden state is directly added
to the current input for representation learning, the model
performance on all three datasets decreases significantly. This
is because the model without the S-ATT module cannot
effectively analyze the correlation between the previous hidden
state and the current input, making it difficult to determine
which previous hidden state should be retained or discarded.
As a result, a large amount of redundant previous hidden
state is introduced into the current representation, interfering
with the learning of temporal relationships and leading to a
noticeable decrease in detection accuracy. Moreover, since the
model lacks the ability to adaptively adjust the retention degree
of previous hidden state, it is sensitive to variations in temporal

4443

segmentation of samples, resulting in significant performance
fluctuations during cross-validation, particularly exhibiting
large standard deviations on the ICS dataset ICS-ADD. In
contrast, the ARN with the S-ATT module can effectively
analyze the relationship between the previous hidden state
and the current input. By constructing a supplementary matrix
to enhance the current input, it realizes a dynamic reset
of the hidden state. The reset current hidden state contains
the important previous hidden state that is unknown in the
current input and highlights the features in the current input
that are related to previous hidden state, thereby significantly
improving the overall performance of the model. In addition,
based on five paired experimental results, we perform onetailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between ARN(ours) and
w/o(S-ATT), and all p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05), indicating
statistical significance.
b) w/o(port/service metadata features): Since our experiments adopt a flow-level feature representation, the constructed
feature set often may contain port/service-related metadata
features (e.g., Sport/Dport and the Service proxy). These fields
may become strongly correlated with labels under specific data
splits, thereby significantly affecting the classifiers decision
and introducing the risk of metadata contamination [48]. To
verify that the performance gain of ARN does not mainly
rely on such port/service fields, we conduct a feature-level
ablation study by removing these metadata features: specifically, we remove Sport and Dport from the ICS dataset
ICS-ADD, and remove Sport, Dport, and Service from the
conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15. Since the SWaT
dataset does not contain these port-/service-related features, no
corresponding removal experiment is performed on SWaT. As
shown in Table VIII, the experimental results show that the
performance change after removing the above features remains
within 0.5%, indicating that ARNs effectiveness primarily
stems from its ability to model temporal behavioral patterns
in traffic rather than exploiting port-/service-related metadata
features. In addition, based on five paired experimental results,
we perform one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between
ARN using the full feature set (ours) and w/o(port/service
metadata features), and all p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05),
indicating statistical significance.
c) Hyperparameter analysis: Given that the ICS-ADD
dataset is relatively new and has a fairly balanced sample distribution, we perform hyperparameter analysis on the sequence
length T using the ICS-ADD dataset, and the results are shown
in Table IX. It can be observed that the model performance
exhibits a rise-then-fall trend as T increases: when T= 4, the
sequence is too short to provide sufficient historical context,
making it difficult to adequately model temporal dependencies
and resulting in inferior performance; when T= 8, the model
benefits from richer temporal information and achieves the
best performance; when T is further increased (e.g., T= 12),
overly long sequences tend to introduce redundant or irrelevant
historical information and may even span transitional states,
thereby weakening the discriminability of local anomalous
patterns and leading to performance degradation. These results
indicate that a moderate sequence length achieves a better balance between sufficient temporal context and noise

4444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

TABLE X
C OMPUTATIONAL C OSTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS . T HE T IME C OST I S M EASURED IN S ECONDS (S), THE M EMORY U SAGE I S M EASURED
IN M EGA B YTES (MB), AND THE FLOP S A RE M EASURED IN M ILLIONS (M). T O E NSURE A FAIR C OMPARISON , W E E VALUATE
THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OST OF E ACH M ETHOD U NDER THE S AME I DENTICAL PARAMETER S ETTINGS .
T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

suppression; therefore, we set T= 8 by default. Moreover,
based on five paired experimental results, one-tailed Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests are performed by taking ARN with T=
8(ours) as the reference and comparing it with ARN with T=
4 and T= 12. All p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05), indicating
statistical significance.
3) Analysis of Computational Overhead: This section
presents experiments evaluating the computational overhead
of the proposed ARN method and the baseline algorithms in
the experimental environment. The evaluation metrics include
FLOPs, memory consumption, and runtime, with runtime covering the overhead of preprocessing and model inference for
all test data. The results are shown in Table III. Since the main
computational cost of SDBSCAN and DHMM does not come
from large-scale floating-point matrix operations, FLOPs are
not used as a measure of computational complexity. It can be
seen that the SDBSCAN-based intrusion detection method and
the DHMM-based intrusion detection method consume much
less memory than all deep learning models. This is mainly
because both are lightweight algorithms based on statistical
and probabilistic inference, with very few parameters. In
contrast, deep learning models need to cache a large number
of weights and hidden states within the network. In particular,
Transformer models must simultaneously process and cache
the dependencies across all time steps, resulting in higher
memory requirements. Therefore, the overall memory consumption of deep learning models is significantly higher than
that of traditional statistics-analysis or time-series algorithms.
Additionally, although SDBSCAN has relatively low memory
overhead, its DBSCAN-based clustering process incurs a high
computational cost when handling high-dimensional data [49],
causing its runtime on the SWaT dataset to exceed 10 seconds.
This is mainly because the efficiency of neighborhood search
in high-dimensional space decreases, leading to a significant
increase in the complexity of distance computation and density
estimation. The DHMM-based intrusion detection method
shows the best performance in terms of memory and runtime
overhead, reflecting higher computational efficiency, its detection performance on the ICS-ADD and SWaT datasets remains
low. Therefore, it is difficult to meet the practical detection
requirements in industrial scenarios, making it unsuitable as a
mainstream intrusion detection solution.
In deep learning-based intrusion detection methods,
although memory overhead is typically much higher than that
of traditional methods such as SDBSCAN and DHMM, the
decreasing cost of memory allows small-scale deep learning

models to be deployed in industrial networks. According to
the experimental results, although our proposed ARN-based
intrusion detection method exhibits higher FLOPs than GRU,
ICS-CAD, AE-LSTM, and DR-AD, its memory and runtime
overhead are comparable to these methods, and its memory
consumption is even lower than that of AE-LSTM and DRAD on the SWaT and UNSW-NB15 datasets. This is mainly
because AE-LSTM and DR-AD adopt a two-stage structure
of feature extraction + detection, in which intermediate feature variables must be retained between the two modules,
thereby increasing the overall memory usage. Moreover, since
the feature extraction and detection models are independent,
additional feature transmission and tensor loading operations
are required during inference, which further increase the total
runtime. This also explains why AE-LSTM exhibits higher
time overhead than ARN, and why DR-AD, despite having
fewer FLOPs, still shows a runtime similar to that of ARN.
The ICS-CAD intrusion detection method, based on LSTM,
and the GRU-based intrusion detection method both have
lower theoretical FLOPs than the proposed ARN method,
but their actual runtime is close to ARN. From the perspective of theoretical FLOPs, ARN exhibits slightly higher
per-step computation than GRU and LSTM, mainly due to
additional linear transformations and attention operations in
the S-ATT module on the hidden state and input vectors.
However, in practice, although ARN still processes sequences
step by step, the matrix multiplications, dot products, and
weighted sums within each time step can be highly parallelized
on SIMD or GPU architectures, fully leveraging hardware
capabilities. In contrast, because the gating mechanism introduces more gate-related branches and element-wise operations,
GRU/LSTM need to perform more matrix multiplications
and nonlinear computations at each time step, which may
increase the accumulated sequence-level latency. Therefore,
despite slightly higher theoretical computation, ARNs actual
runtime remains close to that of GRU and LSTM, which
explains the observed experimental results. In addition, ARN
incurs slightly higher memory usage than GRU and LSTM,
primarily because the S-ATT module generates additional
intermediate vectors and attention matrices at each time step
to compute attention weights between the hidden state and
input. In contrast, GRU and LSTM only need to store a small
number of hidden states and gate-related matrices per step,
resulting in lower memory consumption. We also observed that
GRUs measured memory usage is slightly higher than LSTM,
which may be attributed to implementation-dependent caching

LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN

and kernel fusion behaviors under our memory measurement
setting.
Due to its bidirectional structure, BiDLSTM has the highest
FLOPs among all compared methods. However, inference time
does not necessarily scale strictly linearly with FLOPs. In our
implementation, BiDLSTM performs gate computations step
by step over time and involves multiple matrix multiplications
and activation operations. Its runtime is also influenced by
factors such as GPU parallel efficiency, operator scheduling
overhead, and memory bandwidth. Therefore, although its
inference time is relatively long, it does not increase proportionally with FLOPs. For memory consumption, we measure
memory usage as the difference between the beginning and the
end of the detection phase. Owing to the frameworks memory
reuse/caching mechanism, the net memory increase may vary
across models, making the measured memory overhead of
BiDLSTM slightly lower than that of ICS-CAD.
In contrast, the TNN method employs a Transformer architecture. Its multi-head self-attention module computes pairwise
attention among all elements in the sequence at each time
step, resulting in O(T 2 D) computational complexity and
generating a large number of intermediate attention matrices. In addition, the feed-forward sublayers and projection
operations in multi-head attention introduce additional computation and intermediate activations, significantly increasing
both FLOPs and memory consumption. In practice, these
operations not only lengthen the overall inference time but also
substantially raise the memory footprint, increasing deployment costs in industrial network environments. Given that
industrial intrusion detection often requires real-time or nearreal-time response, the high runtime and memory demands
of Transformer may limit its practical applicability in such
scenarios.
In summary, although traditional methods such as SDBSCAN and DHMM have relatively low memory overhead,
SDBSCAN exhibits a significant increase in runtime when
processing high-dimensional data, and both types of methods
show suboptimal detection performance on ICS datasets (ICSADD and SWaT), making them inadequate for the demands
of modern industrial traffic detection. Among the compared
deep learning methods, although the proposed ARN incurs
slightly higher FLOPs on both the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and
SWaT) and the conventional network dataset (UNSW-NB15),
its inference latency and memory overhead are comparable to
those of GRU and ICS-CAD, and its computational efficiency
during the inference phase is significantly higher than TNN.
Moreover, ARN demonstrates noticeably superior detection
performance compared to other methods, highlighting its high
applicability and practical value as an industrial intrusion
detection solution.
To further evaluate the feasibility of deploying the proposed method in practice, we analyze its latency overhead.
According to Section VII-A, the number of test samples in
the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional
network dataset (UNSW-NB15) are 4,529, 89,983, and 50,000,
respectively. Based on the Time column in Table X, the perflow-sample latency (includes data preprocessing and model
inference time, and we use milliseconds to represent this

4445

time) of the ARN model is approximately 0.203 ms for
ICS-ADD, 0.041 ms for SWaT, and 0.05 ms for UNSWNB15. Considering that communication latency in industrial
networks is typically within 10 ms [47], and taking queuing
effects into account under conservative assumptions (e.g.,
using only 80% of the theoretical throughput to accommodate
additional I/O and caching overhead), the ARN model achieves
a maximum processing capacity of approximately 3,941 and
19,512 samples per second on the ICS datasets ICS-ADD and
SWaT, respectively. This indicates that ARN can satisfy the
real-time requirements of industrial networks. Moreover, on
the conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15, ARN achieves
a maximum processing capacity of approximately 16,000
samples per second, indicating that it also supports efficient
online processing in non-industrial network environments.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In the ICN, network traffic data exhibits characteristics of
large scale, irregularity, multiple features, temporal correlation
and high dimensionality, resulting in low accuracy of existing
intrusion detection methods. In this paper, we focus on designing an accurate intrusion detection method for ICN. First, we
design a novel RNN model, namely, ARN. Subsequently, we
adopt ARN to build a novel intrusion detection method for
ICN. By taking the advantage of ARN, our proposed method
greatly improves the accuracy of intrusion detection. Finally,
we implement our proposed ARN-based intrusion detection
method and provide a performance evaluation. Compared to
existing intrusion detection methods, our proposed method
achieved accuracy rates of 98.93%, 95.57%, and 98.27% on
the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional
network dataset (UNSW-NB15), respectively.
In practical application, ARN may have the same problem
as other RNN methods, that is, in the process of characterizing and learning previous hidden state, ARN and existing
RNN methods will eliminate some previous hidden state that
is irrelevant to the current by calculating the association
between previous hidden state and current input. However,
such information may still be highly valuable for future inputs,
leading to information loss in modeling temporal dependencies. Moreover, network security managers not only expect
real-time intrusion detection but also seek to anticipate the
network security situation at the next time step, enabling
proactive defensive measures. In this paper, we focus solely
on intrusion detection for ICN, without addressing network
security situation forecasting. Hence, future work will explore
these limitations in the ARN model and investigate predictive
security situation assessment for ICN.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

B. Galloway and G. P. Hancke, “Introduction to industrial control
networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 860–880,
2nd Quart., 2013.
T. Cao et al., “Reliable and efficient multimedia service optimization for
edge computing-based 5G networks: Game theoretic approaches,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1610–1625, Sep. 2020.
N. Koursioumpas, S. Barmpounakis, I. Stavrakakis, and N. Alonistioti,
“AI-driven, context-aware profiling for 5G and beyond networks,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1036–1048, Jun. 2022.

4446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[4]

[28] R. F. Fouladi, C. E. Kayatas, and E. Anarim, “Frequency based DDoS
attack detection approach using naive Bayes classification,” presented at
the 39th Int. Conf. Telecommun. Signal Process. (TSP), Jun. 2016.
[29] X. Ye, J. Lan, and W. Huang, “Network traffic anomaly detection based
on self-similarity using FRFT,” presented at the 4th Int. Conf. Softw.
Eng. Service Sci., Beijing, China, May 2013.
[30] D. Huang, X. Shi, and W.-A. Zhang, “False data injection attack
detection for industrial control systems based on both time- and
frequency-domain analysis of sensor data,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 585–595, Jan. 2021.
[31] B. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Zheng, and Y. Song, “Hidden Markov modelbased cyberattack prediction in power systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2025.
[32] Y. Li et al., “Robust detection for network intrusion of industrial IoT
based on multi-CNN fusion,” Measurement, vol. 154, Jun. 2020, Art.
no. 107450.
[33] M. Abdelaty, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, “DAICS: A deep
learning solution for anomaly detection in industrial control systems,”
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1117–1129, Apr.
2022.
[34] A. Yang, Y. Zhuansun, C. Liu, J. Li, and C. Zhang, “Design of intrusion
detection system for Internet of Things based on improved BP neural
network,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 106043–106052, 2019.
[35] K. Sood, M. R. Nosouhi, D. D. N. Nguyen, F. Jiang, M. Chowdhury, and
R. Doss, “Intrusion detection scheme with dimensionality reduction in
next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 965–979, 2023.
[36] Z. Jadidi, J. Hagemann, and D. Quevedo, “Multi-step attack detection in
industrial control systems using causal analysis,” Comput. Ind., vol. 142,
Sep. 2022, Art. no. 103741.
[37] C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Du, and F. Zhang, “An intrusion detection system
using a deep neural network with gated recurrent units,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 48697–48707, 2018.
[38] E. Mushtaq et al., “A two-stage intrusion detection system with autoencoder and LSTMs,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 121, Sep. 2022, Art. no.
108768.
[39] D. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Bu, J. Yu, and L. Yang, “PdGAT-ID: An
intrusion detection method for industrial control systems based on
periodic extraction and spatiotemporal graph attention,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 149, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 104210.
[40] S. Ullah et al., “TNN-IDS: Transformer neural network-based intrusion
detection system for MQTT-enabled IoT networks,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110072.
[41] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017.
[42] G. B. Gaggero, A. Armellin, G. Portomauro, and M. Marchese,
“Industrial control system-anomaly detection dataset (ICS-ADD) for
cyber-physical security monitoring in smart industry environments,”
IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 64140–64149, 2024.
[43] J. Goh et al., “A dataset to support research in the design of secure water
treatment systems,” presented at the Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur.,
Paris, France, 2016.
[44] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
set),” presented at the Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., Canberra, ACT,
Australia, 2015.
[45] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the
comparison with the KDD99 data set,” Inf. Secur. Journal: A Global
Perspective, vol. 25, nos. 1–3, pp. 18–31, Apr. 2016.
[46] Y. Imrana, Y. Xiang, L. Ali, and Z. Abdul-Rauf, “A bidirectional LSTM
deep learning approach for intrusion detection,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 185, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115524.
[47] K. Das and P. Havinga, “Evaluation of DECT for low latency real-time
industrial control networks,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Sens.,
New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2013.
[48] L. D’hooge, M. Verkerken, B. Volckaert, T. Wauters, and F. D. Turck,
“Establishing the contaminating effect of metadata feature inclusion
in machine-learned network intrusion detection models,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Detection Intrusions Malware, VulnerabilityAssessment. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2022.
[49] Y. Lv et al., “An efficient and scalable density-based clustering algorithm for datasets with complex structures,” Neurocomputing, vol. 171,
pp. 9–22, Jan. 2016.

D. Ding, Q.-L. Han, Z. Wang, and X. Ge, “A survey on model-based
distributed control and filtering for industrial cyber-physical systems,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2483–2499, May 2019.
[5] Z. Lv, Y. Han, A. K. Singh, G. Manogaran, and H. Lv, “Trustworthiness
in industrial IoT systems based on artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1496–1504, Feb. 2021.
[6] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot classincremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024.
[7] J. Chen, Y. Chen, S. Cai, S. Yin, L. Zhao, and Z. Zhang, “An optimized
feature extraction algorithm for abnormal network traffic detection,”
Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 149, pp. 330–342, Dec. 2023.
[8] X. Etxezarreta, I. Garitano, M. Iturbe, and U. Zurutuza, “Low delay
network attributes randomization to proactively mitigate reconnaissance
attacks in industrial control systems,” Wireless Netw., vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 5077–5091, Aug. 2024.
[9] J.-M. Shao, G.-Q. Zeng, K.-D. Lu, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng,
“Automated federated learning for intrusion detection of industrial control systems based on evolutionary neural architecture search,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 143, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103910.
[10] Q. Wu, Z. Jiang, K. Hong, H. Liu, L. T. Yang, and J. Ding, “Tensorbased recurrent neural network and multi-modal prediction with its
applications in traffic network management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manage., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 780–792, Mar. 2021.
[11] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN
encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf.
Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), Sep. 2014.
[12] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[13] M. Morchid, “Parsimonious memory unit for recurrent neural networks
with application to natural language processing,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 314, pp. 48–64, Nov. 2018.
[14] H. Fanta, Z. Shao, and L. Ma, “Forget the forget gate: Estimating anomalies in videos using self-contained long short-term
memory networks,” presented at the 7th Comput. Graph. Int. Conf.,
Oct. 2020.
[15] J. Aitchison, “The statistical analysis of compositional data,” J. Roy.
Stat. Society: Ser. B (Methodol.), vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 139–160, 1982.
[16] Y. Zou et al., “Complex network approaches to nonlinear time series
analysis,” Phys. Rep., vol. 787, pp. 1–97, Sep. 2019.
[17] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning and its
applications,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 100379.
[18] W. Wu et al., “Sliding window optimized information entropy analysis
method for intrusion detection on in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 45233–45245, 2018.
[19] Y. Hu et al., “Detecting stealthy attacks on industrial control systems
using a permutation entropy-based method,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 108, pp. 1230–1240, Sep. 2020.
[20] M. Zhou, Z. Zhang, and L. Xie, “Permutation entropy based detection scheme of replay attacks in industrial cyber-physical systems,”
J. Franklin Inst., vol. 358, no. 7, pp. 4058–4076, May 2021.
[21] D. Liao, R. Zhou, H. Li, M. Zhang, and X. Chen, “GE-IDS: An intrusion
detection system based on grayscale and entropy,” Peer-Peer Netw.
Appl., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–14, May 2022.
[22] M. Ahmed, A. Naser Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60,
pp. 19–31, Jan. 2016.
[23] W. Liang, K.-C. Li, J. Long, X. Kui, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An industrial
network intrusion detection algorithm based on multifeature data clustering optimization model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 2063–2071, Mar. 2020.
[24] H. Mittal, A. K. Tripathi, A. C. Pandey, M. D. Alshehri, M. Saraswat,
and R. Pal, “A new intrusion detection method for cyber–physical system
in emerging industrial IoT,” Comput. Commun., vol. 190, pp. 24–35,
Jun. 2022.
[25] Z. D. Zhang, H. T. Shen, and S. J. Wei, “Network anomaly detection
based on traffic clustering with group-entropy similarity,” presented at
the 9th Int. Symp. Netw., Comput. Commun., Shenzhen, China, 2022.
[26] M. Bozdal, M. Samie, and I. K. Jennions, “WINDS: A wavelet-based
intrusion detection system for controller area network (CAN),” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 58621–58633, 2021.
[27] K. Miao, X. Shi, and W.-A. Zhang, “Attack signal estimation for
intrusion detection in industrial control system,” Comput. Secur., vol. 96,
Sep. 2020, Art. no. 101926.