IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

3127

TIME-VAD: Text-Informed Magnitude
Enhancement Feature Learning for Vehicle
Accident Detection and Anticipation
Sumit Mishra , Medhavi Mishra , Pranjay Shyam, and Dongsoo Har , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Vehicular accidents pose a substantial risk to
drivers, underscoring the persistent and vital need for heightening safety measures. Early accident anticipation mechanisms
are imperative for proactive measures, while detection accuracy
is pivotal for prompt response and effective post-accident mitigation. Accurate and early anticipation of accidents for automated
driving assistance systems in vehicles or CCTV in cities remains
a complex task due to the intricate spatial-temporal interactions
within traffic videos. This study presents text-informed magnitude
enhancement in contrastive multiple-instance feature learning
for vehicle accident detection and anticipation (TIME-VAD).
Text is a better representative of concepts when compared to
images in video, thus multi-modal learning is suitable. Also, the
traditional assumption about feature magnitude of accidents and
normal frames in magnitude based multiple-instance learning
using weak supervision may not hold. This has led to the development of a novel weak-supervised learning strategy involving
magnitude enhancement from textual concepts. For a better
frame-level perception of accident risks in videos, dynamic temporal attentions are refined using the proposed dilated temporal
conv-attention (DTCA) block. In-depth component-level analysis
is performed to showcase the model’s efficacy while elucidating
its operational mechanisms. Evaluation is conducted on three
benchmark datasets, considering both earliness and accuracyrelated metrics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
TIME-VAD model outperforms the existing models. Compared to
the previous top-performing supervised model achieving 84.7%
accuracy, TIME-VAD achieves a 94.44% accuracy (measured by
ROC-AUC) on the largest DoTA dataset. Notably, our model
also excels in measuring how early it detects accidents compared
to previous methods. The code will be released on https://
github.com/sumitmishra209/TIME-VAD
Index Terms—Artificial surveillance, multi-modal learning,
accident detection, real-time systems.
Received 25 July 2024; revised 23 December 2024 and 6 June 2025;
accepted 24 November 2025. Date of publication 10 December 2025; date of
current version 10 March 2026. This work was supported by Korea Institute
for Advancement of Technology (KIAT) grant funded by the Ministry of
Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE) (Development of 22-kW Variable Type
Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging System for Building Up Global Chain of
Intelligent/Universal Mechanical Parking System) under Grant P0028821. The
Associate Editor for this article was J. Xun. (Corresponding author: Sumit
Mishra.)
Sumit Mishra is with the Robotics Program, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, Daejeon 34141, South Korea (e-mail: sumitmishra209@kaist.ac.kr).
Medhavi Mishra and Dongsoo Har are with the CCS Graduate School
of Mobility, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon
34141, South Korea (e-mail: medhavi132@kaist.ac.kr; dshar@kaist.ac.kr).
Pranjay Shyam is with Amazon Fulfillment Technologies and Robotics,
Seattle, WA 98109 USA (e-mail: pranjayy@amazon.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3637912

I. I NTRODUCTION
URVEILLANCE systems, prevalent due to the widespread
deployment of CCTV cameras, pose a significant challenge: the inherent limitations in human monitoring capabilities [1]. However, the advent of artificial intelligence
(AI) offers a transformative solution by automating accident
detection and anticipation. A fundamental aspect of effective
accident detection and anticipation is understanding anomalies.
It is imperative to comprehend that anomalies pave the way to
accidents, rendering accidents as anomalies when juxtaposed
with regular traffic patterns. For example, a person suddenly
starting to run fast on a heavy traffic road with approaching
vehicles can be an anomaly that could lead to an accident.
Many anomaly detection datasets include vehicle accidents as
one class among others, such as explosions, acts of crime,
and acts of violence. However, vehicle accident detection
tasks require different treatments than other anomaly classes.
The challenges posed by accidents stem from their inherent
unpredictability and context-dependent manifestations. Each
accident class varies significantly, presenting a multifaceted
hurdle that does not align neatly with conventional clustering, classification, or regression paradigms. This necessitates
adaptations from these areas for accident detection. Recent
surveys highlight the growing importance of vision-based
traffic accident detection and anticipation systems [60], with
approaches ranging from cognitive modeling [58] to ego-view
understanding [59]. Some works address anomalies along with
vehicle accidents, and some focus solely on vehicle accidents,
highlighting the unique requirements of accident detection
tasks [4].
Video accident detection and anticipation by leveraging
deep learning (DL) and other classes of AI emerge as a
promising avenue due to their ability to mine semantic patterns from automatically learned features. Through end-to-end
optimization for feature extractions and accident assessments,
diverse DL models exhibit the capacity to anticipate accidents
across multiple levels spanning frame, temporal-spatial, and
pixel domains and concurrently detect motion. The accident
anticipation task involves identifying accidents before they
happen, while detection focuses on recognizing the start of
an accident event. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our proposed
framework integrates both detection and anticipation capabilities through a unified architecture. The DL model’s output
probability when compared with a threshold determines if an

S

1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 1. TIME-VAD framework architecture for unified accident detection and
anticipation.

event in a frame is classified as a near accident or an accident.
For both tasks, feature extraction and further processing are
crucial steps in any DL model workflow. Therefore, we address
these tasks together as accident detection based on earliness
and accuracy. Existing efforts predominantly focus on unsupervised accident detection [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14], [18] that primarily model normal behavior and
identify deviations from it without utilizing labeled accident
data. They often rely on factors like motion trajectories or
low-level features extracted from image patches to detect
and anticipate accidents, exhibiting strength in simplifying
the accident detection problem by generalizing to diverse
accident distributions. While effective in certain scenarios,
existing work may struggle in crowded scenes or fail to
generalize in complex environments. Other limitations involve
high false-positive rates, poor adaptation to environmental
changes, and the inability to leverage readily available accident
examples that can give prior knowledge about accidents. These
constraints may hinder DL models’ practical utility [19].
Building a fully supervised classification approach is
difficult due to the heterogeneous nature and unknown manifestations of accidents until occurrence and the challenge
of full supervision for all accident classes [19]. To overcome these challenges, self or weak supervision is explored
to improve accident detection accuracy. Improved detection
accuracy can be achieved through semi-supervised methods
that extract normal patterns or by employing limited or
weak supervised techniques such as multiple instance learning
(MIL), which utilizes easy-to-annotate video-level labels for
training [20]. Recent advancements in text and image-based
contrastive learning have showcased notable efficacy with the

availability of DL models, like Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-Training (CLIP) [22], pretrained with large databases.
These models offer features that can be directly utilized or
further refined through contrastive methods. However, the
challenge in training unsupervised and supervised accident
detection frameworks demands a distinct approach to feature
refinement. Therefore, a better technique different from the
traditionally applied supervised [23] or unsupervised contrastive learning [24] is required in accident detection. Textual
representations often articulate concepts more explicitly than
images, prompting the exploration of employing contrastive
supervision using text. Leveraging text-based signals might
offer a more comprehensive and generic portrayal of accidents.
Given the same concept for image and textual data, it is
anticipated that image features corresponding to text features
should exhibit similar trends in magnitude. This correlation
should be a pivotal consideration in structuring the framework
for MIL. From this viewpoint, the present work seeks to tackle
these intricate challenges by proposing a novel approach leveraging text anchor-based contrastive weak-supervised feature
enhancement within a MIL framework (Fig. 2), which has
been tailored specifically for vehicle accident detection (VAD).
Following are the main contributions of this work.
• A novel framework, Text-Informed Magnitude Enhancement Feature Learning for Vehicle Accident Detection
(TIME-VAD) is introduced. It leverages CLIP features for
contrastive fine-tuning using text-based anchors, proving
more effective in accident detection by harnessing the
explicit concepts articulated in textual data.
• Upon analyzing accident and normal traffic concepts in
textual form, it is observed that, contrary to traditional
assumptions, the magnitudes of normal CLIP features
are higher than those of accident features. Consequently,
a reversal of magnitudes is implemented to enhance
learning by using weak-supervised magnitude-based MIL.
• To refine temporal features, a dilated temporal convattention (DTCA) block is proposed, dynamically attending to salient temporal segments. This innovative block
aims to enhance feature representation in the temporal
domain.
• While accident detection and anticipation are related,
previous studies have addressed them separately, focusing
on either timeliness or correctness. Our study achieves
superior performance for both tasks independently and
provides pragmatic results when combined.
• Comprehensive analyses and experiments are conducted
across three diverse datasets, evaluating metrics related
to the correctness and timeliness of accident frame
detection. The proposed framework can showcase superior performance as compared to state-of-the-art models,
underscoring its efficacy in accurately and promptly
detecting traffic accidents.
Our work primarily focuses on vehicle accident detection,
employing AI for real-time identification. The swift responses
enabled by AI not only expedite aid to accident scenes,
promising a significant reduction in casualties but also prioritize the improvement of advanced driving assistance systems
(ADAS) [2]. By swiftly detecting accidents and promptly

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

notifying drivers via ADAS or using it in collision-avoidance
assistance systems, such as automatic emergency braking and
lane-keeping assistance, vehicular safety could be bolstered
[3]. Consequently, our work resides at the juncture of pressing
societal needs and technological innovation, seeking to harness
AI’s potential for accident detection in surveillance and ADAS
applications. The rest of this article is organized as follows.
Section II reviews the existing accident detection works as well
as other related tasks. Our proposed method is introduced in
Section III. The comparison and component analysis experiments on the benchmarks are given in Section IV. Finally,
Section V concludes the paper.
II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW

3129

bag-level annotations that substantially enhance instancelevel accuracy across medical image datasets have been
introduced. Similar to supervised and unsupervised learning,
supervised and unsupervised contrastive learning face the same
constraints, prompting further innovative strategies. Recent
approaches leverage various techniques including two-stream
networks [64] and monocular depth-enhanced 3D modeling
[62] to improve detection capabilities. Previous studies have
investigated weakly supervised anomaly detection based on
temporal cues and feature discrimination [34], [36]. For traffic
accident analysis, text-informed approaches [16], [65] have
shown superior performance over image-based anchors in
representing complex traffic concepts such as “accident scene”
and “normal traffic”, which are better expressed textually.

A. Weakly Supervised Anomaly and Accident Detection

C. Multimodal Traffic Accident Detection and Anticipation

Weakly supervised video anomaly detection capitalizes on
using both normal and abnormal data with varying levels
of supervision, leveraging video-level annotations to enhance
anomaly detection [25], [26], [45], [46]. Unlike general
anomaly detection, traffic accident detection presents unique
challenges requiring temporal reasoning about evolving dangerous situations and early detection capabilities [60], [63].
The DL-based MIL has emerged as a key methodology within
weakly supervised techniques [20], [27], [28], [29], [30],
[31]. However, challenges persist in accurately predicting
accident frames due to the complexity of the context leading to
accidents, which prompts the exploration of novel adaptations.
Recent advancements using DL encompass temporal context
aggregation [28] and the integration of attention mechanisms
[30] in the classification module. These aim to better discern
abnormal events amidst normal video sequences. Encoderbased methods have also gained prominence, training both
feature encoders and classifiers to refine predictions and optimize feature representations more efficiently. These strategies
incorporate pseudo-label generation and self-training schemes
[27], [28]. Recent advancements include self-supervised consistency learning [61] and text-driven temporal modeling [65]
for improved detection accuracy.

Recent advances in traffic accident detection have evolved
beyond general anomaly detection to address domain-specific
challenges through multimodal approaches. While multimodal
anomaly detection traditionally leveraged audio-visual data
[37], traffic scenarios present unique constraints. Extracting external road audio from enclosed vehicle environments
or obtaining clear audio in CCTV feeds poses significant
challenges, making textual input a viable alternative for multimodal learning [16], [65]. Long video event retrieval and
description methods [38] employ superframe segmentation to
mitigate computational complexity, underscoring the need for
language-based methods in processing vast accident-related
video content.
Contemporary traffic accident analysis approaches encompass cognitive modeling [58] for causal understanding and
ego-view analysis [59] for driver-centric perception. Recent
surveys [60] emphasize the shift toward vision-based systems
with multimodal integration. Text-based anomaly detection
[17] has emerged using weakly supervised MIL while considering classification probability on video level, while systematic
reviews [63] identify real-time processing and early detection
as critical requirements. Advanced architectures include selfsupervised consistency learning [61], two-stream networks
[64], and depth-enhanced 3D modeling [62]. Unlike general
approaches focusing on classification probability for video,
our method addresses frame-level vehicle accidents through
feature magnitude enhancement within a text-informed multimodal framework, leveraging semantic understanding for
improved discrimination in vehicular contexts.

B. Contrastive Learning for Anomaly and Accident Detection
Among recent anomaly detection techniques, the integration
of contrastive learning methods has drawn significant attention.
Some approaches, e.g., [32], [33], [34], directly integrate
contrastive learning, showcasing novel models leveraging contrastive attention modules with classifiers. These methods
refine anomalous predictions through attention mechanisms,
significantly improving frame-level receiver operating characteristic - area under the curve (ROC-AUC) and highlighting
their effectiveness in weakly-supervised anomaly detection
scenarios. However, while these methods offer potential solutions, challenges persist. For instance, the direct application
of contrastive learning exhibits limitations, motivating efforts
to pair it with MIL for enhanced anomaly detection [36].
Hence, contrastive self-supervised learning within the realm
of MIL is explored to overcome challenges posed by class
imbalances [35]. Instance-level pseudo labels derived from

III. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, the problem statement is presented and
the proposed method TIME-VAD is described in detail.
The pipeline to train and optimize the TIME-VAD is also
presented.
A. Problem Statement
In the MIL-based method, which is a weakly supervised
VAD, the training videos are labeled solely at the video
level. Videos with accidents are referred to as an abnormal
video and is labeled as 1 (positive) while videos without

3130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

any accidents are referred to as normal and is labeled as
0 (negative). Thus only video label Y ∈ {0, 1} is provided.
Let T denote the number of snippets (frames) in a video,
K the number of selected features for MIL learning, m the
separation margin, D the feature dimension (768 for CLIP),
and L, M the numbers of positive and negative text anchors
respectively. The operations largest-K and least-K select the K
features with highest and lowest magnitudes respectively. The
MIL-based methods treat the video as a bag and each snippet
as an instance, defining a positive video as a positive bag
of features Ba = (a1 , a2 , . . . , aT ) and a negative video as a
negative bag of features Bn = (n1 , n2 , . . . , nT ). In this context,
any video V = {vi }Ti=1 , comprising of T snippets. The objective
of VAD is to learn a function fθ that maps snippet features
either from Ba or Bn to their accident scores or probability
within the range of 0 to 1 such that the following assumption
max fθ (ai ) > max fθ (ni )
i∈Ba

(1)

i∈Bn

is valid. Formulating VAD as a classification task for outputting accident score, a MIL ranking objective function and
MIL ranking loss are proposed in [20]. The objective function
as shown in Eq. (1) aims to ensure that the snippet with the
highest classification score in the positive bag ranks higher
than the one with the highest classification score in the
negative bag. The loss based on this objective is given as


(2)
L (Ba , Bn ) = max 0, max fθ (ni ) − max fθ (ai )
i∈Bn

i∈Ba

To maintain a significant margin between positive and negative
instances, a hinge-based ranking is used. This loss, when
considering the maximum probability of 1 as a hinge, is given
as


L (Ba , Bn ) = max 0, 1 − max fθ (ai ) + max fθ (ni )
(3)
i∈Ba

i∈Bn

MIL-based methods in accident detection encounter inherent challenges that impede their efficacy. These methods face
ambiguities in achieving a high probability score for the
actual accident snippet of a video. This results in potentially
misaligning the highest accident score snippet with the actual
accident snippet. Issues arise when at the start of optimization,
fθ predicts normal snippets in typical videos with the highest
classification score. This potentially reinforces errors during
training, hindering training convergence, and blurring the
distinction between normal and accident behavior. Moreover,
videos with multiple accident snippets may lack sufficient
instances for robust learning. This is because only the highest
classification score is used, impacting the training process.
To overcome MIL challenges, the snippet feature magnitudes (L1 or L2 norm), instead of classification scores, are used
in training by robust temporal feature magnitude (RTFM) [39]
to differentiate between normal and abnormal snippets. The
RTFM assumes that the low magnitude of the snippet’s feature
signifies normal behavior, while higher magnitudes indicate
accidents. In addition, the RTFM learning considers K snippets
instead of just one. The learning enforces a criterion where
the mean of the largest-K feature magnitudes in abnormal
video snippets is higher than that of the mean of the largest-K

feature magnitudes in normal video snippets. For better separability, a margin m is considered between the largest-K
feature magnitudes of abnormal video snippets and the
largest-K feature magnitudes of normal video snippets. This
criterion provides a more robust metric for accident detection.
Based on the largest-K feature magnitudes, the MIL loss
function in RTFM is given by
L (Ba , Bn ) = max (0, m − dθ )

(4)

where
1 X
1 X
largest-K (kai k2 ) −
largest-K (kni k2 )
K
K
max (kai k2 ) > max (kni k2 ) .

dθ =

Also, the RTFM approach enforces alignment between the
classification score of the largest-K magnitude snippets and
their respective videos. This involves training a binary crossentropy-based classification loss function, L f ( fθ , y) where
y ∈ (1, 0) such that y for the largest-K magnitude features
of snippets from an accident video is 1 and y for largest-K
magnitude features of snippets from a normal video is 0. The
y for largest-K magnitude features of snippets from a normal
video is 0 as there is no accident snippets in normal videos.
The variable fθ is a function of x, which is the largest-K
magnitude of feature embeddings from each of Ba and Bn .
By jointly training normal and abnormal samples in both
feature and scoring spaces, the method aims to ensure a
comprehensive learning process. This video label classification
loss for the largest-K features of snippets from accident and
normal videos is given as
X

L f ( fθ , y) =
− y log( fθ (x)) + (1 − y) log(1 − fθ (x)) (5)
x∈largest-K

B. Time-VAD Framework
In the existing RTFM method, several limitations are identified, prompting the development of the TIME-VAD framework
shown in Fig. 2. The RTFM framework involves challenges in
distinguishing positive snippet embedding from negative snippet embedding, as their classification scores kept fluctuating
while training. To address this, the TIME-VAD framework
incorporated contrastive text anchor-based training to improve
the distinction between positive and negative snippet embeddings. Anomaly detection studies [18], [39], [45], [46] used
preprocessed features such as optical flow [43], and object
bounding boxes [42] along with features from RGB or Gray
pixels like I3D [40] or C3D [41]. Incorporating additional
features along with I3D and C3D image-based backbones
improves results but preprocessing additional features is computationally heavy as well as time-consuming. TIME-VAD
employs the CLIP feature extraction backbone, capitalizing on
its ability to comprehend multimodal (text and image) information, unlike conventional image-based backbones. Thus, a
richer representation of data is enabled by using only the
CLIP RGB pixel features. This is particularly beneficial in
scenarios requiring nuanced contextual understanding across
modalities. Furthermore, the assumption that accident frames
exhibit higher magnitudes than normal frames did not hold

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

3131

Fig. 2. TIME-VAD feature learning framework with color-coded processing paths: red for accident-related (accident video, positive anchors, accident frames)
and purple for normal-related (normal video, negative anchors, normal frames) components. Accident videos contain both accident frames (red) and normal
frames (purple).

universally. This is observed particularly in the case of CLIP,
where this pattern is reversed. Hence, The TIME-VAD has
enhanced the magnitude using MIL accordingly. Additionally,
to refine features before classification, a DTCA block is
introduced in TIME-VAD.
1) Clip Feature Extraction and Text Anchor Analysis: The
TIME-VAD integrates the CLIP feature extraction backbone,
deviating from conventional image-based models like I3D
and C3D. CLIP’s unique strength lies in its capacity to
understand multimodal information, associating images with
their respective texts. Unlike standard image-centric models, CLIP trained through contrastive learning comprehends
the nuanced relationships between images and text. This
broader comprehension enables CLIP to encapsulate not only
visual data but also semantic and contextual information,
significantly enhancing accident detection capabilities. The
CLIP model [vit-large-patch14-336] [47], serving as TIMEVAD’s feature extraction backbone, undergoes training on
vast datasets, incorporating distinct image-description pairs.
This model employs an image encoder built around the ViT
architecture [48], which features variations in layer count,
patch size (14 × 14), and input image dimensions (336 × 336
pixels). Simultaneously, its text encoder employs a transformer
architecture [49] with an expanded layer count, amplifying its
grasp of textual contexts for a more comprehensive understanding. Both texts and images have 768 dimension feature
vectors.
Positive and negative text anchors can be either manually
designed or learned. However, hand-crafted text prompts do
not require additional training procedures and still achieve
decent results [15]. Hence, we have manually designed multiple positive and negative text anchors. The text anchors are not
exhaustive, as the fundamental purpose of weak supervision is
acknowledging that exhaustively listing all possible accident
scenarios is impractical and unnecessary. To develop effective
anchors covering the accident types represented in textual
descriptions of accidents and normal driving events from the

Fig. 3. CLIP text anchor analysis: Magnitude distribution histogram shows
embedding frequency per magnitude bin, with accident anchors having lower
mean magnitude than normal anchors. The cosine similarity matrix between
accident and normal anchors, lying in the range of 0.575-0.8, reveals difficulty
in distinguishing events in the textual modality.

W3AL database [73] GPT4, along with manual refining, is
used to generate representative text anchors. During training,
we considered the average effect for the corresponding set
of anchors accordingly. A magnitude distribution analysis is
conducted on 19 negative and 27 positive text anchors listed in
Table I. The analysis, illustrated in Fig. 3, showcases anchor
frequency against magnitude. For positive anchors, the mean

3132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

TABLE I
T EXT FOR P OSITIVE AND N EGATIVE A NCHORS U SED
IN TIME-VAD T RAINING

magnitude was registered at 15.38, contrasting with 17.93 for
negative anchors. This disparity challenges the assumption that
accident frames always exhibit higher magnitudes than normal
frames. Additionally, examining cosine similarity, which is the
dot product of unit vectors between positive and negative text
anchor vectors (as shown in Fig. 3), revealed a range spanning
from 0.575 to 0.8. This exploration highlighted the challenges
in discerning between “accident scene” and “normal traffic”.
This was particularly evident in textual representations, which
are albeit clearer compared to their visual counterparts. These
complexities underscore the intricate nature of the problem domain, especially in visual conceptualizations of such
scenarios.
2) TIME-VAD: TIME-VAD introduces an innovative architecture leveraging the CLIP backbone [22], harnessing the
power of multimodal information. Initially, normal and accident videos are simultaneously input, and each frame from
both videos undergoes 10-crop data augmentation for robust
data. The CLIP backbone [vit-large-patch14-336] [47] extracts
features from each frame of the video and encodes them in a
768-dimension (D) vector. Employing the DTCA block refines
these features in the temporal domain to consider a given
video rather than the frame images of that video independently.
This enhances the features’ representation for temporal context
understanding.
Subsequently, from both the accident and normal videos,
K frame feature embeddings with the least magnitude are
selectively extracted. These frame feature embeddings that
are processed through the proposed architecture undergo three
primary loss functions. The first loss involves employing
features with the least-K magnitude from both videos, emphasizing magnitude-enhanced MIL. The second loss employs
features with the least-K magnitude, from both videos, in a
classification head. Here, the classification probability of K
features associated with the accident video is driven towards
1, while those of the normal video features are pushed towards
0, intensifying the discernment between normal and accident
instances. Furthermore, the third loss integrates contrastive

Fig. 4. Schematic of Dilated Temporal Conv-Attention (DTCA) block. The
block consists of four main components with unique color coding: attention
blocks (green) for global temporal context, C1 blocks (blue) for dimension
adjustment, C2 blocks (orange) for dilated convolutions with varying dilation
rates, and L1 blocks (yellow) for feature processing. The input feature
dimensions are mentioned within the blocks and the corresponding output
feature dimensions are mentioned along the output lines extending from
the block and connecting to other blocks. For Conv-1D (C1), the channel
dimensions are adjusted as per the required output feature dimension.

textual anchor-based training. Utilizing L positive and M negative text anchors features that have dimension D are computed
using CLIP. For the least-K magnitude features extracted from
the accident and normal videos, cosine similarity calculations
are performed with each of the L positive and M negative
anchor features, respectively. These tailored losses, strategically designed within the framework, enhance the model’s
ability to distinguish accident instances from normal patterns,
paving the way for more robust accident detection in video
data.
3) Dilated Temporal Conv-Attention (DTCA) Block:
Inspired by attention techniques in video understanding, the proposed DTCA captures multi-resolution local
temporal dependencies and global temporal dependencies between video frames. The DTCA block is illustrated in Fig. 4. Multi-scale temporal representations are

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

learned using the CLIP pre-computed features: F(clip).
For local temporal dependency, dilated convolutions are
employed over the temporal dimension using a pyramid
of dilated convolution (PDC) [50]. The dilated convolution operation PDC(n) , for n equal to 1, 2, and 4, is
given by
PDC(n) = Conv1D (F(clip), kernel size = 3, dilation = n)
(6)
Further features from each of PDC are processed using RELU
non-linearity, batch normalization layer, and dropout layer for
regularization.
To capture the global temporal context, the attention block
within the transformer [49] is used to process features along
the time dimension. Let F(c) denote input features to the
attention block, which is convoluted with a 1 × 1 convolution
and a learnable position encoding represent element-wise
added to the convoluted features. To reduce spatial dimension, position encoding-added convoluted features are again
convoluted using 1 × 1 convolution. Using these features as
F(c1 ), F(c2 ), and F(c3 ), attention block estimates pairwise
correlations between features, generating an attention map
M ∈ R(T ×T ) given as


F(c1 ) · F(c2 )T
· F(c3 )
(7)
M = Softmax
√
D
This attention map M is then matrix multiplied with F(c3 ),
and convoluted again using 1 × 1 convolution to get features F ∈ R(T ×D) . For better global temporal attention,
initial features F(clip) are divided into three spatial domains:
F(c) ∈ R(T ×(0→D/2),(D/2→D),(0→D)) . Each of these features F(c)
undergoes separate processing using three separate attention
blocks.
Each of the three features processed using attention blocks
as well as the three features processed using PDC are concatenated and convoluted with a 1 × 1 convolution. This reduces
spatial dimensions from F ∈ R(T ×6D) to F ∈ R(T ×D) . In addition, these features are processed using RELU non-linearity,
batch normalization layer, and dropout layer. A skip connection utilizing the original feature (F(clip)) is element-wise
added, producing the final temporal feature representation.
These features are finally used for selecting the least-K magnitude features of accident and normal video frames. Normal
frames, with the least-K magnitude, are selected with a dropout
of 0.7 to maintain good generalization. Also, training batches
of pairs consisting of an accident and a normal video are
processed. After separating the features of normal and accident
videos from a pair, a multi-layer perceptron with 3 layers
is deployed as a classification head. This classification head
outputs a score for each frame of input video out of which
K scores, one for each frame feature embedding having the
least-K magnitudes are chosen for loss calculation while
training.
C. Optimization Procedure
1) Magnitude Enhanced Multiple Instance Learning Loss in
Time-VAD: In TIME-VAD, the optimization process employs
magnitude-enhanced MIL loss. This loss function, L (Ba , Bn ),

3133

relies on the discrepancy dθ . Here, dθ is calculated as the
difference between the mean of the least-K feature magnitude
from normal video snippets and abnormal video snippets.
Here, the snippet is considered as a frame of the video.
The loss is triggered when this difference is less than a
margin m. This formulation aims to ensure that the minimum
magnitude of snippet feature embedding within the normal
video is greater than the minimum magnitude of snippet
feature embedding within the abnormal video, enhancing the
distinction between these snippet feature embeddings during
model optimization. Following RTFM, instead of just taking
the least feature magnitude of the snippet’s feature, the mean
of the least-K feature magnitudes of normal video snippets
is compared with the least-K feature magnitudes of abnormal
video snippets. This magnitude-enhanced MIL loss is given by
L (Ba , Bn ) = max (0, m − dθ )

(8)

where ai ∈ Ba and ni ∈ Bn represent individual frame feature
embeddings, and
1 X
1 X
least-K (kni k2 ) −
least-K (kai k2 )
dθ =
K
K
min (kni k2 ) > min (kai k2 )
2) Frame Classifier Loss in Time-VAD: Within TIMEVAD, the frame classifier loss is integral to the learning
process. This loss, L f ( fθ , y), operates based on the binary
cross-entropy formula, summing over a subset of instances
designated by the least-K magnitude of frame features, where
y ∈ (1, 0) such that y for least-K magnitude features of snippets
from an accident video is 1 and y for least-K magnitude
features of snippets from a normal video is 0. Since frame
labels are not available directly, we use the least-K magnitude
of feature embeddings to match their classification probability
with the corresponding video labels. This results in weak
supervision on frame level based on video labels. fθ is a
function of x, which is the least-K magnitude of feature
embeddings from each of Ba and Bn . Frame classification loss
aims to optimize the model by minimizing the classification
error between abnormal and normal snippets based on video
labels, enabling effective discrimination between these categories during training. This video label classification loss for
the least-K feature magnitude of snippets from accident and
normal videos is given as
X

L f ( fθ , y) =
− y log( fθ (x))+(1−y) log(1 − fθ (x))
(9)
x∈least-K

where x specifically refers to the least-K magnitude feature
embeddings selected for classification.
3) Text Anchor-Based Contrastive Loss in Time-VAD:
Differentiating itself from traditional supervised contrastive
loss [23], TIME-VAD employs the text anchor-based contrastive loss (Lcont ). Unlike traditional contrastive learning
that includes both attraction and repulsion terms, our formulation focuses solely on attracting relevant features to their
corresponding anchors, avoiding explicit repulsion between
cross-category pairs to prevent potential interference in the
weak supervision setting. Loss function Lcont , leverages the
similarity scores between anchor vectors and frame features
in x, which are the least-K magnitude of feature embeddings

3134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

+
from Ba and Bn . Here, x is comprised of both accident ( fleast-K
)
−
and normal ( fleast-K ) frame feature embeddings, which have the
least-K magnitude in the respective accident (Ba ) and normal
(Bn ) video. This process is guided by binary labels (amask and
+
−
nmask ) for fleast-K
and fleast-K
. The text anchor-based contrastive
loss (Lcont ) is then given by

TABLE II
ACCIDENT DATASETS U SED IN E XPERIMENTS

+
−
Lcont ( fleast-K
, fleast-K
, a+ , a− )
+
= LCL (sim( fleast-K
, a+ ), amask )
−
+ LCL (sim( fleast-K
, a− ), nmask )

(10)

where sim denotes the cosine similarity scores between frame
features with least-K magnitude and anchor vectors and binary
masks are constructed as follows: amask are binary labels with
the length of 2K that have K entries as 1 for each of least-K
magnitude features from an accident video and K entries as 0
for each of least-K magnitude features from a normal video.
nmask are binary labels with the length of 2K, which have
K entries as 0 for each of least-K magnitude features from
an accident video and K entries as 1 for each of least-K
magnitude features from a normal video. a+ and a− denote the
positive and negative anchor vector embeddings, respectively.
The video-level label y determines the mask construction,
establishing the direct relationship between video labels and
text anchor vectors used for contrastive learning.
In addition, the contrastive loss function LCL in Eq. (10)
encapsulates the probabilistic interpretation of similarity
scores between frame features and anchor vectors. The function calculates the mean negative logarithm of the softmax
probabilities of similarity scores scaled by a temperature
parameter (temp). These probabilities are multiplied by binary
masks (maski ), assigning weights to each score based on
whether the instance is labeled as 0 or 1. As discussed,
frame masks are made using video labels, which provide weak
supervision on the frame level based on video labels. This
mechanism enables a nuanced understanding of similarity,
facilitating effective separation between accident and normal
instances in the contrastive learning process within TIMEVAD. The contrastive loss function LCL is given by
LCL (simi , maski )
= −mean2K
i=1

!!
esimi /temp
maski × log P sim /temp 
e i
× (1 − maski )
(11)

where simi represents the similarity score of the ith frame
feature, maski ∈ {0, 1} denotes the binary mask, and temp is
the temperature parameter used to scale the similarity scores.
4) Total Loss in Time-VAD: For a total loss, temporal
smoothness, and sparsity regularisation are also needed as used
in [20]. The temporal smoothness (L s ( fθ , f)) enforces a similar
anomaly score for neighboring snippets. It is given by
L s ( fθ , f) =

T −1
X

fθ (fi ) − fθ (fi+1 )

2

(12)

i=1

where f denotes feature embeddings of (Ba , Bn ). Following
the same notations, the sparsity regularisation loss (Lr ( fθ , f))

imposes a prior in which abnormal events are rare in each
abnormal video and is given by
T

Lr ( fθ , f) =

1X
fθ (fi )
T

(13)

i=1

The total loss (Lt ) is the weighted sum of L (Ba , Bn ), L f ( fθ , y),
Lcont , L s ( fθ , f), Lr ( fθ , f), and is given as
Lt = w1 × L (Ba , Bn ) + w2 × L f ( fθ , y) + w3 × Lcont
+ w4 × L s ( fθ , f) + w5 × Lr ( fθ , f)
(14)
where w j are respective weights for j ∈ [1, 5]. During training,
CLIP features were pre-calculated and stored to avoid recalculating them in every epoch, saving GPU memory usage. This
is equivalent to freezing the backbone. Text anchors as well as
video frame CLIP embeddings are used for training. The total
loss is used to train the DTCA block and the classification
head, as shown in Fig. 4. During testing, the CLIP backbone,
DTCA block, and classification head are frozen, and no loss is
calculated. Only video frame CLIP embeddings will be used
for testing. The model outputs a score for each frame of the
video, representing the frame’s accident probability.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION AND E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
A. Datasets
Three datasets named car crash dataset (CCD) [45], dashcam accident dataset (DAD) [51], and detection of traffic
anomaly (DoTA) [4] are used in this paper. The key attributes
and compositions of these datasets are provided in Table II.
CCD and DAD offer unique perspectives on traffic accident
videos taken from different cameras, showcasing diverse scenarios and attributes. CCD, with its 10 frames per second
(FPS) videos, presents a substantial collection of 1,200 positive
and 2,400 negative samples, while DAD’s 20 FPS videos comprise 455 positive and 829 negative samples. A comparative
analysis between these datasets highlights noteworthy distinctions [46]. CCD predominantly features accidents involving
the ego-vehicle (53.4%) with variable appearance features and
random accident start time within the last 2 seconds of the
video. Contrastingly, DAD videos often depict complex urban
traffic accidents where ego-vehicles are not involved (90%
of cases) and specifically containing an accident within the
last 0.5 seconds. To supplement the scarcity of large-scale
annotated datasets, DoTA dataset contains 4,677 videos with
varying lengths for accident cases only. However, the proposed
method needs both accident and normal videos. Thus in DoTA

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

dataset, 4,130 negative samples for training were formed by
combining normal samples from DAD and CCD datasets. The
testing subset, comprising of 1,402 positive videos, remains
unchanged to maintain consistency with original samples for
fair comparison with baselines.
B. Details of Implementation
Instead of generating snippets with multiple frames, we
analyzed each frame individually in our experiments. The
margin m was consistently set to 100, while K was maintained
at 4. In the DTCA architecture, a dropout rate of 0.3 was
applied in L1, and its classification head comprised three fully
connected perceptron (FCP) layers (sized 512, 128, and 1)
separated by dropout layers and ReLU activations. Normal
feature selection employed a dropout of 0.7, whereas no
dropout was applied for accident feature selection. T was set
to 50 in DTCA, which allowed capturing a 5-second temporal
context with a 10 FPS dataset. During real-world testing
involving cross-dataset evaluation, DAD’s 100-frame videos
were downsampled to 10 FPS for testing on CCD, resulting
in 50 frames, as done in [46]. Conversely, training using
the DoTA dataset involved converting variable-length videos
to a standard representation of 50 frames through equally
spaced frame sampling. During the testing phase, predictions
were made using a sliding window approach with 50-frame
windows.
Optimizing TIME-VAD involved using the Adam optimizer
with a weight decay of 0.0005 and a batch size of 32 instances,
each instance combining a normal and an accident video.
This paired video sampling in each batch naturally handles
video-level class balance during training, while the differential
dropout rates (0.7 for normal frames, none for accident frames)
along with sparsity regularization loss help address frame-level
class imbalance. Learning rates were set at 0.0001 for DAD
and DoTA, and 0.0005 for CCD. The loss weights w1 , w2 , w3 ,
w4 , and w5 in Eq. (14) were set as 0.0001, 1, 0.002, 0.0008,
and 0.008, respectively, to maintain comparable loss magnitudes. In Eq. (11), temp was set as 0.1. Implementation was
done using PyTorch, running on Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080
GPU with 12GB memory. During inference, the CLIP model
requires 45.23 msec per frame for CLIP feature extraction.
Additionally, our model takes 18.82 msec per frame to predict
the accident score. Given that human reaction times are not
typically this fast, most datasets and analyses are conducted
at a rate of 10 FPS. Hence, TIME-VAD can handle this frame
rate efficiently. Furthermore, to compare our model with DSTA
[46] and GCRNN [45], we used the models provided by
the authors on GitHub for calculating metrics that were not
directly available in the respective studies. Lastly, we have
reported the available metrics of various models from the
published results of respective studies for baseline comparison.

3135

detection can not be guaranteed, as it depends on the specific
nature of the accident. For example, accidents caused by
sudden events like explosions may not be detected at an earlier
stage. However, studies like DSTA [46] and GCRNN [45]
focused only on the earliness metric, which is a one-sided
aspect of evaluation.
1) Correctness Metrics: Under this category, the model’s
ability to detect accident on frame level is measured using:
Receiver Operating Characteristic - Area Under the
Curve (ROC-AUC): In essence, the Area Under the Curve
(AUC) quantifies the model’s ability to discriminate between
positive and negative instances at the frame level [4]. AUC
is derived from the ROC curve, which depicts the trade-off
between true positive and false positive rates across different
classification thresholds. Hence, the AUC serves as a comprehensive measure. Higher AUC values signify more effective
model performance, with a perfect model achieving an AUC
of 1, while an AUC of 0.5 corresponds to random guessing.
2) Earliness Metrics: These metrics assess the timeliness
of accident anticipation and include:
Mean Time-to-Accident (mTTA): This metric assesses the
earliness of accident anticipation based on positive predictions
[45], [51]. Time-to-Accident (TTA) measures the time taken in
seconds, for the system to anticipate an accident at different
classification thresholds. For various threshold values, TTA
results are obtained. Then, mTTA representing the mean time
taken in seconds is calculated as the average of all TTA values
across these thresholds. This signifies the average duration
between the system’s identification of an impending accident
and the actual occurrence. Hence, mTTA provides an overall
measure of how early the model predicts an accident across
different threshold settings.
Average Precision (AP): This metric evaluates the preciseness in predicting future accidents within a video [45],
[51]. Using confidence scores, an accident is anticipated if a
threshold is reached. True positive predictions occur when the
method accurately anticipates an accident before it happens
at frame y in the video. Conversely, false positives and
false negatives arise when incorrect predictions are made
for non-accident and accident videos, respectively. Varying
the threshold, precision-recall pairs are formed to plot a
precision-recall curve. The average precision is the area under
the precision-recall curve that reflects the system’s overall
accuracy in early anticipation of accidents across the videos.
While ROC-AUC provides a general measure of frame-level
classification performance, Average Precision (AP) offers a
more realistic evaluation for accident anticipation systems.
Unlike ROC-AUC which considers all frame predictions,
AP only evaluates predictions made before accidents occur,
ensuring the metric reflects real-world early warning capabilities. Additionally, AP incorporates time-to-accident weighting,
rewarding models that detect accidents earlier rather than just
detecting them accurately.

C. Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation of a model for accident anticipation involves
assessing two critical aspects: correctness and earliness of
prediction. While correctness (accuracy) is vital for any VAD
system, it is important to note that earliness (timeliness) of

D. Evaluation of the Time-VAD
1) Experimental Analysis of Contrastive Features: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) [52]
is a dimensionality reduction technique used to visualize

3136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF ROC-AUC S CORES BASED ON ACCIDENT AND N ORMAL
F RAME E MBEDDING M AGNITUDES

TABLE IV
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF ACCIDENT A NTICIPATION
M ODELS ON CCD DATASET
Fig. 5. UMAP plot of CLIP embeddings from 32 randomly selected least
magnitude frames of positive (green) and negative (yellow) test videos.
Frame embeddings are juxtaposed with positive (blue) and negative (red) text
anchors.

high-dimensional data in a lower-dimensional space while
maintaining its inherent structure and relationships. This study
applied UMAP to visualize embeddings generated by the
TIME-VAD model trained on CCD. The UMAP plot, as
depicted in Fig. 5, showcases embeddings obtained from
randomly selected 32 positive and 32 negative test videos.
Considering the least four magnitudes of frame embeddings
from each video, the total embeddings constitute 128 positive
test embeddings and 128 negative test embeddings. These
frame embeddings were then contrasted with 27 positive and
19 negative text anchors. The UMAP visualization demonstrates clear clustering patterns that support our approach.
As shown in Fig. 5, while text anchors and their corresponding frame embeddings may appear separated in this
two-dimensional projection, they follow consistent relational
trends across both UMAP dimensions. Specifically, positive
text anchors and positive test frame embeddings form distinct
clusters that are well-separated from the clusters of negative
text anchors and negative test frame embeddings. The positive frame samples consistently maintain higher values in
both UMAP dimensions compared to negative frame samples, following the same pattern observed between positive
and negative text anchors. This parallel alignment of trends,
rather than absolute proximity in the reduced space, validates
our contrastive learning approach’s effectiveness in meaningfully organizing the embedding space and establishing proper
relationships between the magnitude of textual and visual
embeddings for positive and negative cases.
2) Experimental Analysis for Magnitude Enhanced Feature
Learning: An experimental analysis was conducted to explore
the impact of considering the magnitude of accident and
normal frame instances on the ROC-AUC metric across three
datasets: DAD, CCD, and DoTA. For each of the datasets, the
model is trained and then tested on the test set of the respective
dataset. Experiments were performed for two different cases
on each dataset. In the first case, it was assumed that accident
frames tend to have larger magnitude embeddings, while
normal traffic frames exhibit smaller magnitude embeddings.
In the second case, it was assumed that accident frames
tend to have smaller magnitude embeddings, while normal

traffic frames exhibit larger magnitude embeddings. Results
of the ROC-AUC metric for the different cases are enlisted
in Table III. The results depict that the second assumption
led to significant improvements in ROC-AUC metrics for
the relatively challenging DAD and DoTA datasets: from
75.36% to 84.43% for DAD and from 64.26% to 94.44%
for DoTA dataset. Conversely, the relatively simpler dataset,
CCD, showed a marginal change in performance: ROC-AUC
remained comparably high regardless of the approach used,
scoring 95.5% and 95.38% in the respective cases.
3) Comparison to the State-of-the-Art Models: We performed an experimental analysis on the CCD dataset that
demonstrates the effectiveness of our method when compared
with other accident anticipation models based on framelevel ROC-AUC metric. As presented in Table IV, among
the assessed methods, the proposed TIME-VAD model significantly outperforms existing models. TIME-VAD model
showcases a notable ROC-AUC score of 95.38%, while other
methods, such as DSTA and GCRNN, show relatively lower
performance with ROC-AUC scores of 53.19% and 47.87%,
respectively. A notable observation from the training behavior is the trade-off between early anticipation (measured by
AP) and correct anticipation (measured by frame-level ROCAUC). Models situated on the Pareto-optimal frontier strike
an efficient balance, indicating that enhancing the AP often
comes at the expense of a decrease in frame-level ROCAUC [53]. However, even when we optimized for maximizing
AP, the ROC-AUC metric did not fall too much and was
significantly higher than the existing methods. Selecting an
optimal model for implementation should align with specific
user requirements, which account for diverse environmental
factors influencing accident anticipation systems.
Our experimental analysis on the DoTA dataset emphasizes the superior performance of the proposed TIME-VAD
model in terms of frame-level ROC-AUC score, as enlisted
in Table V. In comparison to a spectrum of unsupervised,
weak-supervised, and supervised methods, our model consistently outperforms the previous methods. Specifically, when
considering unsupervised methods such as ConvAE [5] and
ConvLSTMAE [54] with both gray and flow inputs, as

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

TABLE V
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF ACCIDENT A NTICIPATION M ODELS
D OTA DATASET. T EXT I NPUT I S O NLY U SED FOR T RAINING
FOR A LL M ETHODS

3137

TABLE VI
ON

well as the AnoPred model [7], our proposed TIME-VAD
showcases significant improvements. Moreover, even against
supervised methods like fully connected network (FC), LSTM
[56], Encoder-Decoder [57], and TRN [44], the TIME-VAD
model exhibits remarkable advancement, securing a substantial
ROC-AUC score of 94.44%. Notably, the TIME-VAD model
surpasses the performance of unsupervised and supervised
approaches, proving its efficacy in accident anticipation, and
demonstrating its potential as a reliable solution in this
domain.
Furthermore, using the CCD dataset, our experiments
focused on gauging the model’s readiness or earliness to
anticipate accidents by evaluating two critical metrics: AP
and mTTA, as displayed in Table VI. Notably, among the
various models and their respective performance scenarios,
case (b) of TIME-VAD showcased the highest values for both
AP and mTTA. Compared to a recent method (W3AL) [73]
that achieves AP of 99.7% with 3.93 mTTA, TIME-VAD (b)
outperforms it by reaching 99.97% with 4.99 mTTA, though
such saturation of high AP necessitates frame-level ROC-AUC
evaluation for meaningful comparison. This underlines the
proposed model’s superior readiness to anticipate accidents
at an earlier stage. Also, when compared with case (b) of
TIME-VAD model, earliness metrics for DSTA and GCRNN

C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS FOR E ARLINESS M ETRICS W ITH C ORRESPOND ING C ORRECTNESS M ETRIC ON CCD DATASET

models are less but comparable. However, ROC-AUC score
is significantly low for both DSTA and GCRNN models in
comparison to the TIME-VAD. For video level analysis at 80%
recall, TIME-VAD’s anticipation-focused variant (a) achieves
TTA of 2.92s with precision of 0.78. The detection-focused
variant (b) demonstrates higher precision (1.0) with longer
TTA of 4.86s at 80% recall, illustrating the effective tradeoff between early warning and detection accuracy.
As discussed, higher ROC-AUC values might result in
lower earliness-related metrics, reflecting a trade-off between
the earliness metric and the correctness metric (frame-level
ROC-AUC metric). Interestingly, observations from DSTA
[46] and GCRNN [45] models suggest potential overfitting
issues. These issues are specifically due to learning from
accident-irrelevant cues within the scene. This can be the
main reason for the significantly low ROC-AUC for both
DSTA and GCRNN models. In response, we developed a more
balanced model denoted as case (c) in Table VI, aiming to
achieve a harmonious performance across all three metrics.
To achieve the TIME-VAD model case (c), we increased the
weight of frame classifier loss (L f ( fθ , y)) to 10 and then
finetuned the model of the case (a) in Table VI. This balanced
approach in the TIME-VAD model, where all three metrics,
AP, mTTA, and ROC-AUC demonstrate commendable performance, showcases its potential as a promising solution for
accurate and timely accident anticipation. To further validate
the findings, a detailed analysis of precision-recall characteristics is conducted across different threshold values for all three
TIME-VAD variants, as shown in Fig. 6. The comprehensive
evaluation reveals distinct performance characteristics, with
TIME-VAD (a) demonstrating superior overall performance
by achieving the highest area under precision-recall curve
(PR-AUC) (0.703) and ROC-AUC (0.954), reaching peak
precision values of around 0.95 at higher thresholds while
maintaining robust recall, validating its optimization for
detection accuracy. TIME-VAD (b), optimized for early anticipation, exhibits lower but still competitive performance
(PR-AUC: 0.379, ROC-AUC: 0.910), reflecting the inherent
trade-offs when prioritizing temporal anticipation over pure
detection accuracy. TIME-VAD (c) achieves intermediate performance (PR-AUC: 0.538, ROC-AUC: 0.920), successfully

3138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 6. Comprehensive performance analysis of TIME-VAD variants on the CCD dataset showing (from left to right): Precision vs threshold, Recall vs
threshold, Precision-Recall curve, and ROC curve. Three optimization strategies are compared: TIME-VAD (a) optimized for detection accuracy, TIME-VAD
(b) optimized for early anticipation, and TIME-VAD (c) as a balanced approach fine-tuned from variant (a).

TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS FOR D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS OF L OSS
C OMPONENTS FOR CCD DATASET. X I NDICATES I NCLUSION W HILE
× I NDICATES O MISSION OF R ESPECTIVE L OSS C OMPONENT

balancing between the two optimization strategies. Notably, all
variants maintain strong discriminative ability with ROC-AUC
values above 0.91, while the precision-recall analysis reveals
more nuanced differences in handling class imbalance, with
the threshold sensitivity analysis demonstrating that TIMEVAD (a) maintains the most stable precision-recall trade-offs
across different operating points, validating the effectiveness
of the framework.
4) Comparative Analysis of Temporal Models: Different
temporal modelling methods to capture frame events are
compared by replacing DTCA in TIME-VAD architecture on
CCD test dataset. Also, the inference time per frame from
the temporal method part only is noted. The DTCA model
achieved the highest ROC-AUC of 95.38% with an inference
time of 2.84ms per frame. The Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) model with two bidirectional layers and 384 hidden
units per direction reached 94.12% ROC-AUC but required
3.75ms per frame. Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN)
with three stacked dilated convolutional layers (dilation rates
1, 2, 4) demonstrated good efficiency with 91.73% ROC-AUC
and the fastest inference time of only 0.85ms. The Transformer
architecture consisting of three multi-head attention blocks (8
heads each) matched TCN’s detection capability with 91.72%
ROC-AUC and required 1.37ms per frame. Convolutional
LSTM (Conv-LSTM), combining two convolutional layers
(dilations 1, 2) with a two-layer bidirectional LSTM, achieved
89.58% ROC-AUC but had the highest computational cost at
5.59ms per frame.

5) Ablation Study for Loss: To evaluate the effectiveness
of different components of our loss function, we conducted
an ablation study by keeping the temporal smoothness and
sparsity regularization losses constant and varying the presence
of other losses, namely, text anchor-based contrastive loss
(Lcont ), frame classification loss (L f ( fθ , y)), and magnitude
enhanced multiple instance learning loss (L (Ba , Bn )). Our
goal is to optimize the ROC-AUC metric for CCD dataset.
We reported three different metrics in Table VII: ROC-AUC,
mTTA, and AP. The values for the ROC-AUC metric, summarized in Table VII, reveal that the combination of all three
losses resulted in the highest ROC-AUC of 95.38%. The use
of only text anchor-based contrastive loss led to significantly
lower performance across all metrics. Combinations including the magnitude enhanced multiple instance learning loss
generally performed well, particularly when combined with
other losses. The inclusion of frame classification loss and
magnitude enhanced multiple instance learning loss together
yielded better results compared to when either was used alone.
This ablation study demonstrates the importance of combining
different loss components to enhance accuracy and robustness.
6) Experiment for Assessing Model’s Generalizability:
Experiments were conducted to assess the model’s ability
to generalize by training on the CCD dataset and testing
on the DAD test subset, simulating real-world applications.
The results are enlisted in Table VIII. In these cross-domain
evaluations, the readiness of models for accident anticipation in uncontrolled settings was scrutinized. During this
rigorous testing, DSTA’s performance significantly declined
for accident earliness-related metrics (AP). Similarly, our
model exhibited limited efficacy in predicting accidents early.
However, comparative analysis revealed that our model outperformed DSTA in the generalization experiment. This is
demonstrated as AP in DSTA decreased by 64.12% while for
TIME-VAD the decrement is 55.38%.
Remarkably, our model showcased improved performance
in terms of ROC-AUC, demonstrating its enhanced adaptability and robustness when tested in real-world scenarios.
In Table VIII, the underlined metrics highlight the primary
assessment parameters for a given model, emphasizing the
notable variations in model performance between controlled
training settings and real-world applications. The findings

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

3139

TABLE VIII
T ESTING IN R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO . T RAINING I S D ONE ON CCD AND
T ESTING I S D ONE ON DAD T EST-S ET. R ELEVANT M ETRICS FOR E ACH
M ETHOD A RE U NDERLINED . AP AND ROC-AUC A RE
IN % AND M TTA I S IN S

Fig. 7. Qualitative comparison of accident probability for an accident video
with accident event starts from the 30th frame onwards. Selected frames with
numbers are presented.

Fig. 8. Qualitative analysis of accident probability for normal videos by
TIME-VAD. First and last frames are shown for each plot.

suggest that while our model presents promising capabilities
in generalization, there is a need for further optimization to
bolster its performance in accident earliness metrics when
deployed in uncontrolled environments. However, as pointed
out, earliness metrics are dependent on the nature of the dataset
that captures relevant vehicles. This is not the case in the DAD
dataset, as the aforementioned ego-vehicles are not present in
most of the samples along with hard samples of accident cases.
Thus, for DAD the earliness metrics testing has moderate
performance with AP of 44.61%.
7) Qualitative Results: Qualitative analysis of different
models unveils critical insights into their behavior and the

cues they prioritize in accident anticipation. Notably, when
presented with a challenging sample from the CCD dataset, as
shown in Fig. 7, DSTA [46] and GCRNN [45] exhibited signs
of over-fitting, displaying a sharp inclination in accident probability right from the video’s onset. This inclination, however,
seemed more influenced by scene characteristics than actual
accident cues, indicating a susceptibility to learning from
accident-irrelevant features. In contrast, our model showcased
a more nuanced and consistent prediction approach. On a
close examination of the video, the imminent accident seems
perceptible around the 15th frame, and the actual incident
occurs on the 30th frame. Our model consistently gauged the

3140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

evolving likelihood of an accident occurrence, demonstrating
a more accurate and tempered assessment compared to the
overtly biased predictions observed in the other models.
Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 8, the TIME-VAD maintains consistently low accident probabilities across various
normal driving scenarios, including routine maneuvers such
as turning, lane changes, and stopping at red signal. While
some scenarios show elevated accident probabilities toward
the end of the sequences due to potentially risky maneuvers,
all videos are correctly classified as normal when using a
high threshold of 0.9, demonstrating the model’s robust discrimination capability while maintaining high precision. This
robust performance on non-accident scenarios further validates
our model’s ability to discriminate between genuine accident
precursors and normal driving events.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduced TIME-VAD, a model based
on text-informed feature magnitude enhancement using contrastive multiple-instance learning. Through extensive evaluation across diverse benchmark datasets, TIME-VAD outperforms existing state-of-the-art models in both accuracy and
early accident detection. This innovative framework exhibits
superior discriminative capabilities, particularly in identifying
subtle anomalies and ensuring sample efficiency crucial for
traffic video analysis. The inclusion of the DTCA block further
refines temporal attention, enhancing the model’s ability to
perceive nuanced accident risks within video frames. Our
study highlights the effectiveness of TIME-VAD, showcasing an accuracy of 94.44% (measured by ROC-AUC) on
the challenging DoTA dataset, which has the largest sample
size. Additionally, for the smaller sample size dataset of
DAD, TIME-VAD achieves an accuracy of 84.43%. In terms
of generalization, when the model is trained with CCD, a
dataset of moderate sample size, and tested on DAD, the
accuracy for DAD reaches 95.50%, surpassing the CCD test
accuracy by 0.12%. Furthermore, TIME-VAD excels in early
accident detection, achieving AP of 99.97% and an mTTA
of 4.99 seconds on the CCD dataset. This work contributes
to establishing a valuable foundation for advancing accident anticipation systems. It also showcases the potential of
multi-modal integration for proactive safety enhancement in
transportation systems.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

P. Shyam, S. Mishra, K. J. Yoon, and K. S. Kim, “Infra sim-to-real:
An efficient baseline and dataset for infrastructure based online object
detection and tracking using domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Vehicles Symp. (IV), Jun. 2022, pp. 1393–1399.
S. Mishra, P. K. Rajendran, L. F. Vecchietti, and D. Har, “Sensing
accident-prone features in urban scenes for proactive driving and
accident prevention,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 9401–9414, Sep. 2023.
Z. Wang, A. Cosio, and J. Wang, “Implementation resource allocation for
collision-avoidance assistance systems considering driver capabilities,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 12822–12832, Aug.
2022.
Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.

[5]

M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and
L. S. Davis, “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016,
pp. 733–742.
[6] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
[7] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for
anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545.
[8] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[9] J. T. Zhou, J. Du, H. Zhu, X. Peng, Y. Liu, and R. S. M. Goh,
“AnomalyNet: An anomaly detection network for video surveillance,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 2537–2550, Oct.
2019.
[10] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851.
[11] T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence
with appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283.
[12] D. Xu, Y. Yan, E. Ricci, and N. Sebe, “Detecting anomalous
events in videos by learning deep representations of appearance and
motion,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 156, pp. 117–127,
Mar. 2017.
[13] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. H. Khan, M. Segu, F. Yu, and
S.-I. Lee, “Generative cooperative learning for unsupervised video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 14744–14754.
[14] T. Wang et al., “Generative neural networks for anomaly detection in
crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1390–1399, May 2019.
[15] S. He et al., “Region generation and assessment network for occluded
person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 120–132, 2024.
[16] K. Yang, J. Fang, T. Zhu, and J. Xue, “Accident-CLIP: Text-video
benchmarking for fine-grained accident classification in driving scenes,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Auto. Unmanned Syst., 2023, pp. 487–498.
[17] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2024, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 6074–6082.
[18] Y. Yao, M. Xu, Y. Wang, D. J. Crandall, and E. M. Atkins,
“Unsupervised traffic accident detection in first-person videos,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019,
pp. 273–280.
[19] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
[20] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[21] T. You and B. Han, “Traffic accident benchmark for causality
recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2020, pp. 540–556.
[22] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, 2021,
pp. 8748–8763.
[23] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020,
pp. 18661–18673.
[24] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[25] J. Zhang, L. Qing, and J. Miao, “Temporal convolutional network
with complementary inner bag loss for weakly supervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2019,
pp. 4030–4034.
[26] C. He, J. Shao, and J. Sun, “An anomaly-introduced learning method
for abnormal event detection,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 77, no. 22,
pp. 29573–29588, Nov. 2018.
[27] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with
transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp. 1395–1403.

MISHRA et al.: TIME-VAD: TEXT-INFORMED MAGNITUDE ENHANCEMENT FEATURE LEARNING

[28] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance
self-training framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14009–14018.
[29] H. Lv, C. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Localizing anomalies
from weakly-labeled videos,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
pp. 4505–4515, 2021.
[30] Y. Zhu and S. Newsam, “Motion-aware feature for improved video
anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv:1907.10211.
[31] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in
surveillance video,” 2021, arXiv:2108.03825.
[32] S. Chang, Y. Li, S. Shen, J. Feng, and Z. Zhou, “Contrastive attention for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24,
pp. 4067–4076, 2022.
[33] P. Wang, K. Han, X.-S. Wei, L. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Contrastive
learning based hybrid networks for long-tailed image classification,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2021, pp. 943–952.
[34] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering
aided weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 14085–14098, Oct. 2024.
[35] K. Liu et al., “Multiple instance learning via iterative self-paced supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 3355–3365.
[36] P. Wu and J. Liu, “Learning causal temporal relation and feature
discrimination for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 30, pp. 3513–3527, 2021.
[37] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal
violence detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2020, pp. 322–339.
[38] S. Wan, X. Xu, T. Wang, and Z. Gu, “An intelligent video
analysis method for abnormal event detection in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 4487–4495, Jul. 2021.
[39] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro,
“Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal feature magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4975–4986.
[40] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 6299–6308.
[41] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[42] Z. Cai and N. Vasconcelos, “Cascade R-CNN: Delving into high
quality object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6154–6162.
[43] E. Ilg, N. Mayer, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox,
“FlowNet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with deep networks,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 2462–2470.
[44] M. Xu, M. Gao, Y.-T. Chen, L. Davis, and D. Crandall, “Temporal
recurrent networks for online action detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 5532–5541.
[45] W. Bao, Q. Yu, and Y. Kong, “Uncertainty-based traffic accident
anticipation with spatio-temporal relational learning,” in Proc. 28th ACM
Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 2682–2690.
[46] M. M. Karim, Y. Li, R. Qin, and Z. Yin, “A dynamic spatial–temporal
attention network for early anticipation of traffic accidents,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9590–9600,
Jul. 2022.
[47] Hugging Face. OpenAI CLIP (ViT-L/14). Accessed: Jul. 13, 2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-largepatch14-336
[48] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[49] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008.
[50] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated
convolutions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122.
[51] F.-H. Chan, Y.-T. Chen, Y. Xiang, and M. Sun, “Anticipating accidents in
dashcam videos,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 136–153.
[52] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.03426.

3141

[53] Y. Censor, “Pareto optimality in multiobjective problems,” Appl. Math.
Optim., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 41–59, Mar. 1977.
[54] Y. S. Chong and Y. H. Tay, “Abnormal event detection in videos using
spatiotemporal autoencoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Neural Netw. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, May 2017, pp. 189–196.
[55] W. Liu, W. Luo, Z. Li, P. Zhao, and S. Gao, “Margin learning embedded
prediction for video anomaly detection with a few anomalies,” in Proc.
28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 3023–3030.
[56] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[57] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN
encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” 2014,
arXiv:1406.1078.
[58] L. Li, J. Fang, and J. Xue, “Cognitive traffic accident anticipation,”
IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 17–32, May 2024,
doi: 10.1109/MITS.2024.3378460.
[59] J. Fang et al., “Abductive ego-view accident video understanding for
safe driving perception,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2024, pp. 22030–22040.
[60] J. Fang, J. Qiao, J. Xue, and Z. Li, “Vision-based traffic accident
detection and anticipation: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1983–1999, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TCSVT.2023.3307655.
[61] J. Fang, J. Qiao, J. Bai, H. Yu, and J. Xue, “Traffic accident detection via self-supervised consistency learning in driving scenarios,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9601–9614,
Jul. 2022.
[62] H. Liao et al., “Real-time accident anticipation for autonomous driving through monocular depth-enhanced 3D modeling,” Accident Anal.
Prevention, vol. 207, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 107760.
[63] Y. Ali, F. Hussain, and M. M. Haque, “Advances, challenges, and future
research needs in machine learning-based crash prediction models: A
systematic review,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 194, Jan. 2024, Art.
no. 107378.
[64] L. Shi and F. Guo, “Two-stream video-based deep learning model for
crashes and near-crashes,” Transp. Res. C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 166,
Sep. 2024, Art. no. 104794.
[65] R. Liang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Li, “Text-driven traffic anomaly detection with temporal high-frequency modeling in driving videos,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8684–8697, Sep.
2024, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3390173.
[66] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781, Oct.
2022.
[67] U. Tiwari, S. Majhi, M. Balazia, and F. Bremond, “What matters in
autonomous driving anomaly detection: A weakly supervised horizon,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Aug. 2024, pp. 160–170.
[68] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Fok, X. Qi, and Y.-C. Wu, “MGFN:
Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for weakly-supervised
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 387–395.
[69] H. Zhou, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Dual memory units with uncertainty
regulation for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 3769–3777.
[70] S. Majhi, R. Dai, Q. Kong, L. Garattoni, G. Francesca, and F. Brémond,
“OE-CTST: Outlier-embedded cross temporal scale transformer for
weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2024, pp. 8559–8568.
[71] L. Rossi, V. Bernuzzi, T. Fontanini, M. Bertozzi, and A. Prati, “Memoryaugmented online video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2024, pp. 6590–6594.
[72] Y. Zhang and H. Li, “Cross-temporal fusion memory network for traffic
accident detection,” in Proc. Chin. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis.
(PRCV), Oct. 2024, pp. 387–401.
[73] H. Liao et al., “When, where, and what? A benchmark for accident
anticipation and localization with large language models,” in Proc. 32nd
ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2024, pp. 8–17.
[74] T. Wang et al., “GSC: A graph and spatio-temporal continuity based
framework for accident anticipation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 2249–2261, Jan. 2024.
[75] H. Liao et al., “CRASH: Crash recognition and anticipation system
harnessing with context-aware and temporal focus attentions,” in Proc.
32nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2024, pp. 11041–11050.
[76] J. Zhang, Y. Guan, C. Wang, H. Liao, G. Zhang, and Z. Li, “LATTE:
A real-time lightweight attention-based traffic accident anticipation
engine,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 122, Oct. 2025, Art. no. 103173.

3142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Sumit Mishra received the B.Tech. degree in
electronics and communication engineering from
Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Technical University, India,
in 2016, and the M.S. degree from the Robotics
Department, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, South Korea, in 2023, where he
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in robotics.
Earlier, he was with Learnogether Technologies Pvt.
Ltd., as a Research Consultant. His research interests include vision-language models, multimodal
foundation models, cross-modal alignment by deep
learning, explainable AI for safety-critical systems, and computer vision for
intelligent transportation systems.

Medhavi Mishra received the B.Tech. degree in
production and industrial engineering from the
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology,
Allahabad, India, in 2016, and the M.S. degree in
mobility from Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology, South Korea, in 2025, where she
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in mobility. Earlier, she was with HighRadius Technologies
Pvt. Ltd., as a Techno-Functional Consultant. Her
research interests include traffic simulation and modeling, multi-modal perception, and deep learning
applications in intelligent transportation systems.

Pranjay Shyam received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering from Shiv
Nadar University (SNU), India, in 2016, the M.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Mechanical Engineering
Department, Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), South Korea, in 2018
and 2022, respectively. He is currently an Applied
Scientist with Amazon Fulfilment Technologies and
Robotics, USA. His research interests include multimodal scene reconstruction and understanding.

Dongsoo Har (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics engineering from Seoul National University, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Polytechnic
University, Brooklyn, NY, USA. He is currently
a Faculty Member with KAIST. He has authored
and published more than 100 papers in international
journals and conferences. He has also presented
invited talks and keynote in international conferences. His research interests include optimization of
communication system operation and transportation
system development with embedded artificial intelligence. He was a member
of the Advisory Board and the program chair, the vice chair, and the general
chair of international conferences. He was a recipient of the Best Paper Award
from ETRI Journal and the Best Paper Award (Jack Neubauer Award) from
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY.