This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

1

TopoCL: Topological Contrastive Learning
for Time Series
Namwoo Kim , Hyungryul Baik, and Yoonjin Yoon
Abstract—Universal time-series representation learning is
challenging but valuable in real-world applications such as
classification, anomaly detection, and forecasting. Recently, contrastive learning (CL) has been actively explored to tackle
time-series representation. However, a key challenge is that the
data augmentation process in CL can distort seasonal patterns or
temporal dependencies, inevitably leading to a loss of semantic
information. To address this challenge, we propose topological CL
for time series (TopoCL). TopoCL mitigates such information
loss by incorporating persistent homology, which captures the
topological characteristics of data that remain invariant under
transformations. In this article, we treat the temporal and
topological properties of time-series data as distinct modalities. Specifically, we compute persistent homology to construct
topological features of time-series data, representing them in
persistence diagrams (PDs). We then design a neural network to
encode these persistent diagrams. Our approach jointly optimizes
CL within the time modality and time–topology correspondence,
promoting a comprehensive understanding of both temporal
semantics and topological properties of time series. We conduct
extensive experiments on four downstream tasks—classification,
anomaly detection, forecasting, and transfer learning. The results
demonstrate that TopoCL achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, classification, contrastive
learning (CL), forecasting, time-series modeling, topological data
analysis (TDA).

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

IME-SERIES analysis plays a crucial role in numerous real-world applications such as weather, economics,
and transportation. However, analyzing time-series data are
challenging due to its incompleteness, vulnerability to noise,
and complexity. In addition, employing deep learning models
for time-series analysis introduces further obstacles, as it
necessitates well-labeled data. Labeling time-series data is
time-consuming and requires a high level of expertise, creating
significant bottlenecks in the analysis process. In recent years,
contrastive learning (CL) has become increasingly popular in
graph [1], computer vision (CV) [2], [3], natural language

Received 26 November 2024; revised 31 October 2025; accepted 9 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) Basic Research Laboratory under Grant 2021R1A4A1033486
and in part by Midcareer Research funded by the South Korean Government
under Grant 2020R1A2C2010200 and Grant RS-2025-00517342. (Corresponding author: Yoonjin Yoon.)
Namwoo Kim and Yoonjin Yoon are with the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea (e-mail:
namwoo@spacetime.kaist.ac.kr; yoonjin@spacetime.kaist.ac.kr).
Hyungryul Baik is with the Department of Mathematical Science, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (e-mail: hrbaik@kaist.ac.kr).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2026.3675422, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2026.3675422

processing (NLP) [4], and recommendation system [5], [6],
mainly due to its ability to train models without explicit
labels. Accordingly, ongoing research is focused on applying
CL to time-series data for various downstream applications,
including anomaly detection [7], [8], forecasting [9], and
classification [10].
In general, CL leverages data augmentation to create
positive and negative pairs for training, thereby creating a
contrast between similar and dissimilar samples by exploring
different transformations and variations of the data. Several
augmentation techniques for time-series have been proposed to
learn robust and discriminative representations. For example,
permutation reorders segments within a time series to produce
a new sequence [10], [11]. However, using permutation on
time-series data might introduce inappropriate inductive bias,
as it can distort the autocorrelated nature of time-series data.
Techniques borrowed from CV, such as f lipping, which flips
the signs of the original time series, may misrepresent the trend
or seasonal patterns. Moreover, these distortions raise concerns
about whether the augmented time series are, indeed, positive
samples of the original series. Consequently, applying data
augmentation may inevitably risk information loss, making it
difficult to capture semantically meaningful representations.
Therefore, it is necessary to find ways that compensate such
potential information loss.
Recently, topological data analysis (TDA) has emerged as a
subfield of algebraic topology focused on capturing the global
shape of data, where shape broadly refers to data properties
that remain invariant under transformations [12]. Such shape
patterns or topological features include connected components, loops, and voids. Topological features are obtained
by computing persistent homology and are represented as a
multiset in persistence diagrams (PDs) [13]. These diagrams
encapsulate persistent homology across different scales of
data. The overall structure and distribution of sets in the
diagram provide insights into the topological invariants of the
data. By incorporating such topological information, we can
capture the essential structural properties of the time series
that remain invariant under various transformations. Therefore,
integrating topological information can help compensate for
potential information loss due to data augmentation, reduce
inductive bias, and lead to more robust representations.
Fueled by the advancements in both CL and TDA, we
harness the strengths of the two methods and introduce topological CL for time series (TopoCL), a simple yet effective
cross-modal CL approach for universal time-series representations. Our method integrates and leverages information from
the time and topology modalities. To start, we construct

2162-237X © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

topological characteristics from time series data. We apply
delay embedding to time-series data, compute persistent
homology, and design a simple topological module to effectively encode topological information. Our approach then
focuses on a joint objective: ensuring that the augmented versions of the same time series are closely embedded together in
the feature space while preserving the correspondence between
time and topology. The joint learning objective promotes
a comprehensive understanding of temporal semantics and
topological properties of time series and improves robustness
to data augmentations. We perform extensive experiments on
time-series forecasting, anomaly detection, classification, and
transfer learning tasks. The experimental results demonstrate
that the learned representations of TopoCL are effective. The
contributions of this work are as follows.
1) We demonstrate that incorporating topological properties is effective for capturing robust and discriminative
representations of time-series data.
2) We design a novel framework for learning representations of time-series data that takes into account their
topology. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is
the first to combine persistent homology with CL in the
context of time-series representation learning.
3) We conduct extensive experiments across four downstream tasks: time-series classification, anomaly detection, forecasting, and transfer learning on diverse
datasets. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II presents a literature review on TDA and timeseries CL. Section III provides preliminaries. The proposed
framework is described in Section IV. Section V provides
the experimental results of the proposed model. Section VI
presents the additional analysis. Finally, Section VII presents
the conclusion and future work.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Topological Data Analysis
TDA is an emerging field that utilizes abstract algebra
to uncover the intrinsic shape of the data. A fundamental
concept in TDA is PD, which helps to understand the topological structure of data. By computing persistent homology
across scales, such topological structure is represented as
a multiset of points. Directly using PD in machine learning and deep learning models is challenging, since these
models typically work with Hilbert space. To overcome
this, several research efforts have been made to convert
PD into a vector format. For instance, persistence landscapes transform the multiset of points in a PD into a
collection of piecewise-linear functions [14]. Adams et al.
[15] proposed persistence images, which convert PD into
a fixed-size representation. In addition, various kernel functions have been proposed to handle PD, such as geodesic
topological kernel [16] and persistence landscape-based
kernels [17], [18].
Recently, the integration of TDA into neural networks
has been explored, leading to the development of various

topological layers for machine learning applications. The first
approach to input a PD into a neural network architecture
was presented by Hofer et al. [19]. Carrière et al. [20] proposed PersLay, which incorporates PD for graph classification.
Moor et al. [21] proposed a topological autoencoder preserving
topological structures of the input space in latent representations. Kim et al. [22] proposed PLlay, a neural network
layer for learning embeddings from persistence landscapes.
These approaches demonstrated that incorporating persistent
homology with deep learning has the potential to offer a more
comprehensive understanding of data.
B. Time-Series CL
Similar to the advancements of CL in the fields of CV
and NLP, numerous studies incorporate CL into time-series
analysis. TS-TCC [10] employed both weak and strong
augmentations to time-series data and utilized contextual
contrasting to learn transformation-invariant representations.
Mixing-up [23] generated an augmented sample by mixing two
data samples and proposed a pretext task method for predicting
the mixing proportion. Inspired by great success in masked
modeling in NLP and CV, several works adopted this approach
for time series. TS2vec [7] used masking and cropping for
data augmentation, and proposed a hierarchical contrastive loss
to learn scale-invariant representations. InfoTS [24] exploited
a meta-learning framework to automatically select the augmentation method. SimMTM [25] generated multiple masked
series and facilitated reconstruction by assembling complementary temporal variations from multiple masked series.
Recently, several studies have focused on the use of the
frequency domain of time series data. CoST [9] proposed
a disentangled seasonal-trend representation learning framework, incorporating contrastive loss in both the time and
frequency domains. TF-C [26] proposed a novel contrastive
loss to maintain consistency between frequency- and timedomain representations.
Gorade et al. [27] captured both low- and high-frequency
features from the input signal and learns complementary features between them to learn robust representations. TimesURL
[8] proposed a novel frequency-temporal-based augmentation method to maintain temporal dependencies of time
series. However, it still remains unclear whether the proposed
methodologies effectively mitigate the inevitable information
loss resulting from data augmentation. To address this issue,
we propose using persistent homology to capture the essential
structural properties of time-series data, thereby mitigating
such information loss.
III. P RELIMINARY
In this section, we give the formal definitions of the major
terminologies of TDA used in this study.
A. Delay Embedding
Takens’s delay embedding [28] is a commonly used
technique for converting time-series data into point cloud representations. Given an ith time series xi = {xi,1 , xi,2 , . . ., xi,T },
one can extract a sequence of vectors of the form

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES

[xi,t , xi,t+γ , . . ., xi,t+(m−1)γ ] ∈ Rm , where m is the embedding
size and γ is the time delay.
B. Simplicial Complex
In the algebraic topology, a simplex is a geometric object
that generalizes the notion of a triangle or a tetrahedron to
higher dimensions. Specifically, a k−simplex is defined as
a convex hull spanned by k + 1 points v ∈ Rm that are
affinely independent. Then, a simplicial complex K is a finite
collection of simplices such that following hold.
1) If σ ∈ K, every subset of σ (i.e., every face of σ) is an
also element of K.
2) If two simplices σ1 , σ2 ∈ K intersects, their intersection
is a face of both σ1 and σ2 .
C. Vietoris–Rips Complex
To construct a simplicial complex, we used the
Vietoris–Rips complex [29]. Let (X, d) be a finite metric
space equipped with a distance function d. The Vietoris–Rips
complex VR(X, r) is the abstract simplicial complex whose
simplices are subsets of X with diameter (i.e., the maximum
pairwise distance between points) at most r ≥ 0. That is,
a subset S of X is a simplex in VR(X, r) if and only if
the distance d(x, y) ≤ r for any two points x, y ∈ S . The
0-simplices of VR(X, r) are the points of X, and the
k-simplices are the subsets of X of cardinality k + 1 that can
be realized as the union of k + 1 closed balls of radius r
with nonempty pairwise intersections.

3

2) Persistent Homology: Persistent homology is a valuable
technique in TDA for understanding the shape of complex
datasets. For a given simplicial complex K, let (K)m
i=0 be a
nested subcomplexes of K such that ∅ = K0 ⊆ K1 ⊆ . . . ⊆
Km = K, called a filtration. The inclusion maps Ki ,→ K j
defined by f (x) = x induce fi, j : H p (Ki ) → H p (K j ) for all i, j
with 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ m, for all p. Then, the sequence of homology
groups is represented as follows:
0 = H p (K0 ) → H p (K1 ) → . . . → H p (Km ) = H p (K) .

(3)

For given i ≤ j and p, we can consider the pth boundary
maps ∂ip : C p (Ki ) → C p−1 (Ki ) and ∂ pj : C p (K j ) → C p−1 (K j ).
Since Ki ⊂ K j , one can see C p (Ki ) and C p−1 (Ki ) as subspaces
j
)⊂
of C p (K j ) and C p−1 (K j ), respectively. Then, both im(∂ p+1
i
C p (K j ) and ker(∂ p ) ⊂ C p (Ki ) can be considered as subspaces
of C p (K j ). Then, pth persistent homology group is defined as
follows:

ı  j 
(4)
H i,p j = ker ∂ip
im ∂ p+1 ∩ ker ∂ip .
Note that an element of ker(∂ip ) represents both an element
of H p (Ki ) and an element of H p (K j ). If it vanishes in H i,p j ,
j
then it must be in im(∂ p+1
), hence it vanishes in H p (K j ) as
well. In summary, the homology group H i,p j consists of the pth
homology classes of Ki that are still present at K j , i.e., those
not in the kernel of the map fi, j .
The pth Betti number, which refers to the rank of the
homology group, is defined as: βi,p j := rankH i,p j . By analyzing
the sequence of Betti numbers, persistent homology enables
the systematic measurement of topological features (e.g., holes
and voids) in a dataset across multiple scales. Such topological
information can be summarized as PD.

D. Homology
1) Simplicial Homology: Given a simplicial complex K,
a weighted sum of n-simplices with coefficients from Z/Z2 defines an n-chain on K. Then, the space of n-chains on K,
represented as Cn (K), is defined as the vector space spanned
by n-simplicies of K over Z/Z2 . The modules C0 , C1 , . . ., are
connected by boundary operators ∂n : Cn (K) → Cn−1 (K). The
boundary operator for a simplex σ = [v0 , . . . , vn ] is defined as
follows:
n
X
[v0 , . . . , v̂i , . . . , vn ]
∂n (σ) =
(1)
i=0

where [v0 , . . . , v̂i , . . . , vn ] denotes the (n − 1) simplex spanned
by all the vertices except vi . It is easy to see that im(∂n+1 ) is
contained in ker(∂n ) for each n. The nth homology group of
K is defined as follows:

Hn (K) = ker (∂n ) /im ∂n+1 .
(2)
The nth Betti number of K, denoted by βn (K), is the dimension
of the nth homology group of K, which can be computed as the
difference between the kernel dimension of ∂n and the image
dimension of ∂n+1 . In simpler terms, the nth Betti number
indicates the number of n-dimensional voids that exist in the
simplicial complex. For example, β0 indicates the number of
connected components, while β1 represents the number of
loops.

E. Persistence Diagram
In TDA, PD is a useful tool for summarizing topological
information from data across different scales. A PD captures
topological features such as connected components and loops,
showing when these features appear and disappear as the scale
parameter changes. The pth PD Dgm p is defined as a multiset
collection of points (i, j) with µi,p j = 1, where µi,p j is calculated
as follows:


j−1
j
µi,p j = βi,p j−1 − βi,p j − βi−1,
− βi−1,
.
(5)
p
p
Each point (a, b) ∈ Dgm p corresponds to a homological
feature that was born at scale a and dies at scale b. This
homological feature has the persistence value of b − a. Fig. 1
illustrates an example of PD based on the Vietoris–Rips
filtration. The diagram effectively summarizes evolving homological information with respect to . For instance, as 
increases from 0 to 1, the number of connected components
decreases from 4 to 2, which is reflected as a point (0, 1) on
the PD.
IV. S TABILITY OF P ERSISTENT H OMOLOGY U NDER
VARIOUS DATA AUGMENTATIONS
In Section III, we claim that the use of topological features
as a robust auxiliary view in CL is stable under common data
augmentations such as jittering, scaling, and shifting.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

2) Scaling: Rescaling of the entire sequence
x̃t = (1 + ) xt ,


 ∼ N 0, σ2 .

3) Shifting: Additive offset
x̃t = xt + ,


 ∼ N 0, σ2 .

4) Rotation: Sign inversion of the signal
x̃t = −xt .
In Sections IV-A–IV-D, we provide theoretical analyses
showing that the PDs remain stable under each type of
augmentation.
A. Stability Under Jittering
Let x = {xt }Tt=1 be a real-valued time series and x̃ = { x̃t }Tt=1 its
jittered version with x̃t = xt + t . Fix an embedding dimension
m and delay τ, and form the delay-embedded point clouds
˚


N
X = x (i) = xi , xi+τ , . . ., xi+(m−1)τ ∈ Rm i=1
˚

 N
X̃ = x̃ (i) = x̃i , x̃i+τ , . . ., x̃i+(m−1)τ i=1
(6)
where N := T − (m − 1)τ. For each i,
kx (i) − x̃ (i)k22 =

m−1
X

2
i+kτ
.

(7)

k=0

By the Laurent–Massart inequality [31], for any s > 0

√
P kx (i) − x̃ (i)k22 ≤ σ2 m + 2 m s + 2s ≥ 1 − e−s . (8)
Fig. 1. Illustration of PD. (a) Vietoris–Rips filtration. (b) Corresponding PD.

We begin with the following well-established theory from
persistent homology.
Theorem 1 (Rips Stability via Gromov–Hausdorff Distance
[30]): Let (X, dX ) and (Y, dY ) be compact metric spaces, and
let F be a field. For every k ≥ 0, the kth persistent homology
modules of the Vietoris–Rips filtrations
Hk (X; F) = {Hk (VR (X, r) ; F)}r≥0
Hk (Y; F) = {Hk (VR (Y, r) ; F)}r≥0
are 2 dGH (X, Y) interleaved
dI (Hk (X; F) , Hk (Y; F)) ≤ 2 dGH (X, Y) .
In particular, for the associated PDs

dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk (Y) ≤ 2 dGH (X, Y) .
This theorem implies that if two point clouds X, X̃ ⊂ Rd are
close in Gromov–Hausdorff distance, then their Vietoris–Rips
PDs are close in bottleneck distance. Therefore, when data
augmentations cause only small geometric perturbations (i.e.,
when dGH (X, X̃) is small), the corresponding Vietoris–Rips
PDs remain stable.
To further demonstrate the robustness of persistent homology to practical data augmentations, we analyze four representative types of augmentations commonly applied to time
series.
1) Jittering: Additive Gaussian noise applied to each time
step

i.i.d.
x̃t = xt + t , t ∼ N 0, σ2 .

Since dH (X, X̃) ≤ max1≤i≤N kxi − x̃i k2 , we obtain
q

√
dH X, X̃ ≤ σ m + 2 m s + 2s

(9)

−s

with probability at least 1 − N e .
Because dGH (X, X̃) ≤ dH (X, X̃) for subsets of the same
metric space, the Vietoris–Rips stability theorem yields, for
every k ≥ 0


dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk X̃ ≤ 2 dGH X, X̃
q
√
≤ 2 σ m + 2 m s + 2s (10)
with probability at least 1 − Ne−s .
B. Stability Under Scaling
For each i, we have x̃(i) = (1 + )x(i), hence
kx (i) − x̃ (i)k2 = || kx (i) k2 ≤ || M
M := max kx (i)k2 .
1≤i≤N

Taking the canonical pairing i 7→ x̃i yields

dH X, X̃ ≤ max kx (i) − x̃ (i) k2 ≤ || M.
1≤i≤N

(11)

(12)

Since  ∼ N (0, σ2 ), for any s > 0, Gaussian tail bounds
yields

√ 
P || ≤ σ 2s ≥ 1 − 2e−s .
(13)
Consequently,

√ 

P dH X, X̃ ≤ M σ 2s ≥ 1 − 2e−s


dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk X̃ ≤ 2 dGH X, X̃
√
≤ 2 M σ 2s
−s

with probability at least 1 − 2e .

(14)

(15)

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES

5

C. Stability Under Rotation

C. PD Construction

For the sign-inverted time series x̃, the delay-embedded
point clouds X and X̃ are related by the reflection map R(v) =
−v for v ∈ X. Since R is an isometry, the metric spaces (X, d)
and (X̃, d) are distance-preserving isomorphic, and hence
their Gromov–Hausdorff distance satisfies dGH (X, X̃) = 0.
Moreover, because the Vietoris–Rips complex depends
only on pairwise distances, the filtrations {VR(X, r)}r≥0 and
{VR(X̃, r)}r≥0 are isomorphic under S . Consequently, for every
k ≥ 0, the PDs coincide, i.e.,

(16)
Dgmk (X) = Dgmk X̃

To extract topological features from a time series, we
first convert x ∈ Xtime into a point cloud format, enabling
the construction of the Vietoris–Rips filtration. This involves
applying delay embedding to the input sample x. Next, we
compute PDs for H0 and H1 homology groups, summarizing
the topological features of the data. For each channel c in
time-series data, we obtain channel-specific 0-D and 1-D PDs
Dgmc (x). A composite diagram Dgm(x) is then created as
Dgm(x) = ∪c Dgmc (x). Next, points in Dgm(x) are mapped
using δ : (a, b) → (a, b, b − a), resulting in point cloud
data x p ∈ R M×3 , where M is the maximum number of
topological features. The set of topological feature is denoted
by Xtopo = {x1p , x2p , . . . , xNp }. Further details of topological
feature construction are provided in the Appendix.

and their bottleneck distance is 0. Therefore, Vietoris–Rips
persistence is stable under sign inversion of the original time
series.
D. Stability Under Shifting
For the shifted time series x̃ = {xt + ε}Tt=1 , the delayembedded point clouds X and X̃ are related by the translation
map T : X → X̃, defined by T (u) = u + (ε, . . . , ε) for u ∈ X.
Since translation is an isometry, the metric spaces (X, d) and
(X̃, d) are isometric, and hence Vietoris–Rips persistence is
also stable under shifting of the original time series.
These results collectively establish that PDs are robust to
a wide class of common time-series augmentations. The key
implication is that the distance between PDs is always bounded
above by the amount of perturbation applied to the input.
V. P ROPOSED T OPO CL F RAMEWORK
In this section, we present TopoCL framework.
A. Problem Formulation
Our goal is to train a neural network fθ to transform
each time series instance xi ∈ RT ×C in the time series
set Xtime = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } into its representation ri . Here,
N denotes the number of samples, T denotes the number
of timestamps, and C represents the number of variables.
The representation ri is expressed as {ri,1 , ri,2 , . . . , ri,T }, where
ri,t ∈ RF is the embedding vector at time t, with F being the
dimension of embedding vector.
B. Overview
The overall framework of TopoCL is shown in Fig. 2.
Given Xtime , we construct the topological modality Xtopo
by computing its PD. Then, Xtime is fed into the temporal module to capture temporal dependencies. Concurrently,
Xtopo is processed by the topological module to learn the
underlying topology of the data. Temporal features are
learned using a time modality contrastive loss Ltime . In addition, an auxiliary contrastive objective Lcross is applied to
align temporal features and topological features. The output of the temporal encoder fθtime is used for downstream
applications.

D. Topological Feature Extraction
We design a topological feature extractor fθtopo , which
directly processes unordered point sets x p as inputs. Given
that a point cloud is an unordered collection of points, a
neural network capable of processing these M point sets
needs to be invariant to M! possible permutations of the
input set’s order during data feeding. Inspired by the works
on PointNet [32] and Deep Sets [33], we apply a simple
symmetric function to combine information from all the points
in x p = {p1 , p2 , . . . , p M }. Then, the model is unaffected
by the order of input points, preserving invariance to input
permutations.
Specifically, a series of shared multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) φ : R3 → RH is applied to each topological feature
xip ∈ Xtopo to obtain a set of encoded persistence points. We
then aggregate the resulting embeddings via a permutationinvariant function ζ. Formally, the topological encoder is
defined as follows:
˚

 M 
θ
ftopo
xip = ζ φ p j j=1 .
(17)
As illustrated in Fig. 2, we use a max-pooling layer as
the permutation-invariant function ζ. Each point in xip passes
through the series of shared MLP with ReLU activation
and max pooling aggregates all outputs into a topological
representation vector h ∈ RH , where H is the dimension of
the embedding vector. Since both the shared MLP φ and the
max-pooling operator ζ are invariant to the order of the inputs,
θ
the overall function ftopo
is permutation invariant


θ
θ
ftopo
xip = ftopo
π xip
∀ permutations π.
(18)
E. Temporal Feature Extraction
Capturing the temporal dependency is essential for time
series representation learning. Given an input instance xi ,
we construct augmented versions of it. Then, the time-series
feature extractor fθtime maps them to a feature embedding
space, resulting in embeddings ri and ri0 .
To learn discriminative and robust temporal representations,
(i,t)
we use temporalwise and instancewise contrastive losses, `temp

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 2. (a) Overall framework of TopoCL. TopoCL consists of two distinct modules: temporal module and topological module. The temporal module learns
semantically meaningful temporal characteristics using a hierarchical contrastive loss, while the topological module facilitates time–topology correspondence
through cross-modal contrastive loss. To achieve this, topological feature construction is performed in three steps: time delay embedding, PD calculation via
Vietoris–Rips filtration, and point cloud transformation. Subsequently, a contrastive loss between the embeddings from the time and topology modalities is
applied to ensure time–topology correspondence. TopoCL jointly optimizes the learning process through both intramodal and cross-modal correspondences.
topo
After pretraining, the embedding vectors obtained from fθtime are used for downstream applications. (b) Topological feature extractor fθ . The topological
feature extractor comprises a series of MLPs with ReLU activations and a max-pooling layer.

(i,t)
and `inst
[7]. For a given timestamp t, these two loss functions
can be formulated as follows:

0
exp ri,t · ri,t
(i,t)

 (19)
`temp = − log P
0
t0 exp ri,t · ri,t + 1[t,t0 ] exp ri,t · ri,t

0
exp ri,t · ri,t
(i,t)


`inst = − log P 
 .
0
j exp ri,t · r j,t + 1[i, j] exp ri,t · r j,t
(20)

Time modality contrastive loss function Ltime for a mini-batch
B is defined as follows:

1 X X  (i,t)
(i,t)
Ltime =
`temp + `inst
.
(21)
BT i t
Next, we apply the hierarchical contrasting method proposed
by Yue et al. [7]. This involves performing max pooling
0
on ri,t and ri,t
along the time axis and then recursively
compute (21).
F. Time–Topology Alignment
In addition to Ltime , which learns instance-specific characteristics and temporal variation, we propose a contrastive
objective for aligning time and topology modalities. Since the
PD inherently captures topological features that are robust
to perturbations, the proposed cross-modal alignment helps
prevent potential information loss caused by augmentations. To
0
this end, we first map the embedding vectors ri,t , ri,t
∈ RF from
time
temporal encoder fθ , and topological features hi ∈ RH to the
multimodal latent space. Then, we apply projection headers
pro jtime and pro jtopo as follows:
yi = pro jtopo (hi )

(22)

zi = pro jtime ri∗



(23)

z0i = pro jtime

ri∗0



(24)

where ri∗ is an instance level representation of ri,t which is
obtained by applying max pooling across all timestamps. The
average of zi and z0i is computed as follows:

1
zi + z0i .
(25)
2
Next, we maximize the similarity between zai and yi , which
are mapped into the multimodal latent space. The similarity
between zai and yi is defined as s(zai , yi ) = (zai · yi )/(kzai kkyi k)/τ,
where τ refers to the temperature parameter. For a mini-batch
B, (zai , yi ) is regarded as a positive pair, whereas the remaining
2B − 2 feature vectors constitute negative pairs. Our crossmodal contrastive loss between zai and yi can be formulated as
follows:
zai =

(i;time,topo)

`align

= − log P


j∈B


exp s zai , yi
 
 .

exp s zai , y j + 1[ j,i] exp s zai , zaj
(26)

The final cross-modal contrastive loss is formulated as follows:

1 X  (i;time,topo)
(i;topo,time)
`align
+ `align
.
(27)
Lcross =
2B i
(i;time,topo)
In the time-to-topology direction `align
, the temporal
a
view zi acts as the query, and the model is trained to align
it with the matching topological representation yi (target).
(i;topo,time)
Conversely, in the topology-to-time direction `align
, the
topological representation yi becomes the query, and the

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES

temporal representation zai is the target. This symmetric formulation enables the model to learn a mutual alignment between
temporal and topological modalities. Leveraging the inherent robustness of PDs—which capture topological features
resilient to perturbations—the proposed alignment further
helps to prevent potential information loss introduced by data
augmentations.

7

TABLE I
A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL
AND BASELINES ON YAHOO AND KPI DATASETS

G. Overall Objective
The proposed model jointly optimizes CL in time modality
and time–topology correspondence. The overall loss function
can be formulated as follows:
L = Ltime + αLcross

(28)

where α is a hyperparameter.
Please note that instance discrimination using contrastive
loss is not performed on the topology modality. Instead, we
apply contrastive loss to the time modality and leverage topology modality to enhance time series representation learning.
The assumption is that time–topology alignment allows learning comprehensive and complementary semantic information
by incorporating temporal features and their corresponding
topological features.
VI. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments on anomaly detection, classification, forecasting, and transfer learning tasks by
applying TopoCL to state-of-the-art methods. Implementation
details are presented in the Appendix.
A. Anomaly Detection
The anomaly detection is used for identifying and addressing unusual patterns or behaviors across various domains. In
this task, Yahoo [34] and KPI [35] datasets are used. We
apply TopoCL to TS2Vec [7], and the evaluation is performed
under normal and cold-start settings. For the normal setting,
each sample is divided into two portions: one for training and
the other for testing. For the cold-start setting, the model is
pretrained on the FordA dataset from the UCR archive before
evaluating on each target dataset. Following the evaluation
protocol proposed by [34], we determine whether the last point
is an anomaly.
SPOT, DSPOT [36], DONUT [37], SR, and TS2vec methods are used as baselines for the normal setting, while FFT
[38], Twitter-AD [39], and Luminol [40], SR, and TS2vec are
used as baselines for the cold-start setting. As shown in Table I,
in the normal setting, TopoCL improves the F1 score by 1.9%
and 2.2% on the Yahoo and KPI dataset, respectively. In the
cold-start setting, our model outperforms the best baseline,
achieving a 1.8% higher F1 score on the Yahoo dataset and a
0.5% improvement on the KPI dataset.
B. Classification
In this section, we conduct a classification task to evaluate
the performance of the proposed model using the UCR [41]
and UEA [42] archives, selecting 125 univariate and 29

Fig. 3. CD diagram of representation learning methods on time-series
classification tasks, using 125 UCR datasets and 29 UEA datasets.

multivariate time-series datasets from each archive. We train
an RBF kernel-based SVM classifier on top of the learned
representation, following the evaluation protocol used in
T-Loss [43]. The penalty factor for the RBF kernel is selected
by performing a grid search on the validation set, exploring
the range {10i | i ∈ [−4, 4]}
We apply TopoCL to TS2vec and compare its peformance with baselines including DTW, TST [44], TS-TCC
[10], T-Loss [43], TNC [45], TS2vec, and InfoTS [24]. The
classification results for these datasets are summarized in
Table II. The classification accuracy of the proposed model
outperforms the best baseline by 3.8% on the UCR datasets
and by 1.4% on the UEA datasets. Detailed classification
results are provided in the Appendix.
To further evaluate the effectiveness of TopoCL, we perform
a significance test on the classification results. In Fig. 3,
critical difference (CD) diagram [46] for Nemenyi tests on all
datasets is presented. The CD diagram indicates that methods
connected by a bold line do not have significantly different
average ranks. From the results, we can conclude that the
proposed model significantly outperforms other methods in
average ranks.
C. Forecasting
In this section, we conduct two types of forecasting experiments to examine the plug-and-play capability of TopoCL
across different self-supervised learning paradigms. Specifically, we apply TopoCL to: 1) the masked-modeling-based
pretraining framework of PatchTST [47] and 2) contrastivelearning-based frameworks such as TS2Vec and CoST [9]. All
models are evaluated using mean absolute error (MAE) and
mean squared error (mse) as performance metrics.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

TABLE II
C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AND BASELINES ON UCR AND UEA DATASETS

TABLE III
M ULTIVARIATE F ORECASTING R ESULTS W HEN T OPO CL I NTEGRATED W ITH PATCH TST

1) TopoCL With PatchTST: In this task, the PatchTST
architecture is employed as the encoder and trained in a selfsupervised manner using a masked-modeling objective. The
model is first pretrained on the ETT [48] dataset and subsequently finetuned on the same data for task-specific long-term
forecasting. TopoCL is integrated into this training pipeline to
enhance representation learning during the pretraining stage.
The experiments focus on long-term time-series forecasting
with prediction horizons of 96, 192, 336, and 720 time steps.
We compare our method against ten state-of-the-art timeseries forecasting baselines including ASAP [49], iTransformer [50], PatchTST, Crossformer [51], MRformer [52],
NonStat [53], SCINet [54], TimesNet [55], and DLinear
[56]. To ensure a fair comparison, the input sequence length
for all models is fixed at 96. As summarized in Table III,
TopoCL consistently outperforms end-to-end forecasting baselines that directly optimize the prediction loss. It achieves
improvements across most prediction horizons on multivariate
long-term forecasting benchmarks, with an average reduction
of 2.0% in mse and 0.7% in MAE over the best-performing
baseline.
2) TopoCL With TS2Vec and CoST: To further assess the
plug-and-play capability of TopoCL under CL paradigms, we
integrate it into two representative self-supervised frameworks:
TS2Vec and CoST [9]. Following [7] and [9], a ridge regressor
with L2 regularization is trained on top of the final timestep representation rt to forecast future values. Specifically,
the model predicts the next 24, 48, 168, and 720 time
steps based on the preceding observations. The regularization

coefficient is selected using the validation set, searching over
{0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000}.
We use Informer [48], LogTrans [57], TCN [58], LSTnet
[59], TS2Vec, and CoST as baselines. The evaluation results
for multivariate forecasting are shown in Table IV. In general,
CoST + TopoCL outperforms the baselines in most cases,
achieving reductions of 1.76% in multivariate forecasting, in
terms of mse. Furthermore, TS2Vec + TopoCL demonstrates a
3.33% decrease in average mse compared with TS2Vec alone
for multivariate forecasting.
D. Transfer Learning
Transfer learning on time-series data brings a unique challenge, stemming from the complex nature of the data, such
as rapidly changing trends and shifts in temporal dynamics.
In this section, we conduct transfer learning, following the
experimental settings proposed by TF-C [26]. Specifically, the
model is pretrained on the SleepEEG dataset and subsequently
finetuned on the Epilepsy [60], Gesture [61], FD-B [62], and
EMG [63] datasets.
To assess the generality of the proposed approach, TopoCL
is applied to two distinct self-supervised learning paradigms:
CL (TS-TCC [10]) and masked modeling (SimMTM [25]).
The method is compared with several state-of-the-art baselines, including TS-TCC, SimMTM, TS2Vec, CoST, Ti-MAE
[64], TF-C, and TST. Performance is evaluated using accuracy
and F1 score. As shown in Table V, both SimMTM and TSTCC exhibit performance improvements when combined with

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES

9

TABLE IV
M ULTIVARIATE F ORECASTING R ESULTS W HEN T OPOCL I NTEGRATED W ITH C O ST AND TS2 VEC

TABLE V

TABLE VI

T RANSFER L EARNING R ESULTS

A BLATION R ESULTS

TABLE VII

TopoCL. In particular, integrating TopoCL with TS-TCC leads
to a notable performance gain.

E FFECT OF FPS D OWNSAMPLING ON RUNTIME ,
M EMORY U SAGE , AND ACCURACY

VII. A NALYSIS
A. Ablation Study
In this section, we compared TopoCL to its five variants on 128 UCR datasets to study the effectiveness of
the proposed components. The five variants are as follows:
1) w/o time–topology alignment: removes the time–topology
cross-modal alignment from TopoCL; 2) w/o time domain
contrastive loss removes the instance and temporal contrast
from fθtopo ; 3) w/o H0 excludes the 0-D persistent homology
when computing the PD, 4) w/o H1 excludes the 1-D persistent
homology; and 5) avg-pool replaces the symmetric aggregate
function (max-pool) in fθtopo with avg-pool. As shown in
Table VI, any absence of the components leads to a decrease
in performance, showing that all components are imperative.
B. Runtime and Memory Analysis
In this section, the runtime and memory consumption of
the proposed framework are evaluated using two representative datasets: the EigenWorms dataset, which contains the
longest multivariate time series (six channels and 17 984 time

steps), and the DuckDuckGeese dataset, which has the highest
dimensionality (1345 channels and 60 time steps).
Because computational and memory costs increase with the
number of persistence points generated during PD computation, this quantity is reported for both datasets. The maximal
number of persistence points reached 520 910 for DuckDuckGeese and 33 021 for EigenWorms. Although persistent
homology computations are performed entirely as an offline
preprocessing step, the large volume of topological features
caused DuckDuckGeese to exceed the memory capacity of
an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24-GB VRAM). To mitigate
this issue, farthest point sampling (FPS) was applied to the
point cloud xip ∈ Xtopo , reducing redundancy while preserving
the underlying geometric structure. The impact of FPS was
examined by retaining 10k and 1k points, respectively, and the
corresponding runtime, GPU memory usage, and classification
accuracy are summarized in Table VII.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Comparison of classification accuracy under different augmentation
techniques with and without Lcross ) on (a) crop and (b) RefrigerationDevices
datasets.

As shown in the results, applying FPS to our framework
reduces memory consumption, while causing only a marginal
drop in accuracy. These results demonstrate that although the
large volume of topological features can lead to computational
overhead, such challenges can be effectively mitigated through
sampling strategies.

Fig. 5. Visualized explannations. (a) Raw time series. (b) Learned embeddings
of TopoCL w/o Lcross . (c) Learned embedding of TopoCL.

C. Robustness Under Data Augmentation
The robustness of TopoCL was evaluated against different
data augmentation techniques using the Crop and RefrigerationDevices datasets from the UCR archive. Specifically,
common augmentation methods, including jittering, scaling,
shifting, and rotation, were applied individually.
The classification accuracy was measured for both
configurations—with and without the proposed topological
regularization—and the results are summarized in Fig. 4.
While the performance gain from each augmentation varies
across datasets, incorporating Lcross generally led to improved
accuracy under different augmentation settings. These results
empirically demonstrate that time–topology alignment can
help compensate for the information loss introduced during
data augmentation.
D. Visualized Explanation
In this section, we visualize the learned embeddings
obtained from the time–topology alignment. The analysis is
conducted on the RefrigerationDevices dataset, which primarily exhibits periodic behavior with occasional sharp transient
peaks. The first test sample is selected as a representative case
for evaluation.

Fig. 6. Classification results in a limited data sample scenario.

To illustrate the representative structure of the learned
embeddings (see Fig. 5), we focus on the 16 latent dimensions with the highest variance. Without the time–topology
correspondence term Lcross, the representation shows irregular fluctuations and diffuse responses around the transient
anomaly (t ≈ 480), suggesting that the model mainly captures
local amplitude variations. In contrast, incorporating Lcross

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES

produces more periodic and structured embeddings, with the
transient anomaly localized to only a few dimensions.
E. Limited Data Scenario
Due to sensor malfunctions, data transmission errors, or
manual data entry issues, a sufficient amount of data is not
always guaranteed. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method in scenarios with limited data, we adjusted the proportion of training samples. FordB dataset from the UCR
archive is chosen for this analysis. The classification results
using only 1%–9% of the original training dataset are shown
in Fig. 6. The proposed method consistently outperforms w/o
time–topology alignment. This result suggests that leveraging
topological properties can capture the intrinsic characteristics
of the data, even with a small amount of data.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
This article presents TopoCL, a topological CL for time
series. We treat temporal and topological properties of time
series as distinct modalities and propose a joint learning
objective to enhance understanding of both, while also improving robustness to data augmentations. TopoCL is evaluated
across multiple tasks: time-series classification, forecasting,
anomaly detection, and transfer learning. The experimental
results demonstrate the universality, generalization capability,
and effectiveness of the proposed model. Our ablations show
that the joint learning of time modality contrastive loss and
time–topology correspondences enhances these capabilities.
Moreover, TopoCL shows consistent performance across various data augmentation techniques, suggesting its effectiveness
in mitigating information loss resulting from these augmentations. In the future, we aim to extend TopoCL to accommodate
large scale and diverse pretraining datasets, thereby advancing
toward a foundation model for time-series analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the data donors whose
contributions made this article possible.
During the preparation of this work they used ChatGPT
and Grammarly in order to refine the writing and check the
grammar.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020,
pp. 5812–5823.
T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. ICML, 2020,
pp. 1597–1607.
K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of
sentence embeddings,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang.
Process., Nov. 2021, pp. 6894–6910.
Y. Zhang et al., “Enhancing sequential recommendation with graph
contrastive learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul.
2022, pp. 2398–2405.
Y. Yang, C. Huang, L. Xia, C. Huang, D. Luo, and K. Lin, “Debiased
contrastive learning for sequential recommendation,” in Proc. ACM Web
Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 1063–1073.
Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
in Proc. AAAI, 2022, pp. 8980–8987.

11

[8]

J. Liu and S. Chen, “TimesURL: Self-supervised contrastive learning
for universal time series representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI, 2024,
pp. 13918–13926.
[9] G. Trajcevski, Z. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, T. Zhong, and
F. Zhou, “Learning latent seasonal-trend representations for time
series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2022, pp. 38775–38787. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=PilZY3omXV2
[10] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
2021, pp. 2352–2359.
[11] Q. Meng, H. Qian, Y. Liu, L. Cui, Y. Xu, and Z. Shen, “MHCCL:
Masked hierarchical cluster-wise contrastive learning for multivariate
time series,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 9153–9161.
[12] G. Carlsson, “Topology and data,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 46, no. 2,
pp. 255–308, 2009.
[13] D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, and J. Harer, “Stability of persistence diagrams,” in Proc. 21st Annu. Symp. Comput. Geometry, Jun.
2005, pp. 263–271.
[14] P. Bubenik et al., “Statistical topological data analysis using persistence
landscapes,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 77–102, 2015.
[15] H. Adams et al., “Persistence images: A stable vector representation of
persistent homology,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1–35,
2017.
[16] T. Padellini and P. Brutti, “Supervised learning with indefinite topological kernels,” Statistics, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 765–786, Jul. 2021.
[17] X. Zhu, A. Vartanian, M. Bansal, D. Nguyen, and L. Brandl, “Stochastic
multiresolution persistent homology kernel,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2016,
pp. 2449–2457.
[18] P. Bubenik, “The persistence landscape and some of its properties,” in
Proc. Topological Data Anal. Abel Symp. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2020, pp. 97–117.
[19] C. Hofer, R. Kwitt, M. Niethammer, and A. Uhl, “Deep learning with
topological signatures,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 1634–1644.
[20] M. Carrière, F. Chazal, Y. Ike, T. Lacombe, M. Royer, and Y. Umeda,
“PersLay: A neural network layer for persistence diagrams and new
graph topological signatures,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2020, pp. 2786–2796.
[21] M. Moor, M. Horn, B. Rieck, and K. Borgwardt, “Topological
autoencoders,” in Proc. ICML, 2020, pp. 7045–7054.
[22] K. Kim, J. Kim, M. Zaheer, J. Kim, F. Chazal, and L. Wasserman,
“PLLay: Efficient topological layer based on persistent landscapes,” in
Proc. NerIPS, 2020, pp. 15965–15977.
[23] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Ø. Mikalsen, and R. Jenssen,
“Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-supervised representation learning for time series,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 155, pp. 54–61,
Mar. 2022.
[24] D. Luo et al., “Time series contrastive learning with information-aware
augmentations,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 4534–4542.
[25] J. Dong, M. Long, J. Wang, H. Wu, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “SimMTM:
A simple pre-training framework for masked time-series modeling,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 29996–30025.
[26] T. Tsiligkaridis, X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised
contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 3988–4003.
[27] V. Gorade, A. Singh, and D. Mishra, “Large scale time-series representation learning via simultaneous low- and high-frequency feature
bootstrapping,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 991–1002, Jan. 2025.
[28] F. Takens, “Detecting strange attractors in turbulence,” in Proc. Dyn.
Syst. Turbulence, Warwick Symp. Held Univ. Warwick. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2006, pp. 366–381.
[29] L. Vietoris, “Über den höheren Zusammenhang kompakter räume und
eine klasse von Zusammenhangstreuen abbildungen,” Mathematische
Annalen, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 454–472, Dec. 1927.
[30] S. Lim, F. Mémoli, and O. B. Okutan, “Vietoris–rips persistent homology, injective metric spaces, and the filling radius,” Algebr. Geometric
Topol., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1019–1100, Apr. 2024.
[31] B. Laurent and P. Massart, “Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional
by model selection,” Ann. Statist., vol. 28, pp. 1302–1338, Oct. 2000.
[32] R. Q. Charles, H. Su, M. Kaichun, and L. J. Guibas, “PointNet:
Deep learning on point sets for 3D classification and segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 77–85.
[33] M. Zaheer, S. Kottur, S. Ravanbakhsh, B. Poczos, R. R. Salakhutdinov,
and A. J. Smola, “Deep sets,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 3391–3401.
[34] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Jul. 2019, pp. 3009–3017.

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12

[35] Y. B. Nikolay Laptev, Saeed Amizadeh. (2015). A Benchmark
Dataset for Time Series Anomaly Detection. [Online]. Available:
https://yahooresearch.tumblr.com/post/114590420346/a-benchmarkdataset-for-time-series-anomaly
[36] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[37] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. WWW, 2018,
pp. 187–196.
[38] F. Rasheed, P. Peng, R. Alhajj, and J. Rokne, “Fourier transform based
spatial outlier mining,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Data Eng. Automated
Learn. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2009, pp. 317–324.
[39] O. Vallis, J. Hochenbaum, and A. Kejariwal, “A novel technique for
long-term anomaly detection in the cloud,” in Proc. 6th USENIX
Workshop Hot Topics Cloud Comput. (HotCloud), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[40] V. Brennan and M. Ritesh. (2018). Luminol (Github Repository).
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/linkedin/luminol
[41] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom.
Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019.
[42] A. J. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification
archive,” 2018, arXiv:1811.00075.
[43] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. NeurIPS,
2019, pp. 4652–4663.
[44] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff,
“A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation learning,” in Proc. SIGKDD, New York, NY, USA, 2021,
pp. 2114–2124.
[45] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in
Proc. ICLR, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[46] J. Demšar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 1–30, Jan. 2006.
[47] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–24.
[48] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 11106–11115.
[49] J. Chen, P. Li, J. Lv, H. Zha, K. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Learning
temporal features with alternated similarity and proximity attention for
time-series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
no. 9, pp. 16339–16350, Sep. 2025.
[50] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
series forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, 2024, pp. 1–25.
[51] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “Crossformer: Transformer utilizing crossdimension dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc.
ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–21.
[52] S. Zhu, J. Zheng, and Q. Ma, “MR-transformer: Multiresolution transformer for multivariate time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1171–1183, Jan. 2025.
[53] Y. Liu, M. Long, J. Wang, and H. Wu, “Non-stationary transformers:
Exploring the stationarity in time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 9881–9893.
[54] M. Chen et al., “SCINet: Time series modeling and forecasting with
sample convolution and interaction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2022, pp. 5816–5828.
[55] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet:
Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in
Proc. ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–23.
[56] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective
for time series forecasting?,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 11121–11128.
[57] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019,
pp. 5244–5254.
[58] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
arXiv:1803.01271.
[59] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long- and shortterm temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int.
ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jun. 2018, pp. 95–104.
[60] R. G. Andrzejak, K. Lehnertz, F. Mormann, C. Rieke, P. David,
and C. E. Elger, “Indications of nonlinear deterministic and finitedimensional structures in time series of brain electrical activity:
Dependence on recording region and brain state,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat.
Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 64, no. 6, Nov. 2001,
Art. no. 061907.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[61] J. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Zhong, J. Wickramasuriya, and V. Vasudevan,
“UWave: Accelerometer-based personalized gesture recognition and its
applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun.,
Mar. 2009, pp. 1–9.
[62] C. Lessmeier, J. K. Kimotho, D. Zimmer, and W. Sextro, “Condition
monitoring of bearing damage in electromechanical drive systems by
using motor current signals of electric motors: A benchmark data set
for data-driven classification,” in Proc. PHM, 2016, pp. 1–17.
[63] P. PhysioBank, “PhysioNet: Components of a new research resource for
complex physiologic signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, pp. 215–220, Jun.
2000.
[64] Z. Li, Z. Rao, L. Pan, P. Wang, and Z. Xu, “Ti-MAE: Self-supervised
masked time series autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2301.08871.

Namwoo Kim received the B.S. degree in mathematical science and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in civil and environmental engineering from Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea, in 2015, 2017, and
2023, respectively.
From January to June 2023, he was a Visiting
Student Researcher at the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. He is currently
a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, KAIST. His research interests include
spatiotemporal data mining, representation learning, topological data analysis
(TDA), and urban informatics.

Hyungryul Baik received the B.S. degree in mathematical sciences from KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in mathematics
from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, in 2014.
He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, from 2014 to 2017,
before joining the Faculty Member at KAIST, in
2017. He is currently an Associate Professor with
the Department of Mathematical Sciences and the
Director of the Graduate School of AI for Mathematics, KAIST. His research interests primarily involve
dynamical techniques at the geometric topology and geometric group theory,
as well as the topological and geometric structures of low-dimensional spaces.
More recently, he has expanded his research focus toward topological data
analysis and mathematical formalization.

Yoonjin Yoon received the B.S. degree in mathematics from Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea, in 1996, the M.S. degree in computer science
and the M.S. degree in management science and
engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, in 2000 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in civil and environmental engineering from
the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
USA, in 2010.
Since 2011, she has been an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, South Korea. Before arriving at KAIST, she was a Graduate Student
Researcher with the National Center of Excellence in Air Transportation
Operations Research (NeXTOR), University of California, Berkeley, from
2005 to 2010. Previously, she was a Research Assistant with the Artificial
Intelligence Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA, USA, in 1999, and
the Center for Reliability Computing, Stanford University, from 2000 to 2002.
Her research interests include the traffic management of both crewed and
uncrewed vehicles using stochastic optimization, data-driven driving behavior
analysis, and autonomous vehicle traffic flow management using large-scale
driving data.