1970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Toward Context-Aware Anomaly Detection for
AIOps in Microservices Using Dynamic
Knowledge Graphs
Pieter Moens , Bram Steenwinckel , Femke Ongenae , Bruno Volckaert , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Sofie Van Hoecke

Abstract—Microservice applications are omnipresent due to
their advantages, such as scalability, flexibility and consequentially resource cost efficiency. The loosely-coupled microservices
can be easily added, replicated, updated and/or removed to
address the changing workload. However, the distributed and
dynamic nature of microservice architectures introduces a complexity with regard to monitoring and observability, which is
paramount to ensure reliability, especially in critical domains.
Anomaly detection has become an important tool to automate
microservice monitoring and detect system failures. Nevertheless,
state-of-the-art solutions assume the topology of the monitored
application to remain static over time and fail to account for
the dynamic changes the application, and the infrastructure it is
deployed on, undergoes. This paper tackles these shortcomings
by introducing a context-aware anomaly detection methodology
using dynamic knowledge graphs to capture contextual features
which describe the evolving state of the monitored system.
Our methodology leverages resource and network monitoring
to capture dependencies between microservices, and the infrastructure they are running on. In addition to the methodology
for anomaly detection, this paper presents an open-source
benchmark framework for context-aware anomaly detection that
includes monitoring, fault injection and data collection. The
evaluation on this benchmark shows that our methodology
consistently outperforms the non-contextual baselines. These
results underscore the importance of contextual awareness for
robust anomaly detection in complex, topology-driven systems.
Beyond these achieved improvements, our benchmark establishes
a reproducible and extensible foundation for future research,
facilitating the experimentation with broader ranges of models and a continued advancement in context-aware anomaly
detection.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, microservices, knowledge
graph, dynamic graphs, knowledge graph embedding, AIOps,
context.

Received 23 September 2024; revised 1 April 2025, 10 October 2025,
and 17 December 2025; accepted 4 January 2026. Date of publication
12 January 2026; date of current version 16 January 2026. This research
was funded by the FWO Junior Research project HEROI2C (G085920N)
that investigates hybrid machine learning for improved infection management in critically ill patients. The associate editor coordinating the review
of this article and approving it for publication was D. G. Berbecaru.
(Corresponding author: Bram Steenwinckel.)
The authors are with the IDLab, Ghent University–imec, 9052
Gent, Belgium (e-mail: Pieter.Moens@ugent.be; Bram.Steenwinckel@
ugent.be;
Femke.Ongenae@ugent.be;
Bruno.Volckaert@ugent.be;
Sofie.VanHoecke@ugent.be).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3652304

I. I NTRODUCTION
N THE digital landscape that has characterized the last
decade, businesses ranging from e-commerce to finance up
to healthcare rely on software systems to deliver seamless
experiences to their end-users. For instance, an online retail
platform handles thousands, or even millions, of transactions daily [1], while eHeatlh platforms are processing a
large amount of (temporal) data from a plethora of monitoring equipment that requires rapid and accurate analysis
and interpretation [2]. To ensure smooth operations and
meet stakeholder demands, many companies have transitioned
from a traditional monolithic architecture to a Microservice
Architecture (MSA) [3]. Instead of one large, unwieldy application handling everything, e.g., from inventory management
to payment processing in e-commerce or patient monitoring
and prescription handling in eHealth, the system is decoupled
into smaller microservices. Each microservice focuses on a
specific task, such as managing product listings, ingesting
patient monitoring data or processing payments, and communicates over the network with other dependent services
through well-defined Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs). These loosely coupled, fine-grained microservices can
be individually developed and deployed across distributed
machines. This improves scalability and maintenance, but also
allows for more frequent and granular updates, introducing
new versions and features without disrupting the entire system.
For example, during peak shopping seasons, the payment
processing microservice can be scaled independently to handle
increased traffic without affecting other parts of the system.
Similarly, the microservices for ingestion and processing of
real-time monitoring data in an eHeatlh system can be scaled
individually depending on the number of hospital rooms
currently occupied. This avoids horizontal scaling of the entire
application, and thus minimizes the operational cost while
ensuring availability of the overall system.
However, these scalability and resource efficiency benefits
obtained through adoption of the MSA come at a cost
of increased operational complexity in terms of monitoring
and observability [4]. As each microservice encapsulates a
single business functionality, a request to the application often
traverses across multiple interconnected components before
serving the end-user. A fault occurring in one component
can therefore propagate throughout the system. For example,
the checkout microservice for a customer of an e-commerce

I

c 2026 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.

For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1971

platform or a patient being discharged in an eHealth platform
could rely on the payment and e-mail microservices. A fault in
one of these services, e.g., network latency, can affect in these
cases the response time of the checkout service, which in turn
could lead to a violation of timeouts toleration, resulting in an
invalid request observed at the front-end of the application.
System faults observed in microservice applications include,
but are not limited to, network latency, anomalous resource
consumption and unavailability of system components [5].
These faults can cause inaccurate autoscaling of services, violation of Service Level Agreements (SLAs) or even temporary
outage of the application. This in turn can result in increased
operational costs, costs associated with downtime, or even
more drastic effects due to delayed patient care in eHealth
applications.
Classic monitoring solutions, e.g., using Prometheus [6]
and Grafana, or using the ElasticSearch, Logstash and Kibana
(ELK) stack [7], are capable of notifying IT and DevOps engineers in case of failures in the system through threshold-based
alerting. These solutions are based on fine-grained alerting
and require multi-faceted thresholds for Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) in different layers of the application [8].
Determining and updating these thresholds, as well as deriving
the root cause of a fault that propagated through the system
based on numerous alerts, is a complex and tedious task for
IT and DevOps engineers.
Artificial Intelligence for IT Operations (AIOps) [9] aims to
move from monitoring towards observability and address this
issue through Machine Learning (ML). Instead of monitoring
microservices using static thresholds, ML-based solutions,
such as Dynatrace [10], adopt Anomaly Detection (AD)
and Root Cause Analysis (RCA) techniques to automate the
prediction and detection of faults. It thus allows engineers
to respond promptly to potential failures by improving both
failure management as well as resource provisioning (e.g.,
resource consolidation, service composition, and workload
estimation).
The biggest challenge that arises when applying stateof-the-art AD techniques to microservice-based applications,
however, is their inherent dynamic behavior. To optimize
resource consumption and minimize operational costs while
ensuring maximum reliability of the overall system when
handling varying workload, its components are continuously added, updated or removed through autoscaling and
rescheduling of resources. While AD for microservice-based
applications has received increased attention in literature over
recent years, this paper highlights shortcomings and open
challenges when focusing on the temporal characteristics of
the monitored system.
Most related work infers the application topology. It does
this by using Control Flow Graphs (CFG) extracted from
logs or distributed traces to capture how microservices depend
on each other [11]. The relations that can be obtained from
these distributed traces are, however, often limited to the
dependencies between different microservices, and do not
include their relation with the infrastructure they are running
on, for example, the specific hardware node the microservice
is deployed on. Taking into account these relations can be

paramount for detecting anomalies stemming from nodelevel faults, e.g., node unavailability and resource shortage.
Furthermore, integration of log-based and distributed tracing
in MSA is intrusive and requires changes to the application
itself [12]. Developers are tasked with implementing descriptive and informative logging at critical points in the code.
The resulting AD solutions are therefore strongly dependent
on the quality and uniformity of these logs. In addition to
this, a commonly observed shortcoming in related work is that
the overall topology or dependency graph is considered to be
static over time, meaning that the dependencies between components remains the same throughout the entire dataset. The
dynamicity of the monitored system can lead to temporal drift
and affect the performance of the deployed AD models over
time. Accurately capturing these types of dynamic changes in
benchmark datasets is paramount to evaluate the applicability
of the proposed solutions to real-world scenarios.
We define concrete requirements for the AD solution
proposed in this paper based on the these aforementioned open
challenges:
R1 It should take into account both the application layer as
well as the infrastructure layer, and therefore be able to
detect faults in both.
R2 It should be non-invasive and introduce no overhead for
the developers.
R3 It should be able to accurately detect system faults under
dynamic conditions. Temporal changes in the topology
or state of the monitored system should have minimal
impact on the AD model.
R4 It should be deployable for real-time detection of system
faults.
This work makes two main complementary contributions
addressing the identified requirements. First, we introduce
a benchmark dataset that captures the multi-layer and noninvasive aspects of microservice environments (R1, R2).
Second, we propose an anomaly detection approach leveraging
heterogeneous knowledge graphs to model system dynamics
and support real-time fault detection (R3, R4).
The presented research can be subdivided in four
(sub)contributions in chronological order of the paper:
C1 An open, reproducible deployment bundle that integrates
non-intrusive, production-grade monitoring and faultinjection tooling to produce literal-enriched, multi-layer
evaluations for microservice anomaly detection.
C2 A schema or ontology to construct these Knowledge
Graphs (KGs) and express the dependencies between
heterogeneous components in both the application and
infrastructure layers of a MSA.
C3 A benchmark dataset for AD in microservices containing
both data features and contextual features to capture the
dynamic state of the system over time.
C4 A novel methodology for real-time context-aware AD in
microservices based on KGs.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First,
Section II summarizes related work in the domain of anomaly
detection in microservices, and the benchmark datasets used
for evaluation. It also highlights the contributions of this
work with respect to this related work. Before diving into the

1972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

specifics of our methodology, we first describe the microservice environment (C1), the designed schema used to construct
the KGs (C2) and the resulting benchmark dataset (C3) in
Sections III and IV respectively, which provide the necessary context for understanding our approach. Section V then
introduces the proposed methodology towards dynamic KGbased context-aware anomaly detection in microservices (C4).
Section VI provides evaluation results of the proposed solution
and a comparison with the state-of-the-art. Section VII reflects
on the proposed solution and discusses its limitations and
proposes directions for future work. Finally, Section VIII
concludes this paper and highlights the main insights of the
conducted research.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section provides a summary and discussion of related
literature in the domain of anomaly detection in microservices.
We discuss methodologies proposed in recent years as well as
the benchmark datasets on which they have been evaluated,
focusing on the type of faults that are being considered and
the conditions under which the dataset has been collected.
Related work in the domain of microservice-based monitoring and anomaly detection can be roughly divided based on the
type of data used, i.e., log-based solutions, distributed tracingbased solutions and resource metric-based solutions [5].
A. Log-Based Solutions
In most nodes, containers and devices, logs are captured at
critical points for debugging and root cause analysis purposes.
These textual messages are often unstructured and require
parsing strategies and systems [13]. When correctly parsed,
logs provide valuable information about the current state of the
individual services, which has been showcased in the related
work discussed in the following paragraphs.
Nandi et al. [11] introduce a technique to automatically
mine different log message types, or templates, from unstructured execution logs. They construct a CFG from the logs
to capture the execution flow within a single machine.
LogSed [14] extends this method and introduces a temporal
dimension to the collected CFG by calculating the time
between logs within a single flow, resulting in a time-weighted
CFG. They used these time-weighted graphs to detect deviations from normal application behavior by matching captured
interval times with the previously established time weights
in the learned normal CFGs. LogSed [14] uses a benchmark
microservice application, namely Acme Air [15]. They simulate a load of several hundreds of concurrent requests to several
microservices in the application and inject artificial faults pertaining three types of anomalies, namely sequence anomalies,
redundancy anomalies and latency anomalies. These anomalies
directly relate to the CFGs they construct such as deviations
from known sequences, previously unseen logs that can not be
mapped on the known graph, and logs exceeding the expected
interval time.
DeepLog [16] uses a deep learning model, i.e., a Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model, to model a system log
as a natural language sequence. They then learn log patterns

from normal behavior data and detect anomalies based on
deviations from these patterns. In addition, they construct
CFGs from these system logs for diagnosis and RCA of the
detected anomalies. DeepLog focuses on cybersecurity threats
and captures anomalies such as Denial of Service (DoS) and
detected port scans. The dataset considered stems from the
2011 IEEE VAST Mini Challenge 2 [17] and contains log
messages from a firewall and intrusion detection system.
AutoLog [18] captures batches of logs from a given node,
container or microservice and calculates a numerical entropy
vector based on the frequency of the occurrence of certain
terms in the batch of log messages. They then train a deep
learning model, i.e., an Auto Encoder (AE) model, to learn this
normal behavior and use this model to detect future anomalies.
This unsupervised method does not require examples of
anomalies in the training data and is able to detect previously
unseen anomalies. AutoLog [18] captures its own log data
using five different scenarios, each representing a single
system fault. Similarly to DeepLog, the considered scenarios
are focused on cybersecurity and include the detection of DoS,
bruteforce, tampering with data and/or logs.
A second category of log-based solutions for anomaly detection in microservice-based applications focuses on system call
(syscall) log monitoring which captures and tracks low-level
system interactions made by applications (e.g., file access,
network connections, and process execution). In contrast to
application log-based solutions, syscall log monitoring is less
invasive to the application under inspection, making it more
suitable for monitoring third-party or legacy applications.
Due to the nature of syscalls, related work in this field is
primarily focused on the detection of anomalous behavior and
container-based security threats, such as privilege escalation,
unauthorized file modifications, or container breakouts.
Related work, such as ContainerGuard [19], addresses the
problem of imperfect resource isolation and shared kernel
between containers and uses a Variational AE trained on syscall
logs to detect meltdown and spectre attacks. Guo et al. [20]
utilizes the information captured by syscall logs to detect zeroday data manipulation and DoS attacks, meaning that their
solution is able to detect previously unseen threats.
Karn et al. [21], on the other hand, identified cryptocurrency
mining as one of the most serious malware threats in containerbased applications and proposed a solution using sycall log
monitoring and eXplainable AI (XAI) to detect these malicious
cryptocurrency miners and prevent server resources from being
hijacked.
All of these log-based solutions capture detailed information
about events that occur in a single machine, or service.
However, logs lack the full context of the transaction flow
across system components, or microservices, making it difficult to link correlated events as faults propagate through
the distributed system, and to derive the impact on the
overall system. Information about the dependencies between
different system components is essential to capture the state
of the monitored system and detect anomalies that might be
considered normal in different contexts, e.g., the expected
resource usage of a hardware machine is directly correlated to
the number and type of microservices currently running on it.

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

B. Distributed Tracing-Based Solutions
Distributed tracing describes the execution process of a
request across service instances, i.e., invocation chain, by
attaching a trace ID to the captured log messages, making it
possible to easily capture dependencies between services.
Nedelkoski et al. [22] use these distributed traces for
anomaly detection and classification by training a deep learning model, namely a Variational AE in combination with a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). They demonstrate their
model on a lab environment for four different injected anomalies: (i) increase in latency caused by the service, (ii) network
latency, (iii) network packet loss, and (iv) server process
kill. They implemented their own microservice application
consisting of only three microservices for evaluation of their
proposed method.
DeepTraLog [23] investigates a graph-based approach using
a Gated Graph Neural Network (GGNN) model for graph
embedding of logging data of distributed traces. They then
train a Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) classifier
on these embeddings for supervised AD. BertHTLG [24]
extends on this approach and improves the calculation of
embeddings from logging data using a heterogeneous graph
representation enhanced by Sentence-Bert before utilizing a
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and SVDD. Similarly
to DeepTraLog, they then train a SVDD model for supervised
AD. DeepTraLog [23] and BertHTLG [24] both evaluate their
approaches on the TrainTicket benchmark dataset [25], which
contains 14 different types of faults. These faults, however,
are limited to service-level anomalies, such as incorrect configuration of SSL, JVM or Docker, incorrect calculation of
ticket prices, a wrong column name included in the constructed
SQL statement and incorrect synchronization of service states
among services.
Distributed tracing-based solutions, just like logging-based
methods, require custom code within each deployed service.
The collected logs from distributed tracing solutions are
thus limited to the application layer, making it difficult to
capture the impact of an individual trace on the infrastructure
the microservices are running on. Furthermore, monitoring
systems relying on logs and traces are considered invasive as
the adoption of these systems affects the underlying software
application itself. The performance of these approaches is also
heavily reliant on the quality of the available logs.
C. Resource Metric-Based Solutions
As resource metrics (e.g., CPU and memory) and network
metrics (e.g., throughput and latency) can be captured without
altering the application, resource metric-based solutions are
less intrusive and do not require altering the underlying software application itself, nor are they reliant on the qualitative
log data.
Du et al. [26] leverage resource and network metrics for
supervised classification of four types of anomalies, namely
CPU hog, memory hog, network latency and network package
loss. They evaluate four common classification techniques,
i.e., k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN), Random Forest (RF), Naive
Bayes (NB) and Support Vector Machines (SVM). Du et al.

1973

capture a dataset using a custom lab environment. They monitor resource consumption within Virtual Machines (VMs),
such as CPU, memory, cache, network usage (i.e., bytes sent
and received). They implemented a custom script to inject
four targeted system faults, namely high CPU consumption,
memory leak, network package loss and network latency
increase.
Nobre et al. [27] investigates a supervised deep learning approach to anomaly detection in microservice-based
systems. They collected and labeled network resource data
(e.g., network latency and response status codes) through fault
injection, and compared the performance of a Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) classification model trained on the servicelevel monitoring data captured during the load test versus a
model trained on resource-level monitoring data (e.g., CPU
and memory usage). Nobre et al. evaluate their approach using
the SockShop benchmark application [28]. They injected two
faults in two specific microservices, namely the orders and
carts services. The anomalies are on the one hand a functional
anomaly, which throws a runtime exception in the respective
services, and on the other hand a performance anomaly, which
pauses the execution of the program for 5 seconds.
ServiceAnomaly [29] uses a combination of distributed
tracing and network resource metrics to characterize the
normal behavior of the microservice application. They model
the normal behavior of the application as a CFG by extracting
inter-service dependencies from the collected traces. They then
annotate the edges of this CFG using network resource metrics.
During prediction, they calculate the differences between
collected graphs from the healthy state against the newly
received graph. As the authors mention, their combination of
distributed traces with network resource metrics yields high
performance results, but their proposed approach is not capable
of capturing dynamic changes in the application and suffers
when the normal behavior changes over time. ServiceAnomaly
evaluates its proposed solution on two benchmark datasets,
namely Train Ticket [25] and TeaStore [30]. They injected
two additional faults on these benchmark environment under
varying load, namely a fixed service latency of 15 seconds for
80% of the requests and a service hangup anomaly simulated
by temporarily downscaling the targeted microservice to zero
replicas.
Resource metric-based solutions are able to collect highlevel resource and network metrics at the application layer
and the infrastructure layer without altering the monitored
system. While these quantitative metrics are informative of
the health of the system components, they do not include
any context information. ServiceAnomaly [29] tackles this by
combining distributed traces and resource metric monitoring
data into a CFG. This method, however, is once again
intrusive. Furthermore, the constructed CFGs are limited to the
application layer dependencies and do not encompass metrics
captured at the infrastructure layer.
D. Positioning
AD for microservice applications has become an active
research domain, and many solutions have been proposed and

1974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

evaluated on a plethora of benchmark microservice applications. This related work shows high performance when
detecting a variety of faults, such as spikes in resource and
network usage, and application failures. As explicitly pointed
out by ServiceAnomaly [29], all related work in the domain
evaluates their methodologies under varying user load, but the
topology of the application is always assumed to be static.
This poses a strong limitation on the applicability of the
aforementioned state-of-the-art research solutions for real-life
usage.
Distributed software applications, such as microservices, are
characterized by their dynamic nature in order to enable scalability. This means that microservice instances can be added,
rescheduled onto different hardware nodes, and removed to
optimize resource efficiency and robustness of the overall
application. These dynamic changes to the application affect
the current state of the system and influence the normal
behavior seen in monitoring data.
There is thus a need for methodologies capable of detecting
anomalies as the topology of the application changes over
time. In order to achieve this, a more advanced benchmark
dataset is required that captures these dynamic characteristics
and includes contextual features about the monitored application, and the infrastructure it is deployed on.
While some state-of-the-art techniques have leveraged graph
structures, such as CFGs to represent relations between
different services and components, they were limited to
the application layer and contain simple dependency graphs
between microservices. In contrast to homogeneous CFGs, a
KG is defined as a set of triples G = {(h, r , t)}. Each triple
is composed of a head entity h ∈ V, a tail entity t ∈ V, and a
relationship between them r ∈ E. V denotes the set of vertices,
or nodes, in the graph and E denotes the set of edges, or
relationships. KGs are high dimensional data structures which
can be used to incorporate rich semantic metadata about the
heterogeneous entities and their relations.
As previously stated, none of the aforementioned techniques
have been applied to dynamic graphs. A dynamic graph can be
defined as a set of static graphs Gt (Vt , Et ) where each graph
Gti (Vti , Eti ) represents a snapshot of the dynamic graph at
timestamp ti . This graph format is closely related to the group
of temporal KGs and recent temporal KG-based anomalydetection efforts provide powerful tools to model and detect
changes in these time-varying relational data [31], [32], [33].
However, those works are typically developed for symbolic
temporal facts and evaluated on offline link prediction or
KGs-quality tasks. They do not directly address the practical
requirements of microservice monitoring, namely (i) native
support for dense numeric monitoring literals (e.g., CPU,
memory, latency), (ii) incremental/online updating for lowlatency, streaming detection, and (iii) combined application
and infrastructure multi-layer semantics. Adapting these temporal KGs and KG-AD techniques to meet these constraints
therefore requires nontrivial extensions. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the first to consider the dynamic character
of microservices and exploit heterogeneous KGs to capture the
contextual features about the changing topology in both the
application as well as the infrastructure layer.

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF P UBLIC B ENCHMARKS AND O UR DATASET. “+” =
F ULLY S UPPORTED , “–” = N OT S UPPORTED , AND “±” = PARTIALLY
S UPPORTED

Contrary to related work, this paper therefore approaches the
problem of AD for microservices from a different perspective
and emphasizes the impact and complexity of the inherent
dynamic nature of microservice applications.
To make the differences explicit, Table I summarizes a set of
features that are relevant for microservice anomaly-detection
research. Here, Static refers to whether the benchmark assumes
a fixed service topology. Multi-layer indicates whether
both application- and infrastructure-level data are captured.
Numeric denotes the inclusion of time-aligned quantitative
monitoring metrics and Streaming expresses support for continuous, online data collection and evaluation. In contrast to the
existing benchmarks, our approach and benchmark captures
all of these aspects, representing dynamic topologies, multilayer contextual features, rich numeric metrics and streaming
behaviour. Thereby enabling the proper evaluation of anomaly
detection approaches in conditions that more closely reflect
real-world microservice systems.
III. B ENCHMARK E NVIRONMENT
The benchmark dataset contains non-intrusive monitoring
data from different sources which capture the relationships
between microservices. The infrastructure they are running
on makes it possible to trace the dynamic changes the
microservice application undergoes throughout time. This section describes the architecture used to collect this dataset and
its most important components, such as load generation and
fault injection, as well as the different measures taken to ensure
it is representative of real-world microservice applications.
The lab environment is deployed on our Fed4Fire
testbed [34], which makes a large amount of hardware
resources available for research. Seven nodes are used to
deploy and configure a Kubernetes cluster. Each node has a
quad-core Intel Xeon E3-1220 v3 CPU (4 cores, 4 threads),
16 GB RAM and a 250 GB HDD. The node therefore exposes
4 logical CPUs
A. Architecture
The proposed architecture consists of two layers: (i) an
application layer, consisting solely of application microservices required for the functioning of the monitored system, and
(ii) a control layer, consisting of all components used to enable
monitoring, chaos engineering and data collection. To ensure
that there is no interference or residual monitoring data from
the control layer services, the hardware nodes are separated

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1975

Fig. 1. Complete architecture of the proposed solution including the application layer (i.e., Online Boutique microservices demonstrator), the control layer
consisting of monitoring/control components (e.g., Prometheus, Istio), the chaos engineering platform (i.e., Litmus) and custom components for load generation,
data collection and fault injection. cAdvisor and Prometheus Node Exporter are deployed on the application nodes as local metric-collection agents and are
shown within the control layer only as a logical abstraction for readability purposes. In the application layer, the gray boxes denote the Istio-injected sidecar
proxy co-located with the corresponding microservice.

between the two layers. A subset of four nodes is used to run
the application components, while the other three nodes host
the control-layer services. The complete architecture is shown

in Fig. 1. For metric collection, the Prometheus Node Exporter
and cAdvisor run on the application nodes they monitor but
in Fig. 1 they are shown within the control layer as a logical

1976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

abstraction to highlight their role rather than their physical
placement. Both the application and control layer are discussed
throughout this section with a detailed description of their most
relevant components.
The monitoring and injection components of our architecture rely on widely adopted, production-grade tools and will
be discussed more in depth in the following subsections. Using
these established tools ensures fidelity to real deployments
and eases reproducibility. The end-to-end design choices that
enable research on dynamic anomaly detection.
1) Application Layer: To showcase the potential of the
proposed solution for microservice-based applications independent of the use case domain, a representative benchmark
for microservices is used as application layer. As mentioned
ind Section II, a number of benchmark microservice applications have been used in literature, e.g., Train Ticket [25],
Tea Store [30], and Sock Shop [28]. In this paper, the
Online Boutique [35] was chosen to build upon, which
is a cloud-first microservices demo application which has
been used by Google to demonstrate technologies, such as
Kubernetes, Google Kubernetes Environment (GKE), Istio,
Google Cloud Operations (Stackdriver), and gRPC. It represents an e-commerce platform and consists of 10 microservices
written in Golang, Python, C#, Node.JS and Java.
2) Control Layer: The control layer consists of a number
of components used for monitoring and data collection, as well
as chaos engineering and fault injection.
Node Exporter is a Prometheus component designed to
monitor the host system [6]. It is commonly used within
a Kubernetes environment to monitor the nodes within the
cluster. It collects valuable metrics about the CPU, memory
and file system usage of each node. The resulting data is
exposed on an HTTP endpoint, collected by Prometheus and
persisted in a time-series database.
Container Advisor (cAdvisor) is a component developed
by Google to monitor the resource usage and performance
characteristics of Docker containers [36]. It collects, aggregates, processes and exports information about these
containers at run-time, including their CPU and memory
usage. While the Prometheus Node Exporter focuses on nodelevel metrics, cAdvisor solves the observability challenge at
container-level.
Istio is an open-source service mesh technology based on
Kubernetes container orchestration [37]. A service mesh is
a dedicated infrastructure layer that can be added to the
application to enable features, such as observability (e.g.,
network tracing), traffic management (e.g., load balancing),
and security [38]. It divides the application in two layers. The
first layer, called the data plane, consists of the application
specific microservices and a number of network proxies.
These proxies guide and manage all service-to-service communication. The second layer, indicated as the control plane,
consists of services dedicated to performing the service mesh
specific tasks, such as managing and configuring the network
proxies. The Istio control plane consists of three services:
(i) the pilot, which communicates with the proxies to handle
traffic management and routing, (ii) the citadel, which provides
secure communication between services, and (iii) the galley,

which is responsible for configuration management, distribution and processing. The Istio control plane deploys Envoy
network proxies as sidecar proxies [39], which run in the same
Kubernetes Pod as the application container and therefore on
the same node/device. This way communication between the
proxy and the service is local and does not influence the
network. By deploying network proxies as sidecar proxies, the
service mesh can be seamlessly applied to any cloud native
application without altering the underlying microservices.
B. Load Generation
Locust [40] is an open-source load testing tool, designed and
implemented for scalability, that supports running distributed
load tests over multiple machines. It enables developers and
Site Reliability Engineering (SRE) engineers to define user
behaviour in Python code and swarm their system with
millions of simultaneous users. While Locust is built towards
load testing over a fixed period of time, its flexibility allows
extension towards continuous load generation in order to
collect realistic monitoring data under load.
The Online Boutique benchmark microservice application
ships with a default load generation scenario. However, to
ensure the generalization of the proposed solution beyond
the benchmark environment, additional measures are taken
to create a more realistic situation. First, as seen in Fig. 1,
the Load Generator is deployed on a second Kubernetes
cluster to simulate user traffic from outside of the target cluster.
Second, different user scenarios are defined to represent a variety of users (e.g., browsing the catalogue, actively shopping).
Third, six sequential steps were identified to describe a user’s
journey throughout the system, affecting all microservices in
the application. A Markov chain is created to describe these
different stages and the probabilities between the steps. This
way, we introduce the randomness and complexity that can
be observed in real microservice applications. The complete
chain is visualized in Fig. 2. Lastly, the temporal variation
in user load throughout the day is replicated using a custom
distribution over 24 hours. The distribution of simultaneous
users and the resulting throughput captured at the front-end of
the application is shown in Fig. 3.
C. Data Collection
As described in Section III-A2, three categories of monitoring are available in the proposed architecture: (i) node-level
metrics captured by the Prometheus Node Exporter including
resource usage of the different nodes in the Kubernetes cluster,
e.g., CPU, memory and file system usage, (ii) containerlevel metrics captured by cAdvisor including resource usage
of the different containers within the monitored application,
e.g., CPU and memory usage, and (iii) service-level metrics
provided through the Istio service mesh capturing monitoring
data between microservices at the network layer, e.g., number
of requests, and request duration. A complete overview of
the monitoring features captured in the dataset is provided in
Table II.
The Data Collector derives the topology graph by querying
the Kubernetes API and obtaining service dependencies from

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1977

TABLE II
M ONITORING F EATURES C APTURED IN THE DATASET, I NCLUDING
R ESOURCE U SAGE M ETRICS F ROM P ROMETHEUS N ODE E XPORTER AND
C A DVISOR , AS W ELL AS N ETWORK L AYER M ONITORING F ROM I STIO

Fig. 2. A Markov Chain that describes the realistic user scenario used for
load testing, including six unique stages of the user journey starting from the
moment the user visits the Web application (teal dot) until they close the page
(red dot). The outgoing edge weights are the probabilities of the next step
being chosen during the random walk.

patterns, and tolerance for false positives versus detection
delay. The aggregation window is configurable in our pipeline
and can be adjusted for deployments requiring faster or more
conservative alerting.
The Data Collector component is implemented in Python,
using Celery [42] to enable distributed processing of (asynchronous) tasks through a task queue or message broker, such
as Redis or RabbitMQ. Every 15 seconds, i.e., the default
rate at which Prometheus scrapes new monitoring data from
its targets, a task is created to collect the data from the
Prometheus API and store it in a Persistent Volume (PV) on
the cluster. Using distributed processes allows the horizontal
scaling of worker instances and ensures that no window is
missed when the execution time of the data collection process
would exceed 15 seconds.
D. Fault Injection

Fig. 3. Visualization of the load distribution shape (number of users) and
the resulting captured throughput (requests/s) at the front-end service.

the network monitoring data captured by Istio. It then collects
the monitoring data for all nodes and containers in the
system from the Prometheus API using the Prometheus Query
Language (PromQL), which enables querying of aggregated
data. For each of the aforementioned metrics, which can
be queried as distributions, the following aggregations are
calculated over the last windows of five minutes: minimum,
maximum, average, median (P50), P90, P95, deviation and
variance. We aggregate monitoring metrics over five-minute
windows to balance responsiveness with stability in highly
dynamic microservice environments. This design choice is
consistent with operational expectations that in production
microservice settings, anomalies typically need to be detected
within 2–5 minutes to prevent cascading failures and minimize
service impact [41]. Our five-minute aggregation therefore
targets this practical incident-response horizon while reducing
short-lived volatility introduced by autoscaling and rescheduling. Shorter aggregation windows can increase sensitivity but
may also amplify transient spikes and increase false positives,
while longer windows risk delaying detection. In practice,
the ideal aggregation window is likely a tunable deployment
parameter that depends on the application domain, workload

Litmus Chaos is a chaos engineering platform for SRE that
enables the identification of weaknesses in applications and
infrastructures [43]. Other chaos engineering solutions include
(i) managed services through cloud providers, such as Amazon
Web Services (AWS) Fault Injection [44] and Azure Chaos
Studio [45], (ii) commercial platforms, such as Gremlin [46],
and (iii) open-source projects, such as Chaos Mesh [47]. We
choose to employ Litmus Chaos as it is an open-source project
adopted by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)
and backed by a strong community. The Litmus Chaos Hub
provides 50 community-created experiments out-of-the-box
for Kubernetes, AWS, Google Cloud Platform (GCP), Azure,
VMWare and Spring Boot.
Similarly to the Istio service mesh, Litmus Chaos consists
of a control plane and an execution or application plane.
The control plane components include (i) the Chaos Center,
which is the front-end dashboard which can be used to create,
manage and monitor workflows, (ii) the Authentication Server
for authentication with the dashboard and back-end APIs, and
(iii) the GraphQL Server, which is used by the Chaos
Center for creating, updating and monitoring workflows. The
GraphQL Server can also be directly accessed by an external
application to automate the chaos engineering process. The
execution plane includes components, such as (i) the Argo
Workflow Controller [48], an open-source container-native
workflow engine for orchestrating parallel jobs on Kubernetes,

1978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

TABLE III
L IST OF I MPLEMENTED FAULTS U SING L ITMUS C HAOS . S EVEN T YPES OF
FAULTS H AVE B EEN U SED IN THE B ENCHMARK . T HREE OF T HESE FAULT
T YPES R ESULT IN Dynamic C HANGES TO THE S YSTEM AND I TS
T OPOLOGY, D ENOTED AS FAULT T YPE D. T HE R EMAINING F OUR FAULT
T YPES A RE C ONSIDERED Static, D ENOTED AS FAULT T YPE S

Fig. 4. Box plot summary of the fault injection duration (in seconds) per fault
type, providing the time interval during which the fault is actively enforced
on the target.

in our setup. An overview of all resulting fault statistics is
shown in Fig. 4.
(ii) the Subscriber, or Chaos Agent, which serves as a
link between the execution plane and the control plane and
performs health checks, monitors events during execution of
faults and sends back the results to the control plane.
As summarized in Table III, a total of seven faults are
injected using Litmus Chaos. These faults have been chosen
to represent both static faults, which directly impact one
or more monitored metrics of a specific Node or Pod, and
dynamic faults, which result in temporal changes to the
topology of the monitored application. For example, draining
a specific node causes all pods running on that node to be
rescheduled to other available nodes in the system. While
this is common practice before conducting maintenance of a
node, it can also be caused by anomalous behavior, such as
the node becoming unavailable due to hardware issues or the
loss of network connectivity. Similarly, the pod autoscaler in
Kubernetes automatically scales the number of replicas based
on their resource consumption, resulting in the addition or
deletion of pods in the system [49].
The Fault Injector is deployed as a Kubernetes cronjob,
which is executed every two hours. When triggered, it randomly selects a fault to inject from the list in Table III, a
corresponding target, i.e., specific node or pod, and executes
the job with an optional delay of maximum one hour to
maximize the randomness of the dataset. The Litmus GraphQL
API is used to automatically create workflows and collect
the experiment results after execution. Similarly to the load
generation discussed in Section III-B, all parameters are fully
configurable and can be changed to support the creation of
additional data with more or less frequent faults. We report
the fault injection duration, defined as the time interval during
which the experiment actively enforces the fault on the target
resource. For example, in pod-network-latency, an additional
network latency is applied continuously for the configured
duration with a varying range between 150 and 800 seconds

IV. KG C ONSTRUCTION AND DATASET
The collected data described in Section III-C is heterogeneous and originates from numerous data sources, i.e., Node
Exporter, cAdvisor and Istio. This data includes node-level
resource metrics (e.g., CPU, memory, filesystem), servicelevel resource metrics (e.g., CPU, memory) and service-level
network metrics (e.g., request count, duration and size). To
link the different data sources together in a data format that
can be easily understood by both human and machine, we
propose the use of an ontology. This ontology imposes a
uniform schema that expresses which type of data is generated
by which type of sources and how they are interlinked. KGs
are then created by applying ontologies (cf. Section IV-A) to
annotate the collected data (cf. Section IV).
A. Ontology
An ontology has been designed using the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) [50] to describe the key concepts within the
Kubernetes ecosystem. It captures relations between different
resources, such as nodes, pods and containers, which are used
to represent the state of the monitored microservice application. A visualization of the complete ontology is shown in
Fig. 5 and the most relevant concepts are discussed throughout
this section.
A Kubernetes Cluster consists of a set of worker machines,
named Nodes, used to run the containerized application,
connected through the hasNode relation. When shipping
microservices, an Image of the application is provided. These
images are lightweight, standalone, executable packages that
include everything needed to run an application, including
the code, runtime, libraries, environment variables, and configuration files. Each (micro-)service of the application runs
within a Container, a lightweight virtualization layer to ensure

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

Fig. 5.

1979

Ontology describing key concepts in a Kubernetes environment.

the application runs on different host machines, regardless of
their specifications or operating system. Each container thus
consists of an image making up the application, indicated
through the hasImage relation. Containers are encapsulated in
a Pod, which is the smallest deployable unit of computing
available within the Kubernetes ecosystem. Each pod can again
contain one or more containers, indicated through the hasContainer relation, with shared storage and network resources.
Best practice dictates that containers within the same pod
should be tightly coupled as they will always be co-located and
co-scheduled, and are therefore not individually scalable. An
example of a tightly coupled container is the sidecar container
used to proxy all network traffic to a specific container within
a service mesh. Each pod runs on a particular node within the
cluster, indicated through the hasPod relation between node
and pods. A Deployment is used for workload management
and is thus responsible for keeping a set of pods running,
indicated through the controls relation to the different pods
under its management. Each pod controlled by a deployment
is interchangeable and can be updated, added and removed
if needed, e.g., in case of a pod failure or when scaling the
application. A Service is an abstraction within the Kubernetes
ecosystem to expose a group of pods over a network. Pods are
ephemeral resources, meaning that they have a limited lifespan
and should not be expected to be reliable and durable. Services
are therefore used to keep track of which pods are available
and how to reach them. Additionally, services can also be used
for more complex traffic control, such as load balancing.

In addition to the different concepts in the Kubernetes
ecosystem, the collected numerical features are also described
in the ontology, and included as literals in the graph. These
features, as described in Section III-C, are aggregated over
a rolling window. To describe the distinct aggregation types,
each aggregation is represented as a unique property, e.g.,
“hasCPU_average”.
Kubernetes [51] is functionally the most complete and
adopted container orchestration system on the market [52],
however, the ontology proposed in this research can easily be
extended towards other container-based architectures, such as
Docker Swarm [53] or Apache Mesos [54].
B. Dataset and KGs
The resulting dataset comprises of roughly five days of
monitoring data. As mentioned in Section III-C, the dataset
has a temporal granularity of 15 seconds, resulting in 24,770
total time steps. The KG at each step consists of on average
1402 ± 109 triples. As reference for the healthy state of
the monitored system, roughly one day of monitoring data is
captured before the start of the fault injection. Using the fault
injection configuration discussed in Section III-D, a total of 39
faults have been injected during data collection, resulting in
1,018 anomalous graphs. A detailed statistical overview of the
average duration and frequency of the different faults is given
in Table III and Fig. 4 to highlight the randomness introduced
into the dataset to make it as representative of a real application
as possible.

1980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 6. Anomaly detection pipeline of the proposed methodology. The dark blue and teal colors indicate the difference between embeddings generated from
different starting nodes and their respective AD models.

In total, the dataset consists of 250 unique entities and 847
unique relations between them. When taking into account the
monitoring data captured in the graphs, a total of 5,715,493
triples are included. The size and complexity of the collected
dataset is comparable to existing benchmark datasets for
dynamic (knowledge) graphs [55], such as social network
graphs commonly used for link prediction tasks. As the data
is collected from a microservice application in a research
environment, and the complete architecture can be easily
deployed, the dataset can easily be expanded upon, and
additional faults can be introduced.
V. C ONTEXT-AWARE A NOMALY D ETECTION
The captured dataset is particularly challenging due to the
dynamic character caused by the evolving state and topology
of the monitored system. Anomaly detection models, such
as AEs and Isolation Forests [56], often attempt to learn
the normal behavior from training data. When the new data
changes too much due to temporal drift, or dynamic events
in this case, the model will throw too many false positives
and thus has to be retrained to deal with the context shift.
To prevent frequent retraining of the model, and the need for
complex incremental learning strategies, we propose a contextaware anomaly detection method, which takes into account
the contextual-features and how they evolve throughout time.
The contextual information about the current state of the
system is represented in a KG using the ontology described
in Section IV-A.
The following sections discuss each component of our
proposed solution and countermeasures taken to overcome
the challenges with real-time AD based on dynamic graphs.
The complete context-aware anomaly detection pipeline is
visualized in Fig. 6.
A. Node Embedding
Traditional embedding techniques, such as TransE [57] and
RDF2Vec [58], that reduce the dimensionality of the graph
into fixed-length embeddings in the latent feature space cannot
be applied efficiently to dynamic graphs for real-time or online
prediction tasks. This is due to the fact, that for each new

graph at timestamp ti , all the embeddings would have to be
recalculated on the entire dataset. This way, the embeddings
would have the same length, but the latent features can not
be compared, making it impossible to train an AD model on
these embeddings.
To overcome this issue, we propose the use of INK, a
neighborhood-based node embedding technique [59]. Starting
from a set of graphs Gt (Vt , Et ), INK is applied to each graph
Gti (Vti , Eti ) in the dataset. INK uses a random walk approach
starting from a node of interest n with a predefined depth d to
capture contextual information about its neighborhood. This
means that starting from node n INK will follow a relation
in the graph to a neighboring node (depth 1) and will then
continue to follow the relationships from this node to subsequent nodes until the d relationships were crossed (depth d).
Based on the example visualized in Fig. 7 (timestamp t), the
neighborhood at depth one starting from the cluster node
includes features such as:
is_a −
→ [k 8s : Cluster ]
hasNode −
→ [n1]
hasNode −
→ [n2]
Relations at depths ≥ 2 are appended to the features set
by concatenating the steps taking during the random walk. A
simplified example for the second hop neighborhood is given
by:
hasNode(n1)is_a → [k 8s : Node]
hasNode(n1)hasMemory_P50 −
→ 0.173431
hasNode(n1)hasPod −
→ [frontend ]
hasNode(n2)is_a → [k 8s : Node]
hasNode(n2)hasMemory_P50 −
→ 0.120647
hasNode(n2)hasPod −
→ [cartservice]
To describe the neighborhood of the node of interest n,
INK extracts binary features representing the relations in the
KG, i.e., indicating whether this relation is present in the
neighborhood or not. As INK generates node embeddings
using explicit features, the features can be traced throughout

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1981

Fig. 7. An example of generated INK embeddings starting from the cluster with depth 2, and the average z-score calculated at the last timestamp based on
a sample window size. The example between timestamps t and t−1 show the addition of a Kubernetes node in the cluster which results in the running pods
being rescheduled, causing relationships to be added and removed (dotted line) in the KG.

time. New features are created and deleted as the relationships
in the graph are added or removed. This ensures that not all
embeddings have to be recalculated each time a new graph
becomes available at timestamp ti+1 , solving the shortcoming
of other node embedding approaches. Furthermore, having
explicit features makes the INK embeddings interpretable and
usable for root cause analysis [60].
B. Anomaly Detection
Contrary to the other node embeddings, generating INK
embeddings for each graph at timestamp ti results in a set
of node embeddings of variable length as here the feature
set continuously expands over time. This makes it impossible
to use INK embeddings directly as input for ML models,
such as an AE or Isolation Forest (IF). To address this issue,
the features are aggregated over a rolling window. For each
feature extracted from the graphs in the window, the Z-score
is calculated per feature based on its value X at timestamp
ti , the mean μ and standard deviation σ of all values of the
feature in the window as shown in Equation (1).
X −μ
|
(1)
σ
The Z-scores for all features in the window are then
aggregated, resulting in a fixed set of features for the new
graph Gti , i.e., the last graph in the rolling window. This
process is visualized in Fig. 7. As these Z-scores are calculated
on INK embeddings including both relations in the graph as
well as the raw monitoring metrics, it provides an indication
of the similarity of the new graph in comparison to the graphs
Z =|

in the considered window. These graph similarity scores are
then used as input for the anomaly detector.
While there are a multitude of univariate time-series AD
models, three models are considered here, namely a percentilebased detector (QuantileAD), a threshold-based detector
(ThresholdAD) and a local outlier detector (OutlierAD), which
is a density-based technique for outlier identification [61].
These detectors have been implemented using the Anomaly
Detection Toolkit (ADTK), a Python package for unsupervised
and rule-based time series anomaly detection [62]. These
detectors were chosen intentionally as the baseline methods for our proposed benchmark dataset rather than as a
comprehensive survey of all AD families. They provide a
practical, reproducible reference point that operates directly
on the aggregated Z-score representation derived from INK
embeddings while being lightweight and suitable for online
streaming cases. The benchmark itself is designed in a generic,
modular way so that additional detection methods can be
evaluated against the same data and metrics, facilitating future
extensions and comparisons.
The hyper-parameters for the threshold-based detector and
local outlier detector are dynamically optimized with a gridsearch approach, which uses the validation dataset containing
a mixture of healthy and unhealthy samples to determine
the best hyper-parameters. The percentile-based detector is an
unsupervised model that simply uses a Gaussian distribution at
prediction time to determine if the new data point at timestamp
ti lies within the high-confidence interval. If this is the case,
the new graph is assumed to be normal, otherwise it is flagged
as anomalous.

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

C. Ensemble
Due to the complexity of the expanding feature set generated by using INK in a real-time detection setting, the
high dimensional features are reduced to a single similarity
score calculated at timestamp ti , e.g., the average of the
rolling window-based Z-scores. This results in a reduction
of ± 3200 features to a single feature when generating
embeddings for the entire graph (d = 5). To do so while
avoiding this amount of information loss, we propose generating embeddings from different starting nodes. From the
ontology described in Section IV-A and expert knowledge
about Kubernetes environments, it can be deduced that the
instances of k8s:Cluster and k8s:Workload are ideal candidates
to be considered as starting nodes. In contrast to nodes and
pods, clusters and workloads remain mostly static, meaning
that their instances are available in all graphs and can thus
be traced through time. To capture all information from the
graph while minimizing the information loss due to feature
reduction, the embeddings are generated for a neighborhood
depth of 3 (d = 3). Using this smaller neighborhood compared
to capturing the entire graph, an average of only 286 features
are generated starting from an instance of k8s:Cluster.
For our deployment composed of one Kubernetes cluster
and ten microservices, we constructed an ensemble of eleven
models: one ThresholdAD model per monitored entity and
the cluster anomaly voter. The use of ThresholdAD models
across all microservices for this ensemble keeps the pipeline
lightweight, explainable, and fully reproducible. Each model
operates on the aggregated Z-score features derived from the
INK embeddings within its own entity scope and applies a
dynamically optimized threshold to flag abnormal behaviour
as discussed before. The voter combines the ten model
outputs using a logical OR rule: as soon as one per-entity
detector signals an anomaly, the ensemble flags the system as
anomalous. This aggregation prioritizes high recall and early
fault exposure, which is desirable in this production monitoring context where delayed detection is more costly than
an occasional false positive. Moreover, the alarms originate
from per-entity models and each alert is directly tied to the
corresponding service or cluster node in the KG, enabling
straightforward root-cause inspection
VI. E VALUATION
The proposed solution is evaluated against two baseline AD
techniques commonly used in related work (see Section II),
namely an LSTM-AE and an IF. For training, optimization and
evaluation, the dataset has been split in a healthy training set,
an unhealthy training set, and a test set including both healthy
and unhealthy test samples. The same 20-40-40 split is used
for all considered models so that half of the injected faults
are present in the unhealthy training set and the other half are
used during evaluation. The complete quantitative results for
each model are shown in Table IV and discussed throughout
the remainder of this section.
Baseline. To highlight the impact of contextual awareness
when dealing with the dynamic nature of microservice applications, the baseline AD techniques. i.e., LSTM-AE and IF,

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION OF T WO BASELINE M ODELS F ROM
L ITERATURE , I . E ., AN LSTM-AE M ODEL AND AN IF M ODEL , C OMPARED
TO O UR C ONTEXT-AWARE A PPROACHES AS P ROPOSED IN T HIS PAPER

are trained on two distinct feature sets. The first feature set
contains static features inspired by Nobre et al. [27] who
trained a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model on aggregated
application-level and service-level metrics. These features
include the mean, 50th percentile and 95th percentile of the
latency, and the amount of 2xx and of 4xx/5xx requests
reported by the Locust during load generation as discussed
in Section III-B. These features are aggregated over the
different endpoints accessed during the load test, resulting
in five features. Since these features are measured at the
endpoint of the application, i.e., the front-end, the feature set
remains the same throughout the entire dataset. The second
feature set includes dynamic relations between entities in the
graph through features extracted through the INK embedding,
as described in Section V-A. The dynamic graphs therefore
result in the addition or removal of features throughout time.
To evaluate the importance of these dynamic features, the
two baseline AD techniques are also applied on these INK
embeddings in an offline setting. In this offline setting, we can
train the models on the complete set of features by setting
them to 0 if they are not yet present or no longer present at
timestamp t.
The resulting models on this second feature set,
INK-LSTM-AE and INK-IF, can however not be deployed
for online anomaly detection and are thus solely considered
for performance evaluation purposes. We implemented the
INK-LSTM-AE model with a symmetric architecture. The
encoder consists of two LSTM layers with 256 and 128 units,
followed by a bottleneck layer or latent space of size 64.
The decoder mirrors this structure with two LSTM layers of
128 and 256 units, reconstructing the input sequence. The
model was trained using the Adam optimizer, a learning rate of
0.001 and a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) loss. We then train
a Linear Support Vector Classifier (SVC) on the validation
losses to derive the threshold. The hyperparameters of the
INK-IF model were achieved through GridSearchCV on the
training and validation datasets.
As already stated, a first evaluated baseline model is the
LSTM-AE approach which learns the normal state of the
system based on the healthy training set. The quantitative

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1983

Fig. 8. Calculated Z-scores for a rolling window of two hours (480 graphs) and the corresponding predictions of the INK-Z-ThresholdAD model with a
threshold derived from grid search optimization on the validation dataset. The teal vertical lines are considered dynamic faults, the red lines indicate static
faults.

evaluation shows that the model is unable to generalize this
healthy state of the system towards the rest of the dataset.
Due to the dynamic faults, the topology of the system changes
constantly as pods are added, updated and removed during
scaling or rescheduling. The impact of these events results
in a temporal shift in the state of the system, making it
challenging for the AE model to match the newly observed
state with the learned normal behavior during training. In
practice, this means that reconstruction-based models can
misinterpret legitimate topology shifts, such as rescheduling
without user-visible degradation, as anomalies. This results
in missing faults whose primary signal manifests through
changing infrastructure-to-service context rather than a strong
local metric deviation. As can be noted from the results,
even with the dynamic features, the INK-LSTM-AE model
struggles to generalize the changes in context.
Contrary, the INK-IF model shows a noteworthy improvement of 29.7% absolute increases in F1 compared to its
online counterpart IF model trained on solely static features.
Especially in terms of recall, the INK-IF model detects 89.5%
of the faults in the dataset while the baseline IF model only
detects 26.3%. After investigation of the detected faults, it
becomes clear that the IF model is primarily capable of
detecting a limited number of static faults related to network
latency, such as pod-network-latency while the context-aware
version is able to detect nearly all faults in the dataset,
including dynamic faults.
Context-Aware AD. Our proposed context-aware solutions
compute a rolling window-based Z-score on features extracted
using INK, which are then aggregated using various functions,
as listed in Fig. 9. Initially, all aggregated features, including
minimum, mean (P50), standard deviation, average, 90th percentile (P90), 95th percentile (P95) and maximum, were used
as input for the IF model, resulting in the INK-Z-IF model
achieving an F1-score of 0.345 after hyperparameter tuning.
While this model outperforms its online counterpart based

on the baseline feature set, indicating the value of contextual
features for anomaly detection, Fig. 9 shows that certain features, such as minimum and P50, contribute little information,
while others, such as the maximum, are overly sensitive. The
limited informativeness and redundancy within this feature
set reduce the model’s ability to effectively isolate anomalies,
as IF relies on recursive partitioning, which becomes less
effective in low-dimensional spaces. This constraint is evident
from the model’s relatively low performance, suggesting that
a more complex approach may not be justified for such a
restricted feature set.
As described in Section V-B, to further assess the impact
of feature selection, a set of simpler anomaly detectors, i.e.,
QuantileAD, ThresholdAD, and OutlierAD, were evaluated
using a single aggregated feature. Given the limitations of
training an IF on a restricted feature set, these simpler methods
provide a more targeted approach to anomaly detection. After
quantitative evaluation of all the aggregation functions, the
average emerged as the most effective feature, highlighting
the potential for reduced model complexity.
The QuantileAD model is representative of an unsupervised
rule-based detection model that uses a confidence interval to
detect outliers. The choice of interval influences the obtained
performance. Table IV shows the performance results for the
95% percentile (P95) and 90% percentile (P90) confidence
intervals. As can be seen, both context-aware model configurations yield an identical F1-score. As expected, the higher
the confidence interval, the higher the obtained precision due
to a low report of false positives, but the lower the obtained
recall due to the lack of detected anomalies, or true positives,
and vice versa.
In contrast to the QuantileAD, the ThresholdAD model
optimizes its hyper-parameters, i.e., threshold values, based
on the validation set. The tuned INK-Z-ThresholdAD model
shows a high precision of 78.6% while reporting a recall of
57.9% which is an improvement of 31.6% over the online

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Visualization of different aggregation features on the derived Z-scores for INK embedding depth d = 2 and Z-score window size w = 240, the best
performing settings for the INK-Z-ThresholdAD model. For each figure, the faults in the dataset are highlighted in red.

baseline IF model. Fig. 8 shows a graphical representation
of the rolling window-based Z-scores on the dataset and the
obtained results for the proposed INK-Z-ThresholdAD model.
Investigation of the results shows that the detected anomalies
are mostly node-level faults (e.g., node-cpu-hog and nodedrain) or pod-level faults that influence the state of a node
(e.g., pod-autoscaling). As discussed in Section V-C, these
results are to be expected as the INK-Z-ThresholdAD model
is trained on features generated from INK embedding at a
neighborhood depth of 2 (d = 2). The full impact of the INK
embedding depth parameter d and Z-score window size w for
each of these models is visualized in Figure 10. At the best
performing settings (d = 2 and w = 240), not all pod features
are taken into account.
Ensemble. In addition to these context-aware models, a
logical OR ensemble is therefore also evaluated for the INKZ-ThresholdAD technique. Inclusion of additional models
trained on the neighborhood of specific workloads show an
increase in recall, enabling detection of previously undiscovered faults. The ensemble is thus capable of capturing
pod-level faults that the base model could not detect. This

increase in recall, however, comes at a cost of the overall
precision. In our AIOps setting, missing a false negative is
therefore indicated to be more costly than raising an extra alert
(false positive). Operators can aggregate, de-prioritize or tune
away noisy alarms over time, but they might have difficulties
to manually detect new ones. We acknowledge that this
aggregation strategy lowers the precision when a single entitylevel model is temporarily unstable. More sophisticated fusion
strategies could mitigate this effect, including (i) majority
voting across entity detectors, (ii) weighted voting based on
per entity validation performance, or (iii) score-level fusion
where the normalized anomaly scores are combined before
thresholding. We see these strategies as natural extensions of
our modular pipeline and expect them to potentially further
improve the precision–recall balance in future work.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Our whole evaluation has been conducted on the Online
Boutique microservices application, which serves here as a
representative open-source reference for cloud-native systems.

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

Fig. 10. Performance of various models under varying INK embedding depth
parameters d and Z-score window sizes w.

This environment combines a realistic service topology,
multiple programming languages, and standard observability
tooling. This made it well suited for evaluating our AD

1985

approaches. The obtained results are applicable to this single
benchmark, which might limit the generalizability of the
quantitative results. However, our objective was to provide a
reproducible, fully instrumented framework and dataset that
others can readily extend to additional benchmarks or largerscale deployments. Our open-source release of the entire
pipeline ensures that future studies can build upon this foundation to perform broader comparative analyses. The evaluation
results highlight the complexity of this dataset, but also the
importance of contextual features. In contrast to the stateof-the-art that focuses on detecting static faults solely, this
paper has introduced a benchmark that also contains dynamic
faults, such as node-level anomalies, that force scaling and
rescheduling of the pods running on it. These faults do not
always translate into service-level changes, e.g., a noticeable
network delay or sudden spike in resource usage, and are
therefore difficult to detect.
Whereas state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods fail to
take into account the dynamic character of microservice architectures (included in our benchmark), our proposed solutions
score significantly higher than the models trained on purely
static features, or the AE-based model that attempts to learn
the healthy state of the system. Our baseline AD detector
family focuses on lightweight, unsupervised, and explainable
methods, providing a reproducible foundation for operational
root-cause workflows. Future research could extend our INK
features with ensemble and kernel methods (e.g., Isolation
Forest, One-Class SVM), deep reconstruction and probabilistic
models (AE, VAE), temporal sequence models (LSTM-AE),
and graph-aware detectors [63]. Hybrid pipelines combining
fast rule-based detection with higher-precision models and
explainability tools, such as feature-attribution mapped to
knowledge graph entities, could further improve detection
quality while preserving interpretability [64].
Despite room for improvement of our preliminary evaluation
results, they highlight the need for contextual awareness in
microservice AD. The presented solution and its evaluation
show an important trade-off between precision and recall.
The best performing model has an F1-score of 66.7%. This
model, however, is only capable of detecting 57.9% of the
faults in the dataset. These results reflect the high difficulty
of our benchmark, which contains many dynamic, topologydriven faults (node drains, rescheduling, autoscaling) that often
produce weak service-level signals. We intentionally tuned
our INK-Z-ThresholdAD model towards higher precision
(0.786) to reduce operational false alarms. This lowers,
however, the recall score (0.579) and thus the combined
F1. Additionally, these moderate absolute F1 scores stem
from online deployability constraints and not from a lack
of benefit from context-aware features. The detected faults,
as discussed in Section VI, are limited to node-level faults.
By introducing an ensemble of multiple small models for
which the node embeddings are extracted from different start
entities of interest in the KG, an increase in recall can be
achieved up to 89.5%, however, at a cost of precision. The
smaller models are less robust due to their training on a
limited number of specific faults relating to that entity. We
emphasize that the absolute score of our best online model

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

(INK-Z-ThresholdAD) should be interpreted in the context
of a challenging benchmark that includes topology-driven
faults (e.g., node drain, rescheduling, autoscaling) which often
generate weak or delayed service-level symptoms. We stated
here our approach as a context-aware monitoring layer that
prioritizes reliable, interpretable signals over purely maximizing a single performance metric. To mitigate false positive
fatigue in real deployments, the proposed pipeline can be
combined with operational strategies such as (i) requiring
anomaly persistence across multiple consecutive windows
before triggering an alert, (ii) introducing per-entity cooldown
periods, and (iii) using confidence-tiered alerting where lowconfidence anomalies are logged for investigation rather than
immediately escalated [6].1 These measures can be combined
with our method and can be applied without altering the
KG construction or the INK feature extraction. Future work
includes techniques to increase the precision of the whole
proposed anomaly detection framework.
The architecture used for monitoring, fault injection and
data collection is described in detail. Since it consists of purely
open-source technologies that can easily be deployed on a
Kubernetes environment, it can be replicated and expanded
upon. Furthermore, this open-source solution has been made
publicly available on GitHub2 and can be used to expand upon
the dataset. Due to its complexity, the dataset can serve as
an interesting benchmark for future dynamic graph research,
and the extension of existing Knowledge Graph Embedding
(KGE) techniques. Since the proposed solution is based on
KGs, it can be generalized in future research and applied to
other application domains beyond microservice monitoring.
A full evaluation of the overhead introduced by deploying
each presented method for real-time anomaly detection has
not been included. The scope of this paper is limited to
addressing the challenges that arise when applying traditional
AD techniques to a highly dynamic environment. There are,
however, different methodologies for optimizing real-time AD
models and their deployment strategies with regard to resource
consumption and overhead on the monitored system [65].
Our pipeline was, however, designed to be lightweight. Each
KG snapshot contains ±1402 triples and the online INK step
derives small, explicit neighborhood feature sets from nodes of
interest (cluster and workloads). At depth 3, this yields ±286
features for the cluster entity and across the 10 workloads plus
the cluster this corresponds to roughly 3.000 explicit features
per timestamp. The calculated Z-score update and accompanying ThresholdAD/QuantileAD/OutlierAD inference are
linear in the feature count and they require no retraining.
Consequently, the evaluated online boutique deployment, the
online embedding and detection steps are expected to fit
comfortably within the 15s monitoring. The primary runtime
cost is thus dominated by data acquisition and aggregation of
the results from Prometheus. Our design intentionally avoids
global graph recomputation or deep graph model training in
the online path to become real-time applicable.

1 https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/
2 https://github.com/predict-idlab/microservices-addkg

While the online INK extraction itself is bounded by the
neighborhood depth and the number of start entities, a practical
overhead in our current prototype can be the construction of
rolling-window feature matrices. In particular, the aggregated
INK feature set per timestamp is sparse and partially timedependent. Some of the features are stable across time, while
others may only occur rarely and thus be unique to specific
windows. As a consequence, naively constructing windowlevel matrices by concatenating per-timestamp embeddings
(e.g., dataframe concatenation in a for loop) can introduce
avoidable overhead for large window sizes. This cost is not
fundamental and can be reduced by maintaining incremental
window statistics and sparse feature representations, preallocating consistent feature indices and updating window
matrices through vectorized or streaming operations instead
of recomputing them step-by-step. We therefore expect that
a more optimized window-construction strategy will further
reduce the runtime footprint of the online pipeline, especially
when scaling to larger deployments or longer windows. This
optimization, the analysis of the best performing model and a
quantitative evaluation of the overhead will be considered in
future work.
The proposed solution is currently designed to be minimally
invasive and to be deployed out-of-the-box for any application
running on a Kubernetes cluster. However, state-of-the-art
solutions have shown that monitoring data obtained from
distributed traces can positively impact the performance of
the AD solution, especially in detecting service-level faults,
such as configuration errors and malicious queries. The
inclusion of traces, e.g., OpenTracing [12], in the dataset
could therefore lead to more fine-grained data which can
increase the performance, and even assist with root cause
analysis. This, however, will require additional code in each
microservice of the targeted software application, contrary
to the proposed non-invasive solution which is completely
application agnostic.
While quantitative evaluation of explainability and RCA
has not been the focus of this work, the use of
INK as a node embedding technique inherently supports both [60]. Traditional embedding approaches such
as TransE or RDF2Vec project entities into a latent vector space, making it difficult to interpret which relations
or features contribute to an anomaly. INK, in contrast, constructs embeddings by explicitly enumerating and
weighting walk-based features that correspond to concrete
graph relations, such as has_node(node1)has_cpu_average or
depends_on(serviceA,serviceB). During anomaly detection, the
Z-score calculated on these explicit features allows identification of which relations contributed most to the detected
deviation. By ranking these features according to their individual Z-scores at anomaly time, the system can highlight
the dominant factors that led to the anomaly. Because these
features are directly linked to entities and dependencies in the
knowledge graph, they can be traced backward through the
graph to reveal the likely source or propagation path of the
fault, thereby enabling explainable RCA. This mechanism
has been successfully demonstrated for static knowledge
graphs in earlier work [64]. Our benchmark can extend

MOENS et al.: TOWARD CONTEXT-AWARE AD FOR AIOps IN MICROSERVICES

1987

this interpretability principle to the dynamic graph setting,
laying the groundwork for future explainable RCA research
on evolving microservice infrastructures.
While this has not been the focus of this paper, the
use of INK as node embedding technique, instead of traditional embedding techniques, enables explainability and
RCA. Traditional node embedding techniques such as TransE
and RDF2Vec calculate embeddings in a latent embedding
space. INK, however, uses a walk-based approach to capture the neighborhood of a node, or entity, of interest and
generate explicit features. When calculating the Z-score on
these explicit features, the features with the highest impact
on this score can be extracted to provide an explanation
for the detected fault. Furthermore, due to these features
being explicit, e.g., has_node(node1)has_cpu_average, these
features and the relationships captured in the KG can be used
to trace the anomaly to its root cause [60].

[7] A. Lahmadi and F. Beck, “Powering monitoring analytics with elk
stack,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Auton. Infrastruct., Manag. Security
(AIMS), 2015, pp. 1–28.
[8] L. Giamattei et al., “Monitoring tools for DevOps and microservices: A
systematic grey literature review,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 208, Feb. 2024,
Art. no. 111906.
[9] Y. Dang, Q. Lin, and P. Huang, “AIOps: Real-world challenges and
research innovations,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.,
Companion (ICSE-Companion), 2019, pp. 4–5.
[10] “Dynatrace: Unified observability and security.” Accessed: Apr. 30,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.dynatrace.com/
[11] A. Nandi, A. Mandal, S. Atreja, G. B. Dasgupta, and S. Bhattacharya,
“Anomaly detection using program control flow graph mining from
execution logs,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Min., 2016, pp. 215–224.
[12] A. Janes, X. Li, and V. Lenarduzzi, “Open tracing tools: Overview and
critical comparison,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 204, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 111793.
[13] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services
(ICWS), 2017, pp. 33–40.
[14] T. Jia, L. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, F. Meng, and J. Xu, “LogSed:
Anomaly diagnosis through mining time-weighted control flow graph in
logs,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. (CLOUD), 2017,
pp. 447–455.
[15] “Acme air sample and benchmark.” BLUEPERF. Accessed: May 6,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://willemjiang.github.io/acmeair/
[16] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[17] “IEEE vast challenge.” 2011. [Online]. Available: https://visualdata.
wustl.edu/varepository
[18] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “AutoLog: Anomaly detection
by deep autoencoding of system logs,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 191,
Apr. 2022, Art. no. 116263.
[19] Y. Wang et al., “ContainerGuard: A real-time attack detection system in
container-based big data platform,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
no. 5, pp. 3327–3336, Dec. 2020.
[20] S. Guo et al., “A zero-day container attack detection based on ensemble
machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Emerg. Technol.
Factory Autom. (ETFA), 2023, pp. 1–8.
[21] R. R. Karn, P. Kudva, H. Huang, S. Suneja, and I. M. Elfadel,
“Cryptomining detection in container clouds using system calls and
explainable machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 674–691, Mar. 2021.
[22] S. Nedelkoski, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Anomaly detection and
classification using distributed tracing and deep learning,” in Proc. 19th
IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Clust., Cloud Grid Comput. (CCGRID), 2019,
pp. 241–250.
[23] C. Zhang et al., “DeepTraLog: Trace-log combined microservice
anomaly detection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proc. 44th
Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 623–634.
[24] L. Chen, Q. Dang, M. Chen, B. Sun, C. Du, and Z. Lu, “BertHTLG:
Graph-based microservice anomaly detection through sentence-bert
enhancement,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Web Inf. Syst. Appl., 2023,
pp. 427–439.
[25] X. Zhou et al., “Benchmarking microservice systems for software
engineering research,” in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Companion
(ICSE), 2018, pp. 323–324. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3183440.3194991
[26] Q. Du, T. Xie, and Y. He, “Anomaly detection and diagnosis for
container-based microservices with performance monitoring,” in Proc.
18th Int. Conf. Algorithms Archit. Parallel Process. (ICA3PP), 2018,
pp. 560–572.
[27] J. Nobre, E. S. Pires, and A. Reis, “Anomaly detection in microservicebased systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 13, p. 7891, 2023.
[28] “Sock shop: A microservice demo application.” WeaveWorks. Accessed:
Mar. 11, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/microservicesdemo/microservices-demo
[29] M. Panahandeh, A. Hamou-Lhadj, M. Hamdaqa, and J. Miller,
“Serviceanomaly: An anomaly detection approach in microservices
using distributed traces and profiling metrics,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 209,
Mar. 2024, Art. no. 111917.
[30] J. von Kistowski, S. Eismann, N. Schmitt, A. Bauer, J. Grohmann,
and S. Kounev, “TeaStore: A micro-service reference application for
benchmarking, modeling and resource management research,” in Proc.
26th IEEE Int. Symp. Model., Anal., Simul. Comput. Telecommun. Syst.,
2018, pp. 223–236.

VIII. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces a dynamic KG-based approach to
AD for AIOps in microservices. It specifically highlights
the importance of contextual awareness and demonstrates the
shortcomings of state-of-the-art solutions that consider the
topology of the monitored system to be static. Overcoming the
complexity stemming from the dynamic nature of microservice
applications, and research towards dynamic AD solutions
is paramount for its adoption in critical domains, such as
e-commerce but also for example healthcare. Apart from the
proposed solution, a complete architecture has been presented
consisting of open-source tools for monitoring, chaos engineering and data collection. It is non-intrusive and can easily
be integrated in any Kubernetes-based platform.
The dataset collected during this research has the potential
and complexity to serve as a benchmark for future research
towards anomaly detection in microservices, and can be used
for dynamic graph research beyond microservice monitoring.
The presented architecture allows easy extension of this
dataset, both in amount of data collected and the addition of
fault types.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Hasselbring and G. Steinacker, “Microservice architectures for
scalability, agility and reliability in e-commerce,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Softw. Archit. Workshops (ICSAW), 2017, pp. 243–246.
[2] J. Zaki, S. R. Islam, N. S. Alghamdi, M. Abdullah-Al-Wadud, and
K.-S. Kwak, “Introducing cloud-assisted micro-service-based software
development framework for healthcare systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 33332–33348, 2022.
[3] P. Jamshidi, C. Pahl, N. C. Mendonça, J. Lewis, and S. Tilkov,
“Microservices: The journey so far and challenges ahead,” IEEE Softw.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 24–35, May 2018.
[4] M. Usman, S. Ferlin, A. Brunstrom, and J. Taheri, “A survey on observability of distributed edge & container-based microservices,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 86904–86919, 2022.
[5] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[6] B. Brazil, Prometheus: Up & Running: Infrastructure and Application
Performance Monitoring. Santa Rosa, CA, USA: O’Reilly Media Inc.,
2018.

1988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

[31] R. Trivedi, H. Dai, Y. Wang, and L. Song, “Know-evolve: Deep temporal
reasoning for dynamic knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2017, pp. 3462–3471. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v70/trivedi17a.html
[32] J. Wu, M. Cao, J. C. K. Cheung, and W. L. Hamilton, “TeMP: Temporal
message passing for temporal knowledge graph completion,” 2020,
arXiv:2010.03526.
[33] A. Senaratne, P. Christen, P. Omran, and G. Williams, “Anomaly detection and classification in knowledge graphs,” 2024, arXiv:2412.04780.
[34] P. Demeester, P. Van Daele, T. Wauters, and H. Hrasnica, “Fed4FIRE—
The largest federation of testbeds in Europe,” in Building the Future
Internet Through FIRE. Denmark, U.K.: River Publ., 2016, pp. 87–109.
[35] “Online boutique: Cloud-first microservices demo application.” Google.
2015. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/
microservices-demo
[36] N. Tolaram, “Cadvisor,” in Software Development with Go: CloudNative Programming using Golang with Linux and Docker. Berkeley,
CA, USA: Apress, 2022, pp. 347–376.
[37] L. Calcote and Z. Butcher, Istio: Up and Running: Using a Service
Mesh to Connect, Secure, Control, and Observe. Santa Rosa, CA, USA:
O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[38] W. Li, Y. Lemieux, J. Gao, Z. Zhao, and Y. Han, “Service mesh:
Challenges, state of the art, and future research opportunities,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Service-Orient. Syst. Eng. (SOSE), 2019,
pp. 122–1225.
[39] O. Sheikh, S. Dikaleh, D. Mistry, D. Pape, and C. Felix, “Modernize
digital applications with microservices management using the istio
service mesh,” in Proc. 28th Annu. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng.,
2018, pp. 359–360.
[40] J. Heyman. “Locust: Open-source performance and load testing.”
Accessed: Jan. 20, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://locust.io/
[41] S. Xing, Y. Wang, and W. Liu, “Multi-dimensional anomaly detection
and fault localization in microservice architectures: A dual-channel deep
learning approach with causal inference for intelligent sensing,” Sensors,
vol. 25, no. 11, p. 3396, 2025.
[42] F. Pierfederici, Distributed Computing with Python. Birmingham U.K.:
Packt Publ. Ltd, 2016.
[43] (Litmus, Cambridge, MA, USA). Litmuschaos: Open Source Chaos
Engineering Platform. Accessed: Jan. 20, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://litmuschaos.io/
[44] (Amazon, Seattle, WA, USA).) AWS Fault Injection Service. (2021).
[Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/fis/
[45] (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Azure Chaos Studio. (2021). [Online].
Available: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/chaos-studio/
[46] T. Butow. “Chaos engineering: The history, principles,
and practice.” Tutorial, Gremlin. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gremlin.com/community/tutorials/chaos-engineTutorial
[47] “Chaos mesh: Break your system constructively.” Accessed: May 6,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://chaos-mesh.org/
[48] “Argo: Workflow engine for kubernetes.” GitHub. Accessed: Jan. 20,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/argoproj/argo

[49] M.-N. Tran, D.-D. Vu, and Y. Kim, “A survey of autoscaling in
kubernetes,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Future Netw. (ICUFN),
2022, pp. 263–265.
[50] G. Antoniou and F. V. Harmelen, “Web ontology language: Owl,” in
Handbook on Ontologies. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2004, pp. 67–92.
[51] B. Burns, J. Beda, K. Hightower, and L. Evenson, Kubernetes: Up and
Running. Santa Rosa, CA, USA: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2022.
[52] I. M. Al Jawarneh et al., “Container orchestration engines: A thorough
functional and performance comparison,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[53] F. Soppelsa and C. Kaewkasi, Native Docker Clustering with Swarm.
Birmingham, U.K.: Packt Publish. Ltd, 2016.
[54] M. Frampton and M. Frampton, “Apache mesos,” in Complete Guide
to Open Source Big Data Stack. New York, NY, USA: APress, 2018,
pp. 97–137.
[55] S. M. Kazemi et al., “Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A
survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2648–2720, 2020.
[56] M. Jin et al., “An anomaly detection algorithm for microservice architecture based on robust principal component analysis,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 226397–226408, 2020.
[57] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, and O. Yakhnenko,
“Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 1–9.
[58] P. Ristoski and H. Paulheim, “RDF2Vec: RDF graph embeddings for
data mining,” in Proc. 15th Int. Semant. Web Conf. (ISWC), 2016,
pp. 498–514.
[59] B. Steenwinckel, G. Vandewiele, M. Weyns, T. Agozzino, F. D. Turck,
and F. Ongenae, “INK: knowledge graph embeddings for node classification,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 620–667,
2022.
[60] B. Steenwinckel et al., “FLAGS: A methodology for adaptive anomaly
detection and root cause analysis on sensor data streams by fusing
expert knowledge with machine learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 116, pp. 30–48, Mar. 2021.
[61] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manag.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[62] A. Analytics. “A python toolkit for rule-based/unsupervised anomaly
detection in time series.” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
arundo/adtk
[63] L. Akmeemana, C. Attanayake, H. Faiz, and S. Wickramanayake,
“GAL-MAD: Towards explainable anomaly detection in microservice
applications using graph attention networks,” 2025, arXiv:2504.00058.
[64] M. Weyns, T. Blyau, B. Steenwinckel, F. D. Turck, S. V. Hoecke, and
F. Ongenae, “Explainable knowledge graph embeddings for industrial
process monitoring & control,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 123, Nov. 2025,
Art. no. 103242.
[65] P. Moens, B. Andriessen, M. Sebrechts, B. Volckaert, and
S. Van Hoecke, “Edge anomaly detection framework for AIOPs in
cloud and IoT,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Services Sci.
(CLOSER), 2023, pp. 204–211.