This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

1

Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Anomaly Detection
for Microservice Systems with Active Learning
Hui Dou, Shenglai Guo, Lele Zou, Yiwen Zhang*, Pengfei Chen, and Zibin Zheng, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Accurate and robust anomaly detection is critical for
microservice system reliability. Recent multimodal approaches
have improved detection comprehensiveness by integrating metrics, logs, and traces. However, they often overlook intra-modal
uncertainty from noise, ambiguity, or missing data, and intermodal uncertainty arising from varying predictive capabilities
across modalities. Additionally, extensive labeling of multimodal
data remains costly. To address these limitations, we propose
MUAD, an uncertainty-aware multimodal anomaly detection
framework with active learning. MUAD employs a Graph-based
Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) to model intra-modal uncertainty
through probabilistic representations, and a Confidence-aware
Fusion Mechanism (CFM) to dynamically weight modalities
based on their prediction confidence. Furthermore, an active
learning paradigm iteratively refines the model using highconfidence pseudo-labels and informative samples, maintaining
performance under label-deficient conditions. Experiments on
three benchmark datasets demonstrate MUAD achieves 98.10%
average F1-score, outperforming state-of-the-art methods by up
to 7.87%. Results also confirm its robustness under low-quality
data and limited labels.
Index Terms—Microservice systems, anomaly detection, multimodal data, active learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, microservices architecture has gained
widespread adoption in modern application development. By
decomposing tightly coupled applications into independently
deployable services, this approach enhances both flexibility
and scalability. However, as system scale and complexity
increase, the risk of anomalies escalates correspondingly.
Anomalies originating in a single service may propagate
through the call chain and adversely affect the performance
of dependent services, thereby degrading the user experience
and potentially leading to economic losses [1]. Consequently,
timely detection and remediation of performance anomalies is
essential for maintaining system reliability and availability.
The observability data collected by operators in microservice systems, encompassing metrics, logs, and traces, plays
Hui Dou, Shenglai Guo, Lele Zou and Yiwen Zhang are with the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China.
E-mail: {douhui, zhangyiwen}@ahu.edu.cn,
{e24201079, e22301352}@stu.ahu.edu.cn
Pengfei Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
E-mail: chenpf7@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Zibin Zheng is with the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Zhuhai, China.
E-mail: zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Yiwen Zhang is the corresponding author.

a pivotal role in ensuring system reliability and security.
Specifically, logs record detailed information during service
operation, including requests, errors, exceptions, and other
events. Metrics, on the other hand, provide a quantitative
representation of the system’s performance and health status,
with common examples including response time, error rate,
and CPU utilization. Trace data captures the complete path of
a request as it usually flows through multiple microservices.
By utilizing trace IDs and span IDs, it reveals invocation
relationships and provides a global view of service interactions, aiding in the analysis of service dependencies and
performance bottlenecks. Over these years, many studies have
successfully utilized unimodal data (i.e., solely metrics [2],
[3], logs [4], [5] or traces [6], [7]) to achieve automated
anomaly detection, demonstrating certain effectiveness in specific detection tasks. However, due to the limited information
provided by each individual modality, unimodal approaches
exhibit significant limitations in identifying particular types of
anomalies [8], [9], [10]. For example, log data may sometimes
reflect minor errors that have little impact on the overall
system performance, which can easily trigger false alarms
and lead to false positives. Figure 1 provides an illustrative
example of how different modal data may manifest under
various anomaly scenarios in microservice systems. Certain
business-level anomalies, such as database query exceptions
or code defects, often do not cause significant fluctuations in
metrics data, yet they are more readily identifiable through
logs and trace data. In contrast, network congestion anomalies
are typically evident in both metrics and trace data. Therefore,
analytical methods that comprehensively leverage multimodal
data can compensate for the shortcomings of single data
sources, thereby ensuring the comprehensiveness of anomaly
detection.
Given the limitations of unimodal anomaly detection approaches, several studies have proposed multimodal anomaly
detection methods in recent years [11], [8], [12], [13]. Although these approaches obtained prospective performance,
they still suffer from the following challenges:
(1) Intra-modal uncertainty: Multimodal data originates
from heterogeneous sources and is prone to data uncertainty
due to modality noise, absence, and intrinsic ambiguity.
These uncertainties directly compromise data quality, thereby
diminishing the model’s ability to comprehend multimodal
content effectively. Existing approaches [11] [8] typically
employ deterministic point embeddings to learn modalityspecific representations. However, such methods rely heavily
on clean or high-quality data. When processing low-quality
data, uncertain sample embeddings may cause the model to

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

no detected unusual pa�erns

detected unusual pa�erns

System Fault Type

2

Metric

Log

Trace

Resource Underprovisioning
Database Query Failure
Network Conges�on

Fig. 1: Abnormal patterns in multimodal data for different
system failures. This figure illustrates how different fault
types manifest across metrics, logs, and traces. For instance,
resource underprovisioning manifests primarily in metrics,
while database query failures are evident in logs and traces.
inaccurately capture critical information, consequently limiting
both performance and robustness.
(2) inter-modal uncertainty: Although each modal data
deserves to be paid enough attention in order to detect various
anomalous patterns in practical scenarios, the confidence level
of each modality is not static across different samples, which
are termed as “inter-modal uncertainty” in our paper. Existing
multimodal anomaly detection [11], [14], [15] methods inherently assume that all modalities contribute positively to the
detection process. However, when confronted with inter-modal
conflicts, these approaches prevents the dynamic assessment of
which modality can most accurately reflect the system state,
thereby lacking the ability to dynamically assess and adjust
the confidence levels of each modality.
(3) Paucity of training data: Fully labeled high-quality
samples can significantly enhance the detection performance
of models but require extensive manual annotation, which is
both time-consuming and costly. Particularly in the context
of multimodal data, the complexity and workload increase
significantly due to the need to integrate information from
heterogeneous sources and make comprehensive judgments
about the system state. Consequently, a key challenge in
multimodal anomaly detection lies in balancing the trade-off
between annotation cost and detection performance, so as to
maintain effectiveness under under label-deficient conditions.
In this work, we propose MUAD, an uncertainty-aware
multimodal anomaly detection framework enhanced with active learning. It consists of four stages: (1)Unimodal Feature
Encoding, where each modality is encoded into deterministic
point-wise features; (2)Uncertainty Modeling, which derives
robust modality-specific representations by sampling stochastic latent vectors; (3)Dynamic Modality Fusion, where a
Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM) adaptively assigns weights to each modality based on confidence estimates
and fuses them into a global representation; (4)Active Training, which iteratively updates the model using high-confidence
pseudo-labeled data and highly informative manually labeled
samples until the query budget is exhausted. Specifically, to
address the first challenge, we design a Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) module to extract robust feature representations from complex multimodal content. For the second
challenge, CFM enables the model to dynamically focus on
the most discriminative modalities. For the third challenge, we
incorporate an active learning framework for iterative model
training that maintains high detection performance even under
limited labeling resources.
We conducted extensive experiments on two widely adopted
benchmark microservice platforms (TrainTicket [16] and SocialNetwork [15] ) and one public dataset (SN from Eadro
[11]). The experimental results demonstrate that our approach
achieves an average F1-score of 98.10%, surpassing previous
state-of-the-art unimodal and multimodal methods by up to
7.87%. These results also highlight the high robustness and
resilience of MUAD, as it maintains excellent detection performance even under conditions of low-quality modal data and
limited labeled samples.
In summary, our work makes the following contributions:
• We propose MUAD, a novel multimodal anomaly detection framework for microservice systems that leverages
metrics, logs, and traces. By jointly modeling intra-modal
and inter-modal uncertainties, MUAD significantly improves the accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection.
• MUAD employs a graph-based probabilistic encoder
to robustly learn information representations for each
modality, and dynamically integrates these modalities
through a confidence-aware fusion mechanism, achieving
efficient multimodal data integration.
• We innovatively integrate active learning into the multimodal anomaly detection setting, which enables MUAD
to maintain strong detection performance even under
label-deficient conditions. This is particularly important
for multimodal anomaly detection, as the complexity of
multimodal data typically incurs high annotation costs.
• We conduct extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets, where MUAD achieves state-of-the-art performance. The source codes and datasets utilized in MUAD
is open-sourced as a GitHub project [17].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the key motivations. Section III describes the detail
design and implementation of MUAD. After that, Section IV
describes the experimental setups and presents the experimental results and analysis. Section V introduces the related work.
Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.
II. M OTIVATION
Motivation #1: It is necessary to model intra-modal
data uncertainty to enhance the robustness of multimodal
anomaly detection. In real-world scenarios, the collected data
is subject to various uncertainties arising from environmental
disturbances, limitations in the performance of monitoring
components, and human errors. As shown in Figure 2, intramodal data uncertainty primarily includes modality noise,
absence, and intrinsic ambiguity. Specifically, since normal
and anomalous logs may share the same log events, this eventlevel ambiguity makes it difficult for existing log event-based
feature extraction methods to effectively distinguish between

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

Log Uncertainty

3

Metric Uncertainty

...LoggingReporter : Span reported:a56b4…- POST
...LoggingReporter : Span reported:4e26a…- error
...LoggingReporter : Span reported: <*> - <*>
Trace Uncertainty

Fig. 2: Examples of low-quality multimodal data in microservices. Log Uncertainty (Left Top): the consistent log templates
used for extracting both normal and abnormal events result
in ambiguity at the event level. Metric Uncertainty (Right):
unusual fluctuations in CPU and network metrics occur during
normal system operation, introducing noise that may not
indicate actual anomalies. Trace Uncertainty (Left Bottom):
missing latency data in call chains compromises the integrity
and completeness of trace information.
normal and anomalous patterns, thereby increasing the risk
of false positives and false negatives. Moreover, we observed
that the presence of noisy metric data further confounds the
identification of genuine anomalies, as transient fluctuations
induced by factors such as resource contention do not necessarily indicate system anomalies and should not trigger
alerts. Additionally, real-world microservice systems often
face issues with missing multimodal data, which not only undermines the overall integrity of the data but also significantly
impacts the quality of feature representation. In particular, the
absence of call chain data adversely affects the learning of
modal graph features that rely on call chain generation. These
findings suggest that intra-modal data uncertainty diminishes
the model’s ability to comprehend multimodal content, thereby
necessitating a robust feature extraction method to effectively
model such uncertainty.
Motivation #2: It is necessary to deal with intermodal uncertainty to ensure the reliability of multimodal
anomaly detection. Due to the various anomalous patterns,
the confidence level of each modality in anomaly detection
is inherently non-stationary across different samples. To validate this conclusion, we utilize the trained MUAD model to
predict the True Classification Probability (TCP) values for
each modality across two different fault sample sets and two
different normal sample sets from Dataset B. Specifically, TCP
is derived from the softmax output of the modality-specific
classifier, representing how confidently each modality predicts
the correct system state. Higher TCP values (closer to 1.0)
indicate more reliable modality predictions (Detailed formulation can be found in Section III-D). Besides, Dataset B was
collected locally from the open-source microservice systems
SocialNetwork [15] and detailed can be found in Section IV-A.
We focused on two fault types: CPU exhaustion and Database
query failure, as well as another two separate sample sets
from the normal data. These experimental setups enable us
to evaluate the confidence levels of different modalities under
various conditions. As shown in Figure 3, the metrics demon-

Fig. 3: Based on the experimental results of MUAD on
Dataset B, we can find that the confidence scores of different
modalities vary dynamically across samples. Data from lowconfidence modalities may constrain optimal fusion strategies,
thereby adversely affecting system state inference.
strate high confidence scores in detecting CPU overload conditions, indicating their effectiveness in inferring system status.
However, they become unreliable when diagnosing database
query anomalies, where traces obtain the highest confidence
score. If proper weight allocation is not implemented during
multimodal fusion, these metrics may dominate the overall
detection decision, posing a risk to detection robustness. In
such cases, greater emphasis should be placed on modalities
with higher prediction confidence to ensure the reliability of
anomaly detection results. Notably, logs consistently exhibit
low confidence scores, primarily because log-based anomaly
detection methods often fail to meet the precision requirements
of practical applications [8], [14]. These critical observations
motivate our introduction of a dynamic fusion mechanism
into the multimodal anomaly detection framework, enabling
automatic identification of the most trustworthy information
sources and consequently enhancing overall detection accuracy.
III. A PPROACH
A. Design Overview
Figure 4 presents an overview of the MUAD framework, a
multimodal anomaly detector integrated with an active learning strategy. The framework operates in an iterative training
paradigm, wherein human annotators label the most informative samples and high-confidence predictions are automatically
assigned pseudo-labels to expand the annotated dataset. Due
to the innovative introduction of confidence prediction into
the active learning process, MUAD can significantly reduce
the effort of manually labeling data. Within a given query
budget, the model aims to maximize detection performance.
During each iteration, MUAD adopts the approach illustrated
in Figure 5 to jointly model both intra-modal and inter-modal
uncertainties, thereby ensuring the detector’s performance and
robustness. Specifically, modality-specific encoders are first
applied to process inputs from different data sources. To
capture intra-modal uncertainty, a Graph-based Probabilistic
Encoder (GPE) is employed to represent input features as

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

4

service and construct the corresponding time series data.
Similarly, a GRU is employed to generate the trace feature
t
representation, denoted by ft ∈ RD .

Online Detection

Data
Preprocessing

MUAD

Anomaly Detection

Trace
Active Training

Update

Metric
Label

High-confidence
samples
Log

Unlabeled pool

High-information
samples

Engineer

Labeled pool

Fig. 4: The overview framework of MUAD. The framework
operates in an iterative training paradigm with active learning.
In each iteration, multimodal data (metrics, logs, traces) are
processed by MUAD for anomaly detection. The labeled pool
is updated through two mechanisms: high-confidence samples are automatically pseudo-labeled, while high-informative
samples are manually annotated by engineers. This process
continues until the query budget is exhausted.
Gaussian distributions. Subsequently, a Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM) is designed to adaptively assign fusion
weights to each modality. The final fused representation is then
forwarded to the anomaly detector for prediction.
B. Unimodal Feature Representation
In microservice systems, different observable data typically
exist in heterogeneous forms, including logs, metrics, and
traces. To capture modality-specific representations, we design individual unimodal feature extractors tailored to each
modality.
Metric Feature Representation: The metrics collected
from each microservice are presented as a multivariate time
series, reflecting the performance status of the corresponding
service. To efficiently capture the key dynamic information,
we employ a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) to model the
intramodality dynamics in the time series, using its final
hidden state to represent the entire sequence:

t
fm = GRU ( M1k , M2k , ..., MTk ), fm ∈ RD
(1)
 k
k
k
where M1 , M2 , ..., MT denote the multivariate time series
composed of k metrics over an observation window of size T .
fm represents the metric feature, and Dt denotes the output
dimension of the feature extractor.
Log Feature Representation: Following the log parsing approach described in previous work, we first use Drain, a widely
adopted log parsing tool in AIOps research community, to
convert unstructured log messages into structured log events.
Subsequently, we model the occurrence of these log events
using the Hawkes process [18], as it has demonstrated both
effectiveness and efficiency in prior evaluations of log event
representation learning [11]. To ensure that the resulting log
features are compatible with subsequent processing stages, we
project them into a unified D-dimensional space using a fully
connected layer with a ReLU activation function. Finally, we
t
extract deterministic log embeddings, denoted by fl ∈ RD .
Trace Feature Representation: We follow up-to-date previous works [11], [19] and capture delay times to represent
traces. Specifically, we process all traces within each sliding
window to extract the average delay associated with each

C. Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder
Existing multimodal representation methods encode each
modality as a deterministic point in the embedding space,
thereby overlooking the uncertainty inherent in the data.
To address this limitation, we model the input features of
each modality as Gaussian distributions and reconstruct their
embedding representations through distribution sampling. Notably, given the characteristics of anomaly propagation among
microservices, we focus on capturing graph-level features
for each modality to sense the topological structure over a
broader neighborhood, rather than reconstructing independent
embeddings for each service. Specifically, we employ a Graph
Attention Network (GAT) to learn the salient information of
each modality within the graph structure and utilize a pooling
layer to obtain the graph-level features, i.e., {gm , gl , gt }. However, these features remain deterministic and fail to capture
the uncertainty present in multimodal data. Our GPE module
further models the input features of each modality as Gaussian
distributions, which can be formally expressed as:
µv , σv2 = M LP (gv ) , v ∈ {m, l, t}

p(zv |x) = N µv , σv2

(2)
(3)

where the mean vector(µ) represents the feature representation identified by each modality, and the variance vector(σ)
indicates the range of the modality’s distribution over each
dimension—the larger the variance, the higher the uncertainty
of the observed content. Now, instead of a deterministic
point embedding, we can sample a random embedding zv
from p(zv |x). However, since the sampling operation is nondifferentiable, we employ the reparameterization trick to allow
gradient descent to back-propagate normally during parameter
optimization. Specifically, for each modality, we first sample
random noise ξ from a standard normal distribution and then
generate zv as an equivalent sampled representation:
zv = µv + ξσv2 , ϵ ∼ N (0, I)

(4)

Although GPE is capable of estimating the mean and
variance for each modality, if the variance becomes too
small during training, the modality feature representations can
degenerate into deterministic embeddings. To counteract this
effect, we introduce a KL divergence regularization term to
constrain each modality’s distribution to approach the standard
normal distribution, N (0, I). Specifically, the optimization is
formulated as follows:

1X
KL N (µv , σ 2v ) || N (0, I)
Lkl =
3 v
(5)
1X1 2
=
(µv + σ 2v − log σ 2v − 1)
3 v 2
where KL(·) denotes the divergence between two probability
distributions. Under the guidance of this loss function, the
model is discouraged from adopting excessively low variances,
thus preserving the uncertainty in the multimodal features and
preventing their collapse into deterministic representations.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

5

True Classification Probabilities
Modality-Specific Classifier

FC

Log
Encoder

SoftMax

Confidence Learning

Log

FC

Sigmoid

(2) Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder

Trace
Encoder

(3) Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism

MLP

Adaptive Weights

Trace

L

GAT
Metric
Encoder

T

M

(4) Anomaly Detection

Metric

MLP

Anomaly
Detector

(1) Unimodal Feature Representation

Fig. 5: Major stages in MUAD for anomaly detection by modeling both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties. The pipeline
consists of four stages: (1) Unimodal Feature Representation extracts modality-specific features using dedicated encoders;
(2) Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) models intra-modal uncertainty by mapping features to Gaussian distributions
N (µ, σ 2 ) through GAT and MLP layers; (3) Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM) dynamically assigns fusion weights
based on confidence scores,thereby modeling inter-modal uncertainty; (4) Anomaly Detector produces the final prediction.
D. Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism
As the varying importance of different modalities in predicting the final system state, a dynamic mechanism is required
to weigh their contributions during the fusion process. Here
we adopt a confidence-aware fusion mechanism (CFM) that
adaptively estimates modality-specific weights. As shown in
Figure 5, CFM applies a modality-specific classifier to each
modality after obtaining its uncertainty representation. This
classifier generates a softmax output, and the module selects
the true classification probability (TCP) [20], [21] from the
softmax outputs as the confidence score. Unlike using the maximum softmax probability, which may lead to overconfidence
when a modality makes an incorrect prediction, TCP uses the
softmax probability corresponding to the actual label, thereby
mitigating such overconfidence. Formally, for each modality,
the confidence score can be expressed as:
TCPv = y · p (y | zv ) =

K
X

yk pvk

(6)

k=1

where (·) denotes the inner product operation, and yk represents the k element of the label. It can be observed that
TCPv ∈ (0, 1) reflects the correctness of a modality’s information in representing the system state. A higher value of
TCPv indicates that the modality’s features accurately capture
the system state, whereas a lower value suggests incorrect predictions. However, ground-truth labels are unavailable during
the testing phase, making it infeasible to use TCPv directly as
a weight. To ensure consistency between training and testing, a
confidence network is constructed to predict confidence scores
that will serve as the modality fusion weights:
ωv = Sigmoid (MLP (zv ))

(7)

The confidence network is implemented as a lightweight
architecture: a single fully-connected layer that maps zv ∈ RD

to a scalar, followed by a Sigmoid activation to ensure
ωv ∈ (0, 1). This simple design prevents overfitting while
enabling efficient confidence estimation during both training
and inference.
To achieve the above objective, we employ the following
loss function:
n
X
Lvp = −
log(giv (Ii∗ ))
(8)
i=1

Lvq =

n
X

MSE (TCPvi , ωiv )

(9)

X

(10)

i=1

Lcon =

(Lvp + Lvq )

v∈{m,l,t}

In practice, Lvp and Lvq are jointly optimized through endto-end training. During each forward pass, the classifier g v
generates softmax outputs, from which TCPv is computed
and used as the supervision signal for training the confidence
network. Both the classifier and confidence network are updated simultaneously via backpropagation through Eq.(10),
where the two loss components play complementary roles: Lvp
(Eq. 8) ensures accurate classification through cross-entropy
loss on the ground-truth label Ii∗ , while Lvq (Eq. 9) trains the
confidence predictor ω v to estimate the classifier’s reliability
via mean squared error with TCPv . This joint optimization
enables each modality to develop reliable self-assessment
capabilities for optimal multi-modal fusion.
Finally, we aggregate the representations from all modalities
into a unified system state representation
by performing a
P
confidence-weighted fusion: h = ωv zv .
E. Anomaly Detection
Finally, the anomaly detector uses the fused representation
as input to to classify the current system state as either

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

6

The active training procedure of MUAD is described in
Algorithm 1. To fully leverage the above advantages, we
design a novel active learning query strategy hybridly utilizing
the MIS and HCS. Specifically, high-informative samples are
identified by calculating the prediction entropy:
X
H(xi ) = −
p(c | xi ) log p(c | xi )
(12)

Algorithm 1: Active training procedure of MUAD
Input: Unlabeled pool NU ; Labeled pool NL ;
High-confidence sample set; NC Query budget
b; Query batch size k; Confidence threshold θ.
Output: Anomaly detection model MUAD and
Labeled dataset NL .
1 NC = ∅;
2 while |NU | < b do
3
▷Stage 1: Training the MUAD Model
4
begin
5
NL ←NL ∪ NC ;
6
Train the anomaly detection model ▷Eq. (13);
7
end

c

where higher entropy indicates greater model uncertainty.
These samples, termed as most informative samples (MIS) in
our framework, are selected for expert annotation. For highconfidence samples (HCS), the predicted confidence score
[ i (defined in Eq. (6)) serves as the confidence indicator,
TCP
[ i > θ are automatically assigned
and samples with TCP
pseudo-labels via arg max p(y|xi ). These two mechanisms
work complementarily to balance annotation cost and detection performance controlled by the confidence threshold
θ. Based on the above query strategy, the active training
process proceeds as follows. We begin by randomly labeling
10% of the data to initialize the MUAD model. During each
subsequent iteration, we select MIS by computing the entropy
of the model’s predictions. High entropy typically indicates
that the model is uncertain about the sample’s classification,
highlighting areas where the current model struggles and
where expert labeling is most valuable. Next, we perform
confidence prediction and label inference on the remaining unlabeled data, and incorporate samples with confidence scores
exceeding a predefined threshold θ (i.e., HCS) into the training
set for the next iteration. Since the model is essentially a
classifier, we adopt the T[
CP value as an indicator of the
model’s confidence in its predictions. In each learning phase,
the model’s training loss consists of the following components:

8

9
10
11
12
13

▷Stage 2: Labeling High-Informative Samples
begin
Calculate the entropy values in NU ;
Select the Top-k samples for annotation;
Update NL ;
end

14

▷Stage 3: Selecting High-Confidence Samples
for xi ∈ NU do
16
if T[
CP i > θ then
17
Assign pseudo-labels;
18
Update NC ← xi ;
19
end
20
end
21
NL ← NL ∪ S, NC ← NC ∪ H, NU ← NU \ S;
22 end
23 return NL
15

LMU AD = Lano + λ1 Lkl + λ2 Lconf + Lmse
normal or anomalous. We formulate this explicitly as a binary
classification task. Formally, this can be expressed as:
ŷ = argmax[Sof tmax (W h + b)]

(11)

In the equation above, W and b respectively denote the
trainable parameters, and ŷ ∈ {0, 1} represents the predicted
discrete label, where 0 denotes a normal state and 1 denotes an
anomaly. If an anomaly is detected, MUAD triggers an alert
and provides the modality confidence scores to the operator,
facilitating the assessment of the alert’s reliability.
F. Active Training
To balance labeling cost and model performance, we apply
active learning to train our model. As a label-efficient learning
paradigm, active learning selects the most informative samples
(MIS) for annotation under a given query budget, aiming to
maximize model performance at minimal labeling cost. Most
existing studies on active anomaly detection focus on selecting
samples for expert annotation, while overlooking the value of
high-confidence samples (HCS) in accelerating model training.
However, if the model exhibits sufficient confidence in its
predictions, pseudo-labels can be automatically assigned and
incorporated into the training process.

(13)

where Lano denotes the binary cross-entropy loss on labeled
data, and Lmse represents the loss for label confidence estimation. λ1 and λ2 are the weighting coefficients for the
corresponding loss components. We repeat the above iterative
process until the query budget b is exhausted.
IV. E XPERIMENT
In this section, we evaluate MUAD by answering the following
research questions (RQs) through empirical studies:
• RQ1: How effective is MUAD in anomaly detection
tasks?
• RQ2: How does each component contribute to MUAD’s
overall performance?
• RQ3: Does MUAD exhibit high robustness?
• RQ4: Is it necessary to consider high confidence samples
in MUAD’s active learning strategy?
• RQ5: How do MUAD’s hyperparameters affect its performance?
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: To evaluate the performance of MUAD, we
conduct extensive experiments on three datasets (A, B and C),
as summarized in Table I. We randomly selected 60% of the

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

7

TABLE I: Dataset composition.
Dataset

Metric Length

Log Messages

Trace Quantity

model dependency-aware system states in microservices.
DeAnomaly [25] is a two-phase unsupervised anomaly
detection framework that decomposes multivariate time
series to remove normal patterns and uses diffusion
models on residuals for robust and accurate anomaly
detection.
• HG-PAD [26] is an unsupervised framework that models microservice dependencies via heterogeneous graphs,
employing GNN, CVAE, and GAT for anomaly detection
using metrics and traces. We implement this method following the original paper as no official code is available.
• Medicine [10] is a multimodal failure diagnosis approach
that mitigates modality dominance through independent
encoding and adaptive optimization, achieving robust
performance under missing or low-quality modality data.
3) Performance Metrics: Since anomaly detection is essentially a binary classification task, we adopt Precision, Recall,
and F1-score to evaluate the performance of MUAD and other
baseline models. These metrics are defined as follows:
TP
(14)
Precision =
TP + FP
•

Dataset A

473575

386707

Dataset B

290184

216249

33545

Dataset C

16944

15365

11345

11132

data from each of the three datasets for training and used the
remaining 40% for testing, ensuring that the ratio of normal
to abnormal samples remains consistent between the training
and testing sets.
Dataset A and Dataset B were collected locally from
the open-source microservice systems TrainTicket [16] and
SocialNetwork [15], respectively. TrainTicket is a platform
that provides railway ticketing services, while SocialNetwork
simulates a microservice-based social networking application.
Both have been widely studied in prior research on microservice anomaly detection. Following previous studies [11], [22],
we adopt chaos engineering techniques to inject seven types of
anomalies: CPU/memory/disk stress, service failure, database
query exceptions, packet loss, and packet loss/delay. During
our data collection phase, each anomaly lasts for two minutes.
In total, we perform 133 and 84 injection operations on Dataset
A and Dataset B, respectively. Metrics, logs, and trace data
are collected through three separate collectors.
Dataset C is the SN dataset from Eadro [11], which provides a multimodal dataset suitable for microservice anomaly
detection. It contains various faults, such as CPU overload,
network packet loss, and network latency. The dataset includes
7 metrics sampled every 1 second, 126,384 traces, and 15 log
templates.
2) Baselines: We compare MUAD against representative
state-of-the-art methods in microservice anomaly detection,
including both unimodal and multimodal approaches. These
baselines were selected based on their technical diversity,
recency, and reproducibility, ensuring comprehensive evaluation across different modality combinations and detection
paradigms. The selected baselines are as follows:
• MTAD-GAT [23] is a multivariate time series anomaly
detection method that leverages graph attention networks
to capture temporal and inter-variable dependencies of
metrics.
• HADES [8] is a semi-supervised multimodal anomaly
detection model that takes logs and metrics as inputs
and fuses modality features via a cross-modal attention
mechanism.
• MRCA [19] performs automated fault localization using
multimodal data, mainly logs and traces, and detects
anomalous services based on reconstruction probabilities.
• UAC-AD [24] is an unsupervised adversarial contrastive
learning-based method that enhances anomaly detection
by distinguishing hard and abnormal samples.
• MSTGAD [12] proposes a multimodal anomaly detection framework that integrates metrics, logs, and traces
through attentive multi-modal learning.
• Eadro [11] is a supervised multimodal anomaly detection approach that nonlinearly fuses features from three
modalities and employs a graph attention network to

Recall =

TP
TP + FN

(15)

Precision × Recall
(16)
Precision + Recall
where TP (True Positives) denotes the number of correctly
identified anomalous samples, FP (False Positives) refers to the
number of normal samples incorrectly identified as anomalous,
and FN (False Negatives) represents the number of anomalous
samples that were not detected.
4) Implementation and Settings: We implement the prototype of our method using Python 3.8. All experiments are conducted on a Linux server equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce
GTX 3060 GPU. The experimental hyperparameters include
the sliding window length, stride, confidence threshold θ, and
manually tuned loss weights. Specifically, we set the sliding
window length to 10 and the stride to 1. It is worth noting that
microservice modalities are sometimes asynchronous in practice. While data alignment is necessary for multimodal fusion,
the small stride allows MUAD to capture transient anomalies
that might otherwise be smoothed out, and the Hawkes process
implicitly preserves the asynchronous arrival dynamics of logs
within each window. The threshold θ to 0.9. MUAD is trained
using the Adam optimizer [27] with an initial learning rate
of 0.001, a batch size of 50, and 120 epochs per training
stage. We continue the iterative process of sample selection
and training until the model performance reaches the level of
using the fully labeled dataset. For the baseline methods, we
adopt the parameters provided in the corresponding papers and
official open-source implementations.
F1-score = 2 ×

B. RQ1: Overall Performance of MUAD
To evaluate the effectiveness of MUAD in anomaly detection tasks, we compare its overall performance and performance under varying labeled data quantities with several

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

8

TABLE II: Performance comparison for anomaly detection.
Dataset A

Modality

Approach
Metric
MTAD-GAT

✓

HADES

✓

UAC-AD

✓

MRCA
MSTGAD

✓

DeAnomaly

✓

HG-PAD

✓

Medicine

✓

Eadro

✓

MUAD

Log

Trace

✓
✓

Dataset B

Dataset C

F1-score

Recall

Precision

F1-score

Recall

Precision

F1-score

Recall

Precision

0.7520

0.8267

0.6897

0.6706

0.6455

0.6978

0.8561

0.9999

0.7484

0.4275

0.3305

0.6053

0.5631

0.6060

0.5259

0.9084

1.0000

0.8321

0.4589

0.3606

0.6309

0.5070

0.4236

0.6314

0.4761

0.3255

0.8861

✓

✓

0.2090

0.1346

0.4592

0.4355

0.3013

0.7857

0.9412

0.8889

0.9412

✓

✓

0.7438

0.6994

0.7943

0.8251

0.8261

0.8240

0.9802

0.9920

0.9686

0.5259

0.4607

0.6124

0.6788

0.5316

0.9387

0.9753

0.9701

0.9806

✓

0.4742

0.3477

0.7455

0.5121

0.4004

0.7102

0.8167

0.7154

0.9514

✓

✓

0.3663

0.3905

0.4476

0.4143

0.4048

0.4881

0.8056

0.8334

0.8667

✓

✓

0.9022

0.8484

0.9632

0.9234

0.8936

0.9551

0.9831

0.9839

0.9823

✓

✓

✓

0.9809

0.9789

0.9829

0.9692

0.9593

0.9657

0.9928

0.9941

0.9914

MUAD-10%

✓

✓

✓

0.8447

0.8452

0.8443

0.8729

0.8514

0.8956

0.9314

0.9849

0.8833

MUAD-30%

✓

✓

✓

0.9208

0.9271

0.9145

0.9289

0.9231

0.9348

0.9759

0.9822

0.9697

MUAD-40%

✓

✓

✓

0.9584

0.9625

0.9543

0.9358

0.9421

0.9295

0.9825

0.9844

0.9807

representative anomaly detection models, as shown in Table
II. Notably, to mitigate potential dataset size bias, we selected
the closest matching percentage of labeled samples for fair
comparison. Based on these results, we make the following
observations:
Overall, MUAD outperforms other state-of-the-art anomaly
detection methods in terms of F1-score, recall, and precision.
Our approach achieves the highest average F1-scores of 0.9809
on Dataset A, 0.9692 on Dataset B, and 0.9928 on Dataset C,
surpassing the best-performing baselines by 7.87%, 4.58%,
and 0.97%, respectively. Notably, on Dataset C, although
MUAD exhibits a slightly lower recall than Hades, it achieves
a 24.3% improvement in precision. This suggests that Hades
incurs a higher false positive rate, which in turn compromises
the overall reliability of the system. These results further confirm MUAD’s ability to detect anomalies with minimal false
alarms or missed detections, underscoring the effectiveness of
the proposed method.
To further understand MUAD’s advantages, we analyze
the performance of the baseline methods. Single-modality
methods like DeAnomaly show strong performance on specific
datasets (e.g., F1=0.9753 on Dataset C) but suffer degradation
on others (F1=0.5259 and 0.6788 on Datasets A and B),
indicating sensitivity to dataset characteristics and limited
generalization. Multimodal methods, while leveraging richer
information, do not automatically guarantee superiority. HGPAD achieves F1-scores ranging from 0.4742 to 0.8167, and
Medicine yields 0.3663 to 0.8056 across the three datasets.
This suggests that the key challenge lies not in the number of modalities, but in effective fusion under uncertainty.
Among all baselines, Eadro achieves the strongest performance (F1=0.9022–0.9831) yet remains constrained by limited
uncertainty modeling. In contrast, MUAD explicitly models
both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties through GPE
and CFM, enabling consistently superior performance across
all datasets. In addition, MUAD’s representations are robust

not only for detection but also for identifying the source of
anomalies, paving the way for future end-to-end troubleshooting frameworks. In a preliminary experiment on Dataset C, we
extended MUAD with a simple classification head for servicelevel localization. The extended model achieved a HitRate@1
of 99.24%, outperforming the baseline Eadro (97.59%). Finally, despite the architectural complexity, MUAD remains
computationally efficient. For example, it requires only 3.35s
for inference on Dataset C with a consumer-grade NVIDIA
RTX 3060 GPU, which is well within the acceptable range
for practical anomaly detection tasks.
Due to the active learning strategy specially designed for
multimodal anomaly detection model training, MUAD further
demonstrates superior performance under label scarcity. As
shown in Table II, across all three datasets, our approach
is able to achieve an average F1-score of 94.18% using
only 30% of labeled data, marginally outperforming the fully
supervised Eadro method, which attains 93.62%. Moreover,
model performance progressively improves with additional
labeled data, confirming MUAD’s capability to effectively
balance annotation costs and detection performance.
C. RQ2: The Ablation Study of the Proposed Method
To further validate the effectiveness of MUAD, we performed ablation experiments on Datasets A, B, and C. We
designed six sets of ablation experiments to evaluate the
individual modules of MUAD as follows:
• Only Metric: Uses only metric data to evaluate its standalone contribution.
• Only Trace: Employs only trace data to assess its impact.
• Only Log: Relies solely on log data to measure its
effectiveness.
• w/o GPE: This variant removes the Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder, instead using deterministic point features
extracted from each modality.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

9

TABLE III: Experimental results of the ablation study.
Dataset

Dataset A

Dataset B

Dataset C

Approach

F1-score

Recall

Precision

Only Metric

0.9459

0.9306

0.9619

Only Log

0.6805

0.5916

0.8008

Only Trace

0.8837

0.8252

0.9511

w/o GPE

0.9467

0.9367

0.9568

w/o G

0.9650

0.9607

0.9694

w/o CFM

0.9651

0.9666

0.9635

MUAD

0.9809

0.9789

0.9829

Only Metric

0.9452

0.9511

0.9394

Only Log

0.7350

0.5810

0.7070

Only Trace

0.8735

0.8455

0.9035

w/o GPE

0.9484

0.9432

0.9536

w/o G

0.9524

0.9477

0.9571

w/o CFM

0.9350

0.9143

0.9086

MUAD

0.9692

0.9593

0.9657

Only Metric

0.9903

0.9925

0.9882

Only Log

0.9064

1.000

0.8289

Only Trace

0.9470

0.9758

0.9199

w/o GPE

0.9922

0.9919

0.9925

w/o G

0.9925

0.9962

0.9888

w/o CFM

0.9909

0.9919

0.9898

MUAD

0.9928

0.9941

0.9914

w/o G: A simplified variant where the graph component
is removed from GPE, retaining only the probabilistic
encoding for each modality.
• w/o CFM: This variant excludes the Confidence-aware
Fusion Module, performing anomaly detection by directly
concatenating features from all modalities.

•

As presented in Table III, the superior performance of
MUAD can be primarily attributed to the complementary integration of multiple modalities. Relying on a single modality
leads to varying degrees of performance degradation across
datasets. For Dataset A and B, MUAD respectively achieves
an average F1-score improvement of 14.42% and 11.80%,
demonstrating its excellent capability in handling multimodal
data. These results further underscore the importance of integrating diverse data modalities to enhance the accuracy of
anomaly detection.
Modeling intra-modal uncertainty is crucial for robustly
capturing modality-specific features. When the GPE module
is removed, the model struggles to extract meaningful information from low-quality multimodal data, leading to degraded
overall performance. Moreover, in the experimental results on
Datasets A and B, we observe that w/o G performs worse than
w/o GPE, highlighting the benefits of modeling uncertainty
in graph-based modality features. Notably, prior studies [28],
[29] have also widely adopted graph-based representations for
modality features, further validating the effectiveness of our
feature extraction approach.
It is evident that w/o CFM, which relies on simple concatenation rather than the proposed confidence-aware fusion

strategy, exhibits varying degrees of performance degradation
across different evaluation metrics. This further highlights the
superiority of our fusion approach. We attribute this to the
fact that different modalities contribute unequally, and the use
of a confidence-aware approach enables adaptive learning of
weights for each modality, allowing the model to focus more
on the most informative modalities for anomaly detection.
Finally, it is worth noting that the ablation results on
Dataset C seems less pronounced, which is mainly due to the
dataset’s specific characteristics. In detail, the Only Metric
variant achieves an F1-score of 0.9903, which is close to
MUAD’s 0.9928. This is mainly because the smaller size
of Dataset C limits the ability of complex models to fully
exploit their structural advantages. Moreover, the fault types
in Dataset C are relatively homogeneous, with resource- and
performance-related anomalies (e.g., CPU overload, network
latency) accounting for a significant proportion. These anomalies are directly and prominently reflected in performance
metrics, enabling the Only Metric variant to achieve strong
discriminative capability on its own. As a result, incorporating
additional modalities and considering intra-modal and intermodal uncertainty yields only limited incremental gains for
Dataset C.
In summary, the ablation results demonstrate that MUAD’s
components contribute synergistically to its performance gains.
The multimodal integration provides comprehensive observability, while GPE and CFM ensure robust uncertainty modeling and reliable fusion, collectively enabling MUAD to achieve
state-of-the-art anomaly detection across diverse scenarios.
D. RQ3: Robustness Evaluation
To comprehensively evaluate the robustness of MUAD
under realistic data quality degradation, we select Dataset A,
which has the largest data volume among our benchmarks, for
experimentation. We examine two data imperfection scenarios
prevalent in production microservice systems: Inter-modal
Information Inconsistency and Random Modality Missing.
We quantify robustness using relative performance degradation, which normalizes the impact of perturbations against each
model’s clean baseline:
F 1baseline − F 1perturbed
× 100
(17)
Degradation(%) =
F 1baseline
Lower degradation indicates stronger robustness. We compare
MUAD against Eadro, the best-performing multimodal baseline from Section IV-B, using this metric alongside absolute
F1-scores.
1) Inter-modal Information Inconsistency: In practical
microservice systems, multimodal observations may become
inconsistent due to heterogeneous noise, asynchronous data
collection, or partial modality corruption. To simulate such
realistic conditions, we construct an inter-modal information
inconsistency setting, where the reliability of different modalities is unevenly and asynchronously degraded across samples.
Specifically, we consider two perturbation scenarios with increasing severity. Perturbations are generated by adding noise
factor τ sampled from a standard normal distribution N (0, I),
and scaled according to empirical data statistics, ensuring

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

10

TABLE IV: Robustness to Inter-modal Information Inconsistency.
Perturbation Setting
Clean Single-Modal Multi-Modal

Method

Metric

Eadro

F1
0.9022
Deg (%) 0.00

0.8455
6.28

0.7823
13.29

MUAD

F1
0.9809
Deg (%) 0.00

0.9584
2.29

0.9399
4.18

TABLE V: Robustness to Random Modality Missing.
Overall Missing Rate
Method

Metric

Clean

20%

40%

60%

Eadro

F1
Deg (%)

0.9022
0.00

0.8362
7.32

0.7800
13.54

0.7183
20.38

MUAD

F1
Deg (%)

0.9809
0.00

0.9338
4.80

0.8888
9.39

0.8401
14.35

realistic distortion levels without assuming identical noise
patterns across modalities. In the Single-Modality Perturbation
setting, we randomly select 30% of the test samples. For each
selected sample, we apply the noise injection to a single,
randomly chosen modality while keeping others clean. In the
Multi-Modality Perturbation setting, we randomly select 40%
of the test samples and apply simultaneous noise injection to
multiple modalities for each selected sample. By perturbing
several modalities at the same time, this setting induces more
severe inter-modal inconsistency.
As shown in Table IV, MUAD demonstrates strong robustness under both perturbation scenarios. For example, under the
Multi-Modality Perturbation setting, MUAD achieves an F1score of 0.9399 with only 4.18% performance degradation,
significantly outperforming Eadro, whose F1-score drops to
0.7823 with 13.29% degradation—corresponding to a 9.11
percentage point reduction in relative performance loss. This
robustness advantage stems from MUAD’s joint modeling
of intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties. Specifically, the
Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) captures modalityspecific uncertainty by representing features as probabilistic
distributions, while the Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism
(CFM) dynamically adjusts fusion weights by down-weighting
unreliable modalities and emphasizing more trustworthy ones
at the sample level. In contrast, Eadro adopts a fixed fusion
strategy that cannot adapt to modality-level reliability variations, resulting in pronounced performance degradation under
inter-modal inconsistency.
2) Random Modality Missing: In real-world microservice
systems, observability data is often incomplete due to collector
failures, network partitions, or transient system issues. To evaluate MUAD’s resilience under such conditions, we construct a
random modality missing setting, where observability data is
partially unavailable at the sample level. Specifically, for each
test sample, one or more modalities are randomly masked to
simulate unpredictable data loss, with overall missing rates of

20%, 40%, and 60%. The missing pattern is fully randomized
across samples, without assuming which modality is absent or
how many modalities are simultaneously unavailable, reflecting the inherent unpredictability of real-world data collection
failures.
As shown in Table V, MUAD demonstrates strong robustness across all missing rates. At a 60% overall missing
rate, MUAD maintains an F1-score of 0.8401 with 14.35%
performance degradation, substantially outperforming Eadro
(F1: 0.7183, 20.38% degradation), corresponding to a 6.03
percentage point advantage in relative robustness. Moreover,
MUAD exhibits graceful degradation with near-linear performance decay as missing rates increase, whereas Eadro
shows a steeper decline, particularly beyond 40% missing.
This robustness can be attributed to the Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM), which dynamically reallocates fusion
weights when modalities are unavailable, allowing MUAD to
emphasize remaining reliable modalities. In contrast, Eadro’s
fixed fusion strategy cannot adapt to modality absence, resulting in pronounced performance degradation.
In summary, these robustness experiments show that MUAD
maintains stable anomaly detection performance under both
inter-modal information inconsistency and random modality
missing. This demonstrates MUAD’s robustness to degraded
and incomplete multimodal observations and highlights the
importance of uncertainty modeling and dynamic modality
fusion for reliable anomaly detection in practical microservice
environments.
E. RQ4:Necessity of Considering High-Confidence Samples in
Active Learning
In this section, we construct a variant of MUAD without the
High Confidence Samples (w/o HCS) to evaluate the necessity
of taking HCS into consideration in the active learning process. The experiment was conducted on Dataset A which is
considered representative as it features a balanced distribution
of anomalies and a sufficient amount of high-quality data for
reliable evaluation. As shown in the comparative results in
Figure 6, MUAD consistently outperforms the variant without
HCS across all query iterations. On Dataset A, as the number
of query iterations increases, the F1-score of MUAD with HCS
steadily improves from approximately 0.85 to 0.96, whereas
the variant without HCS exhibits lower performance with
d values
limited improvement. Selecting samples with high TCP
proves effective in identifying high-confidence instances and
assigning reliable pseudo-labels, thereby significantly boosting
detection performance. Furthermore, the continual inclusion
of high-entropy samples into the training set facilitates the
discovery of more accurate high-confidence samples over
time. Since these high-entropy samples typically correspond
to instances where the model is uncertain, their annotation
gradually enhances the model’s decision confidence and robustness.
In summary, the experimental results confirm that incorporating high-confidence samples is essential for MUAD’s active
learning strategy, as it effectively reduces annotation costs
while maintaining strong detection performance under label
scarcity.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

0.98

11

w/o HCS
MUAD

0.96
0.94

F1-Score

0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.80

5

10

15
20
25
30
Query Iteration
Fig. 6: Impact of high-confidence samples (HCS) selection
on active learning performance. The x-axis denotes active
learning query iterations, where each iteration corresponds
to one querying round followed by model retraining. The
orange bars represent MUAD with HCS, while the blue bars
show the variant without HCS. Incorporating high-confidence
pseudo-labeled samples consistently improves F1-score across
query iterations, demonstrating the effectiveness of leveraging
reliable predictions to reduce manual annotation costs while
maintaining performance.

F. RQ5:Parameter Sensitivity
In order to balance the ability to model intra- and intermodal uncertainties, MUAD comprises multiple loss components. We conducted further experiments to analyze the impact
of two key loss weights, λ1 and λ2 .
Impact of loss weight λ1 on intra-modal uncertainty
modeling: λ1 controls the weight of the KL divergence term in
intra-modal uncertainty modeling. This hyperparameter serves
as a regularization factor that balances the trade-off between
the compactness and richness of modality-specific information
retained in the learned subspace. As shown in Figure 7, the
optimal values of λ1 for the two datasets are 1.0 and 0.1,
respectively. Under these optimal settings, the model tends to
predict higher variance for noisy samples and lower variance
for high-quality samples.
Impact of loss weight λ2 on inter-modal uncertainty
modeling: λ2 primarily influences the performance of confidence prediction for each modality. As illustrated in Figure
7, the optimal value for both datasets is 0.6. By optimizing
λ2 , the model can adjust its final decision strategy according
to the dynamically learned weights of each modality.
In summary, MUAD demonstrates stable performance
across a wide range of loss weight configurations, indicating low sensitivity to precise hyperparameter selection. This
robustness can be attributed to the complementary nature of
MUAD’s loss components: the primary anomaly detection
objective (Lano ) dominates the optimization process, while the
auxiliary uncertainty modeling terms (Lkl and Lconf ) provide
effective regularization as long as their weights fall within
reasonable ranges. Such stability is particularly valuable for

Fig. 7: Sensitivity analysis of loss weights λ1 and λ2 on
Datasets A and B. The colorbars indicate F1-score performance. Results demonstrate that MUAD maintains consistently high performance across a wide range of hyperparameter
values, indicating strong robustness and low sensitivity to
parameter selection in practical deployment.

practical deployment, as it reduces the need for extensive
hyperparameter tuning across different microservice environments.
V. R ELATED W ORK
A. Unimodal Anomaly Detection
Over the years, numerous anomaly detection methods have
been proposed to ensure the reliability of large-scale systems. Existing unimodal anomaly detection approaches can
be categorized into three types according to the dependent
modality: metric-based, log-based, and trace-based methods.
Metric-based approaches can be further classified into three
categories. Reconstruction-based methods [30], [31], [32] typically reconstruct multivariate time series and detect anomalies
based on reconstruction error or reconstruction probability.
Prediction-based methods [23], [33], [34] forecast future metrics and trigger anomaly alarms when the actual values deviate
from the predicted ones beyond a predefined threshold. Cluster
analysis-based approaches [35], [36], [37] embed time series
segments into a vector space and apply clustering or distancebased techniques to identify segments that deviate significantly
from the majority, thereby flagging them as anomalies.
Logs record critical events during system operation and
serve as an important and valuable resource for online anomaly
detection. Various log-based anomaly detection techniques
[38], [39], [5], [40] have been proposed. For instance, NeuralLog [40] extracts the semantic information of raw log
messages using the BERT model and employs a Transformerbased classification model to detect anomalies. In addition,
since traces capture the interaction details among microservices, they play an indispensable role in reconstructing the
propagation paths of anomalies. Several studies [41], [42], [6]
have focused on anomaly detection in trace data. TraceCRL
[6] integrates graph structural information and differentiates
between normal and abnormal behavior representations in call
chains through a contrastive learning framework. However,
as these methods rely solely on a single modality, they are
prone to overlooking certain types of anomalies, which limits
their ability to ensure the overall security and reliability of the
system.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

12

B. Multimodal Anomaly Detection

and accurate multimodal anomaly detection.

To overcome the limitations of unimodal anomaly detection,
researchers have developed anomaly detection methods based
on multimodal data [43], [9], [24], [12], [44], [45], [1], [46],
[47], [48]. Specifically, DeepTraLog [43] uses a unified graph
to represent the complex structure of traces and the log events
embedded within them, and then builds a deep SVDD model
based on this to detect anomalies in microservice systems.
Anofusion [9] employs GTN to learn the correlations between
heterogeneous multimodal data and uses GAT to capture
key features, ultimately predicting data patterns for anomaly
detection through GRU. AMulSys [44] employs a hierarchical
architecture to model traces, metrics, and logs, utilizes graph
attention network for trace-metric representation extraction,
applies heterogeneous graph Transformer for log representation learning, and introduces category prior guided multimodal
data augmentation with multifaceted contrastive learning to
address class imbalance in anomaly detection. MicroDig [45]
employs a heterogeneous propagation graph to model causal
relationships between microservices, combines heterogeneityoriented random walk algorithm to analyze anomaly propagation patterns, and effectively addresses the root cause localization accuracy issues caused by inconsistency between causality
and calling relationships. MULAN [1] proposes a unified
framework for multi-modal causal structure learning aimed at
root cause localization. It leverages a log-tailored language
model for log representation learning, employs contrastive
learning within a shared latent space to extract both modalityinvariant and modality-specific features, and incorporates a
KPI-aware attention mechanism to evaluate the reliability
of each modality and jointly learn the final causal graph.
In comparison with these methods, our approach explicitly
accounts for both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties,
demonstrating superior effectiveness and robustness.
Recently, a few works have leverage the advantages of
large language models (LLMs) to improve the performance of
AIOPS tasks in microservice systems. For instance, Flow-ofAction [46] proposes an SOP-enhanced multi-agent framework
that constrains LLM reasoning through SOP flow mechanisms.
By incorporating multiple auxiliary agents, it effectively mitigates the hallucination problems of the ReAct framework in
root cause analysis (RCA), thereby significantly improving
diagnostic accuracy. LasRCA [47], designed for one-shot scenarios with extremely scarce fault labels, introduces a collaborative framework that integrates LLMs with small classifiers.
Through iterative sample selection and LLM-driven feedback
annotation, it achieves efficient RCA while balancing accuracy
and computational cost. Furthermore, TAMO [48] presents a
tool-assisted LLM agent framework that unifies temporally
aligned multimodal data representations with domain-specific
tools. This design addresses challenges such as restricted
context windows, modal input constraints, and dynamic dependency hallucinations, and demonstrates superior diagnostic
performance across heterogeneous datasets and common fault
types. Given the growing research interest in combining multimodal data with LLMs for AIOPS in microservices, we plan
to incorporate LLMs in future work to achieve more efficient

C. Uncertainty Learning
Uncertainty is primarily categorized into data uncertainty,
which is caused by noise within the training data and cannot be
mitigated by increasing the amount of data; and model uncertainty, which is mainly due to incomplete training or data and
is related to model parameters. Recently, some studies [49],
[50], [51], [52] have focused on uncertainty research in deep
learning to achieve more robust performance. DUA-Nets [51]
dynamically assigns weights to different views of each sample
by estimating data uncertainty, thereby effectively integrating
multi-view information and mitigating noise effects. DMUE
[52] effectively addresses the issue of label ambiguity in facial
expression recognition by introducing a multi-branch learning
framework to discover the latent distribution within the label
space, and leveraging pairwise relationships between instances
to estimate uncertainty. Our research focuses primarily on
leveraging data uncertainty to improve the performance and
robustness of microservice anomaly detection. At the same
time, we utilize model uncertainty in active learning to select
high-information samples.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we proposed MUAD, an uncertainty-aware
multimodal anomaly detection framework for microservice
systems that explicitly models both intra-modal and intermodal uncertainties. MUAD integrates a graph-based probabilistic encoder to robustly learn modality-specific representations under noisy and incomplete observations, a confidenceaware fusion mechanism to dynamically adjust modality contributions, and an active learning strategy to reduce labeling cost. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
demonstrate that MUAD achieves an average F1-score of
98.10%, outperforming state-of-the-art multimodal methods
by up to 7.87%, while consistently exhibiting significantly
lower performance degradation under challenging conditions
such as inter-modal information inconsistency and random
modality missing.
Despite these promising results, we summarize the limitations of our current work and outline corresponding directions
for future research: (1) Log Semantics: While current log
embeddings capture basic patterns, they may miss deep semantic nuances in complex log messages. We plan to incorporate
Large Language Models (LLMs) to enhance log semantics and
generalization capabilities. (2) Task Scope: The current framework of MUAD is primarily optimized for anomaly detection.
We intend to extend the uncertainty-aware representations to
support a unified framework that simultaneously performs
anomaly detection and fine-grained root cause localization for
microservice systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61902440 and 62272001.
This work was also supported by the Key Project of Nature
Science Research for Universities of Anhui Province of China
under Grant 2022AH040019 and 2022AH05008637.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

R EFERENCES
[1] L. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. He, and H. Chen, “Mulan: multi-modal causal
structure learning and root cause analysis for microservice systems,” in
Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, 2024, pp. 4107–4116.
[2] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2019, pp. 2828–
2837.
[3] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal hierarchical one-class network,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 13 016–13 026, 2020.
[4] L. Yang, J. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Dong, and W. Zhang,
“Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via probabilistic label
estimation,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1448–1460.
[5] X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Q. Lin, B. Qiao, H. Zhang, Y. Dang, C. Xie,
X. Yang, Q. Cheng, Z. Li et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on
unstable log data,” in Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM joint meeting
on European software engineering conference and symposium on the
foundations of software engineering, 2019, pp. 807–817.
[6] C. Zhang, X. Peng, T. Zhou, C. Sha, Z. Yan, Y. Chen, and H. Yang,
“Tracecrl: contrastive representation learning for microservice trace
analysis,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM joint European software
engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software
engineering, 2022, pp. 1221–1232.
[7] S. Zhang, Z. Pan, H. Liu, P. Jin, Y. Sun, Q. Ouyang, J. Wang, X. Jia,
Y. Zhang, H. Yang et al., “Efficient and robust trace anomaly detection
for large-scale microservice systems,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023,
pp. 69–79.
[8] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised crossmodal attention,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1724–1736.
[9] C. Zhao, M. Ma, Z. Zhong, S. Zhang, Z. Tan, X. Xiong, L. Yu,
J. Feng, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang et al., “Robust multimodal failure detection
for microservice systems,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023, pp. 5639–
5649.
[10] L. Tao, S. Zhang, Z. Jia, J. Sun, M. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Sun, C. Yang,
Y. Zhang, and D. Pei, “Giving every modality a voice in microservice
failure diagnosis via multimodal adaptive optimization,” in Proceedings
of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 1107–1119.
[11] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An endto-end troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source
data,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1750–1762.
[12] J. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Yu, J. Li, and X. Zheng, “Twin graph-based
anomaly detection via attentive multi-modal learning for microservice
system,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 66–78.
[13] Z. Zhao, T. Zhang, Z. Shen, H. Dong, X. Ma, X. Liu, and Y. Yang,
“Chase: A causal heterogeneous graph based framework for root cause
analysis in multimodal microservice systems,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–
2406, 2024.
[14] N. Zhao, J. Chen, Z. Yu, H. Wang, J. Li, B. Qiu, H. Xu, W. Zhang,
K. Sui, and D. Pei, “Identifying bad software changes via multimodal
anomaly detection for online service systems,” in Proceedings of the
29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2021, pp.
527–539.
[15] Y. Gan, Y. Zhang, D. Cheng, A. Shetty, P. Rathi, N. Katarki, A. Bruno,
J. Hu, B. Ritchken, B. Jackson et al., “An open-source benchmark suite
for microservices and their hardware-software implications for cloud
& edge systems,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, 2019, pp. 3–18.
[16] X. Zhou, X. Peng, T. Xie, J. Sun, C. Xu, C. Ji, and W. Zhao, “Benchmarking microservice systems for software engineering research,” in
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceeedings, 2018, pp. 323–324.
[17] MUAD, https://github.com/slg-frank/muad.git.
[18] A. G. Hawkes, “Markov processes in apl,” ACM SIGAPL APL Quote
Quad, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 173–185, 1990.

13

[19] Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, Q. Fu, Y. Ma, and P. He, “Mrca: Metric-level root
cause analysis for microservices via multi-modal data,” in Proceedings
of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, 2024, pp. 1057–1068.
[20] C. Corbière, N. Thome, A. Bar-Hen, M. Cord, and P. Pérez, “Addressing
failure prediction by learning model confidence,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[21] Z. Han, F. Yang, J. Huang, C. Zhang, and J. Yao, “Multimodal
dynamics: Dynamical fusion for trustworthy multimodal classification,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 20 707–20 717.
[22] G. Yu, P. Chen, Y. Li, H. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Zheng, “Nezha:
Interpretable fine-grained root causes analysis for microservices on
multi-modal observability data,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint
European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 553–565.
[23] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
graph attention network,” in 2020 IEEE international conference on data
mining (ICDM). IEEE, 2020, pp. 841–850.
[24] H. Liu, X. Huang, M. Jia, T. Jia, J. Han, Y. Li, and Z. Wu, “Uacad: Unsupervised adversarial contrastive learning for anomaly detection
on multi-modal data in microservice systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, 2024.
[25] H. Dou, P. Shi, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Deanomaly: Anomaly
detection for multivariate time series using robust decomposition and
memory-augmented diffusion models,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 2025.
[26] J. Yang, Z. Wang, S. Chen, H. He, Y. Hou, and X. Jiang, “Hg-pad:
Heterogeneous graph structure learning aided performance anomaly
diagnosis in microservice systems,” IEEE Transactions on Services
Computing, 2025.
[27] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2015, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
[28] Z. Xie, H. Xu, W. Chen, W. Li, H. Jiang, L. Su, H. Wang, and D. Pei,
“Unsupervised anomaly detection on microservice traces through graph
vae,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, 2023, pp. 2874–
2884.
[29] S. Xie, J. Wang, H. He, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, N. Zhang, and
B. Li, “Tvdiag: A task-oriented and view-invariant failure diagnosis
framework for microservice-based systems with multimodal data,”
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025,
just Accepted. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3734868
[30] S. Liu, B. Zhou, Q. Ding, B. Hooi, Z. Zhang, H. Shen, and X. Cheng,
“Time series anomaly detection with adversarial reconstruction networks,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4293–4306, 2022.
[31] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Han, Y. Su, R. Jiao, X. Wen, and D. Pei, “Multivariate
time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical intermetric and temporal embedding,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM
SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2021, pp.
3220–3230.
[32] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
graph autoencoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 72, pp. 1–11,
2022.
[33] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, vol. 35, no. 5, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[34] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2018,
pp. 387–395.
[35] A. Zimek, E. Schubert, and H.-P. Kriegel, “A survey on unsupervised
outlier detection in high-dimensional numerical data,” Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp.
363–387, 2012.
[36] J. Kim and C. D. Scott, “Robust kernel density estimation,” The Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 2529–2565, 2012.
[37] L. Xiong, B. Póczos, and J. Schneider, “Group anomaly detection
using flexible genre models,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 24, 2011.
[38] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly detection
and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proceedings

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications
security, 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[39] W. Meng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Zhang, D. Pei, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Zhang,
S. Tao, P. Sun et al., “Loganomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential
and quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs.” in IJCAI, vol. 19, no. 7,
2019, pp. 4739–4745.
[40] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,” in 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 492–504.
[41] P. Liu, H. Xu, Q. Ouyang, R. Jiao, Z. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Yang,
L. Mo, J. Zeng, W. Xue et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice
trace anomalies through service-level deep bayesian networks,” in 2020
IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE). IEEE, 2020, pp. 48–58.
[42] Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, B. Qiao, H. Che, P. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Dang, and
Q. Lin, “Tracelingo: Trace representation and learning for performance
issue diagnosis in cloud services,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM International
Workshop on Cloud Intelligence (CloudIntelligence). IEEE, 2021, pp.
37–40.
[43] C. Zhang, X. Peng, C. Sha, K. Zhang, Z. Fu, X. Wu, Q. Lin, and
D. Zhang, “Deeptralog: Trace-log combined microservice anomaly detection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proceedings of the 44th
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 623–634.
[44] P. Wang, X. Zhang, and Z. Cao, “Anomaly detection for microservice
system via augmented multimodal data and hybrid graph representations,” Information Fusion, vol. 118, p. 103017, 2025.
[45] L. Tao, X. Lu, S. Zhang, J. Luan, Y. Li, M. Li, Z. Li, Q. Yu,
H. Xie, R. Xu et al., “Diagnosing performance issues for large-scale
microservice systems with heterogeneous graph,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 2223–2235, 2024.
[46] C. Pei, Z. Wang, F. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, X. He, R. Kang, T. Zhang,
J. Chen, J. Li et al., “Flow-of-action: Sop enhanced llm-based multiagent system for root cause analysis,” in Companion Proceedings of the
ACM on Web Conference 2025, 2025, pp. 422–431.
[47] Y. Han, Q. Du, Y. Huang, J. Wu, F. Tian, and C. He, “The potential of
one-shot failure root cause analysis: Collaboration of the large language
model and small classifier,” in Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, 2024, pp.
931–943.
[48] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Yuan, M. Xiao, F. Zhuang, and D. Yu,
“Tamo: Fine-grained root cause analysis via tool-assisted llm agent with
multi-modality observation data in cloud-native systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.20462, 2025.
[49] P.-Y. Huang, W.-T. Hsu, C.-Y. Chiu, T.-F. Wu, and M. Sun, “Efficient
uncertainty estimation for semantic segmentation in videos,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp.
520–535.
[50] F. Kraus and K. Dietmayer, “Uncertainty estimation in one-stage object
detection,” in 2019 ieee intelligent transportation systems conference
(itsc). IEEE, 2019, pp. 53–60.
[51] Y. Geng, Z. Han, C. Zhang, and Q. Hu, “Uncertainty-aware multi-view
representation learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 7545–7553.
[52] J. She, Y. Hu, H. Shi, J. Wang, Q. Shen, and T. Mei, “Dive into
ambiguity: Latent distribution mining and pairwise uncertainty estimation for facial expression recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 6248–
6257.

Hui Dou is currently an associated professor in
School of Computer Science and Technology at
Anhui University. He graduated from the department
of computer science of Xi’an Jiaotong University
with a Ph.D. degree in 2017. Dr. Dou is now
interested in AI-driven performance diagnosis and
optimization for distributed systems. Until now, Dr.
Dou has published more than 20 papers in some
international conferences and journals such as ASE,
ICDCS, ICPP and IEEE TSC, TPDS, TIM.

14

Shenglai Guo received his BE degree in Software
Engineering from Wuhan Polytechnic University in
2022, and now is a master student in the School of
Computer Science and Technology at Anhui University. His current research topics mainly focus on
anomaly detection in microservices.

Lele Zou received his BE degree in Data Science
and Big Data Technology from Anhui Polytechnic
University in 2022. He received the MS degree
in Artificial Intelligence from Anhui University in
2025. His current research topics mainly focus on
intelligent operations and maintenance for microservices.

Yiwen Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in management science and engineering from the Hefei
University of Technology, in 2013. He is currently a
Professor with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Anhui University. Meanwhile, he is a
Ph.D. advisor. His research interests include service
computing, cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Until now, Dr. Zhang has published more than 70
papers in some international conferences including
AAAI, ICSOC, ICWS and journals including IEEE
IEEE TSC, TKDE, ACM TOIS, TKDD.

Pengfei Chen is currently a professor in School
of Computer Science and Engineering at Sun Yatsen University. He graduated from the department
of computer science of Xi’an Jiaotong University
with a Ph.D. degree in 2016. Now, he is interested
in distributed systems, AIOps, cloud computing,
Microservice. Until now, Dr. Chen has published
more than 50 papers in some international conferences including ICSE, FSE, ASE, ICSOC, ICWS
and journals including IEEE TDSC, TSC, TCC.

Zibin Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor
and the Dean of the School of Software Engineering,
Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China. He authored
or coauthored more than 200 international journal
and conference papers, including 1 ESI hot paper
and 10 ESI highly cited papers. His research interests include blockchain, software engineering, and
services computing. Prof. Zheng was a recipient of
several awards, including the Top 50 Influential Papers in Blockchain of 2018 and the ACM SIGSOFT
Distinguished Paper Award at ICSE 2010.

© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.