2802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Unified Anomaly Detection via Multi-Scale
Contrasted Memory
Loı̈c Jézéquel , Jean Beaudet, Aymeric Histace , and Ngoc-Son Vu
Abstract—Deep anomaly detection aims to provide robust and
efficient classifiers for zero-shot (unsupervised, UNS) and fewshot (imbalanced supervised, IMS) settings. However, current
models still struggle on edge-case normal samples and are often
unable to keep high performance over different scales of anomalies. Additionally, there is a lack of a unified framework that
efficiently addresses both UNS and IMS settings. To address these
limitations, we present a novel two-stage method which leverages
multi-scale normal prototypes during training to compute an
anomaly deviation score. First, we employ a novel memoryaugmented contrastive learning to jointly learn representations
and memory modules across multiple scales. This allows us to
effectively capture subtle features of normal data while adapting
to varying levels of anomaly complexity. Then, we train an
efficient anomaly distance-based detector that computes spatial
deviation maps between the learned prototypes and incoming
observations. Our model outperforms the SoTA on a wide range
of anomalies, including object, style, and local anomalies, as well
as industrial inspection and face anti-spoofing, while being on
par with SoTa out-of-distribution detectors. Notably, it stands as
the first model capable of maintaining exceptional performance
across both settings.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, industrial inspection, face
anti-spoofing, out-of-distribution, unified model, contrastive
learning, differentiable memory, Hopfield network, unsupervised,
imbalanced supervised settings.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETECTING deviations from a normal baseline is a pivotal challenge in machine learning and computer vision.
However, collecting and annotating anomalous data can be
prohibitively expensive. Thus, unsupervised anomaly detection
(UNS-AD) has gained significant attention [1], [2], [3], [4].
UNS-AD methods train models exclusively with anomaly-free
images to detect unseen anomalies, also termed one-class or
zero-shot AD. Yet, in many real-world scenarios, a small set of
anomaly samples may become available over time, prompting
the need for their inclusion to improve AD performance. Consequently, we transition from UNS to imbalanced supervised
(IMS) or few-shot settings. In this context, available anomaly
samples are often intricate, incomplete, and ill-defined, leading
to a significant departure of AD from conventional binary
classification.

D

Received 8 October 2024; revised 18 July 2025; accepted 26 January 2026.
Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 18 March 2026.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
for publication was Dr. Weiying Xie. (Corresponding author: Ngoc-Son Vu.)
Loı̈c Jézéquel and Jean Beaudet are with Idemia Identity and Security
France, 95520 Osny, France.
Aymeric Histace is with ETIS Laboratory - ENSEA, CYU, CNRS, 95000
Cergy, France.
Ngoc-Son Vu is with LIST3N, Université de Technologie de Troyes (UTT),
10300 Troyes, France (e-mail: son.vu@utt.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2026.3663923

Fig. 1. Comparison of AnoMem with SoTA methods on CIFAR-100 with
different anomaly ratio γ. AnoMem is the first unified model to perform well
in both UNS and IMS settings. The so-called unified method here exhibits
rather random performance for the UNS setting.

To date, no efficient unified AD framework has been able
to seamlessly address both UNS and IMS detection. Existing
methods typically perform only within their original design
settings, as can be seen in Fig. 1. Indeed, these methods
employ different specialized approaches with distinct sets of
hyperparameters. The addition of anomalies into the training
leads to a substantial overhaul of the AD algorithms. This
impracticality becomes apparent in real-world applications,
especially when only normal samples are initially available
(UNS), and the acquisition of anomaly samples occurs at a
later stage (IMS).
Apart from the lack of a unified method, existing AD models
suffer from additional limitations. First, there exists a hard
trade-off between remembering edge-case normal samples and
maintaining generalizability toward anomalies, leading to a
lack of normal sample memorization and high false reject
rates on harder samples. Second, these models often focus
on either local low-scale anomalies or global object-oriented
anomalies but fail to combine both (see Table I). Furthermore,
current models tend to be highly dataset-dependent and do not
explicitly utilize multi-scaling.
To overcome these limitations, we present a novel two-stage
AD model, dubbed AnoMem. Our approach improves the AD
landscape by incorporating multi-scale normal class prototypes
within its training phase to compute anomaly deviation scores
across various scales. Unlike previous memory bank equipped
methods [5], [6], AnoMem leverages normal memory layers
spanning multiple scales, thereby augmenting both anomaly
detection efficacy and the quality of learned representations.
Moreover, by employing modern and backpropagable Hopfield layers for memorization, our method surpasses the
efficiency of nearest neighbor anomaly detectors [7], [8].
While the mentioned detectors require retaining the entire
normal set, our model adeptly learns the most representative

1941-0042 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

2803

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF A NO M EM ’ S P ERFORMANCE . A NO M EM D EMONSTRATES E XCEPTIONAL C APABILITIES FOR I MAGE -L EVEL AD W ITH D IFFERENT T YPES
OF A NOMALY. C ATEGORIZATION I S A PPROXIMATE : “ CLASSIC ” AD ARE O BJECT-A NOMALY D ETECTORS B ETWEEN 2019 AND 2021 (E XCEPT
MSC [9] IN 2023), “IAD” D ENOTES M ORE R ECENT M ETHODS O RIENTED T OWARDS I NDUSTRIAL I NSPECTION . P ERFORMANCE L EVELS
ARE Q UANTIZED AND D ENOTED AS F OLLOWS : ? ? ?: E XCELLENT (S OTA), ??: G OOD (C OMPARABLE TO S OTA), ?: P OOR TO
AVERAGE , G RAYED -O UT: C ANNOT B E A PPLIED , -: R ESULTS N OT AVAILABLE OR C ANNOT B E A PPLIED . R ESULTS IN B LUE
W ERE R E -E VALUATED . “EK” I NDICATES M ETHODS W HICH G ET H ELP F ROM E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE , S UCH AS
P RE -T RAINED M ODELS OR E XTRA DATASETS . E CENT VLM-BASED AD M ETHODS ARE M ULTIMODAL AND
EK-D EPENDENT, T YPICALLY E VALUATED ON I NDUSTRIAL B ENCHMARKS . A LTHOUGH L ABELED AS Z ERO S HOT, T HESE M ETHODS M AY I MPLICITLY E NCODE A NOMALY K NOWLEDGE T HROUGH T HEIR
P RETRAINED M ODALITIES (S EE S ECTION II-B)

samples within a fixed size. Through extensive experiments,
we demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms all
previous memory-equipped anomaly detectors.
Our main contributions are the following:
• We propose to integrate backpropagable memory modules
into contrastive learning (CL) to learn normal class prototypes during training. In the first stage, we jointly learn
representations and memory modules using CL, allowing
for effective memorization of normal prototypes.1 In the
second stage, we learn to detect anomalies using the
learned prototypes. When anomalies are available, we
train a detector on the spatial deviation maps between
learned prototypes and observations. AnoMem is the first
working well in both UNS and IMS settings with a few
anomalies (unified method).
• AnoMem is further improved by using multi-scale normal
prototypes for representation learning and AD. We introduce a novel way to efficiently memorize 2D features
maps spatially. This enables our model to accurately
detect low-scale, texture-oriented anomalies and higherscale, object-oriented anomalies (generic detector).
• The efficiency of AnoMem, was validated through extensive experiments with no external knowledge, including
different types of anomalies (object, subtle style, local,
fine-grained), two real-world applications (industrial
inspection and face anti-spoofing), and OOD detection.
We improve detection with up to 50% error relative
improvement on object anomalies and 14% on face
anti-spoofing.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Memory Modules
A memory module should achieve two main operations:
¬ writing inside a memory from a given set of samples, and
­ retrieving the most similar sample from its memory with
1 Unlike coreset algorithm, which stores samples directly, we leverage the

modern Hopfield network to learn and represent prototypes of normal samples.

minimal error when presented with a partial or corrupted input.
Memory modules will vary based on their capacity to memorize data given a model size and the average reconstruction
error.
A simple memory module is the nearest neighbor queue
(non-differentiable memory). Given a maximum size M, it
stores the last M samples representations in the queue. To
remember an incomplete input x, it retrieves the nearest
neighbor from the queue.
A more powerful and expressive form of memory, known
as the modern differentiable Hopfield layer [17], significantly
extends classical Hopfield networks. It represents memory as
a learnable weight matrix X ∈ Rd×NMem , where each column ξi
denotes a prototype pattern in a d-dimensional space. Retrieval
is performed via the iterative update:

ξ(t+1) = softmax β ξ(t) X X> ,
(1)
where ξ(0) is the input query vector input, and β is the inverse
temperature that controls the sharpness of the attention. Iteration continues until convergence, i.e., |ξ(t+1) − ξ(t) | < , where
the variable t denotes the iteration step. This update is formally
equivalent to the self-attention mechanism in Transformers, but
is reapplied recursively, enabling convergence to fixed-point
attractors. This allows the Hopfield layer to function as both
an associative memory and an attention mechanism.
Key advantages of the Hopfield layer include its exponentially large memory capacity, efficient convergence in a few
steps, and low redundancy in learned patterns due to softmaxbased retrieval. It supports diverse attractors (e.g., global, local,
or specific patterns) and integrates seamlessly into modern
deep architectures. Henceforth, we refer to this module as
a Hopfield layer of size NMem , referring to the number of
memory vectors it contains.
B. Anomaly Detection
1) Overview of AD: Due to its importance, AD has received
significant attention, leading to a wide variety of proposed
methods. For comprehensive surveys of deep AD techniques,

2804

we refer readers to [18], [19], while this section focuses on
approaches most relevant to our work.
Recent advances have increasingly explored the use of
vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [20]) for zero-shot AD.
These models inherently rely on EK, such as pre-trained
multimodal embeddings, and will be discussed in more detail
later. Such developments complement the three major families
of AD techniques—pre-trained feature adaptation, discriminative, and generative methods—as categorized in [18]. In
addition to methodological categories, AD approaches can be
further classified by their supervision levels, depending on the
availability and granularity of anomaly annotations. Common
settings include unsupervised (UNS), imbalanced supervised
(IMS), semi-supervised, and open-set detection. For example,
semi-supervised AD leverages partially labeled data, while
open-set supervised AD [21] targets previously unseen anomalies despite limited anomaly types being available during
training. Recently, the UniAD setting [22] was introduced,
enabling a single model to handle multi-class normal samples,
avoiding the need to train separate models per object category.
While these multi-class UNS-AD methods aim for category
generalization, our approach performs robustly in both UNS
and IMS settings with few anomaly samples, and effectively
detects both texture- and object-level anomalies across different scales.
Concerning its applications and evaluation protocols, AD
can also be categorized differently, as depicted in Table I.
Early AD methods were evaluated on object-anomaly datasets
such as CIFAR10/100, which we refer to as classic AD.
The introduction of the MVTec-AD dataset has catalyzed
the development of methods for industrial inspection, and
recent AD methods are evaluated on industrial datasets rather
than CIFAR10/100. Very closely related to AD is out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection (we will briefly discuss the
difference later). For the OOD detection task, many methods
have been recently proposed, but most of them cannot be
applied to object-anomaly or industrial inspection. This paper
aims to develop a generic AD, and we evaluate AnoMem on
these evaluation protocols. Moreover, we also include very
challenging AD benchmarks such as AD on the fine-grained
CUB200 dataset, as well as the second industrial application
of face anti-spoofing.
2) AD Methods: AD involves classifying data into two
categories: normal and anomalous. While the normal class
is well-defined, the anomaly class encompasses all other
variations, making it broader and more complex. This leads to
a natural data imbalance. In this paper, we categorize existing
methods based on the availability of anomalous samples,
leading to two distinct variations: UNS-AD and IMS-AD.
There exist different UNS-AD approaches. Pretext task
methods learn to solve a different auxiliary task on normal
data [10], [11], [23], [24], and the anomaly score reflects
performance on this auxiliary task. Two-stage methods consist
of representation learning and anomaly score estimation. After
training an encoder on normal data using self-supervised
learning [15], [25], [26], [27] or an encoder pre-trained on
additional datasets [9], [28], [29], a classifier computes the
anomaly score in the latent space [1], [30], [31]. Some

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

methods [7], [8] use a nearest neighbor queue for anomaly
scoring. Density estimation methods estimates the normal distribution using deep density estimators like normalizing-flows
[32], variational models [33] or diffusion models [34], [35].
Reconstruction methods measure the reconstruction error of
a bottleneck encoder-decoder, trained with denoising autoencoders [36], [37] or two-way GANs [38], [39], [40]. Some
incorporate memory in the latent space of an auto-encoder [5],
[6] during training for optimal reconstruction. More recently,
knowledge distillation methods have been adapted to AD
by using the representation discrepancy of anomalies in the
teacher-student model [41], [42].
IMS-AD mainly revolves around two-stage methods and
anomaly distance methods. Some recent work has tried to
generalize pretext task to UNS-AD [23]. In the IMS-AD twostage methods, a supervised classifier with the anomalous
samples is trained in the second stage instead of the aforementioned one-class estimator [43]. Distance methods directly
use a distance to a centroid as the anomaly score and learn
the model to maximize the anomaly distance on anomalous
samples and minimize it on normal samples [44], [45]. To
our best knowledge, no IMS-AD methods in the literature
use any kind of memory mechanism for the anomaly score
computation. For instance, MemSeg [46] and PatchCore [2]
use frozen pretrained encoder and memory is not learned.
Moreover, there is no anomaly distance learning.
Our method performs exceptionally well in both unsupervised (one-class) and imbalanced supervised settings,
establishing it as a unified approach.
3) Vision-Language Models (VLM) Based AD: Recent
years have seen significant advances in vision-language models (VLMs). CLIP [20] pioneered large-scale image-text
pretraining, enabling strong generalization across a wide range
of tasks. Models like LLaVA and GPT-4V further unify vision
and language modalities to achieve human-level understanding. These VLMs have also been applied to AD.
WinCLIP [47] introduces a window-based CLIP approach
with a compositional ensemble of state words and prompt
templates, aiming to efficiently extract and aggregate multilevel features. KAnoCLIP [48] and AA-CLIP [49] leverage
prompt learning and lightweight adapters to adapt CLIP for
industrial AD without requiring anomaly samples (i.e., in
UNS-AD settings). AdaptCLIP [50] further enhances robustness by learning domain-specific prompts and fine-tuning on a
small set of normal samples. AnomalyGPT [51] explores the
use of large-scale VLMs to tackle structural anomaly detection
in industrial environments.
While effective, these methods are multimodal and rely on
EK via large-scale pretrained encoders. Moreover, they have
been primarily evaluated on industrial AD benchmarks, which
may limit their generalizability to more diverse anomaly types.
Although often categorized as UNS or zero-shot AD, from
a strict perspective, VLM-based methods are not truly zeroshot, as information about anomalies may already be implicitly
encoded in the pretrained visual or language modalities.
4) Other AD Tasks: Anomaly localization (AL) is a closely
related task whose goal is to produce an anomaly heatmap.
AL datasets range from defect localization [52] to surveillance

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

2805

Fig. 2. Overview of AnoMem’s training. (a) In the first step, representation and normal prototypes are learned simultaneously across multiple scales using
Hopfield layers and contrastive learning (Sec. III-A); (b) In the second stage, multi-scale anomaly detection models are trained using memory deviation maps,
a process applied only in the IMS-AD setting (Sec. III-B). Learnable components are highlighted in dark gray.

video abnormal event detection [53]. Specialized methods targeting localization [1], [54] have been introduced to efficiently
solve this task.
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to detect whether
or not an observation has been sampled from the same
distribution as the training set [55], [56], [57]. Compared
to AD, normal data of OOD is highly multi-modal since it
cover multiple semantic classes. Moreover, OOD will put more
weight than in AD on the acquisition process of data (e.g.,
capture sensor, lighting, background). Therefore, it is generally
preferred for OOD detectors not to generalize too much on
normal data, while it is the opposite in AD.

Algorithm 1 AnoMem First Learning Stage

C. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning (CL) is a self-supervised representation
learning method. It operates on the basis of two principles:
(1) two different images should yield dissimilar representations, and (2) two different views of the same image should
yield similar representations. The views of an image are
characterized by a set of transformations T . These transformations can range from geometric transformations such
as crops and rotations, to colorimetric transformations with
color jitter. There have been many methods enforcing these
two principles: SimCLR [58], Barlow-Twins [27] and VICReg
[59] with a Siamese network, MoCo [60] with a negative
sample bank, BYOL [61] and SimSiam [62] with a teacherstudent network or SwAV [63] with contrastive clusters. While
some contrastive methods such as SimCLR and MoCo require
negatives samples, other such as BYOL, SimSiam and SwAV
do not.
In the simplest formulation, the pairs of representations
to contrast are only considered from two views of a batch
augmented by transformations (t, t0 ). SimCLR minimized the
loss:
B
1 X
LCO =
`NTX (zk , z0 k ) + `NTX (z0 k , zk )
(2)
2B
k=1

where z, z0 are the last features of the two augmented batches
and `NTX is the normalized temperature-scaled cross entropy
loss (NTX). In practice, minimizing will yield representations
with the most angular spread variance, while retaining angular
invariance in regard to T . Memory mechanisms can also be
used into CL as in [64] and [65]. During training, the positive
and negative pairs are augmented with the samples nearest
neighbors from a memory queue. This allows the model to
reach better performance for smaller batch sizes.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
Sec. III-A first details a novel training procedure to simultaneously learn an encoder’s representations and a set of
multi-scale normal class prototypes (the pseudocode can be
found in Alogithm 1). Sec. III-B then presents how to use
the encoder and the normal prototypes to train a one-class or
imbalanced supervised anomaly detector in a unified framework. Our model is summarized in Fig. 2.
Notation: Let X = {(xk , yk )}k be a training dataset with normal samples (yk = 1) for UNS-AD, and potentially anomalies

2806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

(yk = 0) for IMS-AD. f : RH×W×C → RD is a backbone
made of several stages f (1) , · · · , f (S ) where the dimensions
of the sth scale feature map are H (s) × W (s) × C (s) . We note
z(s) = f (s) ◦ · · · ◦ f (1) (x).
A. Learning Representations and Memorizing Normal Class
Prototypes
We first present how memory modules can be used in CL
to provide robust and representative normal class prototypes,
and then generalize the idea to several scales throughout the
encoder (shown in Fig. 2a). We choose to apply a CL type
method rather than other unsupervised learning schemes, as
it produces better representations with very few labeled data
[66]. We also favor self-supervised learning only on the normal
data rather than using a pre-trained encoder on generic datasets
[28] which often performs poorly on data with a significant
distribution shift.
1) Baseline: To learn unsupervised representations and
identify a set of normal prototypes, one approach is to
sequentially apply CL followed by k-means clustering and use
the cluster centroids as the normal prototypes. However, this
method has two significant limitations:
1) The steps of representation learning and prototype construction are entirely decoupled. Research has shown
that incorporating a few representative samples in the
negative examples significantly enhances representation
quality and reduces the reliance on large batch sizes
[63], [64].
2) The k-means prototypes often fail to capture atypical samples effectively. Consequently, harder normal
samples may not be adequately represented by these
prototypes, leading to a higher false rejection rate during
anomaly detection (AD). We perform ablation studies
to compare AnoMem with this baseline using k-means
centroids in Sec. IV-G.
2) Integrated Method: Jointly Learning Memory and
Encoder: To address above-mentioned flaws, we introduce a
novel approach based on memory modules to jointly learn
an encoder and normal prototypes. Let zk and z0 k respectively
be the encoder features for the contrastive upper and lower
branch. Instead of contrasting zk and z0 k , we apply beforehand
a Hopfield memory layer HF(·) to the upper branch in the case
of normal samples. The memory layer is only applied when
the sample is normal, since we assumed that anomalous data is
significantly more variable and less defined than normal data.
As such, we note
Mem(z, y) = y · HF(z) + (1 − y) · z

(3)

Thus, Mem(z, 1) = HF(z) for normal samples and Mem(z, 0) =
z for anomalies. We introduce now the following contrasted
memory loss for representation learning:
B 

1 X
0
`NTX Mem(zk , yk ), z0 k
LCOM (z, z , y) =
2B
k=1


+ `NTX z0 k , Mem(zk , yk )
(4)

where
`NTX (z, z0 ) = − log P

exp(sim(z, z0 )/τ)
p)/τ)
~p 1[~p,z] exp(sim(z, ~

(5)

and ~p covers any representation inside the multi-view batch,
τ is a temperature hyperparameter and sim(·, ·) is the cosine
similarity.
Remarks: Unlike existing two-stage AD methods [1], [9],
[15], [25], [26], [28], [29], [30], [31] which separate representation learning from anomaly score estimation, our approach
explicitly incorporates anomalous and normal labels from the
very beginning of the representation learning phase. Importantly, the labels yk are utilized solely to filter out anomalies
from memory learning, ensuring that the representation learning is effective in both UNS and IMS settings. Additionally,
the encoder and normal prototypes are learned simultaneously from the very beginning of the representation learning
process.
3) Variance Loss as Regularization: Our procedure can
be prone to representation collapse during the first epochs.
Indeed, we observed that the dynamic between CL and the
randomly initialized memory layer can occasionally lead to
a collapse of all prototypes to a single point during the first
epochs. To prevent this, we introduce a regularization loss to
ensure the variance of the retrieved memory samples does not
reach zero:
B
q


1 X
(6)
yk Var Mem(zk , yk )
LV (z, y) = − P
k yk
k=1

4) Multi-Scale Contrasted Memory: To gather information
from several scales, we apply our contrasted memory loss not
only to the flattened 1D output z of our encoder but also to S
intermediate layer 3D feature maps z(1) , · · · , z(S ) .
We add after each scale representation z(s) a memory layer
HF(s) to effectively capture multi-scale normal prototypes.
However, memorizing the full 3D map as a single flattened
vector would not be ideal. Indeed, at lower scales we are
interested in memorizing local patterns regardless of their
position. Moreover, the memory would span across a space
of very high dimensions. Therefore, 3D intermediate maps
are viewed as a collection of H (s) W (s) 1D feature vectors z(s)
i, j
rather than a single flattened 1D vector. This is equivalent
to remembering the image as patches. Since earlier features
map will have a high resolution, the computational cost and
memory usage of such approach can quickly explode. Thus,
we only apply our contrasted memory loss on a random sample
with ratio r(s) of the available vectors on the sth scale.
Our multi-scale contrasted memory loss:

S


X
X
1
0 (s)
LCOM-MS = P (s)
λ(s) LCOM z(s)
i, j , z i, j , y
s |Ω | s=1 (i, j)∈Ω(s)

(s)
+ λV (zi, j , y)
(7)
where λV controls the impact of the variance loss, λ(s) controls
the importance of the sth scale, and Ω(s) is a random sample
without replacement of bH (s) W (s) r(s) c points from 1, H (s) ×
1, W (s) . We choose to put more confidence on the latest stages

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

which are more semantically meaningful than earlier scales,
meaning that λ(1) < · · · < λ(S ) .
We simultaneously minimize this loss on all the encoder
stages and the S memory layers’ weights. An overview of this
first stage is given in Fig. 2a, and its algorithm is presented in
Alg. 1. Compared to previous memory bank equipped anomaly
and OOD detectors [5], [6], [7], [8], [67], our model is the first
to memorize the normal class at several scales, allowing it to
be more robust to anomaly sizes. Moreover, the use of normal
memory does not only improve AD but also the quality of the
learned representations, as will be discussed in Sec. IV-G.
B. Inference: Multi-Scale Normal Prototype Deviation
In this second step, our goal is to compute an anomaly score
given the pre-trained encoder f and the multi-scale normal
memory layers HF(1) , · · · , HF(S ) . For each scale s, we consider
the difference ∆(s) between the encoder feature map z(s) and
its recollection from the sth memory layer. The recollection
process consists in spatially applying the memory layer to each
C (s) depth 1D vector:

∆(s) = z(s) − HF(s) z(s)
(8)
where (HF(z))i, j = HF(zi, j ).
Remark: It is worth noting that only this second stage has
to be swapped between UNS and IMS settings, resulting in a
unified easily-switchable framework for AD.
a. Unsupervised AD. We use the L2 norm of the difference
map as an anomaly score for each scale, and no further
training is required:
sa (s) (x) = k∆(s) k2

(9)

b. Imbalanced supervised AD. The second training stage
of IMS-AD is summarized in Fig. 2b. We use the additional
anomaly data to train S scale-specific classifiers on the difference map ∆(s) . Each classifier is first composed of an average
pooling layer φ followed by a two-layer MLP g(s) with a single
scalar output. φ reduces the spatial resolution of ∆(s) , to prevent
using very large layers on earlier scales. The output of g(s)
directly corresponds to the sth scale anomaly distance:
sa (s) (x) = g(s) ◦ φ(∆(s) )

(10)

Each scale-specific classifier is trained using the intermediate
features of the same normal and anomalous samples used
during the first step along their labels. The training procedure
is similar to other distance-based anomaly detectors [44],
[45] where the objective is to obtain small distances for
normal samples while keeping high distances on anomalies.
We note that our model is the first to introduce memory
prototypes learned during representation learning into the
anomaly distance learning. The distance constraint is enforced
via a double-hinge distance loss:


1
`dist (d, y) = y· max d− , 0 +(1−y)· max (M−d, 0)
M
where d is the anomaly distance for a given sample and M
controls the size of the margin around the unit ball frontier.
Using this loss, both normal samples and anomalies will be

2807

correctly separated without encouraging anomalous features to
be pushed toward infinity. Our second stage loss is:
B

LSUP =

S


1 XX
`dist g(s) ◦ φ(∆(s) ), yk
S ·B

(11)

k=1 s=1

Finally, all scale anomaly scores are merged using a sum
weighted by the confidence parameters λ(s) :
1 X (s)
λ · sa (s) (x)
(12)
sa (x) = P (s)
λ
s
s
The anomaly score sa effectively combines the expertise of
the scores from each scale, making it more robust to different
sizes of anomalies than other detectors. As mentioned in
Sec. III-A, the λ(s) will put more weight to later scales, making
our detector more sensitive to broad object anomalies.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of AnoMem across a wide
range of benchmarks, demonstrating that it is the first unified
approach capable of effectively addressing both UNS and IMS
anomaly detection, as well as various types of anomalies,
including object, local, fine-grained anomalies, and industrial
applications. In Secs. IV-A and IV-B, we provide a detailed
overview of the benchmarks and implementation details. Subsequently, Secs. IV-C to IV-F compare our method with
the state-of-the-art (SoTA) under different scenarios. Finally,
Secs. IV-G to IV-K present various ablation studies.
Remarks: Since not all existing methods were fully evaluated in all settings and for a fair comparison under the
same conditions, we either use existing implementations or
re-implement and evaluate them ourselves for many of those
methods. We denote those results in blue in the following
tables. As posited in [4], it is unfair to directly compare
methods trained from scratch, including AnoMem, with those
utilizing external knowledge (EK), such as pre-trained models
or additional datasets. Thus, we distinguish between non-EK
and EK methods, exemplified in Tabs. II to IV.
A. Evaluation Protocol and Benchmarks
We evaluated AnoMem across a broad range of anomaly
detection benchmarks, as outlined in Tab. I. This evaluation encompassed: (1) one-class novelty detection, adopting
the terminology from [41], with both object-level and finegrained anomaly detection, (2) two real-world applications of
industrial inspection and face anti-spoofing (FAS), and (3) outof-distribution (OOD) detection. In total, we examined seven
distinct datasets.
1) One-class novelty detection: one class is designated as
normal, while all other classes are treated as anomalous
or novel. The final result reported is the mean of all
runs for each possible normal class. We varied the ratio
γ of anomaly data in the training set and averaged the
metrics over 10 random samples for each ratio. The
UNS-AD setting, where γ = 0, is a special case of
the IMS-AD setting. This protocol presents a realistic
challenge and is commonly used in anomaly detection

2808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

TABLE II
C OMPARISON W ITH S OTA FOR O NE -C LASS N OVELTY D ETECTION . T HE UNS-AD S ETTING , W HERE γ = 0, I S A S PECIAL C ASE OF THE IMS-AD
S ETTING . ∗ I S F ROM [35]. N OTE T HAT, EK M ETHODS IN THE UNS S ETTING U SE V ERY L ARGE E XTERNAL DATASETS , S IGNIFICANTLY M ORE
T HAN O UR IMS S ETTING W HERE W E ACHIEVED B ETTER R ESULTS (S EE T EXT )

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE ON I NDUSTRIAL D EFECT D ETECTION U SING THE MVT EC -AD DATASET

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE ON FACE P RESENTATION ATTACK D ETECTION U SING THE
WMCA DATASET, C OLUMNS R EPRESENT U NSEEN ATTACKS

literature to assess the model’s ability to generalize
to various anomalies without relying on a significant
amount of training anomalies. Datasets included CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 [68], and CUB-200 [69]. Notably,

CUB-200, with its 200 fine-grained bird classes (each
with about 50 images), presents a particularly challenging scenario due to its subtle style and local anomalies.
2) Real-world applications: we focus on two real-world
applications of AD, i.e., industrial inspection detection
(IDD) using the MVTec-AD dataset [52] and face antispoofing (FAS) using the WMCA dataset [70]. The
MVTec dataset includes 5 texture classes and 10 object
classes. The training set comprises 3,629 images free
of anomalies, while the test set encompasses 1,725
images, containing both anomalous and anomaly-free
instances. Each class includes various defects to enable
comprehensive testing. AL evaluation of this dataset is
beyond the scope of this paper and will be addressed in
future work. Shifting to the FAS evaluation protocol,
which aims to differentiate real from fake faces, the
training and test data come from the same dataset, but
one attack type is left unseen during training. This
setup allows us to evaluate the model’s generalization
and robustness against new attack types. The WMCA
dataset, containing over 1900 RGB videos, includes various attacks like paper print (PP), screen recording (SR),
paper mask (PM), and flexible mask (FM), covering
object, style, and local anomalies.

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

3) Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection: we assessed how
well the model can distinguish between in-distribution
(ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) samples after training on the ID dataset. For this evaluation, we included
the commonly used SVHN [71] and LSUN [72] datasets.
We report the area under the ROC curve (AUROC) averaged
over all normal classes.
B. Implementation Details
1) Optimization: Training is performed under SGD optimizer with Nesterov momentum [73], using a batch size of
B = 1024 and a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler [74]
for both of the stages.
2) Model Design: Regarding network architecture, a
Resnet-50 [75] (≈ 25M parameters) is used as the backbone f .
We consider two different memory scales: one after the third
stage and another after the last stage. The associated memory
(1)
(2)
layers are respectively of size NMem
= 512 and NMem
= 256
with an inverse temperature β = 2, along with a pattern
sampling ratio of r(1) = 0.3 and r(2) = 1. The choices of
memory size and sampling ratios are respectively discussed in
Sec. IV-H and Sec. IV-I. The scale confidence factors are set
to increase exponentially as λ(s) = 2 s−1 , and the variance loss
factor is fixed to λV = 0.05 after optimization on CIFAR-10.
We use τ = 0.1 as suggested in [58]. For the anomaly distance
loss, we choose a margin size of M = 2. As for the inverse
temperature β, we used the value recommended in [17] based
on the size of our Hopfield memory size.
We conducted a performance evaluation of AnoMem
using different backbone architectures, including EffNet-B0,
ResNet18, and ResNet50. In the context of one-vs-all evaluation settings (UNS and IMS) on the CIFAR dataset, we
achieved consistently high performance.
Remarks: EffNet-B0 emerged as the top performer, demonstrating superior results, followed closely by ResNet50 and
then ResNet18. The performance gaps between these architectures were relatively small, with EffNet-B0 outperforming
ResNet50 by a margin of 0.2% to 0.3%, while ResNet50
surpassed ResNet18 by a modest margin of 0.4% to 0.6%. In
the rest of the paper, we report the performance of AnoMem
using ResNet50, which was the median performer. It is worth
noting that the memory modules are scalable with the chosen
backbone.
3) Input Preprocessing: For all datasets except CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100, we resize the input images to 224 × 224.
Prior works on the MVTec-AD often resized the images to
128 × 128 or 256 × 256, and [41] found that the resolution
of 256 × 256 produced better results (up to 2 points). We
observed the same findings in our experiments; the resolution
of 256 × 256 gives slightly better results than 224 × 224.
However, to demonstrate our method as a generic detector,
we resize all the images to the same size of 224 × 224. As
for the contrastive invariance transformations, we use random
crop with rescale, horizontal symmetry, brightness jittering,
contrast jittering, saturation jittering with Gaussian blur and
noise as in SimCLR [58].
Remarks: It is worth noting that we do not need specific
augmentations as in CSI [15]. Indeed, CSI requires additional

2809

shift transformations (alongside standard augmentations like
SimCLR and AnoMem) to generate its pseudo OOD negatives.
AnoMem performs differently: it directly learns prototypes of
normal samples and does not rely on pseudo negatives or
require shift augmentations.
C. Results on Novelty Detection
For non-EK methods, we consider various categories of
unsupervised (UNS) approaches: the reconstruction error generative model [38], the knowledge distillation method [41],
methods based on pretext tasks [10], [11], and the two-stage
method [15]. Additionally, we include the two-stage IMS-AD
method in [43]. To further illustrate the limitations of classical
binary classification, we include a traditional deep classifier
trained with balanced batches of normal and anomalous samples. We also incorporate unified methods applicable in both
unsupervised and supervised settings, such as a reconstruction
error model [33], and direct anomaly distance models [44].
Finally, we consider EK methods, including RD, SSD, CSI,
and MSC. The results are summarized in Table II, from which
we can draw several key observations:
1) Methods without EK:
• Superiority of AnoMem: First, among the methods without EK, the classical supervised approach
significantly underperforms compared to specialized
anomaly detectors across all datasets. This underscores the necessity of using dedicated AD methods,
as classical models tend to overfit on anomalies.
Furthermore, AnoMem consistently outperforms all
other detectors considered in the study. While its
performance improves with the availability of more
abnormal data, it remains highly competitive even
when trained with only normal samples.
• Efficient memory usage in AnoMem: the memory
usage in AnoMem is significantly more efficient
than that in MemAE or similar models [5],
[6], which rely on pixel-wise reconstruction loss
to learn memory. In contrast, AnoMem employs
contrastive learning, allowing its learnable neural
network-based memory to develop more robust representations. Unlike other methods, such as coreset
technique, which are limited by static memory
mechanisms, AnoMem creates normal prototypes
that are less constrained and more semantically rich
and generalizable. This approach enables AnoMem
to achieve better performance and adaptability in
AD tasks.
2) Comparison with EK methods:
• Remarks. Although EK methods such as CSI and
MSC do not directly use anomalies, they leverage
extensive additional datasets (like ImageNet1K or
21K with up to 14 million images). The pre-trained
models in these methods incorporate significant
information about “pseudo” anomalies (images from
the additional dataset), while the “strict” UNS setting operates under the assumption of no prior
knowledge.

2810

• Efficiency of AnoMem. Despite requiring less
training data, AnoMem demonstrates superior efficiency. For instance, on CIFAR-10, MSC achieved
94.8% AUC with the help of 1 million additional
images, while IMS-AnoMem attained 97.1% AUC
using only 5% of anomaly classes. This highlights
AnoMem’s effectiveness and efficiency in AD even
with minimal data.
• Generalization capacity on challenging benchmark
datasets. AnoMem significantly outperforms CSI on
CUB-200 and MSC on FAS and industrial inspection tasks, achieving up to 10 percentage points
higher AUC (details provided in the next section).
This indicates that SoTA pre-trained methods like
CSI and MSC may perform poorly in the presence
of distribution shifts, whereas AnoMem consistently
performs excellently. Notably, as other detectors,
including the SoTA CSI, struggle with CUB-200,
this dataset represents a valuable benchmark for
assessing AD performance.
3) Unified anomaly detector: AnoMem performs very
well in both UNS-AD and IMS-AD while other unified
methods fail in UNS-AD. AnoMem is the first efficient
unified anomaly detector. We also note that our change
from UNS-AD to IMS-AD was done with minimal
hyperparameter tuning. This is due to the first training
step being shared between two settings.
D. Results on Industrial Defect Detection
Similar to [4] and the previous section, Table III is divided
into two distinct parts to address the discrepancy of non-EK
and EK methods. From this table, several key observations can
be made:
1) Performance of UNS-AnoMem. Without any specific
design for industrial inspection, UNS-AnoMem outperforms all previous methods that do not use external
knowledge (EK), including PatchCore [2], NSA [3], and
SPR (score-based perturbation resilience) [4].
2) IMS-AnoMem performance in comparison with methods
using EK.
• PatchCore [2] and RD [41] utilize pre-trained
models, whereas DRAEM [12] generates synthetic
anomalies from an additional dataset instead of
relying on pre-trained models. Analyzing the outcomes of PatchCore, which has two variations,
with and without EK, indicates that incorporating
EK enhances performance. Trained from scratch
with a limited amount of anomalies, IMS-AnoMem
achieves SoTA performance. The three results
shown correspond to different ratios of anomalous
samples used (γ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.10).
• Other detectors are more complex than ours. DeSTS
[14] combines a pre-trained teacher network, a
denoising student encoder-decoder, and a segmentation network into a framework, while UniAD [22]
utilizes a pre-trained Transformer. “FastViT + [13]”
combines three methods, that are FastVit in [76],

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE FOR OOD D ETECTION

NSA in [3], and SSMCTB (self-supervised masked
convolutional transformer block) in [13], but still
perform worse than AnoMem, even in the UNS
setting.
E. Results on Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS)
Table IV compares our model’s performance on the FAS
intra-dataset cross-type protocol2 with the methods discussed
in Sec. IV-C. Without any additional tuning specific to face
data, our method achieves high-quality results on the FAS
task, surpassing existing anomaly detection models across all
unseen attack types. Notably, it reduces the performance gap
between coarse attacks (e.g., PM, FM) and more challenging
fine-grained attacks (e.g., PP, SR), thanks to its multi-scale
anomaly detection approach. AnoMem consistently outperforms both CSI and the pre-trained MSC model. Additionally,
the use of certain large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet-21K,
may not be feasible in industrial settings due to restrictive
licensing terms.
F. Results on Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Detection
As shown in Tab. V, AnoMem performs comparably to the
SoTA baseline CSI [15]. However, CSI relies heavily on storing the entire training set features during inference, resulting
in a substantial memory footprint with large training sets. In
contrast, our model efficiently learns a fixed size memory.3
Additionally, CSI tends to perform poorly on datasets with a
limited number of training normal samples, as evidenced by
the results on the one-vs-all CUB-200 (with 50 images per
class).
It is important to note that the algorithms presented in [80]
achieve higher performance on this task, but they rely on
models pre-trained on a large-scale dataset such as ImageNet21K (14M images) [81]. Therefore, a direct comparison
between these methods and AnoMem, which is trained from
scratch on a smaller dataset (50K images from CIFAR),
2 Only a few studies have explored applying generic anomaly detection to
this complex real-world problem involving local anomalies. Consequently, we
need to replicate all the results shown in Tab. IV.
3 In terms of memory usage, CSI and pre-trained models using KNN require
storing the entire normal dataset, whereas AnoMem only needs a fixed size.
For example, for OOD detection with CIFAR as the ID dataset, CSI must
retain 60000 samples. In contrast, AnoMem requires only 768 samples (256
for one memory module and 512 for another).

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

2811

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE OF A NO M EM FOR IMAGE C LASSIFICATION
T HROUGH L INEAR E VALUATION

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE OF A NO M EM FOR UNS-AD W ITH
M ULTI -S CALE M EMORY

is not entirely fair. The pre-training samples used in [80]
overlap in nature with the anomalous samples that need to be
detected. Additionally, this protocol involves a normal class
composed of several subclasses, demonstrating the capability
of our memory modules to handle multi-modal normal cues
effectively.
G. Impact of the Multi-Scale Memory
This section examines the impact of multi-scale memory
layers and highlights their benefits for our model’s performance. We will illustrate these advantages through two distinct
tasks: image multi-class image classification and anomaly
detection. The baseline is the model using only the last feature
map, with k-means centroids as its normal prototypes, as
detailed in Sec. III-A.
1) Image Classification: We evaluate the impact of memory
on image classification using linear evaluation on standard
CIFAR-10/100 benchmarks. This involves training an additional linear classifier on frozen encoder representations to
assess how memory influences the contrastive learning of
these representations. Unlike AD, this experiment focuses
on multi-class image classification and aims to validate the
effectiveness of the first step in our approach, as depicted in
Fig. 2a. Tab. VI shows that incorporating memory layers in the
first branch significantly enhances the quality of the encoder
representations. We hypothesize that, similar to the findings
in [64], adding prototypical samples in one branch enables
the model to contrast positive images against representative
negatives. This approach reduces the need for large batch sizes
and significantly lowers multi-scale CL memory usage.
2) Anomaly Detection: To support the importance of memory for AD, we compare the anomaly detector with k-means
centroids or with the normal prototypes learned during the
first stage (Table VII). In the first case, we train the anomaly
detectors with the same procedure but instead of fetching the
Hopfield layer output we use the closest k-means centroid.
Lastly, we measure the impact of multi-scale AD by comparing
the single-scale model only using the last feature map, and our

Fig. 3. Memory experiments on CIFAR10.

Fig. 4. Sampling ratio experiments.

two-scale model. While we sacrifice some of the memory and
training time for the additional scale, our AD performance is
improved significantly.
H. Impact of Memory Size and Scale
The memory size must be carefully chosen at every scale
to reach a good balance between the normal class prototype
coverage and the memory usage during training and inference.
This section presents some rules of thumb regarding the sizing
of memory layers depending on the scale.
We start by plotting the relation between the last scale
memory size, the representation separability, and the final AD
performance in Fig. 3a. As one could expect, higher memory
size produces better quality representations and more accurate
anomaly detector. However, we can note that increasing the
memory size above 256 has significantly less impact on the
anomaly detector performance. Therefore a good trade-off
between memory usage and performance seems to be at 256
on CIFAR-10.
Further, we study the impact of feature map scale on the
required memory size. In Fig. 3b we fix the last scale memory
size to 256 and look at the AD accuracy for various ratios
of memory size between each scale. As lower scales benefit
more from a larger memory than higher scales, we hypothesize
that the feature vectors of more local texture-oriented features
are richer and more variable than global object-oriented ones.
Memory layers thus need to be of higher capacity to capture
the complexity.
In Tab. VIII, we compare the memory usage of different
memory module types across two datasets. Notably, pretrained
models using a nearest-neighbor (NN) queue require storing
the entire normal set, while AnoMem maintains a fixed memory size.

2812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Fig. 5. t-SNE of learned prototypes, normal and anomalous samples on CIFAR10.

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF A DDITIONAL M EMORY U SAGE FOR
S TORING N ORMAL P ROTOTYPES

Fig. 6. Visualization of rescaled normal prototype deviation maps at scale S 1
(7 × 7) and S 2 (14 × 14) across different spoof types in the WMCA dataset.

We also compare the effect of the scale on the performance
of our model. As shown in Fig. 3b, the AD performance consistently improves with higher scales, even when the memory
size remains the same. The AUC can increase by up to 6 points
when the model is extended to scale S 2. We also note that,
even with a larger memory, performance at the lower scale S 1
plateaus significantly below that of S 2. This would support
that higher scale features are necessary to better discriminate
normal samples from anomalies.
Remarks: We believe that the optimal choice of S depends
on the type of anomaly being considered. If the focus is
solely on object-level anomalies, where the semantic class
differs (e.g., a dog versus a cat), a smaller S is sufficient to
capture the normal semantic patterns at higher feature levels.
However, if finer-grained style anomalies are also taken into
account, where the object belongs to the same semantic class
but exhibits stylistic differences (e.g., a painting of a dog

Fig. 7. Failure case visualizations across datasets. Parentheses indicate the
misclassified ground truth (“Norm” = normal misclassified as anomaly, and
vice versa). Cases illustrate limitations such as background sensitivity, scale
variance, and subtle anomalies.

versus a real dog), a larger S is beneficial. In this case,
combining high-level semantic features with low-level textural
patterns becomes important, albeit at the cost of increased
computational complexity. This complementarity across scales
is illustrated in Fig. 6, where each scale appears to specialize
in detecting different spoof-related cues.

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

TABLE IX
L INEAR E VALUATION ON THE CIFAR-10 I MAGE C LASSIFICATION
B ENCHMARK FOR D IFFERENT λV

TABLE X
UNS-AD E VALUATION ON CIFAR-10 AND CIFAR-100 FOR
D IFFERENT λ(s) F UNCTIONS

2813

K. Qualitative Effectiveness of Learned Prototype
We perform in Fig. 5 a t-SNE analysis on the last-scale prototypes, along with test samples from normal and anomalous
classes of CIFAR-10 after the first learning stage of AnoMem.
As we can see, the representations of normal and anomalous
samples are well separated, confirming the effectiveness of our
memory backed representation learning. Moreover, the learned
normal prototypes are well representative of the normal class,
as testified by the close overlap in representation space.
L. Additional Visualizations

I. Impact of Spatial Sampling Ratios
In the first step, sampling ratios r are introduced to reduce
the number of patterns used in the contrastive loss, which
in turn decreases the size of the similarity matrix. At lower
scales, neighboring samples are sufficiently similar, making
it less detrimental to omit some patterns during training.
To determine the optimal sampling ratio, we evaluate the
anomaly detection AUC across various sampling ratios and
anomalous data ratios γ. Given that the feature maps at the
final scale are spatially small, we only adjust the sampling
ratio at the first scale r(1) while keeping r(2) = 1. The batch
size remains fixed throughout all experiments. The results,
shown in Sec. IV-I, reveal that low sampling ratios (γ < 0.3)
substantially degrade AD performance. However, increasing
the sampling ratio beyond a certain point offers diminishing
returns: doubling the number of sampled patterns yields only
a 2% improvement in relative AUC, which may not justify the
added computational cost.

J. Selection and Tuning of Hyperparameters
The variance loss weight λV was evaluated on the CIFAR10
image classification benchmark using a range of commonly
used. As shown in Tab. IX, AnoMem exhibits minimal sensitivity to λV . Moreover, in our tests, it remains fixed for all
other datasets.
For the confidence weights λ(s) , we compared two monotonically increasing functions linear and exponential. As we can
see from the results on UNS-AD in Tab. X, the exponential
weighting yields a better anomaly detection than the linear
weights. We believe that the linear relation does not sufficiently
enhance object anomalies and imposes excessive constraints
during representation learning, particularly when contrasting
very low-scale patterns.
The margin M enforces a norm constraint on normal and
anomaly representations within a radius of less than 1/M
and more than M, respectively. A value of 1 pushes all
representations indiscriminately onto the unit sphere, while
a high value leads to an ill-posed distance loss. We chose
M = 2 as a compromise, allowing half of the unit sphere
to be allocated for normal samples. Indeed, we are currently
working on dynamically adjusting the value of M.

In Fig. 6, we additionally show the normal prototype deviation maps at two scales, S 1 and S 2 , overlaid on various spoof
images from WMCA. While the deviation maps are generally
spatially aligned with the anomalous regions, the significant
differences in score ranges and focus across scales make it
non-trivial to fuse them into a single, meaningful heatmap.
• Partial spoof: undetected at the higher scale S 1 , but fine
textural inconsistencies are captured at S 2 .
• Replay spoof: S 1 detects screen borders, while S 2 captures unnatural skin saturation.
• Mask spoof: S 1 identifies strong reflections, whereas S 2
reveals subtle mask texture.
The combination of both scales enhances the model’s versatility in detecting diverse spoofing artifacts.
We further present several failure cases for each dataset in
Fig. 7, highlighting a few notable limitations:
• Background sensitivity: The anomaly score can be
overly influenced by the background, as seen in CUB
bird images with unusual backgrounds (d, e) or WMCA
Live samples with atypical clothing (a).
• Lack of scale invariance: The model’s reliance on lowscale features can hinder its ability to generalize across
different subject-to-camera distances (e.g., close-up bird
image in CUB (f)).
• Subtle anomalies: Detection can fail when the anomalous region is too small relative to the minimum scale
considered (e.g., WMCA Paper with a thin border (c), or
minor defects in MVTec samples (g, h, i)).
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
In this paper, we introduce a novel two-stage AD model,
AnoMem, designed to seamlessly operate in both UNS and
IMS settings. Our approach involves the memorization of
prototypes for normal class instances to compute an anomaly
deviation score. By incorporating learnable memory layers
for normal instances within a CL framework, we jointly
enhance encoder representations and establish robust memorization of normal samples. Subsequently, these learned
normal prototypes are leveraged to train a straightforward
detector within a unified framework that accommodates both
UNS-AD and IMS-AD. Moreover, we extend these prototypes
to multiple scales, enhancing the model’s robustness against
various anomaly sizes. Finally, we evaluate the performance of
AnoMem on diverse datasets containing object, style, and local
anomalies to demonstrate its efficiency, even when trained
from scratch under limited data regimes.

2814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

Additionally, we could explore using our model for anomaly
localization. This includes investigating more efficient methods for integrating multiple scales and merging the resulting
anomaly maps into a unified heatmap. We might also examine
the use of memory networks for non-contrastive learning
approaches, such as substituting the `NTX loss with crosscorrelation and considering techniques like Barlow-Twins as
an alternative to SimCLR.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was conducted while Loı̈c Jézéquel was affiliated
with both Idemia and ETIS, and Ngoc-Son Vu was affiliated
with ETIS.
R EFERENCES
[1]

C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.
[2] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[3] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic
anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in
Proc. ECCV, 2021, pp. 474–489.
[4] W. Shin, J. Lee, T. Lee, S. Lee, and J. P. Yun, “Anomaly detection
using score-based perturbation resilience,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 23315–23325.
[5] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[6] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14360–14369.
[7] L. Bergman, N. Cohen, and Y. Hoshen, “Deep nearest neighbor anomaly
detection,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10445.
[8] X. Gui, D. Wu, Y. Chang, and S. Fan, “Constrained adaptive
projection with pretrained features for anomaly detection,” 2021,
arXiv:2112.02597.
[9] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “Mean-shifted contrastive loss for anomaly
detection,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 37, 2023, pp. 2155–2162.
[10] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, S. Kadavath, and D. Song, “Using selfsupervised learning can improve model robustness and uncertainty,” in
Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 15637–15648.
[11] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection for
general data,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020.
[12] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8310–8319.
[13] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer
block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024.
[14] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student–teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[15] J. Tack, S. Mo, J. Jeong, and J. Shin, “CSI: Novelty detection via contrastive learning on distributionally shifted instances,” in Proc. NeurIPS,
2020.
[16] S. Noh, D. Jeong, and J.-H. Lee, “Simple and effective out-ofdistribution detection via cosine-based softmax loss,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16514–16523.
[17] H. Ramsauer et al., “Hopfield networks is all you need,” in Proc. ICLR,
2021.
[18] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and
M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and out
of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” Trans. Mach.
Learn. Res., 2022.

[19] Y. Cao et al., “A survey on visual anomaly detection: Challenge,
approach, and prospect,” 2024, arXiv:2401.16402.
[20] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. ICML, 2021.
[21] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7378–7388.
[22] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. NeuRIPS, 2022.
[23] L. Jezequel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Anomaly detection
via learnable pretext task,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.
(ICPR), Aug. 2022, pp. 1178–1185.
[24] L. Jézéquel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Efficient anomaly
detection using self-supervised multi-cue tasks,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 32, pp. 807–821, 2023.
[25] H. Cho, J. Seol, and S.-G. Lee, “Masked contrastive learning for
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
2021, pp. 1434–1441.
[26] C. Chen et al., “Novelty detection via contrastive learning with negative
data augmentation,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
2021, pp. 606–614.
[27] J. Žbontar, J. Li, I. Misra, Y. LeCun, and S. Deny, “Barlow twins: Selfsupervised learning via redundancy reduction,” in Proc. ICML, 2021,
pp. 12310–12320.
[28] Z. Xiao, Q. Yan, and Y. Amit, “Do we really need to learn
representations from in-domain data for outlier detection?” 2021,
arXiv:2105.09270.
[29] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting
pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 2806–2814.
[30] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “SSD: A unified framework for
self-supervised outlier detection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2021.
[31] K. Sohn, C. Li, J. Yoon, M. Jin, and T. Pfister, “Learning and evaluating
representations for deep one-class classification,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020.
[32] N. Kumar, P. Hanfeld, M. Hecht, M. Bussmann, S. Gumhold, and
N. Hoffmann, “InFlow: Robust outlier detection utilizing normalizing
flows,” 2021, arXiv:2106.12894.
[33] T. Daniel, T. Kurutach, and A. Tamar, “Deep variational semi-supervised
novelty detection,” 2019, arXiv:1911.04971.
[34] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM:
Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 649–655.
[35] H. Mirzaei et al., “Fake it till you make it: Near-distribution novelty
detection by score-based generative models,” in Proc. ICLR, 2023.
[36] P. Perera, R. Nallapati, and B. Xiang, “OCGAN: One-class novelty
detection using GANs with constrained latent representations,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 2893–2901.
[37] S. Schneider, D. Antensteiner, D. Soukup, and M. Scheutz,
“Autoencoders—A comparative analysis in the realm of anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 1985–1991.
[38] N. Tuluptceva, B. Bakker, I. Fedulova, and A. Konushin, “Perceptual
image anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACPR, 2020, pp. 164–178.
[39] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Inf. Process. Med. Imag.
(IPMI), 2017, pp. 146–157.
[40] G. Liu, S. Lan, T. Zhang, W. Huang, and W. Wang, “SAGAN: Skipattention GAN for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image
Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2021, pp. 2468–2472.
[41] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[42] M. J. Cohen and S. Avidan, “Transformaly–two (Feature spaces) are better than one,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 4059–4068.
[43] S. Han, H. Song, S. E. Lee, S. Park, and M. Cha, “Elsa: Energy-based
learning for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach.
Vis. Conf., 2021, p. 361.
[44] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR,
2020.
[45] L. Jezequel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Semi-supervised
anomaly detection with contrastive regularization,” in Proc. 26th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Aug. 2022, pp. 2664–2671.

JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY

[46] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method
for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,”
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835.
[47] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer,
“WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 19606–19616.
[48] C. Li, S. Zhou, J. Kong, L. Qi, and H. Xue, “KAnoCLIP: Zeroshot anomaly detection through knowledge-driven prompt learning and
enhanced cross-modal integration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2025, pp. 1–5.
[49] W. Ma et al., “AA-CLIP: Enhancing zero-shot anomaly detection via
anomaly-aware CLIP,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 4744–4754.
[50] B.-B. Gao et al., “AdaptCLIP: Adapting CLIP for universal visual
anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:2505.09926.
[51] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT:
Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,” in
Proc. AAAI, vol. 38, 2024, pp. 1932–1940.
[52] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[53] V. Mahadevan, W. Li, V. Bhalodia, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly
detection in crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 1975–1981.
[54] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
detection and segmentation,” in Proc. ACCV, H. Ishikawa, C. Liu,
T. Pajdla, and J. Shi, Eds., 2020.
[55] Y. Yu, S. Shin, S. Lee, C. Jun, and K. Lee, “Block selection method
for using feature norm in out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 15701–15711.
[56] M. Lafon, E. Ramzi, C. Rambour, and N. Thome, “Hybrid energy based
model in the feature space for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt,
S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, Eds., Jul. 2023, pp. 18250–18268.
[57] A. Djurisic, N. Bozanic, A. Ashok, and R. Liu, “Extremely simple
activation shaping for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. ICLR,
2022.
[58] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
ICML, vol. 1, 2024, pp. 1597–1607.
[59] A. Bardes, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, “VICReg: Variance-invariancecovariance regularization for self-supervised learning,” in Proc. ICLR,
2021.
[60] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[61] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
[62] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2021, pp. 15745–15753.
[63] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin,
“Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster
assignments,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.

2815

[64] D. Dwibedi, Y. Aytar, J. Tompson, P. Sermanet, and A. Zisserman, “With
a little help from my friends: Nearest-neighbor contrastive learning
of visual representations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9568–9577.
[65] S. A. Koohpayegani, A. Tejankar, and H. Pirsiavash, “Mean shift for
self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 10306–10315.
[66] E. Cole, X. Yang, K. Wilber, O. M. Aodha, and S. Belongie,
“When does contrastive visual representation learning work?” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 1–10.
[67] J. Zhang et al., “Out-of-distribution detection based on in-distribution
data patterns memorization with modern Hopfield energy,” in Proc.
ICLR, 2023.
[68] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
Univ. Toronto, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[69] P. Welinder et al., “Caltech-UCSD birds 200,” California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. CNS-TR-2010-001,
2010.
[70] A. George, Z. Mostaani, D. Geissenbuhler, O. Nikisins, A. Anjos, and
S. Marcel, “Biometric face presentation attack detection with multichannel convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 15, pp. 42–55, 2020.
[71] Y. Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, and A. Ng, “Reading
digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning,” in Proc.
NIPS, 2011.
[72] F. Yu, A. Seff, Y. Zhang, S. Song, T. Funkhouser, and J. Xiao, “LSUN:
Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with
humans in the loop,” 2015, arXiv:1506.03365.
[73] I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. E. Dahl, and G. E. Hinton, “On the
importance of initialization and momentum in deep learning,” in Proc.
ICML, 2013, pp. 1139–1147.
[74] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
warm restarts,” in Proc. ICLR, 2016.
[75] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[76] P. K. A. Vasu, J. Gabriel, J. Zhu, O. Tuzel, and A. Ranjan, “FastViT:
A fast hybrid vision transformer using structural reparameterization,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023,
pp. 5762–5772.
[77] A. Zaeemzadeh, N. Bisagno, Z. Sambugaro, N. Conci, N. Rahnavard, and M. Shah, “Out-of-distribution detection using union of
1-dimensional subspaces,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 9447–9456.
[78] W. Liu, X. Wang, J. D. Owens, and Y. Li, “Energy-based out-ofdistribution detection,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
[79] H. Choi, H. Jeong, and J. Y. Choi, “Balanced energy regularization loss
for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 2023,
pp. 15691–15700.
[80] J. Li, P. Chen, Z. He, S. Yu, S. Liu, and J. Jia, “Rethinking out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection: Masked image modeling is all you need,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2023, pp. 11578–11589.
[81] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition
challenge,” in Proc. IJCV, vol. 115, 2015, pp. 211–252.