4480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

When Pre-Training Meets Contrast Learning:
Few-Shot Encrypted Traffic Classification
With Novelty Detection
Lixin Zhao , Changhao Wu, and Aimin Yu

Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification plays an important
role on network security and network management. However,
existing methods face two key limitations: they require large
volumes of labeled data and are typically designed under the
closed-world assumption. This paper presents a novel approach
combining pre-training techniques with contrast learning
to address the challenges of open-world encrypted traffic
classification. Our method utilizes a BERT-based pre-training
model to learn generic traffic representations from large-scale
unlabeled encrypted traffic. In this stage, two pre-training
tasks, the Masked BURST Model (MBM) and BURST Context
Prediction (BCP), are introduced to capture both structural
and contextual features of the traffic. Following this, a contrast
learning strategy is applied on a small labeled dataset to learn
a discriminative feature space, where traffic from the same
category is clustered closely, and traffic from different categories
is largely separated. This strong discriminative property enables
high-accuracy classification of known traffic categories while
detecting novel ones. Experimental results on five encrypted
traffic classification tasks demonstrate that: 1) under full data
conditions, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
with up to an 11.60% improvement in F1 score in both closedand open-world scenarios; 2) even when working in a few-shot
mode, our method achieves the best performance in three
out of five tasks in the closed-world setting and consistently
outperforms the best methods by up to 9.99% in terms of F1
score in the open-world scenario.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, pre-training,
contrast learning, open-world classification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification, which identifies traffic
types originating from different applications and web
services, serves as a cornerstone for managing and securing
networks. It underpins critical functions such as intrusion
detection [11], quality of service (QoS) optimization [36], user
experience enhancement [9], and overall network visibility
[1]. However, the widespread adoption of encryption (e.g.,

N

Received 13 February 2025; revised 14 September 2025 and 15 January
2026; accepted 12 March 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING Editor S. Magnusson. Date of publication 16 March 2026; date
of current version 1 April 2026. This work was supported by the Project of
Cloud Information Security Protection Technology under Grant E4GZ030302.
(Corresponding author: Aimin Yu.)
Lixin Zhao and Aimin Yu are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China (e-mail:
zhaolixin@iie.ac.cn; yuaimin@iie.ac.cn).
Changhao Wu is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China (e-mail: wuchanghao@iie.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3674624

TLS 1.3, VPN, Tor) also allows malware and unauthorized
services to evade detection, presenting significant challenges
to traditional classification methods.
To address the issue of encrypted traffic classification,
research has shifted from early machine learning (ML) with
handcrafted features [4], [31] [32], [33], [42] to deep learning
(DL) models that automatically extract patterns from raw
traffic [26], [38] [39]. While effective, DL models typically
require massive labeled datasets, which are difficult to obtain
due to the need for expert knowledge and the rapid evolution
of traffic patterns.
In recent years, pre-training techiques have gained great
success on the fields of natural language processing [8]
and computer vision [10]. The pre-training based methods
usually use unlabeled data to learn general knowledge in a
self-supervised learning way and then fine-tuning on limited
amount of labeled data to adapt the specific down-stream
tasks. Some attempts, such as PERT [18], ET-BERT [25], and
YaTC [51] etc. have been made in traffic classification based
on pre-training techniques. However, these existing works
only explore the traffic representation ability provided by pretraining techniques in closed-world setting, that means all the
categories of the downstream tasks are known and fixed. As
a matter of fact, due to the openness of the real world, new
encrypted traffic categories will constantly emerge (e.g. newly
released applications with traffic encryption technology).
Therefore, in order to accommodate the real-world scenarios,
the encrypted traffic classification system should be (1) built
on limited labeled traffic data (i.e., few-shot condition) and (2)
performs high-precision classification for known traffic categories and (3) has the ability to detect novel traffic categories.
Existing works have explored few-shot learning and novel
class detection, such as FC-Net [46] and TrafficGPT [15], but
address only isolated aspects of network traffic analysis. FCNet targets few-shot classification for intrusion detection in
closed-world settings, leveraging small samples but failing to
handle unseen classes, limiting its applicability to dynamic network environments where new applications or threats emerge
frequently. Similarly, TrafficGPT leverages GPT-2 for openworld encrypted traffic classification, demonstrating improved
generalization to unknown traffic types. However, its effectiveness depends on large-scale training data and lacks dedicated
few-shot learning mechanisms. Thus, the primary motivation
of our work is to address the dual challenge of classifying
encrypted traffic with limited labeled data (few-shot) while
detecting unseen classes in open-world scenarios, a combination not fully addressed by existing methods.

2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

The core insight of our work is that effective few-shot openworld encrypted traffic classification necessitates a protocolaware hierarchical representation, rather than treating traffic
as generic byte streams. Unlike prior Transformer-based
approaches that treat traffic as flat token sequences (e.g.,
ET-BERT [25]), we explicitly model the inherent hierarchical structure of network traffic. In protocols such as TLS
1.3 or complex tunneling schemes (VPN/Tor), semantically
meaningful units (BURSTs, defined as consecutive packets in
the same direction) naturally correspond to application-layer
request/response transactions. This structural prior acts as a
critical inductive bias, enabling robust generalization under
few-shot and open-world conditions.
To materialize this insight, we introduce a synergistic pretraining framework centered on the BURST concept. Our
framework jointly optimizes two complementary objectives:
the Masked BURST Model (MBM) task, which captures intraBURST syntactic patterns, and the BURST Context Prediction
(BCP) task, which learns inter-BURST semantic relationships.
This hierarchical modeling strategy yields a robust representation foundation that serves as a strong initialization for
downstream adaptation. Furthermore, to address the theoretical gap in open-world traffic classification, we refine these
representations through a theoretically grounded supervised
contrastive learning (SCL) stage. As analyzed in Proposition 1,
this explicitly optimizes the intra-class compactness and interclass separation in the embedding space, thereby minimizing
the open-world risk bound.
We evaluate the performance of our approach on five
encrypted traffic classification tasks. Experimental results
demonstrate that: (1) under full data conditions, our approach
outperforms existing methods across all five tasks, achieving
improvements of 11.60%, 0.92%, 8.83%, 5.60% and 2.16%
in F1 score in the closed-world scenario, and 11.74%, 6.44%,
8.04%, 15.96% and 13.91% in the open-world scenario; (2) in
the few-shot setting, our method achieves the best performance
on the GEAC, ETCV, and EACT tasks, with only a marginal
gap compared to state-of-the-art methods, which operate under
full data conditions, on the EMC and EAC-1.3 tasks in
the closed-world scenario. Notably, compared to specialized
few-shot traffic classification approaches, our method yields
a maximum improvement of 49.32% across all five tasks.
Furthermore, in the open-world scenario, our approach (i.e., in
few-shot condition) consistently outperforms the best existing
methods (i.e., in full data condition) by 3.22%, 2.22%, 0.50%,
9.99% and 0.69% respectively in F1 score.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Integrated Framework for Open-World Analysis: We
explore the synergy between pre-training techniques and
contrast learning to address the dual challenges of fewshot classification and novel class detection in encrypted
traffic.
• Hierarchical Pre-training Scheme: We design two
domain-specific pre-training tasks to capture intraBURST structural patterns and inter-BURST contextual
logic, respectively. Their joint optimization yields a robust
foundation for few-shot adaptation.
• Optimized Metric Space via SCL: We customize a
supervised contrastive learning (SCL) strategy that explicitly enforces intra-class compactness and inter-class

4481

separation, which is theoretically justified to reduce the
open-world classification risk.
• Theoretical Foundation: We provide a theoretical analysis (Proposition 1) that quantifies how the quality of
the learned embedding space bounds the performance
of the nearest mean novelty detector, offering insights
into the method’s effectiveness.
• Extensive Validation: We conduct comprehensive evaluations across five encrypted traffic classification tasks.
Results show that our approach consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both closed-world and openworld scenarios, particularly under few-shot constraints.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
Existing encrypted traffic classification methods can be
divided into two main categories: ML-based methods and DLbased methods. Table I provides a summary and comparison
of existing traffic classification methods, with detailed descriptions presented in the following section.
ML-based methods. The dominant ML-based methods
[4], [31] [32], [33], [42] commonly employ algorithms such
as SVM, KNN, and Naive Bayes to classify encrypted traffic.
They typically rely on manually extracted features, such
as packet count, packet size, and packet inter-arrival time
etc. Recent work like [47] employs advanced handcrafted
path signature features for encrypted traffic analysis,
demonstrating the ongoing potential of feature engineering.
The performance of these approaches hinges on the ability
to extract discriminative features that effectively capture the
differences among traffic categories. However, this feature
extraction process is heavily dependent on domain expertise,
posing challenges to the scalability and adaptability. Whisper
[12] detects malicious traffic, including zero-day attacks, by
leveraging frequency domain features. However, from a traffic
classification perspective, while it can identify novel classes,
its capability is limited to binary classification rather than
fine-grained multi-class classification. FOSS [23] employs
a tree-based framework for fine-grained unknown attack
detection in open-world network intrusion scenarios, but it
cannot effectively adapt to few-shot scenarios.
DL-based methods. DL-based methods automatically learn
complex feature patterns from the raw traffic and perform
classification. Multiple deep learning models are adopted by
different studies, including CNN-based models [29], [38],
[40], RNN-based models [26], [41] and GNN-based models
[20], [39]. Besides, some works [7], [28], [50] also solve the
problem of open-world traffic classification based on deep
learning techniques. Although DL-based methods eliminate
tedious feature engineering, they depend on a large amount of
labeled traffic data for model training to learn valid features.
However, it is time-consuming and error-prone to perform
large-scale traffic labeling. It should be noted that some
DL-based methods [46], [48], [49] focus on few-shot traffic
classification, a scenario that aligns with our focus. However,
these studies lack novelty detection ability. In contrast, our
approach performs open-world traffic classification without
requiring large amounts of labeled data.

4482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF THE E XISTING N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ETHODS

B. Pre-Training Techniques
Pre-training, also known as self-supervised pre-training,
is an approach that involves training a model on a large
amount of unlabeled data before fine-tuning it on a specific
downstream task with labeled data. Pre-trained models, such as
BERT [8] and its variants [21], [27], [37], have demonstrated
a powerful ability to capture generic patterns from largescale unlabeled data, significantly enhancing performance
in downstream tasks. In the field of traffic classification,
PERT [18] was the first to adapt ALBERT for the task
of encrypted traffic classification, demonstrating promising
performance. However, it lacks a tailored design for encrypted
traffic representation and pre-training tasks, which constrains
its generalization to emerging encryption technologies. To
address these limitations, ET-BERT [25] introduces a novel
representation method for encrypted traffic and redesigns two
pre-training tasks. Similarly, TrafficFormer [54] develops a
more fine-grained and complex pre-training task, termed the
Same Origin-Direction-Flow (SODF) task. TrafficLLM [6]
introduces a dual-stage tuning framework leveraging LLMs
for network traffic analysis, using traffic-domain tokenization
along with EA-PEFT to enhance detection and generation
tasks. However, all these methods require extensive fine-tuning
data and are confined to closed-world assumptions, failing to
generalize to novel classes outside the training distribution. For
open-world scenarios, OWCP [24] synthesizes new classes in
a spherical space for N+ 1 classification, yet risks overfitting
due to the complexity of sampling from an infinite class
space. TrafficGPT [15] utilizes GPT-2 [35] combined with the
K-LND [7] distance metric for novelty detection. However,
as demonstrated in Section V-E, generic pre-trained features
without explicit discriminative constraints often lack sufficient class separability. Unlike these approaches, we explicitly
impose a supervised metric learning objective to enforce a
compact and discriminative manifold, which is critical for
robust few-shot and open-world classification.

C. Contrast Learning
Contrast learning is a key approach in self-supervised representation learning, aiming to bring similar samples closer in
feature space while pushing dissimilar ones apart. While it has
achieved significant success in computer vision (e.g. SimCLR
[5], MoCo [19], BYOL [17]) and natural language processing

(e.g. SimCSE [13]), applying it to network traffic remains challenging due to the multi-source heterogeneity and semantic
ambiguity of raw traffic data. In this paper, we bridge pretraining with contrast learning to better characterize encrypted
traffic. Unlike self-supervised paradigms such as SimCLR or
MoCo, which rely on data augmentations and lack explicit
label guidance, our contrastive learning strategy is based on the
Supervised Contrastive Learning (SCL) framework. Moreover,
existing studies mainly adopt contrastive learning in a heuristic
manner, without offering theoretical guarantees in open-world
settings. This limitation motivates our formulation of SCL
tailored for encrypted traffic, which explicitly optimizes discriminability under few-shot and novelty-aware constraints.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Model Overview
The overall framework of our approach is shown in Fig. 1,
which consists of two stages: pre-training and contrast learning. The goal of pre-training is to learn generic patterns for
each traffic flow from large-scale unlabeled encrypted traffic,
and the pre-trained model is then used as a feature extractor
to obtain high-quality initial feature vector representations to
conduct contrast learning. In the contrast learning stage, given
the limited labeled traffic data, it performs similarity learning
under the supervision of a customized contrastive loss function
to obtain an embedding space, in where an open-world nearest
mean classifier is applied.
B. Pre-Training Stage
In the pre-training stage, the model is trained on a massive
unlabeled traffic dataset. The raw traffic data is first converted
into tokens (tokenization), and then constructed into the input
for the pre-training tasks. There are two pre-training tasks:
Masked BURST Model (MBM) task and BURST Context
Prediction (BCP) task.
1) Data Preprocessing: Unlike natural language text which
contains explicit semantic units, traffic data is a pure byte
stream on the network. In order to effectively leverage the
pre-training technique for generic traffic patterns learning,
we perform the follow data preprocessing steps: (1) Flow-toBURST, (2) BURST Tokenization, (3) Token Embedding.
(1) Flow-to-BURST: Give the raw traffic data, we first split
out flows with the same 5-tuple (i.e., source IP, source port,

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4483

Fig. 1. Overview of the whole framework.

destination IP, destination port, and protocol), which includes
packets in both directions. Then, each flow is converted into
multiple BURSTs each of which contains a sequence of
consecutive packets transmitted along the same direction [34].
BURST arises from application-layer behavior and underlying
protocol dynamics and it typically represents a distinct logical
unit of data exchange. In modern web services, the interaction
between client and server often involves segmented resource
requests and responses, driven by the need to fetch multiple
objects such as scripts, stylesheets, or media files. These segmented transfers are shaped by the concurrency mechanisms
of application-layer protocols like HTTP/2 and transport-layer
features like TCP’s congestion control management. As a
result, a BURST reflects both the structure of application data
and the temporal characteristics of its transmission, offering
insights into the operational patterns of the specific application.
(2) BURST Tokenization: In order to transform the BURSTs
into the token representations for pre-training, we draw an
analogy between traffic flows and documents in natural language. From this perspective, BURSTs in flows can be mapped
to sentences in documents. To transform BURSTs into tokenized representations, we decompose each BURST into a
sequence of units analogous to words in natural language. Considering that BURST is composed of a string of hexadecimal
numbers such as 802b04d732, a 2-gram model is employed
to segment hexadecimal BURST data into units consisting of
2 adjacent bytes. For the above example, after segmentation,
the results are 802b 2b04 04d7 d732. We empirically set the
size of segment unit to 2 to limit the corpus size, since a large
corpus space will significantly increase computational cost.
These units are further tokenized using the Byte-Pair Encoding
tokenizer, with a maximum corpus size constrained to 65536
tokens. In addition to the BURST units, special tokens such as
[CLS], [SEP], [MASK] and [PAD] are included in the corpus.
[CLS] is used for classification tasks. [SEP] is used to separate
different BURSTs in the BCP task. [MASK] is used to replace
the masked tokens in the MBM task. [PAD] is used to pad the
input to the maximum length.
(3) Token Embedding: We select BERT as the base model
for pre-training. Since the encoder of the BERT lacks convolutional or recurrent components, it is essential to incorporate
additional information that enables the model to capture the
positional relationships within the input data. Additionally, to

Fig. 2. Illustration of the two pre-training tasks for generic traffic feature
learning.

facilitate the BCP task, it is necessary to include supplementary identifiers that encode the BURST segment information.
These two steps are referred to as positional embedding and
segment embedding, respectively. Furthermore, the process of
transforming BURSTs into tokenized representations is known
as token embedding. Collectively, these three embedding
processes–positional, segment, and token embedding constitute the input representation required for pre-training.
2) Pre-Training Tasks: As shown in Fig. 2, we design two
pre-training tasks, namely MBM task and BCP task, to effectively capture the internal relationships between bytes within
a single BURST and the interrelations between BURSTs
originating from the same flow or across different flows. The
motivation for this two-task design is to learn a comprehensive
representation of traffic flows by capturing both low-level
byte patterns within individual protocol data units (BURSTs)
and high-level contextual relationships between these units.
These two tasks are jointly optimized to enable the model to
comprehend both intra-BURST structures and inter-BURST
correlations, thus facilitating the learning of more generic
feature representations for each flow.

4484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

• MBM TASK. Similar to the Masked Language Modeling
and the Masked Image Modeling introduced in BERT [8]
and BEiT [2] respectively, the MBM task is utilized to learn
the internal byte dependencies within BURSTs by predicting
randomly masked tokens. This task forces the model to
understand the syntactic structure and internal correlations
of a BURST, which is often determined by specific network
protocols (e.g., the structure of a TLS handshake record or
an HTTP header). For example, in a BURST containing a
TLS Client Hello message, the values of certain bytes (e.g.,
version, cipher suites, extensions) are highly correlated. If the
bytes indicating the TLS version are masked, the model must
infer their value based on the surrounding context bytes that
define the TLS handshake structure. In detail, as shown in the
upper part of Fig. 2, we first randomly select tokens to be
masked in the input BURST. Then, for each of the masked
tokens, one of the following actions is performed: (1) Replace
it with the [MASK] token with 80% probability. (2) Replace it
with another token with 10% probability. (3) Do nothing with
10% probability. Finally, a BERT-based model is trained to
predict [MASK] based on the preceding and following bytes
within the BURST. If there are k tokens are randomly masked
in the input BURST S , the loss function for the MBM task
L MBM can be defined as:
L MBM = −

k
X

log(P(MAS Ki = tokeni |Ŝ ; θ))

(1)

i=1

where θ is the set of trainable parameters of Transformer
encoder and P is the probability function modeled by θ. Ŝ
is the representation of BURST S after masking and MAS Ki
is the masked token at the ith position in BURST S .
• BCP TASK. The MBM task discussed above focuses
on learning intra-BURST byte dependencies within individual
traffic units. However, modeling isolated BURSTs alone is
insufficient to capture the generic behavioral patterns of complete traffic flows. To this end, we design the BURST Context
Prediction (BCP) task to learn contextual dependencies across
BURSTs at the flow level.
Unlike Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) in natural language
processing or the Same-origin Burst Prediction (SBP) task
adopted in prior work such as ET-BERT [25], our BCP task
is explicitly grounded in the structural characteristics of network traffic. In ET-BERT, segment-level prediction is typically
constructed by splitting packet sequences at predefined or
arbitrary boundaries, which is effective for capturing local
co-occurrence patterns but does not explicitly model how
semantically meaningful transmission units interact over time.
In contrast, we adopt the BURST, which naturally delimited
by changes in packet direction, as the basic semantic unit. A
BURST often corresponds to a complete request or response
at the application layer, thereby preserving protocol-level
transactional integrity.
Based on this formulation, the BCP task aims to capture higher-order, flow-level semantics by modeling whether
two BURSTs are contextually related within the same communication session. Such relationships are often indicative
of application behavior. For example, in a video streaming
flow, a small request BURST from the client is typically
followed by a large response BURST from the server

containing video data. By learning to distinguish whether two
BURSTs originate from the same flow or from unrelated flows,
the model is encouraged to encode inter-BURST interaction
patterns, including request-response coupling, protocol handshake structure, and transactional rhythms that are invariant
to payload encryption. These flow-level semantics are difficult to capture using packet-level or intra-BURST prediction
objectives alone, yet they are critical for representing complex
encrypted tunnels such as TLS 1.3 and Tor traffic.
Concretely, the BCP task is formulated as a binary classification problem. As illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 2,
during pre-training, two BURSTs are randomly selected to
form a BURST pair. These paired BURSTs are labeled as
BURST-a and BURST-b through segment embedding. With a
probability of 50%, BURST-b is sampled from the same flow as
BURST-a; otherwise, it is sampled from a different flow. Given
a BURST pair Bi = (BURST-ai , BURST-bi ) and its groundtruth label yi ∈ {0, 1}, where yi = 1 indicates that the two
BURSTs originate from the same flow, the loss function of
the BCP task is defined as:
LBCP = −

n
X

log(P(1 − yi |Bi ; θ))

(2)

i=1

In the end, as shown in Equation 3, a weighted sum of L MBM
and LBCP is used as the final loss function for pre-training.
Here, λ is a hyperparameter for balancing the loss values of
the two tasks.
L = λ ∗ L MBM + LBCP
(3)
In essence, the MBM task learns the syntax of traffic (the
structure of individual BURSTs), while the BCP task learns
the storyline (how BURSTs logically connect to form a
meaningful flow). Their combination provides a robust and
general-purpose representation for encrypted traffic flows.
C. Contrast Learning Stage
In traditional methods based on pre-training techniques,
they usually perform fine-tuning by first initializing with the
parameters of the pre-trained model and then continue to train
on the data of the specific task. Unlike these methods, we use
the trained model as a feature extractor to get robust initial
feature vector representations for traffic flows and these feature
vectors are further used as the input for contrast learning. This
decoupled two-stage formulation provides superior scalability
in practical deployment, because it avoids repeatedly finetuning the large pre-trained backbone and enables efficient
updates through retraining only the small contrastive module
when new classes emerge. To be more specific, when the pretraining stage is finished, the parameters are frozen and the raw
traffic data for contrast learning are processed into the same
form as the pre-training stage. Through multi-layer nonlinear
transformation, we obtain the last hidden state as inputs of the
contrast learning stage.
1) Contrast Learning Strategy: Based on the feature representations output from the pre-trained model, this contrast
learning module aims at learning a contrast embedding space
where instances (i.e. traffic flows) have small intra-class scatter
and big inter-class separation. To this end, give each paired
training instances ( x̂i = f (xi ; θ), xˆj = f (x j ; θ)), where xi and

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4485

dissimilar pair in the training set, we can define the loss
function for contrast learning as follows:
X
LCL =
h(1 − yi j (τ − ||g( x̂i ; θ̂) − g( xˆj ; θ̂)||22 ))
(8)
i, j

Fig. 3. Illustration of our proposed contrast learning strategy. (a) original
feature space. (b) contrast embedding space.

x j denote raw traffic flows after preprocessing and f (·; θ) is
a nonlinear mapping modeled by the pre-trained model, the
pair-wise feature distance metric of ( x̂i , xˆj ) can be measured
by computing the Euclidean distance between their feature
representations in the contrast embedding space, which can
be defined as follows:
D( x̂i , xˆj ) = ||g( x̂i ; θ̂) − g( xˆj ; θ̂)||2

(4)

where g(·; θ̂) is modeled by a neural network.
In order to obtain more discriminative feature representations in the contrast embedding space, we expect that the
distances between similar pairs are smaller than those between
dissimilar pairs and there is a large margin between the similar
pairs and dissimilar ones. In our supervised contrast learning
paradigm, the similar and dissimilar pairs are constructed
according to the traffic classes in the downstream tasks.
Specifically, if two instances belong to the same traffic class,
they will be considered a similar pair; otherwise, they will be
considered a dissimilar pair. In addition, to avoid the problem
of data imbalance, we downsample dissimilar pairs to match
the number of similar pairs. In this regard, if x̂i and xˆj are
from the same traffic class, their contrast embedding feature
distance D( x̂i , xˆj ) should be smaller than an up-margin τ1 ; if
x̂i and xˆj are from different traffic classes, D( x̂i , xˆj ) should be
bigger than a down-margin τ2 . This can be formulated as:
(
D2 ( x̂i , xˆj ) < τ1 , yi = y j
(5)
D2 ( x̂i , xˆj ) > τ2 , yi , y j
where τ2 should be bigger than τ1 to enforce the discriminative
feature learning. Furthermore, we introduce an intermediate
parameter τ to reduce the number of free parameters. Specifically, we set τ1 = τ − 1 and τ2 = τ + 1, thus the constraint in
(5) can be simplified as:
1 − yi j (τ − D2 ( x̂i , xˆj )) < 0

(6)

where yi j denotes whether the paired instances ( x̂i , xˆj ) come
from the same class, which is defined as follows:
(
1, yi = y j
yi j =
(7)
−1, yi , y j
An intuitive illustration of our proposed contrast learning
strategy is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that, with the
constrain in (6), there will be an explicit margin between the
similar and dissimilar pairs in the learned contrast embedding
space. Through imposing this constrain on each similar and

where h(x) = max(0, x) is the hinge loss function. It is
worth noting that, thanks to the generic feature representations
produced by the pre-trained model, only a small amount of
instances need to be labeled (i.e. few-shot) for contrast learning to obtain a discriminative feature space which contributes
to performing open-world classification.
2) Open-World Classification: In traditional pre-training
based traffic classification methods, a classifier is commonly
fine-tuned under a closed-world assumption where the number
of possible labels associated with instances at evaluation stage
is known and fixed. However, in real-world scenarios, this
assumption does not hold. In our problem setting, instances
from previously unknown categories may appear after the
classifier is built. Inspired by the Nearest Mean Classifier
utilized in [30], we compute a novelty class detection threshold
T i for each known class i to reject novel class’s instances
and classify instances belonging to known classes. Here, to
determine the optimum threshold value T i for each class i,
we assume that the instances of each class i follow a normal
distribution in the contrast embedding space, characterized
by a specific mean value µi and variance value σ2i . Through
applying the average intra-class distance with a narrow range
of float, we obtain the threshold T i for each class i. This can
be formulated as:
1
0
X
1
(9)
||g( x̂; θ̂) − µi ||22 A + ησi
Ti = @
||Mi ||
x̂∈Mi

where Mi is the training set of class i and ||Mi || denotes the
number of instances in Mi . η is a hyperparameter to control
the classification boundary for each known class.
Finally, to predict the label yi for a raw traffic flow xi ,
we first transform xi through f (·; θ) to get its initial feature
representation x̂i . Then, we further project x̂i to the contrast
embedding space through g(·; θ̂). In the contrast embedding
space, we compute the distance set D̄ x̂i , j from g( x̂i ; θ̂) to
the class center of each known class j. Lastly, we select
the minimum distance minD̄ x̂i , j from D̄ x̂i , j and obtain the
corresponding class label y j . If minD̄ x̂i , j is less than the
threshold T j , the predicted label for xi is y j . Otherwise, xi
will be identified as an instance from novel class. This can be
formulated as:
8
<argminD̄ x̂i , j , if minD̄ x̂i , j < T j
yi = j=1,2,...,C
(10)
:−1,
otherwise
where C is the number of known classes and −1 denotes the
label of novel class.
D. Theoretical Justification
This section provides the analytical foundation for our
methodology, specifically addressing why SCL facilitates novelty detection. We formalize the open-world setting and derive
a generalization bound based on class separation.

4486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Setting. Let P1 , . . ., PC be the distributions of the C known
classes, and Pnovel the unknown novel class distribution.
S At
training time we observe n labeled instances from Cc=1 Pc
only; Pnovel
 is revealed only at test
 time. Denote by Σin =
Ec=1..C E x∼Pc (g(x) − µc )(g(x) − µc )> the intra-class covariance,
and by Σout = Ec=1..C (µc − µ̄)(µc − µ̄)> the inter-class covariance, where µc = E x∼Pc [g(x)] and µ̄ = Ec=1..C [µc ].
Proposition 1: Assume Σin  λ̄ Σout with λ̄ < 1. Then the
expected 0-1 risk of the nearest-mean classifier h satisfies


d log n
4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
∗
+O
(11)
R(h) ≤ ROW +
τ2
n
where R∗OW is the minimum attainable risk under the above

open-world protocol, d the embedding dimension, and τ the
margin in (8).

Proof: For any test sample x drawn from one of the C + 1
distributions, define the margin

kg(x) − µc0 k − kg(x) − µc k
(12)
γ(x) = 0 min
c ∈{1,...,C,novel}

where c is the true class of x. A classification error occurs if
and only if γ(x) < 0. By Chebyshev’s inequality,
P(γ < 0) ≤

Var(γ)
(Eγ)2

(13)

Under the covariance assumption Σin  λ̄ Σout we have
Var(γ) ≤ 4 Tr(Σin ) ≤ 4λ̄ Tr(Σout )

(14)

The margin loss (8) drives the embedding such that Eγ ≥ τ
in population. With finite
we only achieve Eγ ≥ τ −

√ instances
ε(n), where ε(n) = O d/n is the uniform-deviation bound
yielded by the Rademacher complexity of the d-dimensional
linear nearest-mean rule [3]. Inserting this lower bound into
Chebyshev’s inequality gives
Var(γ) 4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
≤
(Eγ)2
(τ − ε(n))2



4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
ε(n)
=
1+O
τ2
τ


4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
d log n
=
+O
(15)
τ2
n
√
where the last step uses ε(n) = O( d/n) and Taylor expansion
under ε(n)  τ. Since R(h)−R∗OW ≤ P(γ < 0), the proposition
follows.


The overall statistics and description about the tasks and the
corresponding datasets are shown in Table II. Before using
these datasets, we remove packets that are irrelevant to actual
data transmission, such as packets using ARP protocol and
DHCP protocol. In addition, to avoid model bias caused by
strong correlation information in each traffic flow, we remove
the Ethernet header, the IP address from the IP header and the
protocol port from the TCP/UDP header.
B. Datasets Usage Settings
• Pre-training Dataset. We select approximately 10GB of
unlabeled traffic data from the ISCX-VPN [14] dataset for pretraining. This dataset provides network traffic captured from
popular applications, including Skype, YouTube, Facebook,
and others. It includes both VPN and non-VPN traffic, offering a balanced representation of encrypted and unencrypted
scenarios.
• Closed-world Settings. To verify the effectiveness of our
approach and compare with other baseline studies in closedworld scenario, each dataset is randomly divided into the
training set, the validation set and the test set in a ratio of
8: 1: 1. Among them, the training set is used to conduct
contrast learning and the validation set is used for optimal
hyperparameter selection and the test set is used to measure
the quality of classification results.
• Open-world Settings. Similarly, to verify the effectiveness of various methods in open-world scenario, we make
the follow settings: for each dataset, 80% of the classes are
randomly selected as known classes, while the remaining 20%
are designated as novel classes. The instances from the known
classes are further divided into the training set, the validation
set, and the test set in a ratio of 8: 1: 1. The test set of the
known classes combined with all instances from the novel
classes constitutes the complete test set.

P(γ < 0) ≤

Interpretation. The MBM+BCP pre-training furnishes
generic and robust initial embeddings in which contrastive
learning can sculpt a highly discriminative space; empirically,
this yields intra-class covariance Σin that is markedly smaller
than inter-class covariance Σout . The derived bound confirms
that this compactness, which captured by a small λ̄, directly
tightens the risk upper-bound for the nearest-mean classifier,
all without requiring any novel class instances during training.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
A. Datasets and Tasks
We conduct five encrypted traffic classification tasks based
on seven public available datasets to evaluate our approach.

C. Implementation
We implemented our approach on a server equipped with
one NVIDIA RTX4090-24G GPU and an AMD 7542 CPU (14
vCPUs), 112 GB of memory. The main network architecture
of pre-training model consists of multiple layers of bidirectional Transformer blocks, each composed of multi-head
self-attention layers [44]. In detail, the network is composed of
12 Transformer blocks, with each self-attention layer including
12 attention heads. We set the dimension of each input token
to 128, and the number of input tokens is 512. In the pretraining stage, we set the balancing coefficient λ to 1. The
batch size is set to 32 and the total steps is set to 500, 000.
The learning rate is 2 × 10−5 , and the warmup ratio is 0.1.
A residual network architecture is applied for conducting
contrast learning. Specifically, the network consists of four
residual blocks, where each block contains 2 convolutional
layers, followed by a skip connection that allows the input
to bypass the convolutional operations and be added directly
to the output. In the contrast learning stage, we set the
batch size to 32, the total epochs to 20 and the learning
rate to 0.001. In addition, the margin τ is set to 5, and the
threshold adjustment coefficient η is set to 2, both of which
are determined through optimal hyperparameter search on the

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4487

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE TASKS AND DATASETS . T HE D ESCRIPTION OF E ACH TASK I S D ETAILED IN THE D ESCRIPTION C OLUMN

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR D IFFERENT TASKS W ITH VARYING K-S HOTS IN C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

validation set of the EMC task. These values are fixed for all
subsequent experiments.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate our approach on five encrypted
traffic classification tasks to answer the following questions:
• RQ1: How effective is our approach under different
k-shot settings?
• RQ2: How does our approach compare to existing methods under both closed-world and open-world settings?
• RQ3: Is the proposed components effective in enhancing
the overall performance?
• RQ4: Do the two proposed pre-training tasks contribute
to learning generic and robust feature representations,
rather than simply benefiting from increased model capacity?
• RQ5: How does our approach perform in terms of time
overhead and system resource consumption?
A. Evaluation Metrics
We assess and compare the performance of the various
methods through four typical metrics, including Accuracy
(AC), Precision (PR), Recall (RC), and F1 score. To avoid
biases caused by data imbalance, we calculate macro average
for each metric. Moreover, for the GEAC task, we report the
macro average results across the Cross-Platform (iOS) and
Cross-Platform (Android) datasets for brevity. Similarly, for
the ETCV task, we provide the macro average over the ISCXVPN (Service) and ISCX-VPN (App) datasets.

B. K-Shot Classification
In this section, we demonstrate the performance of our
approach under different K-shot settings. We verify it on both
closed-world and open-world scenarios. Here, the symbol K
in K-shot is not the absolute number of instances in each
class used for training. Instead, K means K% of instances
are randomly selected from each class of the training set
to conduct contrast learning (e.g. 10-shot indicates that we
randomly select 10% of instances from each class in training
set). The results are detailed in Table III and Table IV.
Closed-world: As shown in Table III, when K = 1,
the performance across all the five tasks is worst because
too few training instances contain limited information about
the diversity of encrypted traffic, which leads to the model
being in an under-fitting state. As the value of K increases,
the classification performance is becoming better and better.
This is not surprising since more information of the training
classes is incorporated into the training phase as K increases.
Specifically, as K grows to 10, the F1 score improves to
0.449, 0.831, 0.709, 0.772 and 0.620 respectively on the five
tasks. When K reaches 20, the classification performance can
be close to the optimal results achieved in K = 100, with
the F1 score gaps only 9.08%, 1.81%, 8.00%, 4.08% and
4.69% respectively across the five tasks. This can be attributed
to the generic initial feature representations obtained from
the customized pre-training model for traffic flows. These
representations enable the subsequent contrast learning task to
learn discriminative features even with only a few instances.
The classification performance of GEAC task is relatively
low (i.e., F1 score is 0.606 when K = 100 and 0.551 when

4488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR D IFFERENT TASKS W ITH VARYING K-S HOTS IN O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING

K = 20). Apart from the large number of categories of GEAC
task, we analyze the reasons for the category similarities,
which contribute to the task’s difficulty, including: (1) Similar
application behaviors—applications of same type (e.g. stream
media applications such as Youku, Tencent Video, iQiyi etc.
or social media applications such as Wechat, QQ etc.) exhibit
overlapping traffic patterns and similar burst characteristics
(e.g., frequent, short bursts for messaging), reducing inter-class
discriminability. (2) Shared third-party domains—multiple
applications connect to common third-party domains for
shared services, such as googleadservices.com for advertising,
appsflyer.com for mobile attribution and marketing analytics,
and googleapis.com for various Google API services, further
blurring category boundaries. However, although the classification accuracy is lower compared to other tasks, we still
achieved the best results compared to other related works,
which is discussed in section V-C.
Open-world: As shown in Table IV, compared to the
closed-world setting, the classification performance has
slightly decreased in the open-world setting, e.g., 2.64%,
3.33%, 4.28%, 2.86% and 3.87% decrease in F1 score respectively across the five tasks when K = 100. This decrease is in
accordance with expectation because open-world classification
requires model to obtain more discriminative features and has
stronger generalization ability. Specifically, in the closed-world
setting, the training set and test set both come from known
categories, so the model is easy to learn the characteristics
of each category and achieve good results on the test set. In
comparison, in the open-world scenario, the model should have
the ability to adapt to the instances of unknown categories.
However, it is worth noting that our approach still achieves
high classification performance across the five tasks when
K reaches 20 (i.e., F1 scores of 0.545, 0.921, 0.812, 0.903,
0.724) and it achieves the best results with F1 scores of 0.590,
0.959, 0.873, 0.952 and 0.819 when K = 100. To demonstrate
the advantage of our approach for few-shot encrypted traffic
classification, we will mainly compare the results obtained at
K = 20 with baselines in the following sections.
C. Comparison Under Closed-World Setting
For the comparison under the closed-world setting, we
evaluate a diverse set of baselines, comprising two MLbased methods: AppScanner [42] and BIND [32], two
DL-based methods: FS-Net [26] and Deeppacket [29], and
four pre-training based methods: PERT [18], ET-BERT [25],
TrafficFormer [54], and TrafficLLM [6]. Since these methods
are not optimized for few-shot learning, we train them on

the entire training set for each task to demonstrate their best
performance. For pre-training based approaches, we adhere
to the dataset selection protocols outlined in their respective
papers. Additionally, we incorporate three recent few-shot
learning methods–FC-Net [46], MetaMRE [48], and FS-MTC
[49]–evaluated under a consistent 20-shot condition for fair
comparison. The experimental results are shown in Table V.
• GEAC Task. The results for the GEAC task are shown
in the leftmost part of Table V, We can observe that the
pre-training based methods are consistently better than both
ML-based and DL-based methods. The reason is that the pretraining based methods obtain essential packet or flow features
from large-scale unlabeled traffic data which contributes a
lot to the built of target classifier. Among all pre-training
based methods, PERT has the worst performance since it has
not designed specific task to learn the transmission structure
of traffic. ET-BERT and TrafficFormer perform better than
PERT by respectively introducing well-designed pre-training
task for traffic feature learning. TrafficLLM, which uses LLMs
for generic traffic representation, achieves competitive results
but underperforms TrafficFormer in this task, with an F1 score
of 0.522 compared to 0.543. Our approach surpasses the stateof-the-art TrafficFormer by 1.47% in F1 score, highlighting
the efficacy of contrast learning in enhancing feature discriminability across traffic categories. Among few-shot methods,
FC-Net, MetaMRE, and FS-MTC exhibit poor performance
(F1 scores below 0.370, approximately 49.32% lower than
ours), highlighting their limited capacity to learn discriminative features from small datasets when dealing with large,
similar traffic categories.
• EMC Task. The results for the EMC task are shown in the
second column group of Table V. In this task, the pre-training
based methods are also superior to those of ML-based and
DL-based ones. PERT still performs worst in all pre-training
methods. TrafficLLM performs strongly, achieving an F1 score
of 0.982, close to TrafficFormer’s 0.983, benefiting from its
LLM-based representation learning for malware traffic patterns. Our approach achieves marginal improvements of 0.10%
across all metrics compared to ET-BERT but lags behind TrafficFormer by 0.81%, 0.91%, 1.02%, and 0.91% in accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 score, respectively. However, with
50% of training instances (K = 50) incorporated into our
contrastive model, performance aligns with TrafficFormer, and
with 100% incorporation, it exceeds TrafficFormer by 1.12%,
1.02%, 0.91%, and 0.91% in the respective metrics. The
strong performance of baselines may be attributed to unencrypted traffic in the malware dataset, providing additional
plaintext information. Among few-shot methods, FC-Net and

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4489

TABLE V
T HE R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT A PPROACHES ON GEAC, EMC, ETCV, EACT AND EAC-1.3 TASKS U NDER C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

MetaMRE achieve performance comparable to ML- and
DL-based approaches but remain inferior to pre-training-based
methods. FS-MTC, benefiting from preliminary knowledge
derived from auxiliary dataset, achieves a higher F1 score than
FC-Net and MetaMRE, yet still trails our method by 7.74%.
• ETCV Task. The results for the ETCV task are shown
in the third column group of Table V, from where we can
see that the classification performance of ML-based methods
and DL-based methods is comparable and consistently inferior to that of the pre-training based methods. Among the
baselines, TrafficLLM achieves F1 = 0.838 and TrafficFormer
achieves 0.836, both of which are comparable to our method
(F1 = 0.839). Nevertheless, with 100-shot data, the F1 score
of our method rises to 0.912, which surpasses TrafficLLM
and TrafficFormer by 8.83% and 9.09% respectively. Fewshot methods such as MetaMRE (F1 = 0.703) and FS-MTC
(F1 = 0.661) remain notably below pre-training based methods
(i.e., 19.34% lower than ours), confirming the importance
of large-scale representation learning for imbalanced datasets
like ETCV task. In addition, our contrast learning strategy
further mitigates the problem of class imbalance by emphasizing instance similarity in the embedding space, improving
representation of minority classes.
• EACT Task. The results for the EACT task, shown in the
fourth column group of Table V, highlight poor performance
across most baselines except TrafficFormer and TrafficLLM,
due to Tor’s multi-layer encryption and routing, which obscure
consistent patterns. Traffic features like packet size and timing,
relied upon by ML-based methods, are rendered ineffective.
TrafficFormer applies a traffic data augmentation method to
reduce the model’s reliance on irrelevant information and
enrich the training instances, which contributes a lot to the
classification performance. TrafficLLM excels with an F1
score of 0.928, outperforming other baselines, thanks to its
LLM-driven contextual representation for anonymized traffic.
Our approach achieves 0.940, improving over TrafficFormer
and TrafficLLM by 3.18% and 1.29% respectively. With
100-shot instances, our method further rises to 0.980, which
is 6.95% higher than TrafficFormer and 5.60% higher than
TrafficLLM. In contrast, few-shot baselines (e.g., MetaMRE
0.524, FC-Net 0.518) lag significantly, highlighting the advantage of pre-training combined with contrast learning under
heavy obfuscation conditions.

• EAC-1.3 Task. The results for the EAC-1.3 task are
shown in the rightmost part in Table V. Our approach performs
better than all ML-based and DL-based methods. It improves
by 8.12% and 2.65% in F1 score over the best ML-based
method BIND and DL-based method FS-Net respectively.
Among pre-training methods, we surpass PERT and ET-BERT
with gains of 8.9% and 2.4% in F1 score, respectively.
TrafficLLM (F1 = 0.801) performs competitively but falls
short of TrafficFormer (F1 = 0.834) by 3.3%, while our
method narrows this gap, trailing TrafficFormer by 2.2%.
With full training data (100-shot), our approach further excels,
surpassing TrafficFormer by 2.16% in F1 score. The slight
underperformance under 20-shot conditions is justified by the
practical costs of traffic labeling. Among few-shot methods,
they exhibit significant performance gaps. While FS-MTC,
benefiting from auxiliary dataset, achieves the best results,
it still underperforms our method by 24.4%, highlighting
the inherent limitations of existing few-shot approaches in
handling large volumes of TLS 1.3 traffic–where they struggle
to learn sufficiently discriminative features.
D. Comparison Under Open-World Setting
We select eight baselines for the comparison in open-world
setting. Among these baselines, there are three ML-based
methods: Whisper [12], FOSS [52], ProGraph [23], three
DL-based methods: Prototype [50], K-LND [7], Trident [53],
and two pre-training based methods: OWCP [24] and TrafficGPT [15]. It is worth noting that Whisper [12] does not
possess multi-class classification capabilities. However, given
its ability to detect unknown categories, it is still included
as a comparative baseline. All evaluation metrics of Whisper are reported under the binary classification setting of
known categories versus novel categories. We train all baseline
models on the entire training set for each task to show
their best performance. The experimental results are shown
in Tables VI. Whisper demonstrates strengths in detecting
unknown categories with F1 scores ranging from 0.477 to
0.903 across tasks, leveraging frequency domain analysis for
robust realtime detection, but its lack of multi-class support
limits its applicability in complex open-world scenarios. The
following analysis will primarily focus on comparisons with
other baselines in the multi-class context.

4490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

TABLE VI
T HE R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT A PPROACHES ON GEAC, EMC, ETCV, EACT AND EAC-1.3 TASKS U NDER O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING

• GEAC Task (open). The results for the GEAC task
are shown in the leftmost part of Table VI. The pretraining based methods demonstrate better results compared to
ML-based and DL-based methods. This superiority suggests
the necessity of obtaining robust feature representations from
pre-trained models for the open-world classification task. For
the pre-training based methods, our approach improves 7.84%,
14.88%, 23.68%, 17.97% in terms of accuracy, precision,
recall and F1 score over OWCP. The reason for the poor
performance of OWCP is that it synthesizes new instances
that around the boundaries of known classes and use them
as the training instances from novel class, but these synthesized instances may not conform to the actual novel class
distribution. In contrast, we make no assumptions about the
distribution of new classes; instead, we focus on learning
more discriminative features based on the available instances
from the known classes. Our approach perform better than
TrafficGPT in terms of accuracy (+ 2.48%), recall (+ 8.91%)
and F1 score (+ 3.22%) but worse in precision (-2.53%). We
attribute this to the insufficient training instances for contrast
learning, as when 100% training instances are used (K = 100),
the precision will be 3.03% higher than TrafficGPT.
• EMC Task (open). The results for the EMC task are
shown in the second column group of Table VI. Our approach
achieves the best performance across all evaluation metrics,
demonstrating its effectiveness in this domain. Specifically, it
outperforms the best-performing DL-based method Trident by
10.69% in F1 score and surpasses the top pre-training based
method TrafficGPT by 2.22% in F1 score. These substantial
improvements highlight the robustness and adaptability of our
approach in handling the challenges associated with encrypted
malware classification. The superior performance indicates
that our method effectively captures discriminative features,
enabling more accurate detection of known and novel malware.
This underscores the potential of our approach as a valuable
tool for real-world malware detection tasks.
• ETCV Task (open). The results for the ETCV task
are shown in the third column group of Table VI. In this
task, pre-training based methods demonstrate superior performance compared to the ML- and DL-based approaches.
Specifically, our approach achieves improvements of 31.82%,
6.00% and 0.50% in F1 score over the state-of-the-art
ML-based method Prograph, DL-based method Prototype
and the pre-training based method TrafficGPT respectively.
Addressing the data imbalance challenge inherent to this task,

our approach effectively mitigates the issue by: (1) capturing
byte-level dependencies within BURSTs as well as the correlations between BURSTs, and (2) learning a similarity metric
rather than directly searching for class boundaries. While
our approach records a slightly lower accuracy (−0.12%)
compared to TrafficGPT, it is important to note that TrafficGPT
relies on dataset-specific fine-tuning in a closed-world setting
to extract features prior to open-world classification. This
process is less practical in real-world scenarios. By contrast,
the generic feature representations derived from the pre-trained
model in our approach are dataset-independent, making it more
applicable to real-world situations and better aligned with
practical requirements.
• EACT Task (open). The results for the EACT task
are shown in the fourth column group of Table VI. Our
approach achieves consistent improvements across all evaluation metrics, surpassing the existing best results obtained
by OWCP by 6.72%, 9.79%, 11.64%, 9.99% in accuracy,
precision, recall and F1 score respectively. This demonstrates
the effectiveness of our method in addressing the challenges
posed by multi-layer encrypted traffic. Such traffic introduces
significant difficulties due to the obfuscation and encryption
mechanisms inherent in the Tor protocol. OWCP tackles
this challenge by firstly conducting contrastive pre-training
to extract discriminative features and then synthesizing flows
of novel class in the feature space to enrich the training
instances. In contrast, we design explicit pre-training tasks to
learn robust and generic feature representations that are better
suited for encrypted traffic. These features are further refined
and enhanced through a contrastive learning strategy, leading to improved discriminative capability. This combination
enables our approach to handle the complexities of encrypted
Tor traffic and perform open-world Tor traffic classification
effectively.
• EAC-1.3 Task (open). The results for the EAC-1.3
task, presented in the rightmost part of Table VI, reveal
that while pre-training methods typically lead, the DL-based
method Trident surpasses the pre-training method OWCP by
9.48% in F1 score, benefiting from its decoupled one-class
learning framework for fine-grained detection. Nevertheless,
Trident still trails our approach by 10.03% in F1 score. Our
approach outperforms the best baseline, TrafficGPT, achieving improvements of 1.21%, 0.42%, 0.82%, and 0.69% in
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score, respectively. These
results suggest that our method’s ability to learn generic yet

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4491

Fig. 4. The visualization for traffic flows on EMC task in different feature space.
TABLE VII
A BLATION R ESULTS ON EMC TASK

discriminative features through task-specific pre-training, combined with contrast learning strategies, allows it to generalize
better to complex and highly encrypted traffic. Furthermore,
the superiority of our approach highlights its practical value for
handling real-world encrypted application classification tasks,
especially under the constraints posed by modern encryption
protocols such as TLS 1.3.
E. Ablation Study
To address RQ3 and RQ4, we analyze the contributions
of pre-training and contrast learning, and further examine the
effectiveness of our two pre-training tasks as well as the impact
of model capacity.
1) Impact of Components: To examine the impact of
pre-training and contrast learning components, we set up
four baselines as follows: (1) NO Pre-Training (NOPT): raw bytes of the first 4 packets (32 bytes each)
after sanitizing biased fields are used for contrast learning.
(2) No Contrast Learning (NO-CL): applying our openworld classification on features from the pre-trained model.
(3) ET-BERT+CL: replacing our pre-training model with
ET-BERT. (4) TrafficFormer+CL: replacing our pre-training
model with TrafficFormer.
Results on the EMC task (Table VII) show that methods
combining both pre-training and contrast learning consistently outperform those using only one component, confirming
their complementary roles. NO-CL yields the worst performance, indicating that contrast learning is crucial for obtaining
discriminative representations. NO-PT performs better than
NO-CL but still lags behind other baselines, showing that
pre-training benefits generic feature extraction and facilitates subsequent discriminative learning. Compared with
ET-BERT+CL, our approach improves F1 score by 1.04%
and 0.88% in closed- and open-world settings, respectively.
ET-BERT only considers intra-BURST correlations, whereas

our MBM and BCP jointly capture both intra- and interBURST relationships. Our method also matches TrafficFormer+CL despite TrafficFormer using a more complex
SODF task, demonstrating that our simpler MBM+BCP design
is both efficient and effective.
To provide a more intuitive comparison, we visualize the
distributions of traffic flows on EMC task by projecting
them onto a two-dimensional feature space using t-SNE. As
illustrated in Fig. 4, the plots have instances from 16 known
classes, indicated from 0 to 15 in different colors, and a set of
instances from novel class (i.e., the remaining 4 categories of
EMC task) indicated in black color. Fig. 4a shows the distribution of raw traffic. This is achieved by selecting the first 4
packets from each flow and the first 32 bytes from each packet.
The resulting 4×32-dimensional feature vector is then reduced
to two dimensions after sanitizing biased fields. Meanwhile,
Fig. 4b illustrates the distribution of traffic flows output by
NO-CL, Fig. 4c is the output of NO-PT and Fig. 4d displays
the output of our complete method. Clearly, the instances are
completely inseparable in the original feature space. After
through the pre-training model, the instance distribution is
more dispersed, but the separability is still poor. Directly apply
contrast learning strategy on the raw traffic can obtain features
with a certain degree of discriminability compared to NoCL or original input, but the instance clusters from different
classes still have a high degree of overlap. In contrast, the
output of our complete method has more distinct groups of
instance clusters for different classes compared to both No-CL
and No-PT and instances from novel classes are well separated
from other clusters containing known class instances. This
also indicates that both the pre-training and contrast learning
component play crucial roles in our approach and complement
each other. In particular, the pre-training component help
extract robust initial feature representations and the contrast
learning component make these feature representations more
discriminative to adapt to the open-world encrypted traffic
classification problem.
2) Effectiveness of Pre-Training Tasks: Furthermore, to
verify the effectiveness of our proposed pre-training tasks
(MBM and BCP) in learning generic and robust feature
representations, we perform an ablation study using adversarial
samples generated via the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
[16]. FGSM introduces controlled perturbations to the original
traffic representations, mimicking real-world noise such as
packet error or network jitter, thereby enabling an evaluation
of the learned features’ resilience.

4492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. F1 score variation with increasing  on ETCV task.

Fig. 6. F1 score variation on EMC task.

Adversarial samples are generated on the test set using the
FGSM formulation:
x0 = x +  · sign(∇ x L(θ, x, y))

(16)

where x represents the embedded representation of a
BURST–a sequence of tokenized traffic units derived from
raw flows via our preprocessing pipeline. Here,  controls the
perturbation magnitude (evaluated at 0, 0.01, 0.1, and 0.5), L
is the loss function, and sign denotes the sign function. The
perturbations are applied to the token embeddings of BURSTs,
which are processed by the BERT-based model. We compare
three configurations on the ETCV task, where models are finetuned with a softmax classifier and then tested on the perturbed
test set. The three configurations are as follows:
• Configuration 1: Pre-training with only MBM, which
reconstructs masked byte sequences within a BURST to
learn generic structural patterns.
• Configuration 2: Pre-training with only BCP, which
predicts contextual relationships between BURSTs to
enhance robustness.
• Configuration 3: Pre-training with both MBM and BCP
(our proposed model).
Fig. 5 illustrates the variation in F1 scores across three configurations under different perturbation magnitudes . Without
perturbation, Configuration 1 exhibits an F1 score 12.3%
lower than Configuration 3, and its performance deteriorates
sharply with minor perturbation ( = 0.01). Under significant
perturbation, the F1 score drops to 0.392, suggesting that
while the MBM task facilitates effective feature learning, features derived solely from MBM lack robustness. Conversely,
Configuration 2 yields the lowest F1 score (below 0.543)
even without perturbation, indicating that learning contextual
relationships between BURSTs alone does not yield generic
features. In contrast, Configuration 3 shows minimal F1 score
degradation (1.43% drop) with minor perturbation. As 
increases, the F1 score remains relatively stable, retaining a
value above 0.780 even at  = 0.5, underscoring the synergistic
role of MBM and BCP pre-training tasks in ensuring the
acquisition of generic and robust feature representations.
In addition, to further evaluate whether the generic and
robust features stem from increased model capacity, we configure the pre-training model with varying architectures as
follows:
• Cap. 1: 2 Transformer block with model dimension 32.
• Cap. 2: 12 Transformer block with model dimension 32.
• Cap. 3: 2 Transformer block with model dimension 128.
• Cap. 4: 12 Transformer block with model dimension 128.
• Cap. 5: 24 Transformer block with model dimension 256.

The model capacity increases progressively from Cap. 1
to Cap. 5. Fig. 6 depicts the variation in F1 scores across
these five configurations on the EMC task, where fine-tuning
is performed using a softmax classifier following pre-training.
The results indicate that the F1 score improvement plateaus
from Cap. 2 to Cap. 5. Notably, despite Cap. 3 having a larger
model capacity than Cap. 2, its F1 score decreases by 1.82%.
Furthermore, comparisons between Cap. 2 and Cap. 4, and
between Cap. 4 and Cap. 5, reveal that merely increasing
model width or depth yields marginal gains, with F1 score
improvements of only 1.68% and 0.31%, respectively. These
findings underscore that simply augmenting model capacity
does not significantly contribute to acquiring generic and
robust feature representations; rather, such representations are
the result of the synergistic interplay between our pre-training
tasks MBM and BCP.
F. Overhead Analysis
In this section, we first give the model parameter quantity
and then perform an overhead analysis of our approach, measuring training time (s/100 batches), inference time (ms/flow)
and GPU memory usage during both training and testing.
The pre-training model parameter mainly consists of four
parts: token embeddings, positional embeddings, Transformer
encoders and output layers. According to our implementation
settings, the approximate number of parameters is as follows:
#Param1 ≈ V × D + L̂ × D
„ƒ‚… „ƒ‚…
token emb

pos emb

+ N × (12D2 + 13D) + (V + 1) × D
„
ƒ‚
… „ ƒ‚ …
output

12-layer encoder

= 65,536 × 128 + 512 × 128
+ 12 × (12 × 1282 + 13 × 128)
+ (65,536 + 1) × 128
≈ 19.3M parameters.

(17)

where V denotes the vocabulary size; D denotes the model
dimension; L̂ denotes the maximum sequence length; N
denotes the number of Transformer blocks. Similarly, the
model of contrast learning mainly comes from two parts: the
convolutional layers in the residual blocks (including their
shortcut connections), and the fully connected layers. The
approximate number of parameters is calculated as follows:
#Param2 ≈

8
X

(i) (i)
(i)
3 × Cin
Cout + Cout



i=1

„

ƒ‚

1D conv (8 layers)

…

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

4493

TABLE VIII
OVERHEAD S TATISTICS OF O UR A PPROACH

+

4
X

( j) ( j)
( j)
1 × Cin
Cout + Cout



Fig. 7. Comparison of model update cost during emergence of novel classes
on EMC task.

j=1

„
+

3
X

ƒ‚

…

1×1 shortcut (4 layers)
(k)
(k)
D(k)
in · Dout + Dout

G. Operational Considerations


k=1

„

ƒ‚

…

fully connected layers (fc1−fc3)

= 59, 968 +
„ ƒ‚ …
conv layers

6, 656
„ƒ‚…

shortcut layers

≈ 265.5K parameters

+ 198, 914
„ ƒ‚ …
FC layers

(18)

(i)
(i)
where Cin
and Cout
denote the input and output channels of the
( j)
( j)
i-th convolution layer; Cin
and Cout
denote the input and output
(k)
channels of the j-th shortcut convolution; D(k)
in and Dout denote
the input and output dimensions of the k-th fully connected
layer.
The overhead statistics based on the above model capacity
are shown in Table VIII. To ensure accurate measurements,
we restricted the system such that when a model task was
executed, it remained the only CPU- and GPU-intensive job
on the machine. Training time was calculated by recording
the total time required to process the entire training set,
dividing by the total number of batches, and then multiplying by 100. As we can see from the first column of
Table VIII, our method takes 5.31s and 2.64s respectively in
the pre-training and contrast learning stage, totally 7.95s. To
calculate the inference time, we recorded the total time taken
by the model to infer the entire test set and then divided
by the number of test flows. Our approach takes 1.12 ms
and 0.05 ms per flow respectively during the pre-training
and contrast learning stage, totally 1.17 ms, which are shown
in the second column of Table VIII. The last two columns
show the GPU memory usage during both training and testing.
The pre-training model’s GPU memory consumption during
training is relatively high (9719MB) due to the need to learn
attention-based token embedding representations for tokens
derived from BURSTs, which involves extensive forward
and backward calculations across Transformer blocks and
generates a large number of intermediate variables. However,
during testing, the GPU memory usage drops to 3773MB since
gradient calculations and back propagation are not required.
In comparison, for contrast learning, the GPU memories
are low during both training (46MB) and testing (12MB)
phase, because only the small contrast embedding network
requires gradient computation and parameter updates, which
significantly reduces the memory footprint.

In this section, we discuss the practical considerations
involved in deploying our approach in a production environment. Two primary challenges arise in operational settings:
i) the computational cost of pre-training, and ii) the ability to
efficiently update the model when new categories emerge.
One-time pre-training cost. The pre-training stage is
designed to be a one-time offline process that captures
generalizable patterns across a wide range of traffic types.
Retraining the pre-trained model is typically unnecessary
unless the underlying traffic distribution undergoes substantial
and persistent shifts, such as the introduction of new encryption standards, major application-layer protocol redesigns, or
fundamental changes in traffic composition. In such cases,
updating the pre-trained model with newly collected unlabeled
traffic restores representational relevance while keeping longterm maintenance manageable.
Fast and lightweight model updates. The second operational challenge concerns incremental updates when novel
traffic classes appear. Traditional softmax-based models, such
as ET-BERT, suffer from architectural coupling, where the
output layer is tied to a fixed number of classes. Consequently,
the emergence of a novel class necessitates a structural modification of the classification head followed by a complete
fine-tuning of the entire model, a process that is both disruptive and time-consuming (i.e., the update cost is orders
of magnitude higher than ours as shown in Fig. 7). In contrast, our approach utilizes a gradient-isolated update strategy.
Since the pre-trained backbone is frozen, only the lightweight
contrastive module requires updating. As illustrated in Fig. 7,
our approach achieves “plug-and-play” adaptation, completing
the model refresh in less than 15 seconds with a negligible
memory footprint (<50 MB), regardless of the number of
novel classes. These findings confirm that our framework is
substantially more scalable in real-world environments where
new traffic categories emerge frequently and rapid adaptation
is essential.
Recommended deployment workflow. Based on the above
considerations, our approach may be deployed in practice
following the workflow: i) collect unlabeled traffic data from
the target environment and conduct one-time pre-training;
ii) label a small number of samples for the downstream task
and perform contrast learning; iii) carry out online classification using the trained model; iv) maintain a candidate pool of
traffic instances predicted as novel classes; and v) periodically

4494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

label a small subset from the candidate pool to refresh the
contrastive module.

R EFERENCES
[1]

VI. D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss some limitations of our approach
and its potential impact on further research in this field. i)
BURST division. Our BURST division employs a primary
criterion: grouping consecutive packets in the same direction.
However, we acknowledge that network attributes such as
inter-packet delays and idle times can influence the logical segmentation of traffic. Even within the same direction, prolonged
intervals between packets may signify distinct applicationlayer operations, such as separate resource requests, which
could justify further segmentation. We note that the BCP task
is designed to learn contextual relationships between BURSTs.
This capability helps mitigate the impact of imperfect segmentation by enabling the model to discern whether BURSTs
belong to the same flow or represent unrelated operations,
thereby preserving structural characteristics at a higher contextual level. ii) Flow-level classification. We learn robust feature
representation for each flow and perform classification task
at singe-flow level. We have not taken the multi-flow relations into consideration, which may degrade the performance
under multi-flow scenarios (e.g. P2P network usually generate
multi-flows to transmit files between peers). Meanwhile, we
cannot perform fine-grained classification at the packet level
as well. iii) Fairness of comparison. Our approach relies
on a pre-training stage, whereas several baselines do not.
We acknowledge that this asymmetry may raise concerns
regarding fairness. However, to the best of our knowledge,
no existing method simultaneously supports pre-training, fewshot learning, and novel class detection. As a result, it is
difficult to compare against a single unified baseline that
covers all three capabilities. Instead, we selected multiple representative methods, each corresponding to a different subset
of these capabilities (pre-training based classifiers, few-shot
learners, and novelty detectors). This design ensures that every
dimension of our method is evaluated against the strongest
available alternatives. Future research may explore unified
benchmarks that incorporate pre-training for all candidate
methods, enabling more strictly controlled comparisons.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an efficient open-world encrypted
traffic classification approach, which achieves few-shot classification by combining pre-training techniques with contrast
learning. In the pre-training stage, we design two pre-training
tasks: MBM task and BCP task, one learns the byte dependencies within BURSTs and the other learns the relationships
between BURSTs, together they guarantee the robust initial
feature representations of traffic flows. In the contrast learning
stage, a discriminative feature space is learned based on the
customized contrast learning strategy. The characteristic of
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability within this
feature space allows us to employ a distance-based metric for
classifying known categories and detecting novel ones. We
evaluate our approach on five encrypted traffic classification
tasks and the results demonstrate that our approach achieves
consistently better performance than baseline studies in both
closed- and open-world settings.

G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
[2] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of
image transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254.
[3] P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson, “Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3,
pp. 463–482, Nov. 2002.
[4] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian,
“Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, Apr. 2006.
[5] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[6] T. Cui et al., “TrafficLLM: Enhancing large language models for
network traffic analysis with generic traffic representation,” 2025,
arXiv:2504.04222.
[7] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne,
“Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109991.
[8] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[9] I. Din, N. A. Saqib, and A. Baig, “Passive analysis of web traffic
characteristics for estimating quality of experience,” in Proc. IEEE
Globecom Workshops, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–5.
[10] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[11] Z. M. Fadlullah, T. Taleb, A. V. Vasilakos, M. Guizani, and
N. Kato, “DTRAB: Combating against attacks on encrypted protocols
through traffic-feature analysis,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 1234–1247, Aug. 2010.
[12] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[13] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of
sentence embeddings,” 2021, arXiv:2104.08821.
[14] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[15] Y. Ginige, T. Dahanayaka, and S. Seneviratne, “TrafficGPT: An LLM
approach for open-set encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 19th
Asian Internet Eng. Conf., Aug. 2024, pp. 26–35.
[16] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
[17] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[18] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[19] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[20] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
[21] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut, “ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language
representations,” 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
[22] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
pp. 253–262.
[23] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
[24] X. Li, B. Feng, T. Zang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, and J. Ma, “Facing unknown:
Open-world encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive pretraining,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2023,
pp. 1255–1260.

ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

[25] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[26] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[27] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
[28] Z. Liu, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Towards open world
traffic classification,” in Proc. Inf. Commun. Security: 23rd Int. Conf.,
Chongqing, China, Nov. 2021, pp. 331–347.
[29] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
[30] T. Mitchell et al., “Never-ending learning,” Commun. ACM, vol. 61,
no. 5, pp. 103–115, 2018.
[31] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using Bayesian
analysis techniques,” in Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS Int. Conf. Meas.
Model. Comput. Syst., Jun. 2005, pp. 50–60.
[32] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[33] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15.
[34] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th
Annu. ACM workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Oct. 2011, pp. 103–114.
[35] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog,
vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[36] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service
mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic
classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., Oct.
2004, pp. 135–148.
[37] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2019,
arXiv:1910.01108.
[38] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2019,
pp. 680–687.
[39] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[40] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[41] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent
neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Depend.
Secure Comput., early access, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[42] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[43] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2020, pp. 1–18.
[44] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[45] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[46] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.

4495

[47] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[48] C. Yang et al., “Few-shot encrypted traffic classification via multi-task
representation enhanced meta-learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 228, Jun.
2023, Art. no. 109731.
[49] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[50] L. Zhao, L. Cai, A. Yu, Z. Xu, and D. Meng, “Prototype-based malware
traffic classification with novelty detection,” in Proc. Inf. Commun.
Security: 21st Int. Conf., Beijing, China, Dec. 2020, pp. 3–17.
[51] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[52] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024.
[53] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
[54] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860.

Lixin Zhao received the B.S. degree from Nankai
University in 2013 and the Ph.D. degree in computer
sciences from the University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2020. He is currently a Research Assistant with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests
include network security and data security.

Changhao Wu received the B.S. degree from
Nankai University in 2022 and the M.S. degree in
cyberspace security from the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2025.
His research interests include network security and
intrusion detection.

Aimin Yu received the B.S. degree from Nankai
University and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute
of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2011.
He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
His research interests include system security and
trust computing.