IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

905

When Unknown Threat Meets Label Noise: A
Self-Correcting Framework
Qianwei Meng , Qingjun Yuan , Jing Tao, Pinghui Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Siqi Lu , Guangsong Li ,
Yongjuan Wang , and Xiaohong Guan , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) are crucial for network management and security. However, in real-world
scenarios, NIDS faces two core challenges: (i) label noise, where
mislabeled samples in the training data distort the model’s decision
boundaries; (ii) unknown attack detection, where existing methods
struggle to identify novel attack patterns in dynamic attack environments. More critically, these two challenges are interlinked,
forming a vicious cycle that continuously degrades the overall
reliability of NIDS. Existing research often addresses these issues in
isolation, and no method has yet been proposed to coordinate their
antagonistic effects systematically. To tackle this open problem, we
propose AEGIS-Net for the first time—a dual anti-noise framework
based on multi-prototype correction and model-agnostic detection.
AEGIS-Net introduces a density-difference-driven multi-prototype
competition mechanism, which achieves fine-grained noise label
correction through feature space sub-cluster analysis. We also
design a distribution-independent k-nearest neighbors detection
paradigm, using the corrected compact feature space to determine
unknown attacks in open environments. The two modules are collaboratively optimized through a shared encoder, forming a positive
cycle of noise suppression and detection enhancement. Extensive
experiments on real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of
AEGIS-Net in addressing these dual challenges. Notably, under
50% asymmetric noise conditions, AEGIS-Net achieves classification accuracy of 89.02% for known attacks and 98.76% for unknown attack detection on the MAL_TLS2023 dataset. Theoretical
proofs and visualization analysis reveal the anti-noise properties of
AEGIS-Net under feature space stability constraints.
Index Terms—Network intrusion detection system, unknown
attack, encrypted traffic.

Received 29 April 2025; revised 27 August 2025; accepted 15 September
2025. Date of publication 19 September 2025; date of current version 14
January 2026. This work was supported in part by The National Key Research
and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB2705000 and in
part by the Natural Science Foundation of Henan under Grant 252300420992.
(Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan.)
Qianwei Meng, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li, and Yongjuan Wang are with the
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: mengqw20@163.com;
080lusiqi@sina.com; lgsok@163.com; pinkywyj@163.com).
Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and Network
Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China, also with the Henan
Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering
University, Zhengzhou 450001, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of
Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100816, China (e-mail:
gcxyuan@outlook.com).
Jing Tao, Pinghui Wang, and Xiaohong Guan are with the MoE Key Lab for
Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail: jtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; phwang@xjtu.edu.cn;
xhguan@xjtu.edu.cn).
Our code is available at https://github.com/niebikong/AEGIS-Net.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3611908

I. INTRODUCTION
URRENT malicious traffic detection methods, especially
the intelligent methods that have been widely used in
recent years, heavily rely on prior knowledge [1], [2], [3]. As
attackers’ behaviors become increasingly covert and new attack
patterns continue to emerge, obtaining precise prior knowledge
becomes more challenging. Specifically, attackers use techniques such as traffic shaping and encrypted payloads to make
malicious traffic highly overlap with normal traffic in terms of
statistical features [4], [5], [6]. Manual or automated labeling
tools struggle to differentiate such obfuscated traffic, leading to
the mislabeling of malicious samples as normal or normal traffic
as attacks, thereby introducing label noise in the dataset.
We summarize the main manifestations of weak prior knowledge in network intrusion detection (NIDS) into two typical
scenarios: the first is label noise, where some malicious traffic in
the dataset is incorrectly labeled as normal or as other malicious
behaviors; the second is unknown attacks, where the model
encounters certain attack categories that were not present in
the training dataset after deployment. Label noise significantly
weakens the model’s generalization performance by causing
feature space distribution shifts and decision boundary distortion [7], [8], [9]. Experiments show that even in scenarios with
low noise rates (≤5%), the upper limit of classification accuracy
is still suppressed at 89% [10]. The model, lacking labels for
unknown attacks, is unable to recognize such traffic, leading
to a sharp increase in false positive rates [11]. Furthermore, if
NIDS includes these misclassified samples in the training set, it
results in new label noise. This misclassification continuously
pollutes the training set, forming a vicious cycle of ”noise-false
detection-more noise,” causing the overall reliability of NIDS to
decline.
In real-world scenarios, the challenges of label noise and
unknown attacks, two major weak prior knowledge issues, coexist, leading to a sharp decline in the detection performance
of malicious behaviors in NIDS. Therefore, NIDS faces two
difficult tasks: T1: the accurate classification of known malicious
attacks, and T2: the precise detection of unknown attacks.
For T1, existing methods assume that the training data labels
are sufficiently accurate and cover the known attack categories.
This assumption is actually difficult to satisfy, as automated
labeling tools may produce mislabels due to protocol parsing
errors or feature extraction biases. In contrast, manual labeling
is easily limited by the experience level of security analysts [12].

C

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Especially in the context of the widespread use of encryption
protocols and the upgrading of traffic obfuscation technologies [13], the reliability of traditional rule-based or signaturebased labeling methods continues to decrease. For T2, existing
methods need to construct a highly discriminative latent feature
space to distinguish between known and unknown categories and
also design robust confidence evaluation mechanisms to reject
uncertain samples [14]. Under the premise of label noise, these
current methods do not have effective countermeasures.
Current NIDS are facing the coupling effect of label noise and
unknown attacks, which fundamentally stems from the dependency on the closed-world assumption in supervised learning
and the unreliability of prior knowledge in a dynamic attack
environment. Therefore, the first challenge of our work is CH1:
How to design methods for handling label noise in weak prior
knowledge? The second challenge of our work is CH2: How to
design noise-resistant detection methods for unknown malicious
traffic?
There are two common strategies used to address CH1: loss
correction [15], [16] and sample selection [17], [18]. Loss correction methods directly modify the design of the loss function
or the assumption of the label distribution, allowing the model
still to learn the correct feature mapping despite label noise. This
method heavily depends on the accurate estimation of the noise
distribution, such as the noise transfer matrix. Sample selection
methods dynamically identify potential clean samples, using
only high-confidence samples for training or assigning weights
to samples to reduce the impact of noise [19]. Sample selection
can explicitly exclude simple noisy samples, but it is prone to
discarding difficult clean samples, leading to a fuzzy decision
boundary for the model. In addressing CH2, whether using
discriminative or generative models, the core challenge lies in
managing uncertainty in open environments [14], [20]. When
facing the complex scenario of noise-unknown attack coupling,
theoretical shortcomings still exist.
To address CH1, we observe that there is a density difference
between clean samples and noisy samples. Additionally, since
network traffic in high-dimensional representation spaces often
contains multiple sub-clusters, we select multiple prototypes
for each category of sample to infer the true label of noisy
samples, achieving precise classification of known malicious
traffic. To address CH2, we do not make any assumptions about
the underlying distribution of traffic, and model-independent,
based on the distance of the sample to the known class, we
distinguish between known and unknown class traffic.
Considering both CH1 and CH2, we propose a novel intrusion detection system, AEGIS-Net, under the scenario of
weak prior knowledge. Its innovation lies in two aspects: First,
a multi-prototype dynamic correction mechanism based on
density heterogeneity is constructed. By exploring the multisubcluster distribution characteristics of known class traffic,
a dynamic prototype set is established to accurately locate
noise samples and correct their labels, overcoming the limitations of single-prototype representation in modeling intraclass diversity. Second, a non-parametric detection paradigm
based on the relative distance ratio of K-nearest neighbors
is designed. An adaptive threshold mechanism constructs a
distribution-independent open space metric system, eliminating

Fig. 1. Early methods considered CH1 and CH2 in isolation. (a) Decision
boundary of a closed-world classifier under noisy labels in an open environment.
(b) Decision boundary of a closed-world classifier under noisy label learning
in an open environment. (c) Decision boundary of AEGIS-Net in an open
environment.

reliance on traffic distribution assumptions. The two modules
form a bidirectional enhancement mechanism through a shared
feature encoding network: the label correction process enhances
the feature compactness of known classes. At the same time, the
model-independent k-nearest neighbor detection leverages the
corrected feature space to improve the separability of unknown
attacks, forming a positive feedback loop of noise suppression
and detection enhancement. We prove both theoretically and
experimentally that the detection performance of AEGIS-Net is
independent of the noise rate under the premise of feature space
stability. A comparison between our AEGIS-Net and existing
methods is visualized in Fig. 1.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first intrusion detection model to comprehensively consider both label noise and
unknown attack detection in a weak prior knowledge scenario.
In summary, this paper provides the following contributions:
r To address CH1, we propose a density difference-driven
multi-prototype label noise correction mechanism, achieving fine-grained label correction through feature space
sub-clusters.
r To address CH2, we design a model-agnostic paradigm
for unknown traffic detection, eliminating the reliance
on specific distribution assumptions found in traditional
methods. We theoretically prove that AEGIS-Net exhibits
noise-resistant properties in open-world scenarios.
r We validated the effectiveness and efficiency of AEGISNet on four public datasets for both CH1 and CH2. Compared to the current SOTA, AEGIS-Net achieves optimal
performance. Even in high-noise scenarios, the performance of unknown malicious traffic detection remains
unaffected by noise rates.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
presents an overview of the related work, followed by a problem
statement in Section III. Subsequently, the method design is
detailed in Section IV. The proof of theory is given in Section V.
Moreover, our approach is evaluated in Section VI. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
In this paper, we only review various classification models
related to noise label handling and unknown malicious traffic
detection. In Table I, we give a summary for each related work.

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

907

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORK

A. Noise Label Handling
Noise label handling methods can be summarized into Loss
Correction, Sample Selection, Semi-Supervised Learning, and
Meta-Learning, among others. MCRe [19] balances robust training and data cleaning, resulting in a cleaner dataset and a more
accurate classification model. UTC [21] employs a consensus
filtering mechanism with an ensemble of classifiers, using a
veto strategy to identify and remove strong noise samples.
The introduction of Tolerant Weight adjusts the contribution of
suspected noisy samples in training, reducing the noise impact.
NSTC [22] enhances traffic classification performance under
noisy environments by integrating multiple classifiers to detect
noise, weighted sample selection, and combining robust classifiers. Co-teaching [23] uses two neural networks, with the
current network passing the samples it considers clean to the
other network for training, thereby avoiding noise accumulation.
DSDIR [26] proposes a distribution-aware sample selection
method to re-label samples while addressing both noise label
and long-tail issues. TRACE [27] utilizes a multi-loss optimization mechanism to jointly optimize feature completeness, intraclass compactness, and inter-class distinguishability, generating
noise-resistant traffic representations.
B. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection
CBSeq [20] employs channel-level behavior clusters as detection units, extracting four types of behavior sequences and
using independent sub-networks for each. The self-attention

mechanism captures internal relationships within sequences
to distinguish malicious from benign traffic. In the work by
Qing et al. [24], they leverage neural networks to synthesize
unknown traffic, effectively converting the open-world problem
into a closed-world classification challenge. The work in [25]
introduces Wasserstein DRO into federated learning, leveraging
noisy data by normalizing it into a robust region defined by the
Wasserstein-2 distance, dynamically adjusting the distribution
of noisy data to align with clean data. RoFi [38] develops a
robust traffic representation method that generates a Traffic Aggregation Matrix (TAM) using packet counts and time series to
fully capture key information features leaked in the traffic. RFGHELAD [39] integrates multiple machine learning/deep learning models into a single framework using heterogeneous ensemble learning, addressing the coexistence of unknown attacks and
adversarial attacks in fine-grained attack detection scenarios.
Yang et al. [43] proposes a lightweight method for detecting
unknown malicious traffic by utilizing a variational autoencoder
and EVT theory to model reconstruction errors, with dynamic
model updates through model distillation. The authors in [44]
presents RAGN (Robust Adaptive Graph Neural Network) for
detecting unknown malicious traffic and improving resilience to
adversarial attacks, along with the SPAN (Semantic-Preserving
Adversarial Node Injection) attack method to evaluate defense
capabilities in dynamic environments. HyperVision [45] models
IP addresses as nodes and traffic patterns as edges, reducing
graph density through flow aggregation and feature recording
and employing unsupervised graph learning techniques like

908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

connectivity analysis and key vertex clustering to detect anomalous interactions. Kitsune [46] continuously learns the pattern of
normal traffic through an autoencoder. Once behavior deviates
from this normal pattern, it is flagged as anomalous based on
the reconstruction error. However, if attack traffic is mixed into
the deployment environment from the beginning, the model
will incorrectly learn the abnormal behavior and will no longer
classify it as anomalous in the future. This is a limitation of
Kitsune.

TABLE II
SYMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS USED IN THIS PAPER

C. In Summary
Existing research has made significant progress in addressing
noisy labels and unknown malicious traffic detection. However,
these two critical challenges are often tackled in isolation, leading to suboptimal performance in real-world scenarios where
both issues coexist. To address the above limitations, this paper proposes a collaborative optimization framework for noise
robustness and unknown attack detection. Through dynamic
label correction and a flexible, generalizable, non-parametric
open-world detection paradigm, it achieves accurate detection
of unknown malicious traffic in noisy environments.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
The problem of simultaneously solving CH1 and CH2 can
be defined as follows:
Let Ṽ = {xi , yi }N
i=1 be the training data of known classes
traffic (possibly containing noise), and notate RO and Rε represent the unknown risk and empirical risk, respectively. The goal
of detecting unknown malicious traffic is to find a measurable
function f ∈ H, where f (x) > 0 indicates correct identification.
The following formula determines the function f :

  
,
(1)
arg min RO (f ) + λr Rε f Ṽ
f ∈H

where λr is a regularization constant.
From observing this function, we can derive the following
conclusions:
There is a trade-off between empirical risk and unknown risk.
When the empirical risk is large, it indicates poor model fitting on
the training set, and the closed-world classification performance
is suboptimal. In this case, if the model fails to effectively
distinguish the known classes, its decision boundary may not be
clear enough, making it more prone to misclassifying unknown
classes, thereby increasing the unknown risk and degrading the
performance of unknown class detection. When the empirical
risk is small, although the closed-world classification performance is better, overfitting may occur, resulting in decreased
generalization ability of the model. In this case, the model may
overly rely on the distribution features of the training data,
reducing its robustness to unknown classes, which may actually
increase the unknown risk. The goal of (1) is to adjust the
importance of both risks by the weight λr , but the selection
of λr during the optimization process is challenging.
In the case of having only known-class traffic, the unknown
risk RO cannot be directly computed or optimized because RO

involves the integration over the open space, which cannot be
computed explicitly.
When there are noisy labels in the training set, the noisy labels
introduce incorrect supervisory signals, causing the model to
learn erroneous feature associations. In this case, the model
may fail to converge effectively, and the empirical risk will
significantly increase. Suppose the model forcibly fits noisy
labels, such as memory noise samples. In that case, it may result
in the empirical risk being underestimated on the training set,
but the true generalization ability decreases, and the closedworld classification remains worse. Additionally, noisy labels
distort the distribution of the known classes, leading the model
to learn incorrect decision boundaries, making it more likely
to misclassify unknown class traffic as known classes, which
increases the unknown risk. As the noise rate increases, the
closed-world classification performance continues to decline,
and the empirical risk increases overall, which also increases
the unknown risk, resulting in worse unknown class detection
performance.
To minimize the interference of noisy labels, a direct approach
is to detect the noisy samples in the training dataset Ṽ and correct
the labels of the noisy samples, thereby reducing their impact
on the function as much as possible.
Formally, given a training set Ṽ , where x is a traffic sample and
y is its annotated label with y ∈ L = {1, 2, . . . , c}. We denote
the true label of xi as yi∗ . Conventionally, we assume that all
annotated labels of the traffic samples are correct, i.e., yi = yi∗ .
Thus, we can use the cross-entropy loss function to optimize the
model parameters and achieve an accurate classification of the
traffic. However, the assumption of clean labels is too strict for
real-world scenarios, and noisy labels are unavoidable in realworld datasets. Therefore, our goal is to design a noise-resistant
method for unknown malicious traffic detection. The symbols
and definitions used in this paper are shown in Table II.
IV. OUR APPROACH
Our system is designed based on a dual strategy: First, by
analyzing the clustering characteristics of encrypted traffic in a
high-dimensional feature space, we dynamically select multiple
representative samples as reference benchmarks for each known
traffic class. By measuring the similarity differences between
samples, we identify and correct mislabeled traffic data, thereby

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

909

Fig. 2. The overview of AEGIS-Net. After the initial training is completed using noisy labels during the training phase, it proceeds to the noisy label correction
phase. The noise label correction phase consists of four steps: I: Calculate the density and similarity metric for each sample, II: Prototype selection, III: Voting
decision, IV: Noise sample label correction. These four steps are alternated and repeated in each epoch.

alleviating the interference of noisy labels on model learning.
Second, during the unknown attack detection phase, we employ
a model-independent mechanism based on neighboring sample
distance comparison. By calculating the distance between the
test sample and known categories, we determine whether it
belongs to an unknown attack type, avoiding any pre-specified
assumptions about the data distribution. Both modules share
a feature encoding network, which enhances the intra-class
cohesion of the feature space through noise correction, while
the optimized compact features improve the ability to distinguish
unknown classes, forming a closed-loop optimization process.
The overall framework of AEGIS-Net is shown in Fig. 2,
which consists of three modules: the traffic preprocessing module, the model training module, and the unknown malicious traffic detection module. The traffic preprocessing module extracts
statistical features from the raw network flows and transforms
them into feature vectors. The model training module corrects
the labels of the training data through noise label correction,
thereby obtaining a reliable network representation to assist
downstream tasks. Based on this, the model has learned the
correct decision boundaries. The unknown malicious traffic
detection module uses the KNN algorithm to detect unknown
malicious traffic.
A. Traffic Preprocessing
The traffic preprocessing module transforms raw network
traffic into a one-dimensional feature vector. As shown in Fig. 2,
we divide the raw network traffic into bi-directional flows according to five tuples. We use CICFlowMeter1 to compute the
features of each flow. In the experiments, we remove categorical
features such as Flow ID, Src IP, Src Port, Dst IP, Dst Port,
and Timestamp, keeping only numerical features to prevent the
model from memorizing specific information and instead focus
on learning the inherent patterns of attacks.

1 https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter

B. Training Phase
The core objective of the training phase is to optimize the
parameters θ of the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) so
that the feature extractor E acquires discriminative representation capabilities. Standard training uses the cross-entropy loss
function:
n
1
yi log F (xi , θ) ,
(2)
L(F (θ, x), y) = −
n i=1
where n is the mini-batch size, and yi is the label corresponding
to the feature vector xi . Since real-world data may contain
label noise (i.e., yi could be incorrect), a dynamic correction
mechanism is introduced to generate corrected labels ŷ. Based
on the original and corrected labels, a robust classification loss
function is constructed:
LCla = (1 − α)L(F (x, θ), y) + αL(F (x, θ), ŷ).

(3)

To enhance the structure of the feature space, a contrastive
learning mechanism is further introduced. The InfoNCE loss
function [47] is used to improve intra-class compactness and
inter-class separability:



n
exp qi · ki+/ τ
1

LContrast = −
log
, (4)
n
n i=1
j=1 exp (qi · kj− /τ )
where qi is the encoding vector of the query sample i, ki+ is
the encoding vector of the positive sample corresponding to
query sample i, kj− is the encoding vector of a negative sample
not corresponding to query sample i, and τ is the temperature
parameter that controls the distribution of similarity scores.
Considering the above objectives, the overall loss function is
defined as:
Ltotal = LCla + βLContrast
= (1−α)L(F (x, θ), y)+αL(F (x, θ), ŷ)+βLContrast ,
(5)
where α, β ∈ [0, 1] are balancing weights. The training process
is divided into two stages: 1) Initial Pretraining: For the first

910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Npre epochs, set α = 0, and only use the original noisy labels y
to train the model. 2) Co-Optimization: Once the model has acquired preliminary representation capabilities, the Noisy Label
Correction module is activated to generate ŷ, and the parameters
θ are jointly optimized using the dual loss.
In the Noisy Label Correction module, our goal is to obtain
the correct label for each network flow to provide supervisory
information for model training. For label correction, the first
step is to select several class prototypes for each type of traffic.
Inspired by the CFSFDP [36] algorithm, we first extract deep
features of the network flows using the preliminary network
trained in the first stage. In the experiment, the model consists of a feature extraction network E and a classification
network h, so F (x, θ) = h · E(x), where h is a fully connected
layer.
To select appropriate class prototypes for the c-th class, we
first extract a set of deep features {E(xi )}ni=1 from the traffic samples {xi }ni=1 with the same noisy label c, where n is
the number of samples with the noisy label c. We then use
cosine similarity to calculate the similarity between the deep
features of the c-th class samples, constructing a similarity
matrix S ∈ Rn×n , where Sij = cos(E(xi ), E(xj )) ∈ [−1, 1].
Sij represents the similarity between any two samples xi and xj .
The larger Sij is, the more similar the two samples are. However,
the problem arises that as n increases, the computation and
storage of the matrix S will become extremely time-consuming
and expensive. Therefore, here, we only randomly sample m
samples from the n samples, with m < n, and thus only need
to compute the matrix S m×m to reduce the computational
cost.
To select appropriate prototypes, we define a density ρi for
each sample xi based on the similarity matrix S:
ρi =

m


χ (Sij − Sc ) ∈ (−m, m) ,

(6)

j=1

where Sc is the truncation density, and χ(·) is the sign function.
Sc is a constant, which is the value of the element in the matrix S
after sorting all elements from small to large and selecting the top
40%. Experiments show that the value of Sc has no significant
impact on the experimental results.
From the above definition of density ρ, it can be observed
that the larger the density of a sample, the more its surrounding
samples are. Samples with correct labels should be close to each
other, while samples with noisy labels usually form clusters that
are far from their corresponding noisy label samples. In Fig. 3(a),
the density of noisy label samples and correctly labeled samples
is shown. It can be seen that noisy label samples generally have
a smaller density, while correctly labeled samples tend to have
a larger density. In other words, samples with higher density are
often clean samples from which we can select prototypes for
the class. If p prototypes are needed, the samples with the top p
largest density values are considered class prototypes. However,
this introduces a problem: if these p prototypes are all in the
same sub-cluster, these p prototypes are essentially the same
prototype and do not serve the purpose of representing multiple
sub-clusters within a class.

Fig. 3. (a) Density ρ of noisy and clean samples in the Mal_TLS2023 dataset.
(b) Distribution of the density ρ and similarity metric η. Red stars indicate the
samples with the top-6 highest ρ values.

Therefore, we define a similarity metric for each sample:
ηi =

maxj,ρj >ρi Sij ,
minj Sij ,

ρi < ρmax
,
ρi = ρmax

(7)

where ρmax = max{ρ1 , ρ2 , . . . , ρm }. From this definition, it
can be seen that for the sample xi with the largest density, the
similarity metric ηi is the smallest; for the other low-density
samples xi , their similarity metric ηi is defined as the similarity
between xi and xj with a higher density value than xi . From
the above definition, it can be seen that a smaller similarity
metric ηi indicates that the features of sample xi are not closely
related to other high-density samples. Therefore, samples with a
high-density value ρ (higher likelihood of clean labels) and a low
similarity metric η (clean label, but moderately far from other
clean labels) meet our criteria for selecting class prototypes.
In Fig. 3(b), the red stars are the samples with the largest
density ρ. Samples with high density ρ tend to have relatively
small similarity metric η. In this paper, we select prototypes with
η < 0.95 from the top-ranked samples. Even if the number of
prototypes that meet the conditions after filtering is less than p,
we will still select the p smallest indices based on the similarity
metric η in the engineering implementation to ensure that the
prototype set remains complete. In other words, regardless of
the density ρ and the similarity measure η, each category will
ultimately have p prototypes.
After selecting the prototype sets
{E(xi1,i2 )}i1=1,2,...,c;i2=1,2,...,p ,

(8)

for each known class, where c is the number of known traffic
classes, and {E(xi1 ), E(xi2 ), . . . , E(xip )} represents the prototype set for the i-th known traffic class. Given an unlabeled
sample x, we first obtain its embedding representation E(x), and
then calculate the similarity between E(x) and the prototype sets
of different classes:
p

σc =

1
cos (E(x), E(xil )) , i = 1, 2, . . . , c.
p

(9)

l=1

Here, we use the average similarity over the p prototypes. This
voting decision method prevents the misclassification of some
hard samples that have nearly identical high similarities into
different classes. We can then obtain the corrected label ŷ ∈

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

Algorithm 1: The Training Process of AEGIS-Net.
Input: Noisy labeled dataset Ṽ , hyperparameters α, β, p,
m
Output: Trained model F = h · E with robust feature
representation
1: Initialize neural network parameters θ for E and h
2: Split Ṽ into mini-batches {B1 , B2 , . . ., BT }
3: for epoch = 1 to Ntotal do
4:
if epoch ≤ Npre thenPre-training with noisy labels
5:
for each mini-batch Bt do
6:
Calculate classification loss Lpre using (5),
where α = 0.
7:
θt+1 ← θt − ξ∇θt Lpre
8:
end for
9:
else
Noise label correction
10:
for each class c ∈ {1, . . ., c} do
11:
Extract deep features {E(xi )} for samples with
noisy label c.
12:
Randomly sample m features {z1 , . . ., zm }.
13:
Calculate similarity matrix S ∈ Rm×m .
14:
Calculate density ρi using (6).
15:
Calculate similarity metric ηi using (7).
16:
Select p prototypes.
17:
end for
18:
for each mini-batch Bt do
19:
Obtain corrected labels ŷ using (10).
20:
Calculate classification loss LCla using (3).
21:
Calculate contrastive loss LContrast using (4).
22:
Total loss Ltotal = LCla + βLContrast .
23:
θt+1 ← θt − ξ∇θt Ltotal
24:
end for
25:
end if
26: end for
{1, 2, . . . , c}, where
ŷ = arg max σi , i = 1, 2, . . . , c.
i

Algorithm 2: Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection.
Input: Test sample xtest , training features
Θ = {z1 , . . ., zn }, k, λ
Output: Detection result D ∈ {Known, Unknown}
1: Extract penultimate layer feature: ztest = E(xtest ).
2: Normalize feature: ztest ← ztest /ztest 2 .
3: Calculate distance set Δ ← {ztest − zi 2 | zi ∈ Θ}.
4: Sort Δ in ascending order to get {d(1) , . . ., d(n) }.
5: Retrieve k-th smallest distance: d(k) ← Δ[k].
6: if d(k) < λ then
7:
D ← Known
8: else
9:
D ← Unknown
10: end if
11: return D

space. This decision-making method can be represented by the
following formula:
D(xtest ) =

C. Unknown Traffic Detection
After completing the training process, the model F has corrected noisy labels and learned deep representations of traffic,
achieving intra-class compactness and inter-class separation
in the representation space. Many unknown malicious traffic
detection methods constrain each known class to a specific distribution in the representation space [31], [43], but this approach
is difficult to achieve. Our method makes no assumptions about
the underlying feature space and detects unknown malicious
traffic based on distance or density.
The KNN-based detection method calculates the distance
between each test sample and training sample in the embedding

Known,
Unknown,

if S (xtest ) ≤ λ
,
if S (xtest ) > λ

(11)

where S(x) is the score function, and a larger value of S(x)
indicates a higher probability that the test sample is classified as
an unknown class. λ is the threshold.
Specifically, we use the normalized penultimate layer features z = E(x)/E(x) for detecting unknown malicious traffic. Assuming the training set is represented in the embedding
space as Θ = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn }. During the detection phase, the
normalized representation ztest is first calculated. Then, for
each training sample in Θ, the distance di = ztest − zi  is
computed, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The distance values di are then
arranged in ascending order to form the reordered distance vector Δ = {d(1) , d(2) , . . . , d(n) }, where ∀i < j, d(i) < d(j) . The
decision function can be represented as:

(10)

After obtaining the corrected label data, we use it as supplementary supervisory signals to train the neural network F during
the training phase. The training process of our model is shown
in Algorithm 1.

911

S(ztest , k) =

Known,
Unknown,

if N Nk (ztest ) ≥ λ
,
if N Nk (ztest ) < λ

(12)

where N Nk (ztest ) = d(k) represents the distance to the k-th
nearest neighbor of ztest . The threshold λ is usually chosen to
ensure a high proportion of known class samples (e.g., 95%)
are correctly classified. At this point, the threshold λ does not
depend on the unknown malicious traffic class because unknown
malicious traffic is invisible. We summarize our unknown malicious traffic method in Algorithm 2.
The advantage of KNN is its simplicity and ease of understanding, and it does not require training. However, its disadvantage is the high computational cost, especially on large datasets,
as it requires calculating the distance between the test sample and
all samples in the dataset. We choose to use the Approximate
Nearest Neighbor (ANN) algorithm for vector retrieval [48].
Unlike KNN, ANN does not always return the exact nearest
neighbors, but returns approximate nearest neighbors within a
certain error margin, trading off retrieval speed for accuracy.

912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

V. THEORETICAL JUSTIFICATION
In this section, we provide proof that AEGIS-Net uses KNN
for unknown malicious traffic detection and that the results of
unknown malicious traffic detection are independent of noise.
Definition 1. (Feature Space Stability): Let the feature extractor be E ∗ in the noise-free case, and E be the feature extractor
obtained after label correction and contrastive learning in the
noisy case. The feature distribution shift is defined as:
ΔE = Ex∼D [E(x) − E ∗ (x)2 ] ,

(13)

where D is the distribution of the known class training sample.
It is assumed that after label correction and contrastive loss
optimization, ΔE < ε, where ε is a small constant.
Definition 2. (Non-parametric Detection Mechanism): The
unknown malicious traffic detection phase uses the KNN algorithm. For a test sample xtest , define its KNN distance to the
training set Ṽ as N Nk (xtest ) = d(k) . The threshold λ is determined by the γ-quantile of the known class distance distribution:


λ = inf t | Px∼D d(k) (x) ≤ t ≥ γ .

(14)

Lemma 1. (Proof in Appendix-A): According to the Feature Space Stability assumption, for any sample x, E(x) −
E ∗ (x)2 ≤ ε. Therefore, for any two samples xi and xj , their
feature distance shift satisfies:
E(xi ) − E(xj )2 + E ∗ (xi ) − E ∗ (xj )2 ≤ 2ε.

(15)

Lemma 2. (Proof in Appendix-B): For the test sample xtest ,
the difference in its KNN distance between the noisy and noisefree cases satisfies:
d(k) (xtest ) − d(k) (xtest ) ≤ 2ε.

(16)

Theorem 1. (Proof in Appendix-C): Given that the γ-quantile
λ of the class distance distribution satisfies P (d(k) (x) ≤ λ) ≥ γ
when the feature distribution shift ΔE < ε, the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) shift of the distance distribution
satisfies:
2ε
(17)
|Fr (t) − F0 (t)| ≤ ,
σ
where σ is the standard deviation of the distance distribution
(assuming σ
ε). Therefore, the change in threshold satisfies:
|λ(r) − λ(0)| ≤ 2ε,

TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR KNOWN AND UNKNOWN CLASSES OF TRAFFIC IN
PUBLIC DATASETS

(18)

where r ∈ [0, 1) is the noise rate.
The premise of Theorem 1 is the feature space stability,
i.e., ΔE < ε, where ε is a small constant. In experiments on
public datasets, we computed the mean value of ΔE as 1.210
with a standard deviation of std = 0.06 on the Mal_TLS2023
dataset. This shows that AEGIS-Net satisfies the feature space
stability. Furthermore, the conclusion of Theorem 1 is that
the threshold variation |λ(r) − λ(0)| ≤ 2ε. Fig. 4 shows the
detection thresholds of AEGIS-Net on different datasets. In the
case of symmetric noise, λ(0) on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset is
0.0099, λ(0.1) = 0.0264, and λ(0.5) = 0.0527, which satisfies
the conclusion of Theorem 1.

VI. EVALUATION
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of AEGIS-Net in addressing CH1 and CH2 by presenting
experimental results and analyses under different experimental
conditions.
A. Datasets
We use three benchmark datasets for network intrusion detection: Mal_TLS2023 [49], CICIDS2017, and CICIDS2018 [50].
In the CICIDS2017 dataset, we use all 14 types of malicious
traffic samples. In the CICIDS2018 dataset, we select the traffic
from the two days of 3.2 and 2.16 and choose three kinds
of malicious traffic among them: DoS attacks, DoS attacksSlowHTTPTest, and Bot, to form the attack samples, and the rest
of the benign traffic as the normal samples. In the unknown traffic
detection phase, we select the CICDarknet2020 [51] dataset
as the unknown class traffic, which includes eight types of
darknet traffic such as Audio-Stream, Browsing, Chat, Email,
P2P, Transfer, Video-Stream, and VOIP. These darknet traffic
types actually come from the Tor and VPN traffic in the ISCXTor2016 [52] and ISCXVPN2016 [53] datasets. As shown in
Table III, these datasets provide sufficient benign traffic and a
wide range of attack traffic categories, such as DDoS attacks,
brute force, scanning attacks, etc. These four representative
datasets allow us to evaluate the proposed method comprehensively.
B. Implementation Details
1) Traffic Preprocessing: For the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, we
use the preprocessed dataset provided by the author. Each network flow in this dataset has a feature vector of 117 dimensions,
which includes common statistical features as well as additional
features specific to TLS traffic, such as cipher suite, cipher suite
length, and certificate length. The dataset contains a total of 23
classes and 92,034 TLS malicious network flows. This dataset
is class-balanced. The CICIDS2017 dataset contains 2,829,385
network flows, including 2,272,688 benign flows and 556,697
malicious flows across 14 classes, such as Bot, DDoS, DoS
GoldenEye, SSH-Patator, and Infiltration. The CICIDS2018
contains 1,364,431 network flows, which include 1,074,342
benign flows with 290,089 malicious flows, which consist of
three different kinds of malicious flows, which we uniformly
consider as malicious flows in the experiments of this paper.
Since these two datasets are class-imbalanced, particularly with

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

regard to benign traffic, we use an undersampling technique
to reduce the number of samples from the majority classes.
The CICDarknet2020 dataset contains 119,562 malicious traffic
flows, covering diverse types of darknet traffic. These datasets
were split into training and test sets at a 7:3 ratio.
2) Noise Settings: We have designed symmetric and asymmetric label noise types to test our model based on real-world
scenarios. In the symmetric noise scenario, the sample labels
are randomly shuffled to other classes with a fixed probability.
In the asymmetric noise scenario, we simulate labeling errors of
easily confused categories in real network traffic. For example, in
the CICIDS2017 dataset, since infiltration attacks often use port
scanning as a precursor, a fixed proportion of PortScan traffic
is randomly labeled as Infiltration. DoS Slowhttptest and DoS
slowloris are both variants of DoS attacks with similar traffic
patterns, and a fixed proportion of DoS Slowhttptest traffic is
randomly labeled as DoS slowloris.
3) Training Details: The network uses a deep residual neural
network whose core architecture consists of a cascade of multiple residual blocks, each containing a double convolution operation. The four-level residual block constructs a feature pyramid through a progressive channel expansion strategy, which
allows the network to gradually capture abstract features at the
deeper level while retaining fine-grained detail information. The
global adaptive average pooling layer compresses each channel
response into a scalar and finally generates a 1024-dimensional
discriminative feature vector.
All experiments are performed on an Ubuntu 20.04 system
equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 5218R CPU@2.10 GHz
80 GB RAM and a Tesla V100 32 GB GPU. Python 3.10.13
and Pytorch 2.1.1 are used to build our model. We use the SGD
optimizer for model training, with an initial learning rate of
0.001, 50 epochs, 20 pre-training epochs, a batch size of 128, α
= 0.1, and β = 0.5. In the unknown malicious traffic detection
phase, the KNN algorithm is set with k = 50.
4) Baselines: We have selected several state-of-the-art noise
label handling methods and unknown malicious traffic detection
methods to compare with AEGIS-Net in this paper:
i) Noise Label Handling Methods:
r Co-teaching [23] uses two neural networks, with the current network passing the samples it considers clean to the
other network for training.
r MCRe [19] balances robust training and data cleaning,
resulting in a cleaner dataset and a more accurate classification model.
r RAPIER [24] leverages the characteristic that normal traffic distribution is compact and malicious traffic distribution is dispersed. It estimates the distribution and corrects sample labels using an autoregressive generative
model.
ii) Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection Methods:
r RoFi [38] enhances robustness to packet direction and
timing by using a traffic aggregation matrix, providing a more robust representation of traffic than existing website fingerprinting defense strategies. RoFi
outperforms existing WF attacks in two open-world
scenarios.

913

r Trident [41] trains a one-class classifier for each known
class, enabling it to handle both sample and class increments. It facilitates fine-grained unknown traffic detection
and model incremental updates.
r RFG-HELAD [39] combines a DNN with contrastive learning to create a K-classification model and employs a
distance-based out-of-distribution detection algorithm for
identifying unknown attacks.
C. Known Attack Classification Experiments (To CH1)
Deep networks have powerful memory capabilities, allowing
them to achieve high accuracy on the training set even in the
presence of a high proportion of noisy labels by memorizing
the random noise in the training data. However, the generalization performance on the test set significantly drops. Therefore,
designing a noise label handling module is crucial in complex
scenarios such as encrypted malicious traffic classification. For
CH1, we set up different experimental environments to validate the effectiveness of the AEGIS-Net noise label correction
module.
Tables IV, V, and VI show the performance of AEGIS-Net
in classifying known class traffic across three public datasets.
From these results, we can draw the following conclusions:
1) AEGIS-Net has stronger robustness to noise: In symmetric noise scenarios, under low noise conditions, AEGIS-Net
maintains high classification accuracy, similar to comparative
methods like MCRe and Co-teaching. For example, in the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1,
AEGIS-Net achieves a classification accuracy of 96.69% and
an F1-score of 96.37%. In high-noise scenarios, most methods,
such as Co-teaching and RoFi, see a significant performance
drop, with classification accuracy falling below 70%. However,
AEGIS-Net still maintains a high level of performance. In
asymmetric noise scenarios, asymmetric noise has a greater
impact on models. In the Asym-50% scenario, Co-teaching’s
F1-score on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset drops to 64.98%, while
AEGIS-Net’s F1-score remains stable above 89%, indicating its
better adaptability to complex noise.
2) AEGIS-Net has the strongest cross-dataset performance
consistency: On datasets that focus more on malicious TLS
traffic classification, AEGIS-Net’s F1-score in the Asym-50%
noise scenario significantly outperforms comparative methods, such as RAPIER’s 83.56% versus AEGIS-Net’s 89.87%,
demonstrating its precise capture of encrypted traffic features.
On the CICIDS2017/2018 dataset, which contains diverse attack types, methods like Trident, RoFi, and RFG-HELAD,
which lack noise label processing modules, show large performance fluctuations under high noise. In contrast, AEGISNet’s accuracy and F1-score decline only slightly, indicating
its superior ability to generalize across heterogeneous attack
patterns.
3) AEGIS-Net demonstrates the best label noise handling
capability: Looking across each row of the tables, whether for
multi-class or binary classification tasks, under various noise
conditions, MCRe outperforms Co-teaching and RAPIER in
label noise handling, as MCRe is a model compatible with both

914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IV
THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET

TABLE V
THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE CICIDS2017 DATASET

TABLE VI
THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE CICIDS2018 DATASET

data cleaning and robust training. However, as the noise rate
increases, AEGIS-Net outperforms these three models. This is
due to AEGIS-Net’s excellent label noise handling capability,
where it selects multiple prototypes for each class and accurately
corrects noisy labels based on the distance of samples from the
prototypes.
Chen et al. [54] proves the theoretical upper bound for the
classification accuracy of models trained on datasets with label
noise. For symmetric noise rate r, the upper bound for test
accuracy is:
P (y f = y) = (1 − r)2 +

r2
,
c−1

(19)

where y f denotes the predicted label by neural network f , and c
is the number of classes. For asymmetric noise rate r, the upper
bound for test accuracy is:
P (y f = y) = (1 − r)2 + r2 .

(20)

Table VII presents a comparison of AEGIS-Net’s known class
traffic classification performance and theoretical performance
under different noise rates, as well as the proportion of pure
data after label correction. From this, it can be observed that
the theoretical accuracy of the classifier significantly decreases
as the noise rate increases. For example, on the Mal_TLS2023
dataset, the theoretical accuracy is 26.14% when the symmetric
noise rate is 50%. However, due to the presence of the label
correction module, the model’s actual performance far exceeds
the theoretical value.
Data cleaning is a core method for improving model performance under noisy labels, and the quality of the cleaned data
directly impacts the classification results. From the performance
on the three datasets, data cleaning significantly reduced the
actual training noise rate, resulting in a higher proportion of pure
data, which helps mitigate the impact of label noise on model
performance. In the absence of label noise, AEGIS-Net achieves
classification accuracies of 96.86%, 98.23%, and 99.83% on

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

915

TABLE VII
THE PERFORMANCE OF AEGIS-NET IN CLASSIFYING KNOWN CLASSES OF TRAFFIC UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE SCENARIOS UNDER THREE DATASETS, WITH THE
PERCENTAGE OF PURE DATA AFTER LABEL CORRECTION

TABLE VIII
THE OPEN-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON MAL_TLS2023, CICIDS2017, AND CICIDS2018 DATASET

the three datasets, respectively. Even when the asymmetric
noise rate reaches 50%, AEGIS-Net’s classification accuracies
on the three datasets are still 89.02%, 81.32%, and 99.73%,
showing improvements of 39.02%, 31.32%, and 49.73%, respectively, compared to the theoretical accuracy. This demonstrates that AEGIS-Net has excellent label noise correction
capabilities.

D. Unknown Attack Detection Experiments (To CH2)
Noisy label samples form pseudo-class clusters in the feature
space, occupying the open region that should belong to unknown
attacks. This causes the unknown attack detection performance
of NIDS to be inevitably affected by noisy labels. Therefore,
designing a noise-resistant method for unknown attack detection
is crucial. For CH2, we set the CICDarknet2020 dataset as the
unknown class attack traffic and validate the effectiveness and

efficiency of AEGIS-Net for unknown attack traffic detection in
three different experimental environments.
Table VIII shows a comparison of AEGIS-Net with other
methods in the open world. The following conclusions can be
drawn:
1) AEGIS-Net exhibits significantly better noise robustness
compared to baseline methods: In both symmetric and asymmetric high-noise scenarios, AEGIS-Net’s detection accuracy
and AUC values are close to or reach 100%. For example,
on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, AEGIS-Net achieves an accuracy of 98.76% under Sym-50% noise, while RoFi, Trident,
and RFG-HELAD only achieve 74.19%, 55.18%, and 62.59%,
respectively. This indicates that AEGIS-Net’s label correction
mechanism effectively suppresses noise interference in the
feature space, whereas traditional methods experience a significant drop in performance under noise.
2) AEGIS-Net has a stronger ability to distinguish unknown
attacks: The AUC value reflects the model’s ability to differenti-

916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 4. The score distribution of known and unknown samples of AEGIS-Net on different datasets, with the green vertical line representing the threshold calculated
based on the training set.

ate between known and unknown categories. AEGIS-Net’s AUC
is higher than that of baseline methods in all scenarios, and it
reaches 100% under multiple noise conditions. For instance, in
the Asym-50% scenario of the CICIDS2017 dataset, AEGIS-Net
achieves an AUC of 98.60%, while RFG-HELAD only achieves
55.45%. This demonstrates that AEGIS-Net constructs a compact known class feature distribution through multi-prototype
contrastive learning, significantly improving the clarity of the
unknown class boundary.
3) AEGIS-Net shows excellent cross-dataset generalization:
In three heterogeneous datasets, the standard deviations of
AEGIS-Net’s accuracy and AUC are less than 0.5% and 0.3%,
respectively. In contrast, baseline methods like Trident show
an accuracy fluctuation of 34.81% in the Sym-50% scenario of
CICIDS2018, dropping from 84.26% to 62.45%. This indicates
that AEGIS-Net’s model-agnostic detection paradigm is insensitive to traffic feature distribution differences, showing stronger
adaptability to different scenarios.
From Table VIII, it can be seen that AEGIS-Net’s performance in detecting unknown malicious traffic is independent of
the noise rate. This is because AEGIS-Net’s detection model is
non-parametric, and the detection module does not participate in
model training. Although the model’s closed-world performance
is strongly correlated with different noise rates, the detection of
unknown traffic remains unaffected. This is actually desirable.
If open-world detection performance depended on closed-world
detection performance, the model’s closed-world performance
would inevitably degrade as the noise rate increases, leading to
a deterioration in open-world detection performance. However,
in this study, although AEGIS-Net’s closed-world performance
slightly decreases as the noise rate increases, it has little effect
on open-world detection performance.
Fig. 4 shows the anomaly scores for different samples, where
the green line represents the classification threshold determined
based on the known class samples. Samples exceeding this
threshold are classified as unknown malicious traffic. From
this, it can be observed that, regardless of the noise rate or the
dataset used, there is almost no overlap between the scores of

known and unknown class samples. Furthermore, almost 100%
of the anomaly scores for known class samples are below 0.1,
while the anomaly scores for unknown class traffic are widely
distributed. For example, in the Mal_TLS2023-Asym10% scenario, the anomaly scores for unknown class traffic range from
[0.05, 0.8], in sharp contrast to the scores of known class
samples. Nearly 100% of the unknown class samples have
anomaly scores greater than the threshold, enabling a clear
distinction between known and unknown class traffic. This
explains the excellent performance of AEGIS-Net as shown in
Table VIII.
As shown in Fig. 5, from the visualization results of the penultimate layer features of different datasets, it can be observed that
the penultimate layer features from different datasets exhibit
a significant multi-cluster structure in the embedding space.
This phenomenon directly validates the rationality of selecting
multiple prototypes for each class.
For example, in the CICIDS2018 dataset, although the training set contains only two major categories, benign and malicious
traffic, benign traffic includes various network behaviors such
as normal web browsing, sending and receiving emails, and
file transfers. This can be corroborated by the visualization
results showing multiple sub-clusters within the benign traffic.
If only a single prototype were used, it would fail to capture
the intra-class diversity, leading to blurred feature representations. In contrast, multiple prototypes can accurately represent
the intra-class structure. In the CICIDS2017 dataset, focusing
specifically on DDoS attacks, there are various attack types,
such as Flood Attacks, Amplification Attacks, Layer 7 Attacks,
and Hybrid Attacks, each with significant differences in traffic
patterns, such as packet frequency, protocol types, and load
distribution. This results in a clear separation of sub-clusters in
the feature space. A single prototype cannot distinguish between
attack types, whereas multiple prototypes can model different
attack patterns separately, improving classification and detection
accuracy.
Furthermore, the high separation between different classes
indicates that the model has learned discriminative features

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

Fig. 5.

917

Penultimate layer feature space visualization, where orange dots indicate unknown malicious traffic.

Fig. 6. In the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, the impact of the number of prototypes p
on the closed-world classification performance of AEGIS-Net under symmetric
noise scenarios.

to distinguish between various attack types. The contrastive
loss further strengthens this separation, making the decision
boundaries clearer. The orange scatter in the figure indicates
the location of unknown malicious traffic, indicating that unknown malicious traffic exhibits high randomness and diversity
in the feature space. These orange scatter overlap with other
colored points (representing known traffic) but mostly lie on the
boundary of known traffic, suggesting that darknet traffic shares
some feature similarities with known traffic. However, darknet
traffic has unique encryption methods, communication patterns,
or load characteristics, causing it to be separated from known
traffic in the feature space.
E. Sensitivity Analysis
In this subsection, we perform sensitivity analysis on the
critical hyperparameter in AEGIS-Net.
1) Effect of p: From Fig. 6, it can be observed that when
the noise level is low, the model’s classification performance
is not significantly affected by different values of p, with the
classification accuracy remaining around 95%. Under low noise,
the feature distributions of samples within the same class are
concentrated, and a small number of prototypes can cover the
intra-class diversity. Increasing the number of prototypes (p)

does not notably improve classification performance and may
even introduce redundancy. Therefore, increasing the number of
prototypes is not necessary to enhance performance. In the case
of high noise, if each class only has one prototype, the model’s
classification accuracy drops to 56%. As the value of p increases, the model’s classification accuracy gradually improves.
However, when p exceeds 16, the model’s accuracy begins to
decline. Under 50% noise, a single prototype may be severely
contaminated by noisy samples, such as label errors causing
prototype shifts, which prevent it from effectively representing
the true class center. In low-noise scenarios, a small number
of prototypes can adequately represent the class without redundancy. In high noise scenarios, more prototypes are required to
cover intra-class diversity and correct for noise. Therefore, in
our experiment, we choose p = 14 to balance robustness across
different noise levels.
2) Effect of k: Table IX shows the impact of the hyperparameter k on the performance of unknown malicious traffic detection
and the corresponding detection time. When the value of k is
small, ranging from 10 to 1000, the detection accuracy remains
high, indicating that smaller k values effectively capture the
local features of the data, making them suitable for detecting
unknown malicious traffic. However, when k exceeds 2000, the
accuracy drops sharply to about 23.59% due to underfitting, as
more neighbors may include samples from different categories,
thus affecting the classification results. In extreme cases, such as
when k equals the number of training samples, the output classification will be the most frequent class, rendering the distance
irrelevant. Moreover, as the value of k increases, the average
detection time per flow also increases, but the overall difference
is not significant. When k = 50 , the average time spent on each
flow in the KNN algorithm is 0.0353 ms. Considering both the
detection accuracy for unknown classes and the time cost, we
choose k = 50 in this paper.
3) Effect of m: As shown in Table X, the closed-world
classification accuracy is not significantly affected by different sample sizes m. This is because m is used to reduce the
computational and storage overhead of the similarity matrix S,
which has a size of n × n, where n is the number of samples
in the training set. When n is large, computing and storing S
becomes time-consuming and expensive. By randomly sampling

918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE IX
IN THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET, THE EFFECT OF THE PARAMETER k IN THE KNN ALGORITHM ON THE DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF UNKNOWN MALICIOUS
TRAFFIC UNDER SYMMETRIC NOISE OF 0.1

TABLE X
IN THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET, THE EFFECT OF THE SAMPLE SIZE m ON THE
CLASSIFICATION OF KNOWN CLASS TRAFFIC UNDER SYMMETRIC NOISE OF 0.1

Fig. 7. The impact of the percentile Sc on model performance in the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a noise rate of 0.1.
Fig. 8. Accuracy heatmap for hyperparameters α and β of AEGIS-Net on
Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1.

m samples (where m < n), the size of the similarity matrix
is reduced to m × m, significantly reducing the complexity of
computation and storage. Although the sample size m reduces
the number of samples, the randomly sampled samples still
effectively represent the distribution of the entire training set.
Therefore, the similarity matrix S computed based on these
sampled samples can still reflect the similarity relationships
between samples in the training set. In this paper, we choose
m = 1280 for the experiments.
4) Effect of Sc : As shown in Fig. 7, within the range of
percentiles Sc from 0.1 to 0.9, the performance fluctuation
of AEGIS-Net under both symmetric and asymmetric noise
scenarios is less than ±1.5%. This stability arises from the core
property of the density calculation ρi in (6): when Sc varies
within the effective range, only the absolute density values of the
samples are adjusted, while the relative density ranking between
samples remains highly consistent. Therefore, the prototype
selection remains unchanged, and the final performance is not
significantly affected.
5) Effect of α, β: The weight factors α, β ∈ [0, 1] are used
to balance the loss function in (5). We perform hyperparameter
tuning within the range of 0.1 to 0.9. Under the condition of
symmetric noise rate of 0.1 on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, the
classification accuracy is shown in Fig. 8. The optimal performance of AEGIS-Net is achieved when α = 0.1 and β = 0.5,
reaching 96.69%. Therefore, we set α = 0.1 and β = 0.5 as the
final values.

Fig. 9. Effect of different thresholds λ on AEGIS-Net performance on the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1.

6) Effect of Different Threshold λ: As shown in Fig. 9, the
AUC remains stable across all values of λ, demonstrating that
the model’s ability to capture unknown threats is completely
unaffected by the threshold. Although lowering the threshold
gradually improves performance, with the detection accuracy
increasing from 98.759% to 99.752%, we believe that in practical applications, ensuring a 95% pass rate for known class
traffic and achieving an accuracy of 98.759% is sufficient. The

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

919

TABLE XI
ABLATION STUDY OF AEGIS-NET ON MAL_TLS2023 DATASET WITH A
SYMMETRIC NOISE RATE OF 0.1, WHERE ACCURACY AND F1-SCORE
REPRESENT THE DETECTION METRICS FOR KNOWN TRAFFIC

Fig. 10. The impact of contrastive loss on model performance in the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset.
Fig. 11. In the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, clean sample rate over training epochs
(Symmetric Noise). The pretraining phase consists of the first 20 epochs.

1% performance improvement from fine-tuning the threshold
seems negligible.

F. Ablation Study
1) Effect of Contrastive Loss: The top and bottom figures in
Fig. 10 illustrate the impact of contrastive loss on AEGIS-Net
under symmetric and asymmetric noise scenarios, respectively.
It can be observed that, regardless of the presence of contrastive
loss, the detection accuracy for unknown malicious traffic remains identical under both noise conditions, at 98.76%. This
indicates that the detection of unknown malicious traffic is not
significantly affected by different noise conditions. Contrastive
loss, however, significantly improves the robustness of classification for known classes, especially under asymmetric noise
conditions, where the performance gap expands as the noise level
increases. For instance, at a 40% noise level, the gap reaches
5.06%.
Specifically, while the contrastive loss optimizes the feature
space to improve the compactness of the known classes, the
unknown class samples naturally move away from the known
class clusters due to distribution differences. As a result, the
detection performance mainly depends on the geometric structure of the feature space rather than the classifier parameters, so
there is no negative impact on the detection of unknown classes.
Contrastive loss, based on the relationships between samples
(positive/negative pairs) rather than individual labels, reduces
direct reliance on incorrect labels. Optimizing the intra-class
and inter-class relationships in the feature space significantly

enhances the robustness of classification for known classes under
noisy labels.
2) Effect of Pretraining and Label Correction: As shown in
Table XI, we investigate the effectiveness of the pretraining
procedure and the label correction module proposed in this
paper. Without pretraining, the model’s performance drops significantly, and under the Sym-50% condition, the model almost
completely fails. This indicates that pretraining the model before
the label correction module begins to operate is crucial, as it
helps the encoder E learn good representational capabilities.
After removing encoder E, the model’s performance shows a
significant decline in different noise environments. Specifically,
in the 10% symmetric noise environment, the classification
accuracy drops from 96.69% to 84.02%, a decrease of 12.67%;
in the 50% symmetric noise environment, the accuracy falls from
95.84% to 80.67%, a decrease of 15.17%. The F1 score exhibits a
similar trend, indicating a noticeable reduction in the overall discriminative ability of the model. This outcome demonstrates that
encoder E, as the core component of feature extraction, plays
a crucial role in the model’s robustness under noisy conditions.
Its effective representation capability is an essential foundation
for AEGIS-Net to maintain high performance.
In the absence of the label correction module, a convolutional
neural network trained using only cross-entropy and contrastive
loss, while having some classification ability, performs poorly
and falls far short of practical usability. As shown in Fig. 11,
during the first 20 epochs, although the label correction module is not active, the neural network still exhibits some label

920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

TABLE XII
AVERAGE TESTING TIMES OF DIFFERENT METHODS

Fig. 12. Performance evaluation of various models under symmetric noise
with label-corrected Mal_TLS2023 dataset.

correction capability, leading to a gradual increase in the clean
sample ratio in the training set. After 20 epochs, when the label
correction module becomes active, the clean sample ratio in the
training set improves further. Under the Symmetric noise of 0.5,
the final clean sample ratio reaches 94%, indicating that the
proposed label correction module is effective.
G. Evaluation on Time Cost
We divide the complexity of the model into two aspects:
feature extraction time and classifier prediction time [55], [56],
[57]. FET stands for Feature Extraction Time, which refers to
the time required for converting the raw traffic into a feature
vector. The prediction time refers to the time spent in detecting
each flow, while the total time is the sum of feature extraction
time and classifier prediction time.
Table XII presents the feature extraction time and the average detection time per network flow for different methods.
AEGIS-Net requires an average of 0.20 ms per network flow,
which is better than RFG-HELAD’s 1.18 ms, achieves the
fastest speed. Trident maintains multiple single-class one-class
learners, which results in slightly lower detection efficiency.
Overall, AEGIS-Net does not have a significant disadvantage
in detection efficiency compared to the current methods.
H. Scalability Analysis
Based on the corrected training set from AEGIS-Net, we
trained and evaluated six models, including AEGIS-Net (the
CNN model), MLP, LSTM, and three machine learning models
(RF, SVM, and XGBoost). For the three deep neural networks—
AEGIS-Net, MLP, and LSTM—we adopted a training strategy
that combines cross-entropy loss with InfoNCE contrastive loss.
As shown in Fig. 12, under different noise rates, the proposed
AEGIS-Net model demonstrates the best performance on the

corrected training set. MLP, RF, and XGBoost also exhibit
good classification performance, while the LSTM model performs relatively weaker. The results indicate that the proposed
label correction module not only effectively improves model
performance but also possesses strong versatility, serving as
a plug-and-play preprocessing component that can be flexibly
integrated with other models and play a positive role.
The unknown traffic detection module employs a modelagnostic K-nearest neighbor paradigm, which provides it with
high versatility and integrability. Specifically, this module relies
solely on the normalized feature vector of the input sample and
a threshold λ that is adaptively determined based on the distance
distribution of known class samples. Due to its non-parametric
nature, this module does not depend on any specific classification
architecture or parameter training phase; it makes decisions
based directly on relative distances within the feature space.
As a result, the module can function as an independent component that seamlessly integrates with different NIDS through
a standardized interface, significantly enhancing the system’s
ability to detect unknown threats without affecting the existing
detection processes.
VII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
Our work has a few limitations. First, when the features of
benign traffic change over time, our method may fail. In our
improvement plan, detecting concept drift in traffic samples
should be considered. Second, when facing adversarial traffic
samples with incorrect labels, these samples are closer in distribution to the incorrect class, which could interfere with the noise
label correction process. Future work will explore customized
solutions, which will be a promising research direction. Lastly,
as part of future work, we will investigate which components
can run in parallel to maximize efficiency.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In the dynamic network environment, network intrusion detection systems face the dual challenges of label noise and
unknown attack detection. This paper proposes a novel antinoise detection framework, AEGIS-Net. AEGIS-Net dynamically selects multiple prototypes for each class through a multiprototype strategy to achieve accurate noise label correction.
It also designs a model-agnostic k-nearest neighbors distance
detection paradigm, which determines unknown attacks by calculating the relative distance ratio between the test sample and
known classes, eliminating the dependence on traffic distribution
assumptions common in traditional methods. This makes the
model more flexible and versatile. We prove, through the feature
space stability hypothesis, that the detection threshold is independent of the noise rate, mathematically verifying the anti-noise
property of unknown attack detection. Additionally, a series
of experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of AEGIS-Net
in known attack classification, unknown attack detection, and
cross-scenario generalization ability. Moreover, we show performance improvement compared to the state-of-the-art baseline
methods.

MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid of the
unseen: A siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic discovery,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–7.
[2] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: Robust
malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and confidence
mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 6871–6885,
2024.
[3] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024.
[4] J. Li, X. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Tao, P. Wang, and X. Guan, “Mining repeating
pattern in packet arrivals: Metrics, models, and applications,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 408, pp. 1–22, 2017.
[5] X. Wang et al., “Entropy-regulated cross-modal generative fusion for
multimodal network intrusion detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 126, 2025,
Art. no. 103581.
[6] Q. Yuan et al., “Multi-agent for network security monitoring and warning:
A generative ai solution,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 114–121,
Sep. 2025.
[7] B. Van Rooyen and R. C. Williamson, “A theory of learning with corrupted
labels,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 228, pp. 1–50, 2018.
[8] B. Han et al., “A survey of label-noise representation learning: Past, present
and future,” 2020, arXiv: 2011.04406.
[9] X. Xia et al., “Extended T : Learning with mixed closed-set and open-set
noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 3047–3058, Mar. 2023.
[10] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” in
Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. data Mining, 2017,
pp. 1723–1732.
[11] Q. Meng et al., “Beyond known threats: A novel strategy for isolating and
detecting unknown malicious traffic,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 89, 2025,
Art. no. 103920.
[12] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough: Challenges in labeling network traffic,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, 2022,
Art. no. 102810.
[13] D. Barradas, C. Novo, B. Portela, S. Romeiro, and N. Santos, “Extending
C2 traffic detection methodologies: From TLS 1.2 TO TLS 1.3-enabled
malware,” in Proc. 27th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses, 2024,
pp. 181–196.
[14] S. Le, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, and H. He, “An adaptive classification and updating
method for unknown network traffic in open environments,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 238, 2024, Art. no. 110114.
[15] E. Arazo, D. Ortego, P. Albert, N. O’Connor, and K. McGuinness, “Unsupervised label noise modeling and loss correction,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2019, pp. 312–321.
[16] G. Patrini, A. Rozza, A. Krishna Menon, R. Nock, and L. Qu, “Making
deep neural networks robust to label noise: A loss correction approach,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1944–1952.
[17] Z. Sun et al., “PNP: Robust learning from noisy labels by probabilistic
noise prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 5311–5320.
[18] Y. Li, H. Han, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “DISC: Learning from noisy labels via
dynamic instance-specific selection and correction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 24070–24079.
[19] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe: A
unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels based
on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024.
[20] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A channellevel behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, 2023.
[21] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Luo, and D. Xia, “Robust traffic
classification with mislabelled training samples,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int.
Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst., 2015, pp. 328–335.
[22] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noiseresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019.
[23] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with
extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
pp. 8536–8546.
[24] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? a robust framework for
detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2309.04798.

921

[25] S. Shi, Y. Guo, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Han, “Distributionally robust
federated learning for network traffic classification with noisy labels,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 6212–6226, May 2024.
[26] G. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Sun, L. Xing, and Y. Zhang, “DSDIR: A two-stage
method for addressing noisy long-tailed problems in malicious traffic
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2025,
pp. 1–5.
[27] Y. Cai, C. Peng, S. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, and B. Fang, “TRACE: A robust
framework for malicious traffic detection with noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2025, pp. 1–5.
[28] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 397–405.
[29] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[30] Z. Liu, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Towards open world traffic
classification,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Secur., Chongqing,
China, Springer, 2021, pp. 331–347.
[31] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational
auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning approach
for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, 2021.
[32] Y. Gu, Y. Lai, and Y. Wang, “Zen-tor: A zero knowledge known-unknown
traffic classification method,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022,
pp. 885–890.
[33] H. He, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, S. Le, and Z. Zhao, “A data skew-based unknown
traffic classification approach for TLS applications,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 1–12, 2023.
[34] X. Li, B. Feng, T. Zang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, and J. Ma, “Facing unknown:
Open-world encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive pretraining,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 1255–1260.
[35] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, W. Li, W. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Unknown attack traffic classification in SCADA network using heuristic clustering technique,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2625–2638, Sep. 2023.
[36] A. Rodriguez and A. Laio, “Clustering by fast search and find of density
peaks,” Science, vol. 344, no. 6191, pp. 1492–1496, 2014.
[37] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne, “Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 236, 2023, Art. no. 109991.
[38] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting website
fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624.
[39] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[40] Z. Gao, J. Li, L. Wang, Y. He, and P. Yuan, “CM-UTC: A cost-sensitive matrix based method for unknown encrypted traffic classification,” Comput.
J., vol. 67, 2024, Art. no. bxa e017.
[41] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic detection,” in
Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
[42] R. Chen, L. Luo, X. Wang, B. Ren, D. Guo, and S. Zhu, “Knowing
the unknowns: Network traffic detection with open-set semi-supervised
learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251, 2024, Art. no. 110630.
[43] X. Yang, F. Tong, F. Jiang, and G. Cheng, “A lightweight
and dynamic open-set intrusion detection for industrial Internet of
Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 2930–2943,
2025.
[44] E. Akpaku, J. Chen, M. Ahmed, F. K. Agbenyegah, and W. L. BrownAcquaye, “RAGN: Detecting unknown malicious network traffic using a
robust adaptive graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 262, 2025,
Art. no. 111184.
[45] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Aug. 2024.
[46] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, arXiv:
1802.09089.
[47] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
[48] S. Arya, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, R. Silverman, and A. Y. Wu,
“An optimal algorithm for approximate nearest neighbor searching fixed
dimensions,” J. ACM, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 891–923, 1998.

922

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[49] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels
based on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, 2023,
Art. no. 103300.
[50] I. Sharafaldin et al., “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset
and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst.
Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[51] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Kaur, and A. Rahali, “DIDarkNet: A contemporary
approach to detect and characterize the darknet traffic using deep image
learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2020, pp. 1–13.
[52] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
Syst. Secur. Privacy, SciTePress, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[53] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[54] P. Chen, B. B. Liao, G. Chen, and S. Zhang, “Understanding and utilizing
deep neural networks trained with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2019, pp. 1062–1070.
[55] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, and A. Liotta, “Experimental review of neuralbased approaches for network intrusion management,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2480–2495, Dec. 2020.
[56] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection model
based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021.
[57] M. T. Jahangir, M. Wakeel, H. Asif, and A. Ateeq, “Systematic approach
to analyze the avast IoT-23 challenge dataset for malware detection using machine learning,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Emerg. Technol., 2023,
pp. 234–239.

Qianwei Meng is currently working toward the PhD
degree with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network
Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering
University. His research interests include network
security and unknown traffic detection.

Qingjun Yuan is currently a postdoctoral researcher
with MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and
Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, and
also a lecturer with the Henan Key Laboratory of
Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering University. His research interests include
side-channel analysis and encrypted traffic analytics.

Jing Tao received the BS and MS degrees in automatic control from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working toward the PhD degree with the Systems Engineering Institute. He is currently a teacher
with Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests
include Internet traffic measurement and modeling,
traffic classification, abnormal detection, and botnet.

Pinghui Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
a professor with the MOE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong
University, Xi’an, China, and also with the Shenzhen
Research Institute, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shenzhen, China. His research interests include internet
traffic measurement and modeling, traffic classification, abnormal detection, and online social network
measurement.

Siqi Lu received the PhD degree from the Henan Key
Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology.
He is a lecturer with the Henan Key Laboratory of
Network Cryptography Technology. His research interests include blockchain security, formal methods,
security protocol, and Big Data security.

Guangsong Li received the PhD degree from the
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
Technology. He is a professor with the Henan Key
Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology.
His research interests include blockchain security,
security protocol, information security and formal
methods.

Yongjuan Wang received the PhD degree from Information Engineering University, in 2009. She is
currently working with the Henan Key Laboratory
of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main research interests include cryptographic analysis and
cyberspace security.

Xiaohong Guan (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
PhD degree in electrical engineering from the University of Connecticut, Storrs, in 1993. Since 1995,
he has been with the Department of Automation,
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, and the Center for Intelligent
and Networked Systems, Tsinghua University. He is
currently with the MOE Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Faculty of
Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, where he is also the
dean with the Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering. He is an
Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.