644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. IT-22, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 1976

 New Directions in Cryptography
 Invited Paper

 WHITFIELD DIFFIE AND MARTIN E. HELLMAN, MEMBER, IEEE

 Abstract-Two kinds of contemporary developments in cryp- The best known cryptographic problem is that of pritography are examined. Widening applications of teleprocessing vacy: preventing the unauthorized extraction of informahave given rise to a need for new types of cryptographic systems,
 tion from communications over an insecure channel. In
which minimize the need for secure key distribution channels and
supply the equivalent of a written signature. This paper suggests order to use cryptography to insure privacy, however, it is
ways to solve these currently open problems. It also discusses how currently necessary for the communicating parties to share
the theories of communication and computation are beginning to a key which is known to no one else. This is done by sendprovide the tools to solve cryptographic problems of long stand- ing the key in advance over some secure channel such as
ing.
 private courier or registered mail. A private conversation
 between two people with no prior acquaintance-is a common occurrence in business, however, and it is unrealistic
 to expect initial business contacts to be postponed long
 I. INTRODUCTION
 enough for keys to be transmitted by some physical means.

W E STAND TODAY on the brink of a revolution in
 cryptography. The development of cheap digital
hardware has freed it from the design limitations of me-
 The cost and delay imposed by this key distribution
 problem is a major barrier to the transfer of business
 communications to large teleprocessing networks.
chanical computing and brought the cost of high grade Section III proposes two approaches to transmitting
cryptographic devices down to where they can be used in keying information over public (i.e., insecure) channels
such commercial applications as remote cash dispensers without compromising the security of the system. In a
and computer terminals. In turn, such applications create public key cryptosystem enciphering and deciphering are
a need for new types of cryptographic systems which governed by distinct keys, E and D, such that computing
minimize the necessity of secure key distribution channels D from E is computationally infeasible (e.g., requiring
and supply the equivalent of a written signature. At the lOloo instructions). The enciphering key E can thus be
same time, theoretical developments in information theory publicly disclosed without compromising the deciphering
and computer science show promise of providing provably key D. Each user of the network can, therefore, place his
secure cryptosystems, changing this ancient art into a enciphering key in a public directory. This enables any user
science. of the system to send a message to any other user enci-
 The development of computer controlled communica- phered in such a way that only the intended receiver is able
tion networks pron$ses effortless and inexpensive contact to decipher it. As such, a public key cryptosystem is a
between people or computers on opposite sides of the multiple access cipher. A private conversation can thereworld, replacing most mail and many excursions with fore be held between any two individuals regardless of
telecommunications. For many applications these contacts whether they have ever communicated before. Each one
must be made secure against both eavesdropping.and the sends messages to the other enciphered in the receiver’s
injection of illegitimate messages. At present, however, the public enciphering key and deciphers the messages he resolution of security problems lags well behind other areas ceives using his own secret deciphering key.
of communications technology. Contemporary cryp- We propose some techniques for developing public key
tography is unable to meet the requirements, in that its use cryptosystems, but the problem is still largely open.
would impose such severe inconveniences on the system Public key distribution systems offer a different apusers, as to eliminate many of the benefits of teleprocess- proach to eliminating the need for a secure key distribution
ing. channel. In such a system, two users who wish to exchange
 a key communicate back and forth until they arrive at a
 Manuscript received June 3,1976. This work was partially supported
 key in common. A third party eavesdropping on this exby the National Science Foundation under NSF Grant ENG 10173. change must find it computationally infeasible to compute
Portions of this work were presented at the IEEE Information Theory the key from the information overheard, A possible solu-
Workshop;Lenox , MA, June 23-25, 1975 and the IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory in Ronneby, Sweden, June 21-24, tion to the public key distribution problem is given in
1976. Section III, and Merkle [l] has a partial solution of a dif-
 W. Diffie is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford
Universitv. Stanford. CA. and the St,anford Artificial IntelliPence
 Y Lab- ferent form.
oratory, g&ford, CIk 94.505. A second problem, amenable to cryptographic solution,
 M. E. Hellman is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. which stands in the way of replacing contemporary busi-

 .
DIFFIE AND HELLMAN: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CRYPTOGRAPHY 645

ness communications by teleprocessing systems is authentication. In current business, the validity of contracts
is guaranteed by signatures. A signed contract serves as
legal evidence of an agreement which the holder can
present in court if necessary. The use of signatures, however, requires the transmission and storage of written
 KEY
contracts. In order to have a purely digital replacement for SOURCE
this paper instrument, each user must be able to produce
 Fig. 1. Flow of information in conventional cryptographic system.
a message whose authenticity can be checked by anyone,
but which could not have been produced by anyone else,
even the recipient. Since only one person can originate transmitted over a public channel, thus assuring the sender
messages but many people can receive messages, this can of a message that it is being read only by the intended rebe viewed as a broadcast cipher. Current electronic au- cipient. An authenticationsystemprevents the unauthorthentication techniques cannot meet this need. ized injection of messages into a public channel, assuring
 Section IV discusses the problem of providing a true, the receiver of a message of the legitimacy of its sender.
digital, message dependent signature. For reasons brought A channel is considered public if its security is inadeout there, we refer to this as the one-way authentication quate for the needs of its users. A channel such as a teleproblem. Some partial solutions are given, and it is shown phone line may therefore be considered private by some
how any public key cryptosystem can be transformed into users and public by others. Any channel may be threatened
a one-way authentication system. with eavesdropping or injection or both, depending on its
 Section V will consider the interrelation of various use. In telephone communication, the threat of injection
cryptographic problems and introduce the even more is paramount, since the called party cannot determine
difficult problem of trap doors. which phone is calling. Eavesdropping, which requires the
 At the same time that communications and computation use of a wiretap, is technically more difficult and legally
have,given rise to new cryptographic problems, their off- hazardous. In radio, by comparison, the situation is respring, information theory, and the theory of computation versed. Eavesdropping is passive and involves no legal
have begun to supply tools for the solution of important hazard, while injection exposes the illegitimate transmitter
problems in classical cryptography. to discovery and prosecution.
 The search for unbreakable codes is one of the oldest Having divided our problems into those of privacy and
themes of cryptographic research, but until this century authentication we will sometimes further subdivide auall proposed systems have ultimately been broken. In the thentication into message authentication, which is the
nineteen twenties, however, the “one time pad” was in- problem defined above, and user authentication, in which
vented, and shown to be unbreakable [2, pp. 398-4001. The the only task of the system is to verify that an individual
theoretical basis underlying this and related systems was is who he claims to be. For example, the identity of an input on a firm foundation a quarter century later by infor- dividual who presents a credit card must be verified, but
mation theory [3]. One time pads require extremely long there is no message which he wishes to transmit. In spite
keys and are therefore prohibitively expensive in most of this apparent absence of a message in user authenticaapplications. tion, the two problems are largely equivalent. In user authentication, there is an implicit message “I AM USER X,”
 In contrast, the security of most cryptographic systems
 while message authentication is just verification of the
resides in the computational difficulty to the cryptanalyst
 identity of the party sending the message. Differences in
of discovering the plaintext without knowledge of the key.
 the threat environments and other aspects of these two
This problem falls within the domains of computational
 subproblems, however, sometimes make it convenient to
complexity and analysis of algorithms, two recent discidistinguish between them.
plines which study the difficulty of solving computational
 Fig. 1 illustrates the flow of information in a convenproblems. Using the results of these theories, it may be
 tional cryptographic system used for privacy of commupossible to extend proofs of security to more useful classes
 nications. There are three parties: a transmitter, a receiver,
of systems in the foreseeable future. Section VI explores
 and an eavesdropper. The transmitter generates a plainthis possibility.
 text or unenciphered message P to be communicated over
 Before proceeding to newer developments, we introduce
 an insecure channel to the legitimate receiver. In order to
terminology and define threat environments in the next
 prevent the eavesdropper from learning P, the transmitter
section.
 operates on P with an invertible transformation SK to
 produce the ciphertext or cryptogram C = SK(P). The key
 II. CONVENTIONAL CRYPTOGRAPHY
 K is transmitted onlv to the legitimate receiver via a secure
 Cryptography is the study of “mathematical” systems channel, indicated by a shielded path in Fig. 1. Since the
for solving two kinds of security problems: privacy and legitimate receiver knows K, he can decipher C by operauthentication. A privacy system prevents the extraction ating with SK-~ to obtain SK-~(C) = SK-~(SK(P)) = P,
of information by unauthorized parties from messages the original plaintext message. The secure channel cannot
646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. NOVEMBER 1976

be used to transmit P itself for reasons of capacity or delay. bits of the plaintext. Block ciphers act in a purely combi-
For example, the secure channel might be a weekly courier natorial fashion on large blocks of text, in such a way that
and the insecure channel a telephone line. a small change in the input block produces a major change
 A cryptographic system is a single parameter family in the resulting output. This paper deals primarily with
{SKJK~~I(~ of invertible transformations block,ciphers, because this error propagation property is
 valuable in many authentication applications.
 SdPl - WI (1) In an authentication system, cryptography is used to
 from a space (P) of plaintext messages to a space (C) of ci- guarantee the authenticity of the message to the receiver.
 phertext messages. The parameter K is called the key and Not only must a meddler be prevented from injecting tois selected from a finite set (K) called the keyspace. If the tally new, authentic looking messages into a channel, but
 message spaces (PI and {C) are equal, we will denote them he must be prevented from creating apparently authentic
 both by (M). When discussing individual cryptographic messages by combining, or merely repeating, old messages
 transformations SK, we will sometimes omit mention of which he has copied in the past. A cryptographic system
 the system and merely refer to the transformation K. intended to guarantee privacy will not, in general, prevent
 The goal in designing the cryptosystem {SK) is to make this latter form of mischief.
 the enciphering and deciphering operations inexpensive, To guarantee the authenticity of a message, information
 but to ensure that any successful cryptanalytic operation is added which is a function not only of the message and
 is too complex to be economical. There are two approaches a secret key, but of the date and time as well; for example,
 to this problem. A system which is secure due to the com- by attaching the date and time to each message and enputational cost of cryptanalysis, but which would succumb crypting the entire sequence. This assures that only
 to an attack with unlimited computation, is called com- someone who possesses the key can generate a message
putationally secure; while a system which can resist any which, when decrypted, will contain the proper date and
 cryptanalytic attack, no matter how much computation time. Care must be taken, however, to use a system in
 is allowed, is called unconditionally secure. Uncondi- which small changes in the ciphertext result in large
 tionally secure systems are discussed in [3] and [4] and changes in the deciphered plaintext. This intentional error
 belong to that portion of information theory, called the propagation ensures that if the deliberate injection of noise
 Shannon theory, which is concerned with optimal perfor- on the channel changes a message such as “erase file 7” into
 mance obtainable with unlimited computation. a different message such as “erase file 8,” it will also cor-
 Unconditional security results from the existence of rupt the authentication information. The message will
 multiple meaningful solutions to a cryptogram. For ex- then be rejected as inauthentic.
ample, the simple substitution cryptogram XMD resulting The first step in assessing the adequacy of cryptographic
from English text can represent the plaintext messages: systems is to classify the threats to which they are to be
now, and, the, etc. A computationally secure cryptogram, subjected. The following threats may occur to cryptoin contrast, contains sufficient information to uniquely graphic systems employed for either privacy or authentidetermine the plaintext and the key. Its security resides cation.
solely in the cost of computing them. A ciphertext only attack is a cryptanalytic attack in
 The only unconditionally secure system in common use which the cryptanalyst possesses only ciphertext.
is the one time pad, in which the plaintext is combined A known plaintext attack is a cryptanalytic attack in
with a randomly chosen key of the same length. While such which the cryptanalyst possesses a substantial quantity
a system is provably secure, the large amount of key re- of corresponding plaintext and ciphertext.
quired makes it impractical for most applications. Except A chosen plaintext attack is a cryptanalytic attack in
as otherwise noted, this paper deals with computationally which the cryptanalyst can submit an unlimited number
secure systems since these are more generally applicable. of plaintext messages of his own choosing and examine the
When we talk about the need to develop provably secure resulting cryptograms.
cryptosystems we exclude those, such as the one time pad, In all cases it is assumed that the opponent knows the
which are unwieldly to use. Rather, we have in mind sys- general system (SK) in use since this information can be
tems using ‘only’ a few; hundred bits of key and imple- obtained by studying a cryptographic device. While many
mentable in either a small amount of digital hardware or users of cryptography attempt to keep their equipment
a few hundred lines of software. secret, many commercial applications require not only that
 We will call a task computationally infeasible if its cost the general system be public but that it be standard.
as measured by either the amount of memory used or the A ciphertext only attack occurs frequently in practice.
runtime is finite but impossibly large. The cryptanalyst uses only knowledge of the statistical
 Much as error correcting codes are divided into convo- properties of the language in use (e.g., in English, the letter
lutional and block codes, cryptographic systems can be e occurs 13 percent of the time) and knowledge of certain
divided into two broad classes: stream ciphers and block “probable” words (e.g., a letter probably begins “Dear
ciphers. Stream ciphers process the plaintext in small Sir:“). It is the weakest threat to which a system can be
chunks (bits or characters), usually producing a pseudo- subjected, and any system which succumbs to it is conrandom sequence of bits which is added modulo 2 to the sidered totally insecure.
DIFFIE AND HELLMAN: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CRYPTOGRAPHY 647

 A system which is secure against a known plaintext at- system itself. The receiver’s password tables and other
 tack frees its users from the need to keep their past mes- authentication data are then more vulnerable to theft than
 sages secret, or to paraphrase them prior to declassifica- those of the transmitter (an individual user). As shown
 tion. This is an unreasonable burden to place on the sys- later, some techniques for protecting against this threat
 tem’s users, particularly in commercial situations where also protect against the threat of dispute. That is, a mesproduct announcements or press releases may be sent in sage may‘ be sent but later repudiated by either the
 encrypted form for later public disclosure. Similar situa- transmitter or the receiver. Or, it may be alleged by either
 tions in diplomatic correspondence have led to the cracking party that a message was sent when in fact none was. Unof many supposedly secure systems. While a known forgeable digital signatures and receipts are needed. For
 plaintext attack is not always possible, its occurrence is example, a dishonest stockbroker might try to cover up
 frequent enough that a system which cannot resist it is not unauthorized buying and selling for personal gain by
 considered secure. forging orders from clients, or a client might disclaim an
 A chosen plaintext attack is difficult to achieve in order actually authorized by him but which he later sees
 practice, but can be approximated. For example, submit- will cause a loss. W e will introduce concepts which allow
 ting a proposal to a competitor may result in his enci- the receiver to verify the authenticity of a message, but
 phering it for transmission to his headquarters. A cipher prevent him from generating apparently authentic meswhich is secure against a chosen plaintext attack thus frees sages, thereby protecting against both the threat of comits users from concern over whether their opponents can promise of the receiver’s authentication data and the
 plant messages in their system. threat of dispute.
 For the purpose of certifying systems as secure, it is
 appropriate to consider the more formidable cryptanalytic III. PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY
 threats as these not only give more realistic models of the
 working environment of a cryptographic system, but make As shown in Fig. 1, cryptography has been a derivative
 security measure. Once a secure channel exists along which
 the assessment of the system’s strength easier. Many syskeys can be transmitted, the security can be extended to
 tems which are difficult to analyze using a ciphertext only
 other channels of higher bandwidth or smaller delay by
 attack can be ruled out immediately under known plaintext or chosen plaintext attacks. encrypting the messages sent on them. The effect has been
 to limit the use of cryptography to communications among
 As is clear from these definitions, cryptanalysis is a
 system identification problem. The known plaintext and people who have made prior preparation for cryptographic
 chosen plaintext attacks correspond to passive and active security.
 system identification problems, respectively. Unlike many In order to develop large, secure, telecommunications
 subjects in which system identification is considered, such systems, this must be changed. A large number of users n
as automatic fault diagnosis, the goal in cryptography is results in an even larger number, (n2 - n)/2 potential pairs
to build systems which are difficult, rather than easy, to who may wish to communicate privately from all others.
identify. It is unrealistic to assume either that a pair of users with
 The chosen plaintext attack is often called an IFF at- no prior acquaintance will be able to wait for a key to be
tack, terminology which descends from its origin in the sent by some secure physical means, or that keys for all (n2
development of cryptographic “identification friend or n)/2 pairs can be arranged in advance. In another paper
foe” systems after World War II. An IFF system enables ii the authors have considered a conservative approach
military radars to distinguish between friendly and enemy requiring no new development in cryptography itself, but
planes automatically. The radar sends a time-varying this involves diminished security, inconvenience, and restriction of the network to a starlike configuration with
challenge to the airplane which receives the challenge,
encrypts it under the appropriate key,and sends it back to respect to initial connection protocol.
the radar. By comparing this response with a correctly W e propose that it is possible to develop systems of the
encrypted version of the challenge, the radar can recognize type shown in Fig. 2, in which two parties communicating
a friendly aircraft. While the aircraft are over enemy ter- solely over a public channel and using only publicly known
 techniques can create a secure connection. W e examine two
ritory, enemy cryptanalysts can send challenges and exapproaches to this problem, called public key cryptosysamine the encrypted responses in an attempt to determine
the authentication key in use, thus mounting a chosen
plaintext attack on the system. In practice, this threat is
countered by restricting the form of the challenges, which
need not be unpredictable, but only nonrepeating.
 There are other threats to authentication systems which
cannot be treated by conventional cryptography, and
which require recourse to the new ideas and techniques
introduced in this paper. The threat of compromise of the
receiver’s authentication data is motivated by the situation in multiuser networks where the receiver is often the Fig. 2. Flow of information in public key system.
64X IEEE TRANSACTJONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, NOVEMBER 1976

terns and public key distribution systems, respectively. equals Em. Letting B = Em l we have m - DC. Thus, both
The first are more powerful, lending themselves to the enciphering and deciphering require about n2 operations.
solution of the authentication problems treated in the next Calculation of D from E, however, involves a matrix insection, while t,he second are much closer to reahzation. version which is a harder problem. And it is at least con-
 A public key cryptosystem is a pair of families ceptually simpler to obtain an arbitrary pair of inverse
PKIK E (KI and ID 1 K K E JRJof algorithms representing matrices than it is to invert a given mabrix, St.art with the
invertible transformations, identity matrix I and do elementary row and column operations to obtain an arbitrary invertible matrix E. Then
 I&:(Mj -+ {M) (2) starting with I do the inverses of these same elementary
 D[(:(M) ---*’{M) (3) operations in reverse order to obtain 61 - E--l. The sequence of elementary operations could be easi1.y deteron a finite message space (MJ, such that mined from a random bit string.
 Unfortunately, matrix inversion takes only a.bout n3
 1) for every K E {Kb EK is the inverse of DK, operations. The ratio of “cryptanalytic” time (i.e., com-
 2) for every K E {KJ and M E (MI, the algorithms EK puting D from E) to enciphering or deciphering t,ime is
 and DK are easy to compute, thus at most n, and enormous block sizes would be re-
 3) for almost every K E (KJ, each easily computed al- quired to obtain ratios of 3 O6 or greater. Also, it does not
 gorithm equivalent to Df( is computationally inappear that knowledge of the element,ary operat.ions used
 feasible to derive from EK,
 to obtain E from I greatly reduces the time for computing
 4) for every K E {K), it is feasible to compute inverse D. And, since there is no round-off error in binary arithpairs EK and DK from K.
 metic, numerical stability is unimportant in the matrix
 Because of the third property, a user’s enciphering key inversion. In spite of its lack of practicaleutility, this matrix
EK can be made public without compromising the security example is still useful for clarifying the relationships
of his secret deciphering key DK. The cryptographic sys- necessary in a public key cryptosystem.
tem is therefore split into two parts, a family of enciphering A more practical approach to finding a pair of easily
transformations and a family of deciphering transforma- computed inverse algorithms E and D; such that, D is hard
tions in such a way that, given a member of one family, it to infer from E, makes use of the difficulty of analyzing
is infeasible to find the corresponding member of the programs in low level languages. Anyone who has tried to
other. determine what operation is accomplished by someone
 The fourth property guarantees that there is a feasible else’s machine language program knows that E itself (i.e.,
way of computing corresponding pairs of inverse trans- what E does) can be hard to infer from an algorithm for E.
formations when no constraint is placed on what either the If the program were to be made purposefully confusing
enciphering or deciphering transformation is to be. In through addition of umleeded variables and statements,
practice, the cryptoequipment must contain a true random then determining an inverse algorithm could be made very
number generator (e.g., a noisy diode) for generat,ing K, difficult. Of course, E must be complicated enough to
together with an algorithm for generating the EK ~- n, prevent its identification from input-output pairs.
pair from its outputs. Essentially what is required is a one-way compiler: one
 Given a system of this kind, the problem of key distri- which takes an easily understood program writ,ten in a h.igh
bution is vastly simplified. Each user generates a pair of level language and translates it into an incomprehensible
inverse transformations, E and D, at his terminal. The program in some machine language. The compiler is one-.
deciphering transforrnation D must be kept secret, but way because it must be feasible to do the compila.tion, but
need never be communicated on any channel. The enci- infeasible to reverse the process. Since efficiency in size of
phering key E can be made public by placing it in a public program and run time are not crucial in this application,
directory along with the user’s name and address. Anyone such compilers may be possible if the struct,ure of the
can then encrypt messages and send them to the user, but machine language can be optimized to assist in the conno one else can decipher messages inbended for him. Public fusion.
key cryptosystems can thus be regarded as multiple access Merkle [I] has independently studied the problem of
ciphers. distributiug keys over an insecure channel. His approach
 It is crucial that the public file of enciphering keys be is different from that of the public key cryptosystems
protected from unauthorized modification. This task is suggested above, and will be termed a public key distrimade easier by the public nature of the file. Read prot,ec bution system. The goal is for two .users, A and B, to setion is unnecessary and, since the file is modified infre- curely exchange a key over an insecure charmel. This key
quently, elaborate write protection mechanisms can be is then used by both users in a normal cryptosystem for
economically employed. both enciphering and deciphering. Merkle bas a solu.tion
 A suggestive, although unfortunate!.y useless, example whose crypt,analytic cost grows as n,2 where n is the cost to
of a public key cryptosystem is to encipher the plaintext, the legitimate users. Unfortunately the cost to the legitirepresented as a binary n-vector m, by multiplying it by mate users of the system is as much in transmission time
an invertible binary n X n matrix E. The cryptogram thus as in computation, because Merkle’s protocol requires n
DIFFIE AND IIELLMAN: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CRYPTOGRAPHY 649

potential keys to be transmitted before orie key can be as their key. .User i obtains Kij by obtaining Y, from the
decided on. Merkle not.es that this high transmission public file and letting
overhead prevents the system from being very useful in
 Kij z yj”[ mod q (9)
practice. If a one megabit limit is placed on the setup
protocol’s overhead, his technique can achieve cost ratios = (a”/)Xl Inod q (10)
of approximately 10 000 to 1, which are too small for most ;: ,x-!x, z NX,X lmodq.
applications. If inexpensive, high bandwidth data links (11)
become available, ratios of a million to one or greater could User j obtains Kij in the similar fashion
be achieved and the system would be of substantial prac-
 Kij = Yx/ mod 4. (12)
tical value.
 W e now suggest a new public key distribution system Another user must compute Kij from Yi and Yj, for exwhich has several advantages. First, it requires only one ample, by computing
“key” to be exchanged. Second, the cryptanalytic effort mod q,
 Kjj z ~~iyil~~cvY~)
appears to grow exponentially in the effort of the legitimate (13)
users. And, third, its use can be tied to a public file of user W e thus see that if logs mod q are easily computed the
information which serves to authenticate user A to user B system can be broken. While we do not currently have a
and vice versa. By making the public file essentially a read proof of the converse (i.e., that the system is secure if logs
only memory, one personal appearance allows a user to mod q are difficult to compute), neither do we see any way
authenticate his identity many times to many users. to compute Kij from Yi and Yj without first obtaining ei-
Merkle’s technique requires A and B to verify each other’s ther Xi or Xi.
identities through other means. If q is a prime slightly less than 26, then all quantities
 The new technique makes use of the apparent difficulty are representable as b bit numbers. Exponentiation then
of computing logarithms over a finite field GF(q) with a takes at most 2b multiplications mod q, while by hypothprime number q of elements. Let esis taking logs requires q112 = 2b/2 operations. The
 cryptanalytic effort therefore grows exponentially relative
 Y = crx mod q1 forl_<XIq-1, (4) to legitimate efforts. If b = 200, then at most 400 multiwhere 01is a fixed primit,ive element of GE’(q), then X is plications are required to compute Yi from Xi, or Kij from
referred to as the logarithm of Y to the base 01,mod q: Yi and Xj, yet taking logs mod q requires 21°0 or approximately lO”O operations.
 X = log, Y mod q, forl<YIq-1. (5)
Calculation of Y from X is easy, taking at most 2 X log2 q
multiplications [6, pp. 398-4221. For example, for X =
1% The problem of authenCication is perhaps an even more
 serious barrier to the universal adoption of telecomrnuny = ,I8 = (((u.“)2)“)2 x *2. (6) ications for business t,ransactions than the problem of key
Computing X from Y, on the other hand can be much more distribution. Authentication is at the heart of any system
difficult and, for certain carefully chosen values of q, re- involving contracts and billing. W ithout it, business cannot
quires on the order of qlk operations, using the best known function. Current electronic authentication systems cannot
algorithm [7, pp. 9, 575-5761, [$I. meet the need for a purely digital, unforgeable, message
 The security of our technique depends crucially on the dependent signature. They provide protection against
difficulty of computing logarithms mod q, and if an algo- third party forgeries, but do not protect against disputes
rithm whose complexity grew as logzq were to be found, our between transmitter and receiver.
syst.em would be broken. While the simplicity of the In order to develop a system capable of replacing the
problem statement might allow such simple algorithms, current written contract with some purely electronic form
it might instead allow a proof of the problem’s difficulty. of communication, we must discover a digital phenomenon
For now we assume that the best known algorithm for with the same properties as a written signature. It must be
computing logs mod q is in fact close to optimal and hence easy for anyone to recognize the signature as authentic, but
that q1/2 is a good measure of the problem’s complexity, impossible for anyone other than the legitimate signer to
for a properly chosen q. produce it. W e will call any such technique one-way au-
 Each user generates an independent random number thentication. Since any digital signal can be copied pre-
Xi chosen uniformly from the set of integers {1,2, . . . ,q - cisely, a true digit,al signature must be recognizable without
1). Each keeps Xi secret, but places being known.
 Consider the “login” problem in a multiuser computer
 Yi =z a *ysrjlod q (7) system. When setting up his account, the user chooses a
 password which is entered into the system’s password diin a public file with his name and address. When users i
 rectory. Each time he logs in, the user is again asked to
and j wish t,o communicate privately, they use
 provide his password. By keeping this password secret
 Kij = 01~1x~ mod (1 (8) from all other users, forged logins are prevented. This,
650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, NOVEMBER 1976

 however, makes it vital to preserve the security of the discussed later, is probably present in the most promising
 password directory since the information it contains would class of one-way functions.
 allow perfect impersonation of any user. The problem is Polynomials offer an elementary example of one-way
 further compounded if system operators have legitimate functions. It is much harder to find a root xe of the polyreasons for accessing the directory. Allowing such legiti- nomial equation p (3~) = y than it is to evaluate the polymate accesses, but preventing all others, is next to im- nomial p(x) at x = x0. Purdy [l l] has suggested the use of
possible. sparse polynomials of very high degree over finite fields,
 This leads to the apparently impossible requirement for which appear to have very high ratios of solution to evala new login procedure capable of judging the authenticity uation time. The theoretical basis for one-way functions
of passwords without actually knowing them. While ap- is discussed at greater length in Section VI. And, as shown
pearing to be a logical impossibility, this proposal is easily in Section V, one-way functions are easy to devise in
satisfied. When the user first enters his password PW, the practice.
computer automatically and transparently computes a The one-way function login protocol solves only some
function f(PW) and stores this, not PW, in the password of the problems arising in a multiuser system. It protects
directory. At each successive login, the computer calculates against compromise of the system’s authentication data
f(X), where X is the proffered password, and compares when it is not in use, but still requires the user to send the
f(X) with the st ored value f (P W). If and only if they ‘are true password to the system. Protection against eavesequal, the user is accepted as being authentic. Since the dropping must be provided by additional encryption, and
function f must be calculated once per login, its compu- protection against the threat of dispute is absent altotation time must be small. A million instructions (costing gether.
approximately $0.10 at bicentennial prices) seems to be A public key cryptosystem can be used to produce a true
a reasonable limit on this computation. If we could ensure, one-way authentication system as follows. If user A wishes
however, that calculation of f-l required 1030 or more in- to send a message M to user B, he “deciphers” it in his
structions, someone who had subverted the system to ob- secret deciphering key and sends DA(M). When user B
tain the password directory could not in practice obtain receives it, he can read it, and be assured of its authenticity
PW from f(PW), and could thus not perform an unau- by “enciphering” it with user A’s public enciphering key
thorized login. Note that f(PW) is not accepted as a pass- EA. B also saves DA(M) as proof that the message came
word by the login program since it will automatically from A. Anyone can check this claim by operating on
compute f (f(PW)) which will not match the entry f(PW) DA(M) with the publicly known operation EA to recover
in the password directory. M. Since only A could have generated a message with this
 We assume that the function f is public information, so property, the solution to the one-way authentication
that it is not ignorance off which makes calculation of f-l problem would follow immediately from the development
difficult. Such functions are called one-way functions and of public key cryptosystems.
were first employed for use in login procedures by R. M. One-way message authentication has a partial solution
Needham [9, p. 911. They are also discussed in two recent suggested to the authors by Leslie Lamport of Massapapers [lo], [ll] which suggest interesting approaches to chusetts Computer Associates. This technique employs a
the design of one-way functions. one-way function f mapping k-dimensional binary space
 More precisely, a function f is a one-way function if, for into itself for h on the order of 100. If the transmitter
any argument x in the domain off, it is easy to compute the wishes to send an N bit message he generates 2N, rancorresponding value f(x), yet, for almost all y in the range domly chosen, k-dimensional binary vectors
off, it is computationally infeasible to solve the equation x1,x1,x2,x2, * * * ,XN,XN which he keeps secret. The rey = f(x) for any suitable argument x. ceiver is given the corresponding images under f, namely
 It is important to note that we are defining a function Y 1, Yl,Y 2, yz, * * * ,YN,YN. Later, when the message m =
which is not invertible from a computational point of view, (1721+2, * - - ,mN) is to be sent, the transmitter sends xi or
but whose noninvertibility is entirely different from that Xi depending on whether ml = 0 or 1. He sends x2 or X2
normally encountered in mathematics. A function f is depending on whether m2 = 0 or 1, etc. The receiver opnormally called “noninvertible” when the inverse of a point erates with f on the first received block and sees whether
y is not unique, (i.e., there exist distinct points 3~1and x2 it yields yi or Yi as its image and thus learns whether it was
such that f(xi) = y = f (x2)). We emphasize that this is not 3~1or X1, and whether ml = 0 or 1. In a similar manner the
the sort of inversion difficulty that is required. Rather, it receiver is able to determine m2,m3, . . . ,mN. But the remust be overwhelmingly difficult, given a value y and ceiver is incapable of forging a change in even one bit of
knowledge of f, to calculate any x whatsoever with the m.
property that f (3c) = y. Indeed, if f is noninvertible in the This is only a partial solution because of the approxiusual sense, it may make the task of finding an inverse mately lOO-fold data expansion required. There is, howimage easier. In the extreme, if f(x) = yc for all x: in the ever, a modification which eliminates the expansion
domain, then the range off is (yc), and we can take any x problem when N is roughly a megabit or more. Let g be a
as f-l(yo). It is therefore necessary that f not be too de- one-way mapping from binary N-space to binary n-space
generate. A small degree of degeneracy is tolerable and, as where n is approximately 50. Take the N bit message m
DIFFIE AND HELLMAN: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CRYPTOGRAPHY 651

 and operate on it with g to obtain the n bit vector m’. Then
 use the previous scheme to send m’. If iV = 106, n = 50, and
 k = 100, this adds kn = 5000 authentication bits to the
 message. It thus entails only a 5 percent data expansion CIPHERTEXT

 during transmission (or 15 percent if the initial exchange
 Y-f(x)
 OfYl,Yl, -*- ,YN,YN is included). Even though there are
 Fig. 3. Secure cryptosystem used as one-way function.
 a large number of other messages (2N-n on the average)
 with the same authentication sequence, the one-wayness
 of g makes them computationally infeasible to find and
 thus to forge. Actually g must be somewhat stronger than defined by
 a normal one-way function, since an opponent has not only
 m’ but also one of its inverse images m. It must be hard
 f(X) = SxPd. (15)
 even given m to find a different inverse image of m’. This function is one-way because solving for X given f(X)
 Finding such functions appears to offer little trouble (see is equivalent to the cryptanalytic problem of finding the
 Section V). key from a single known plaintext-cryptogram pair. Public
 There is another partial solution to the one-way user knowledge off is now equivalent to public knowledge of
authentication problem. The user generates a password (SK] and PO.
X which he keeps secret. He gives the systemfT(X), where While the converse of this result is not necessarily true,
f is a one-way function. At time t the appropriate au- it is possible for a function originally found in the search
thenticator is f T-t(X), which can be checked by the sys- for one-way functions to yield a good cryptosystem. This
tem by applying ft(X). Because of the one-wayness off, actually happened with the discrete exponential function
past responses are of no value in forging a new response. discussed in Section III [8].
The problem with this solution is that it can require a fair One-way functions are basic to both block ciphers and
amount of computation for legitimate login (although key generators. A key generator is a pseudorandom bit
many orders of magnitude less than for forgery). If for generator whose output, the keystream, is added modulo
example t is incremented every second and the system 2 to a message represented in binary form, in imitation of
must work for one month on each password then T = 2.6 a one-time pad. The key is used as a “seed” which determillion. Both the user and the system must then iterate f mines the pseudorandom keystream sequence. A known
an average of 1.3 million times per login. While not insur- plaintext attack thus reduces to the problem of determountable, this problem obviously limits use of the tech- mining the key from the keystream. For the system to be
nique. The problem could be overcome if a simple method secure, computation of the key from the keystream must
for calculating f c2tn), for n = 1,2, . . . could be found, much be computationally infeasible. While, for the system to be
as X8 = ((X2)2)2. For then binary decompositions of T - usable, calculation of the keystream from the key must be
t and t would allow rapid computation off T-t and ft. It computationally simple. Thus a good key generator is, almay be, however, that rapid computation of fn precludes most by definition, a one-way function.
f from being one-way. Use of either type of cryptosystem as a one way function
 suffers from a minor problem. As noted earlier, if the
 function f is not uniquely invertible, it is not necessary (or
 V. PROBLEMINTERRELATIONSANDTRAPDOORS possible) to find the actual value of X used. Rather any X
 with the same image will suffice. And, while each mapping
 In this section, we will show that some of the crypto- SK in a cryptosystem must be bijective , there is no such
graphic problems presented thus far can be reduced to restriction on the function f from key to cryptogram deothers, thereby defining a loose ordering according to fined above. Indeed, guaranteeing that a cryptosystem has
difficulty. W e also introduce the more difficult problem this property appears quite difficult. In a good cryptoof trap doors. system the mapping f can be expected to have the char-
 In Section II we showed that a cryptographic system acteristics of a randomly chosen mapping (i.e., f(Xi) is
intended for privacy can also be used to provide authen- chosen uniformly from all possible Y, and successive
tication against third party forgeries. Such a system can choices are independent). In this case, if X is chosen unibe used to create other cryptographic objects, as well. formly and there are an equal number of keys and messages (X and Y), then the probability that the resultant
 A cryptosystem which is secure against a known
 Y has k + 1 inverses is approximately e-l/k! for k =
plaintext attack can be used to produce a one-way func-
 7 , , f . . . . This is a Poisson distribution with mean X =
 0123
tion.
 1, shifted by 1 unit. The expected number of inverses is
 As indicated in Fig. 3, take the cryptosystem (SK:(P) - thus only 2. While it is possible for f to be more degenerate,
{C]}K,(Kf which is secure against a known plaintext attack, a good cryptosystem will not be too degenerate since then
fix P = PO and consider the map the key is not being well used. In the worst case, if f (X) =
 Yc for some Yc, we have S,(P,) = Cc, and encipherment
 of PO would not depend’on the key at all!
652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, NOVEMBER 1976

 While we are usually interested in functions whose do- For A and B to establish a common private key, A
main and range are of comparable size, there are excep- chooses a key at random and sends an arbitrary plaintions. In the previous section we required a one-way text-cryptogram pair to B. B, who made the trap-door cifunction mapping long strings onto much shorter ones. By pher public, but kept the trap-door information secret,
using a block cipher whose key length is larger than the uses the plaintext-cryptogram pair to solve for the key. A
blocksize, such functions can be obtained using the above and B now have a key in common.
technique. There is currently little evidence for the existence of
 Evans et al. [lo] have a different approach to the prob- trap-door ciphers. However they are a distinct possibility
lem of constructing a one-way function from a block cipher. and should be remembered when accepting a cryptosystem
Rather than selecting a fixed Pa as the input, they use the from a possible opponent [12].
function By definition, we will require that a trap-door problem
 f(X) = SXLQ. (16) be one in which it is computationally feasible to devise the
 trap door. This leaves room for yet a third type of entity
This is an attractive approach because equations of this
 for which we shall use the prefix “quasi.” For example a
form are generally difficult to solve, even when the family
 quasi one-way function is not one-way in that an easily
S is comparatively simple. This added complexity, howcomputed inverse exists. However, it is computationally
ever, destroys the equivalence between the security of the
 infeasible everrfor the designer, to find the easily computed
system S under a known plaintext attack and the oneinverse. Therefore a quasi one-way function can be used
wayness off.
 in place of a one-way function with essentially no loss in
 Another relationship has already been shown in Section
 security.
IV.
 Losing the trap-door information to a trap-door one-way
 A public key cryptosystem can be used to generate a function makes it into a quasi one-way function, but there
one-way authentication system. may also be one-way functions not obtainable in this
 manner.
 The converse does not appear to hold, making the con-
 It is entirely a matter of definition that quasi one-way
struction of a public key cryptosystem a strictly more
 functions are excluded from the class of one-way functions.
difficult problem than one-way authentication. Similarly,
 One could instead talk of one-way functions in the wide
a public key cryptosystem can be used as a public key
 sense or in the strict sense.
distribution system, but not conversely.
 Similarly, a quasi secure cipher is a cipher which will
 Since in a public key cryptosystem the general system
 successfully resist cryptanalysis, even by its designer, and
in which E and D are used must be public, specifying E
 yet for which there exists a computationally efficient
specifies a complete algorithm for transforming input
 cryptanalytic algorithm (which is of course computationmessages into output cryptograms. As such a public key
 ally infeasible to find). Again, from a practical point of
system is really a set of trap-door one-way functions,
 view, there is essentially no difference between a secure
These are functions which are not really one-way in that
 cipher and a quasi secure one.
simply computed inverses exist. But given an algorithm
 We have already seen that public key cryptosystems
for the forward function it is computationally infeasible
 imply the existence of trap-door one-way functions.
to find a simply computed inverse. Only through knowl-
 However the converse is not true. For a trap-door one-way
edge of certain trap-door information (e.g., the random
 function to be usable as a public key cryptosystem, it must
bit string which produced the E-D pair) can one easily find
 be invertible (i.e., have a unique inverse.)
the easily computed inverse.
 Trap doors have already been seen in the previous
paragraph in the form of trap-door one-way functions, but VI. COMPUTATIONALCOMPLEXITY
other variations exist. A trap-door cipher is one which
 Cryptography differs from all other fields of endeavor
strongly resists cryptanalysis by anyone not in possession
 in the ease with which its requirements may appear to be
of trap-door information used in the design of the cipher.
 satisfied. Simple transformations will convert a legible text
This allows the designer to break the system after he has
 into an apparently meaningless jumble. The critic, who
sold it to a client and yet falsely to maintain his reputation
 wishes to claim that meaning might yet be recovered by
as a builder of secure systems. It is important to note that
 cryptanalysis, is then faced with an arduous demonstration
it is not greater cleverness or knowledge of cryptography
 if he is to prove his point of view correct. Experience has
which allows the designer to do what others cannot. If he
 shown, however, that few systems can resist the concerted
were to lose the trap-door information he would be no
 attack of skillful cryptanalysts, and many supposedly sebetter off than anyone else. The situation is precisely
 cure systems have subsequently been broken.
analogous to a combination lock. Anyone who knows the
 In consequence of this, judging the worth of new systems
combination can do in seconds what even a skilled
 has always been a central concern of cryptographers.
locksmith would require hours to accomplish. And yet, if
 During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, mathehe forgets the combination, he has no advantage.
 matical arguments were often invoked to argue the
 A trap-door cryptosystem can be used to produce a strength of cryptographic methods, usually relying on
public key distribution system. counting methods which showed the astronomical number
DIFFIE AND HELLMAN: NEW DIRECTIONS IN CRYPTOGRAPHY 653

of possible keys. Though the problem is far too difficult to of interest or effort which has prevented people from
be laid to rest by such simple methods, even the noted al- finding solutions in P time for these problems. It is thus
gebraist Cardano fell into this trap [2, p. 1451. As systems strongly believed that at least one of these problems must
whose strength had been so argued were repeatedly bro- not be in the class P, and that therefore the class NP is
ken, the notion of giving mathematical proofs for the se- strictly larger.
curity of systems fell into disrepute and was replaced by Karp has identified a subclass of the NP problems,
certification via crypanalytic assault. called NP complete, with the property that if any one of
 During this century, however, the pendulum has begun them is in P, then all NPproblems are in P. Karp lists 21
to swing back in the other direction. In a paper intimately problems which are NP complete, including all of the
connected with the birth of information theory, Shannon problems mentioned above [14].
[3] showed that the one time pad system, which had been While the NP complete problems show promise for
in use since the late twenties offered “perfect secrecy” (a cryptographic use, current understanding of their diffiform of unconditional security). The provably secure culty includes only worst case analysis. For cryptographic
systems investigated by Shannon rely on the use of either purposes, typical computational costs must be considered.
a key whose length grows linearly with the length of the If, however, we replace worst case computation time with
message or on perfect source coding and are therefore too average or typical computation time as our complexity
unwieldy for most purposes. W e note that neither public measure, the current proofs of the equivalences among the
key cryptosystems nor one-way authentication systems can NPcomplete problems are no longer valid. This suggests
be unconditionally secure because the public information several interesting topics for research. The ensemble and
always determines the secret information uniquely among typicality concepts familiar to information theorists have
the members of a finite set. W ith unlimited computation, an obvious role to play.
the problem could therefore be solved by a straightforward W e can now identify the position of the general
search. cryptanalytic problem among all computational prob-
 The past decade has seen the rise of two closely related lems.
disciplines devoted to the study of the costs of computa- The cryptanalytic difficulty of a system whose ention: computational complexity theory and the analysis of cryption and decryption operations can be done in P time
algorithms. The former has classified known problems in cannot be greater than NP.
computing into broad classes by difficulty, while the latter To see this, observe that any cryptanalytic problem can
has concentrated on finding better algorithms and be solved by finding a key, inverse image, etc., chosen from
studying the resources they consume. After a brief di- a finite set. Choose the key nondeterministically and verify
gression into complexity theory, we will examine its ap- in Ptime that it is the correct one. If there are M possible
plication to cryptography, particularly the analysis of keys to choose from, an M-fold parallelism must be emone-way functions. ployed. For example in a known plaintext attack, the
 A function is said to belong to the complexity class P (for plaintext is encrypted simultaneously under each of the
polynomial) if it can be computed by a deterministic keys and compared with the cryptogram. Since, by as-
Turing Machine in a time which is bounded above by some sumption, encryption takes only P time, the cryptanalysis
polynomial function of the length of its input. One might takes only NP time.
think of this as the class of easily computed functions, but W e also observe that the general cryptanalytic problem
it is more accurate to say that a function not in this class is NP complete. This follows from the breadth of our
must be hard to compute for at least some inputs. There definition of cryptographic problems. A one-way function
are problems which are known not to be in the class P [13, with an NP complete inverse will be discussed next.
pp. 405-4251. Cryptography can draw directly from the theory of NP
 There are many problems which arise in engineering complexity by examining the way in which NY complete
which cannot be solved in polynomial time by any known problems can be adapted to cryptographic use. In partictechniques, unless they are run on a computer with an ular, there is an NP complete problem known as the
unlimited degree of parallelism. These problems may or knapsack problem which lends itself readily to the conmay not belong to the class P, but belong to the class NP struction of a one-way function.
(for nondeterministic, polynomial) of problems solvable Let y = f(x) = a . x where a is a known vector of n inin polynomial time on a “nondeterministic” computer (i.e., tergers (al,az, . -. ,a,) and x is a binary n-vector. Calcuone with an unlimited degree of parallelism). Clearly the lation of y is simple, involving a sum of at most n integers.
class NP includes the class P, and one of the great open The problem of inverting f is known as the knapsack
questions in complexity theory is whether the class NPis problem and requires finding a subset of the (ai) which sum
strictly larger. toy.
 Among the problems known to be solvable in NP time, Exhaustive search of all 2n subsets grows exponentially
but not known to be solvable in P time, are versions of the and is computationally infeasible for n greater than 100
traveling salesman problem, the satisfiability problem for or so. Care must be exercised, however, in selecting the
propositional calculus, the knapsack problem, the graph parameters of the problem to ensure that shortcuts are not
coloring problem, and many scheduling and minimization possible. For example if n = 100 and each ai is 32 bits long,
problems [13, pp. 363-4041, [14]. W e see that it is not lack y is at most 39 bits long, and f is highly degenerate; re-
654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, NOVEMBER 1976

quiring on the average only 238 tries to find a solution. The failure of numerous attempts to demonstrate the
Somewhat more trivially, if ai = 2i-1 then inverting f is soundness of cryptographic systems by mathematical proof
equivalent to finding the binary decomposition of y. led to the paradigm of certification by cryptanalytic attack
 This example demonstrates both the great promise and set down by Kerchoffs [2, p. 2341 in the last century. Althe considerable shortcomings of contemporary com- though some general rules have been developed, which aid
plexity theory. The theory only tells us that the knapsack the designer in avoiding obvious weaknesses, the ultimate
problem is probably difficult in the worst case. There is no test is an assault on the system by skilled cryptanalysts
indication of its difficulty for any particular array. It ap- under the most favorable conditions (e.g., a chosen plainpears, however, that choosing the {ai) uniformly from text attack). The development of computers has led for the
{O,i,Z, * - - ,2n-l] results in a hard problem with probability first time to a mathematical theory of algorithms which can
oneasn-m. begin to approach the difficult problem of estimating the
 Another potential one-way function, of interest in the computational difficulty of breaking a cryptographic
analysis of algorithms, is exponentiation mod q, which was system. The position of mathematical proof may thus come
suggested to the authors by Prof. John Gill of Stanford full circle and be reestablished as the best method of cer-
University. The one-wayness of this functions has already tification.
been discussed in Section III. The last characteristic which we note in the history of
 cryptography is the division between amateur and pro-
 VII. HISTORICALPERSPECTIVE fessional cryptographers. Skill in production cryptanalysis
 has always been heavily on the side of the professionals,
 While at first the public key systems and one-way aubut innovation, particularly in the design of new types of
thentication systems suggested in this paper appear to be
 cryptographic systems, has come primarily from the amunportended by past cryptographic developments, it is
 ateurs. Thomas Jefferson, a cryptographic amateur, inpossible to view them as the natural outgrowth of trends
 vented a system which was still in use in World War II [2,
in cryptography stretching back hundreds of years.
 pp. 192-1951, while the most noted cryptographic system
 Secrecy is at the heart of cryptography. In early crypof the twentieth century, the rotor machine, was invented
tography, however, there was a confusion about what was
 simultaneously by four separate people, all amateurs [2,
to be kept secret. Cryptosystems such as the Caesar cipher
 pp. 415,420,422-4241. We hope this will inspire others to
(in which each letter is replaced by the one three places
 work in this fascinating area in which participation has
further on, so A is carried to D, B to E, etc.) depended for
 been discouraged in the recent past by a nearly total govtheir security on keeping the entire encryption process
 ernment monopoly.
secret. After the invention of the telegraph [2, p. 1911, the
distinction between a general system and a specific key
allowed the general system to be compromised, for example by theft of a cryptographic device, without comprom- REFERENCES
ising future messages enciphered in new keys. This prin- [I] R. Merkle, “Secure communication over an insecure channel,”
ciple was codified by Kerchoffs [2, p. 2351 who wrote in submitted to Communications of the ACM.
 [2] D. Kahn, The Codebreakers, The Story of Secret Writing. New
1881 that the compromise of a cryptographic system York: Macmillan, 1967.
should cause no inconvenience to the correspondents. [3] C. E. Shannon, “Communication theory of secrecy systems,” Bell
About 1960, cryptosystems were put into service which Syst. Tech. J., vol. 28, pp. 656-715, Oct. 1949.
 [4] M. E. Hellman, “An extension of the Shannon theory approach to
were deemed strong enough to resist a known plaintext
 cryptography,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Sept.
cryptanalytic attack, thereby eliminating the burden of 1975.
keeping old messages secret. Each of these developments [5] W. Diffie and M. E. Hellman, “Multiuser cryptographic techniques,”
decreased the portion of the system which had to be pro- presented at National Computer Conference, New York, June 7-10,
 1976.
tected from public knowledge, eliminating such tedious [6] D. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2, Semiexpedients as paraphrasing diplomatic dispatches before Numerical Algorithms. Reading, MA.: Addison-Wesley, 1969.
 [7] --, The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 3, Sorting and
they were presented. Public key systems are a natural
 Searching. Reading, MA.: Addison-Wesley, 1973.
continuation of this trend toward decreasing secrecy. [S] S. Pohlig and M. E. Hellman, “An improved algorithm for com-
 Prior to this century, cryptographic systems were limited puting algorithms in GF(p) and its cryptographic significance,”
to calculations which could be carried out by hand or with submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theorv.
 [9] M. V. Wilkes, Time-Sharing Computer Systems. New York: Elsimple slide-rule-like devices. The period immediately sevier, 1972.
after World War I saw the beginning of a revolutionary [lo] A. Evans, Jr., W. Kantrowitz, and E. Weiss, “A user authentication
trend which is now coming to fruition. Special purpose system not requiring secrecy in the computer,” Communications
 of the ACM, vol. 17, pp. 437-442, Aug. 1974.
machines were developed for enciphering. Until the de- 1111G. B. Purdy, “A high security log-in procedure,” Communications
velopment of general purpose digital hardware, however, of the ACM, vol. 17, pp. 442-445, Aug. 1974.
 cryptography was limited to operations which could be 1121W. Diffie and M. E. Hellman, “Cryptanalysis of the NBS data encryption standard” submitted to Computer, May 1976.
performed with simple electromechanical systems. The [I31 A. V. Aho, J. E. Hopcroft, and J. D. Ullman, The Design and
 development of digital computers has freed it from the Analysis of Computer Algorithms. Reading, MA.: Addisonlimitations of computing with gears and has allowed the Wesley, 1974.
 [I41 R. M, Karp, “Reducibility among combinatorial problems,” in
 search for better encryption methods according to purely Complexity of Computer Computations. R. E. Miller and J. W.
 cryptographic criteria. Thatcher, Eds. New York: Plenum, 1972, pp. 855104.