IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007 223

 Bayesian Neural Networks for Internet
 Traffic Classification
 Tom Auld, Andrew W. Moore, Member, IEEE, and Stephen F. Gull

 Abstract—Internet traffic identification is an important tool the distinguishing of classes with an accuracy exceeding that of
for network management. It allows operators to better predict (standard) port-based mechanisms. We illustrate this classificafuture traffic matrices and demands, security personnel to detect tion process operating as an offline tool, as in the auditing of
anomalous behavior, and researchers to develop more realistic
traffic models. We present here a traffic classifier that can achieve forensic work. Finally, we suggest ways to further improve the
a high accuracy across a range of application types without any performance of our classifier, indicating that the most effective
source or destination host-address or port information. We use identifiers of an Internet application remain concentrated into a
supervised machine learning based on a Bayesian trained neural relatively small number of characteristics. The contributions of
network. Though our technique uses training data with categories this paper include the following:
derived from packet content, training and testing were done using
features derived from packet streams consisting of one or more • illustration of the Bayesian framework using a neural
packet headers. By providing classification without access to the network model that allows identification of traffic without
contents of packets, our technique offers wider application than using any port or host [Internet protocol (IP) address]
methods that require full packet/payloads for classification. This is information;
a powerful advantage, using samples of classified traffic to permit • a classification accuracy of over 99% when training and
the categorization of traffic based only upon commonly available
information. testing on homogeneous traffic from the same site on the
 same day;
 Index Terms—Internet traffic, network operations, neural net-
 • a classification accuracy of 95% in the (more realistic) sitwork applications, pattern recognition, traffic identification.
 uation of training on one day of traffic from one site, and
 testing on traffic from that site for a day eight months later;
 I. INTRODUCTION this is a figure significantly higher than for the approach
 adopted in [2];
 • we document the features of flows, derived from streams

A CCURATE identification of network applications is fundamental to numerous network activities, from security
monitoring to accounting, and from quality of service meaof packet headers having of greatest contribution to classifiers based upon a naive Bayesian approach and upon a
 Bayesian neural network approach. We show that a small
surements to forecasting for long-term provisioning. However,
 number of features carry high significance regardless of
application classification schemes are inaccurate because the
 the classification scheme. We also show that there is some
knowledge commonly available to the network, i.e., packet
 overlap in features of high importance to either method;
headers, increasingly does not contain sufficient information.
 • finally, our work validates the premise that the activity
 In common with [1], we describe a method with application
 of a network user (in terms of applications) is reversible.
to the networking community. We illustrate this method through
 We define the process as reversible if it permits identifiexamples applied to data which has been made available to us.
 cation of a users network-based applications based upon
We use supervised machine-learning to train a classifier, and
 the network traffic alone. Further, this process is performed
then compare the predicted category with the actual category for
 without the benefit of IP (host) address or port information.
each object. We attained a significantly higher degree of classi-
 The conclusion we draw, extending the work of others, is
fication accuracy using less information than previous methods.
 that traditional anonymization procedures that remove pay-
Notably, for our neural network classifier, we do not use port
 load contents, IP address, and port numbers may not hide
or host information; this is the same situation as faced when atthe network-based application observed.
tempting to classify anonymized traffic.
 In the application of Bayesian technique, we plan to provide
insight into the nature of network traffic itself. We demonstrate II. MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORK
that information able to be derived from a traffic flow can allow The identification of Internet applications through traffic classification is a basic problem of broad interest. A clear interest
 Manuscript received January 13, 2006; revised June 1, 2006. exists among the operators of networks since, with knowledge
 T. Auld and S. F. Gull are with the Department of Physics, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, U.K. (e-mail: tauld@mrao.cam.ac.uk).
 of what applications are present in a network, network opera-
 A. W. Moore is with the Department of Computer Science, Queen Mary, Uni- tors are better able to plan, budget, and bill. Network operators
versity of London, London E1 4NS, U.K. (e-mail: andrew.moore@dcs.qmul.ac. and users have a continuing interest in systems that can identify
uk). anomalies in network traffic to reduce the impact of malicious
 Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. behavior [3]. Alongside these direct and practical applications
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNN.2006.883010 of classification are others that set out to model the Internet: the
 1045-9227/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

modeling of traffic-mix, user composition, and so on. Our ap- features on a per-flow basis, allow some differentiation to be
proach, relying upon packet observations but without access to inferred. As in [9], the authors restricted themselves to a small
site-specific information (such as the role of machines, access number of classes and a trivial set of features. Each class may
to the user and system-administrator community, or access to have included a relatively large number of network-based applithe content of packets) allows for a method with the widest pos- cations, but the authors were never able to establish this method
sible application. We are independent of the original site that as anything more than a property-grouping technique. This
sourced the data and can operate in the traditional anonymiza- work applied an unsupervised method to provide a clustering
tion environments of packet traces without payload, IP address, of traffic. Even in their final analysis, the clusters of traffic
or even port number. The ability to perform accurate identifica- types were never identified beyond port-based methods: The
tion without this information forms the motivation for this work. technique itself introduces considerable error. McGregor et al.
 The most common technique for the identification of net- provide a useful contribution by illustrating that (unsupervised)
work applications through traffic monitoring relies on the use machine learning is plausible, but the work is not comparable
of well-known ports: An analysis of the headers of packets is with our own as it is done without the benefit of an accurately
used to identify traffic associated with a particular port and thus preclassified training set.
of a particular application [4], [5]. Such a process is likely to The link between the applications causing network traffic and
give inaccurate estimates of the amount of traffic carried by the features present in network traffic was further investigated
different applications, since specific protocols, such as hyper- by Zander et al. [11]. Following a motivation that intersects with
text transfer protocol (HTTP), are frequently used to relay other our own work—inaccurate port-based classification and retypes of traffic, e.g., a virtual local area network (VLAN) trans- stricted access to payloads—they attempt maximum-likelihood
ported over HTTP. Also, emerging services avoid the use of (ML)-based classification of network traffic. In particular,
well-known ports altogether as in some peer-to-peer applica- they use sophisticated self-clustering to group similar-property
tions. These traditional classification techniques face increasing traffic as a part of the classification process. However, like
inadequacy. A brief summary of previous classification methods McGregor et al., these authors used unsupervised learning but
now follows. did not have access to a precise application membership. Such
 The work of Karagiannis et al. [6] about how accurate traffic base-level uncertainty is in contrast with this paper.
classification can impact social and political decisions, cited Hernández-Campos et al. [12] aim to provide more accurate
differences in the perceived and actual growth of peer-to-peer classification, based on simulation. They describe representanetworks. This approach requires accessible port (and IP ad- tive traffic patterns for input to the simulation but do not seek
dress) information. Illustrating changes in accuracy derived to identify the traffic itself. Soule et al. [13] perform flow clasfrom content-based classification, Moore and Papagiannaki [7] sification aiming to identify membership among a small set of
also noted an accuracy no better than 50%–70% for port-based classes: Elephant flows (those of long-life and large data conclassification using the official Internet Assigned Numbers tent), and nonelephant flows. Their method is used to estimate
Authority (IANA)1 list. flow-membership probability.
 In [8], Karagiannis et al. present a more generic classification Zuev and Moore [2] applied a naive Bayesian classifier to
scheme that, instead of examining individual flows, looks at pat- traffic classification. Significantly, the simple classifier asterns of flows among sets of ports and hosts. While this scheme sumed independence between each of the variables describing a
is also shown to operate on payloadless flows, it supposes that particular object. The data, drawn from previous hand-classifiaccess to full headers remain untested in situations where the IP cation work, exhibited considerable redundancy and significant
address or port numbers are not available to the classification interdependence among features describing each flow; this will
scheme. significantly reduce the accuracy of classification. Clearly, a
 Roughan et al. [9] classify traffic into a small number of cat- method that incorporates dependence, such as the Bayesian
egories suitable for quality of service applications. They use neural network, could provide a more robust and effective
techniques such as clustering using nearest neighbor to provide classifier.
the required classification. With a small set of features and an Using an entropy maximization method, Gu et al. [14] illusunknown (implicit assumption) of the accuracy of the testing trate the application of machine-learning techniques to the comand training data sets, the authors restrict themselves to broad putation of baseline distributions representing traffic behavior.
properties common to relatively large sets of network-based They are then able to identify deviations from this baseline as
applications. indications of anomalies. Papagiannaki et al. [15] demonstrate a
 In contrast, McGregor et al. [10] identify traffic with similar similar method. Their technique performs a wavelet multiresoobservable properties by applying an untrained classifier to the lution analysis for the identification of overall long-term traffic
problem. The untrained classifier identifies classes of traffic trends. This trend prediction can then provide operational inhaving similar properties, but does not directly assist in under- sight into the network. Mandjes et al. [16] also present work
standing what or why applications have been grouped in this on anomaly detection in the specific application of voice over
way—indeed, without content-derived information the authors Internet traffic. These authors all report on the limits of meaare left to guess the precise type of each application. This surement for effective anomaly detection.
work demonstrated that the properties of network traffic, using In common with Papagiannaki et al., Hajji [17] attempts
 1http://www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers
 to identify the baseline of normal network operation. Their
 method uses a stochastic approximation of the maximum-like-
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 225

lihood function and to again detect anomalies in the overall TABLE I
network behavior. For a further entropy-based mechanism, EXAMPLES OF NETWORK TRAFFIC ALLOCATED TO EACH CATEGORY [7]
Xu et al. [18] documents a procedure for profiling the general
makeup of traffic. However, these approaches are not intended
to provide an insight at the level of network-based application,
but to assist in an understanding of the higher level traffic mix.
 A specific application of neural networks is demonstrated by
Atiya et al. [19]. They describe techniques that are able to predict the utilization of video traffic using sparse-basis selection.
They are able to both estimate the video traffic requirements and
recursively update the estimation process.
 The field of security also uses machine-learning techniques
(see [20] for a recent survey). However, this work has largely
been targeted at the detection of malicious behavior on a multiuser machine, or the filtering of false alarms [21].
 For the recognition of a single flow of traffic, current intrusion detection systems for the network (e.g., [22] and [23]) commonly rely on signature matching and server ports as the primary identification technique. Our work is entirely compatible
with these current systems and we foresee its implementation as about 1000 users connected to the Internet via a full-duplex gipart of a complete intrusion detection system (IDS) framework. gabit Ethernet link. Full-duplex traffic on this connection was
 monitored for each traffic set.
 III. DATA SET This site hosts several biology-related facilities, collectively
 referred to as a genome campus. There are three institutions
 We illustrate our method with preclassified data described
 on site that employ about 1000 researchers, administrators, and
originally in [7]. This data, also used in [2], consists of detechnical staff. The campus is connected to the Internet via a
scriptions of Internet traffic that have been manually classified.
 full-duplex gigabit Ethernet link. The monitor was located on
Hand-classification of two distinct days of data for an active
 this connection to the Internet. Each traffic set consists of a full
Internet facility provides the input for sets of the training and
 24-h weekday period in both link directions.
testing phases. The data was provided as a set of flows taken
from two distinct days; each day consisted of ten sets of classified transport control protocol (TCP) traffic flows, with each B. Traffic Categories
object described by its membership class and a set of features.
 Fundamental to classification work is the idea of classes of
 Each of the ten data sets covered the same length of time
 traffic. In the present data set, traffic was classified into common
(approximately 24 min); these nonoverlapping samples were
 groups of network-based applications. Other approaches to
spaced randomly throughout the 24-h period. The samples are
 classification may have fewer definitions, e.g., malicious versus
intended to be representative of multiple times within the 24-h
 nonmalicious for an intrusion-detection system, or may opt for
period. A description of the classes, definitions of the object of
 protocol-specific definitions, e.g., the identification of specific
classification, and a description of the features of each object are
 applications or specific TCP implementations [26].
given later. Further details of the original hand-classification are
 Table I lists the classes we use alongside a nonexhaustive list
given in [7], and the data sets themselves are described at length
 of applications. Interestingly, each traffic class contains a variety
in [24].
 of different types of data. For example, the BULK class consists
 For the purposes of this study, we treated all data coming from
 of both the control and data flows of the file transfer protocol
a single day as a single trace—any subsampling of a trace meant
 (FTP).
we were subsampling from across the whole day, not selectively.
We are then able to perform full cross correlation in the knowledge that we are not making unintended assumptions about the C. Classification Objects
stability of either the traffic mix or features of the traffic over a Any classification scheme requires the parameterization of
24-h period. the objects to be classified. By using these parameters, the classifier assigns an object to a class.
A. Data Collection
 The fundamental object classified in our approach is a
 Throughout this paper, we have used data collected by the TCP/IP traffic flow, which is represented as a flow of one or
high-performance network monitor described in [25]. The data more packets between a given pair of hosts. It is defined by an
sets we used were based on traces captured using its loss-lim- -tuple consisting of the IP address of the pair of hosts, and
ited, full-payload capture to disk facility with time stamps because we limit ourselves to TCP, the TCP port numbers used
having resolution better than 35 ns. by the server and client [27].
 We examine data for several different periods in time from In this paper, we are limited to the training and testing sets
one site on the Internet. This site is a research-facility host to available. These consist of TCP traffic only, and are made up
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

 TABLE II
 EXAMPLES OF FEATURES DESCRIBING EACH OBJECT USED AS INPUT FOR CLASSIFICATION [31]. EACH OF THESE FEATURES IS PROVIDED FOR
 BOTH DIRECTIONS OF THE DUPLEX TRAFFIC, WHEREVER RELEVANT EACH FEATURE IS ALSO PROVIDED FOR THE TOTAL FLOW

of semantically complete TCP connections. Semantically com- participant, or the peer-to-peer traffic; it may be masquerading
plete flows are flows for which a complete connection setup and as web traffic.
tear-down was observed. Although less well-defined flows may This process of combining host knowledge, with verificalead to a less accurate classification process, there is a degree of tion-using content (also verification including contact with
equivalence between any complete and incomplete flow defini- the users and site-administrators of the site) allowed the origtion [28]. The Bayesian methods we describe here are applicable inal data to be classified, by hand, with very high accuracy.
regardless of the definition of a flow. The classification of this traffic is described in [7]. Related
 We have not evaluated our scheme against packet flows methods are discussed by others [6] and used in a number of
without an easily identified beginning or end. Along with in- intrusion-detection-systems, e.g., Bro and SNORT [22], [23].
completely observed TCP flows, such partially observed flows As stated in the Introduction, the use of site-specific inforinclude those based on the user datagram packet (UDP) services mation, such as the role of machines, access to the user and
and are routinely used for the Internet name services [domain system-administrator community, and the access to the content
name system (DNS)], streaming-media, and popular local-area of packets, may not be assumed. We are motivated to use a
protocols such as the Sun network file system (NFS). Claffy supervised machine-learning process as it exploits the original
et al. [28] consider that employing an appropriate time-based manual-labor to seed classification for data quantities, such as
mechanism—using inactivity timeouts to delimit flows—would that present in quantities that could not feasibly be classified
be sufficient to delimit a flow for the purpose of work such as using the same manual process as the original seed data.
ours. We believe that an important interaction may take place
between such timeout-based mechanisms and certain features E. Object Features
we create; in itself, the topic of appropriate features for network Each object is a flow of data described by its class and a set
traffic deserves further work in itself. of features. The original flow data was not available to us, but
 each object has a number of particular properties, such as the
D. Manual Classification Process client and server port of each flow, along with a number of char-
 The manual classification process consists of identifying acteristics parameterizing its behavior. These features allow for
classes, using content-based classification methods. In this discrimination between the different traffic classes. Table II proprocess, a combination of manual and semiautomated pro- vides a summary of the 246 per-flow features that are available
cesses was used to identify the membership class for each to us. A full description of these features is provided in [24].
object (flow). An example of this process is that the total The computational overhead for the total feature group has
data-mix is reduced to many (millions of) flows for the 24-h led us to use an offline technique at this time.
period. The membership of each flow is then decided based We make extensive use of the tcptrace tool [30] to proon both the contents and knowledge about the systems that vide features that are derived from the contents of the TCP and
exchanged the flow. For example, a flow may be to or from IP packet headers. Using a packet trace as input, this tool coma web server; the flow content is inspected to verify that the putes values based upon the packets it has processed. However,
transfer contains web traffic, and the flow is then classified as tcptrace processes a set of observations made by a monibeing a member of world wide web (www). Another example toring system, so that measures such as round trip time (RTT)
is where inspecting the contents of a flow reveals that one have components in both the (monitoring-point) server and
previously identified as being to or from a web server, in-fact, (monitoring-point) client directions. This gives rise to two
contains peer-to-peer traffic. In this situation, the web server estimates of values such as RTT; in reality these values are parmay be performing a dual-role: web-server and peer-to-peer tial-RTT as used and defined in [32]; conceptually, the two par-
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 227

tial-RTT values together construct the whole. The power of dis- streams in memory and in the monitoring system. Of additional
crimination offered by certain features that are location-specific, note is the large standard deviation in time taken per flow; the
like those derived from RTT, may change should the point of time taken to compute features is proportional to the size of the
measurement be moved. The resulting change in the quality of flow. Though there are some features that induce a fixed overdiscrimination is left for future work. head, any computation based on a collection of packets of flows
 The IP address of the source or destination was not used as (e.g., the computation of interarrival time, packet size, and so
part of the data sets. This is to provide a degree of site-indepen- on) incurred, for our features, an overhead proportional to the
dence in the trained neural network; it also removes any depen- number of packets observed. With a modified definition of the
dence of the trained neural network upon address use within any flow object, the computation of any feature will be bound and
network against which it is used. Early work indicated that the finite; alongside the investigation of the adequacy of features,
IP address incorporated an overwhelming amount of discrim- the definition of flows is a valuable area for further work.
ination power. Though the particular information in an IP address has been used, for static classification, to good effect in G. Processing of the Features
the studies of others (e.g., [3], [6], [8], and [18]), we have been As part of the procedure for using the Bayesian neural netmotivated by the desire to test features that are independent of a work, we process the features describing each traffic object. Feaparticular network configuration, especially IP addresses which, ture preprocessing was not performed for the naive Bayesian
even on the same site, can change over time. work of Section IV.
 The data comprise the class, the client and server port
F. Note on the Construction of Features
 numbers, and 246 other flow features, some of which were
 All stages of the preparation of input data for this study—the described previously. Some are integers less than 65 536, others
construction of flows, the content-based classification of are floating point numbers, and some are boolean or have an
training sets, and the computation of features to describe unknown value. Later, we shall use a Bayesian neural network
flows—were performed as offline processes. Offline processing to predict the probabilities that a flow belongs to each of the
is consistent with a number of potential applications of accurate ten categories.
classification mechanisms, including, long-term forecasting and We assume nothing about the inputs but believe the order for a
the auditing of network traffic. Each of these procedures may given input may be important, and perform a “histogram equalbe performed online, in real-time, with appropriate tradeoffs. ization”: the features were mapped between 0 and 1, and equal-
 As we noted previously, a method that relies upon the se- ized by sorting and indexing. Thus, all numbers between 0 and
mantic definition of a TCP flow cannot provide flow objects 1 are represented approximately equally. All members having
until the end of the flow is observed. Thus, for real-time or con- identical values are assigned the same output value. Boolean
tinuous operation, semantically incorrect TCP flows must be variables were labelled 0 or 1 in the obvious fashion, with unconstructed; and Section III-C discusses this approach for TCP known values being 0.5. Some further manipulation of the data
and other datagram (e.g., UDP) data flows. is performed on an experiment by experiment basis, and this is
 In view of this reliance on the complete flow observation, we described in Section V-A.
do not compute object features until we have all flow observa- The data thus available to the classifier are 246 real numbers
tions for a period. However, the features themselves are rela- between 0 and 1. For each object (flow), or “row” of data, we
tively lightweight computations. Those with the greatest over- also have the class (an integer between 1 and 10), which can
heads rely upon the complete set of variables to compute a be used for training and testing of the classifier. Following our
statistic, such as the median or first/third quartile. note at the beginning of this section, we have two data sets each
 Some of the features themselves can be computed only after taken from two workweek days separated by eight months; there
a complete flow observation; a fertile area for further work is was a total of 337 000 flows in the first and 175 000 flows in the
the establishing of flow features suitable across a wide range of second.
applications. Such work would investigate the impact of lower Although we did not identify any remaining data issues, it
quality features (such as prematurely computed median values) may be desirable to identify the features with the most predicon the contribution of the feature to classification. tive power, and thus reduce the number of features in the cate-
 The computation of features for this work is object-indepen- gorization problem.
dent, and linear in the number of features. Computation of a full Preprocessing of the features for use by in the Bayesian neural
set of features (246) for all traces took over 40 h on a dedicated network contributed a negligible overhead in the preparation of
system area network (SAN), but the removal of the computa- the features—the majority time remains in the overhead of their
tion of Fourier transfer values reduced the computation of the computation from the raw data.
remaining features (226) across 553 188 objects to less than 40 s We now proceed with a description of the methods used to
per flow, with a standard deviation of 22. Clearly, a better fast classify our network data.
Fourier transform (FFT) implementation will contribute significantly to the computation period.
 IV. NAIVE BAYESIAN METHOD
 Another large contributor to the overall performance was
the need to manipulate the files containing the trace data used In this paper we compare two methods: The application of a
in this work. In other implementations, these overheads will Bayesian neural network described in Section V, and the naive
be replaced by the overheads associated with managing packet Bayesian estimator used by Moore and Zuev [2].
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

 TABLE III
 COMPARATIVE RANKING OF VALUABLE FEATURES. NB Rank REFERS TO THE TEN MOST-VALUABLE FEATURES DERIVED USING THE FCBF AND THRESHOLD
 METHODS OF [2], SHOWN IN SECTION IV. BNN Rank REFERS TO THE FEATURE-INTERDEPENDENT RANKING DESCRIBED IN SECTION VII.
 PORT INFORMATION AND HOST IP ADDRESS WAS ASSUMED NOT TO BE AVAILABLE

A. Naive Bayesian Approach of membership for each feature. This approach assumes that all
 features are equally valuable and are independent. Further, in
 The naive Bayesian method associates an object with a par- this simplest of approaches, the probability of membership is
ticular class of membership based upon the sum of probabilities based upon the modeling of a feature by a Gaussian curve.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 229

 Clearly the assumptions of the model and the assumptions of
the independence and importance of all features do not hold. In
the work of Moore and Zuev [2], this approach is progressively
refined to illustrate the impact that an improved model of the
features and a refined list of features can give to the overall accuracy of the classification process.
 Moore and Zuev [2] also include the use of naive Bayesian
kernel estimation. This is similar to the naive Bayesian method
algorithmically; the only difference arises in estimating the
membership of an instance to a particular class: ,
 . In contrast with naive Bayesian which estimated
 , by fitting a Gaussian distribution over the
data, kernel estimation provides an estimate of the real density
 Fig. 1. Perceptron neural network with one hidden layer.
 by

 a hidden layer are connected to all nodes in adjacent layers. A
 (1) particular network architecture is denoted by
 where is the number of input nodes, is the number
where is called the kernel bandwidth and is any of nodes in the th hidden layer, and is the number in the
kernel, where a kernel is defined as any nonnegative func- output layer. For example, Fig. 1 is described by 5 : 3 : 4.
tion (although it is possible to generalize) normalized such Each connection (represented by an arrow in Fig. 1) carries a
that . Examples of such distributions in- weight , and we write , the set of weights for the
clude top hat , which gener- neural network. An activation function is defined on the
ates a histogram to approximate , Gaussian distribution hidden layer, taking as its argument
 , and many others [33]. The
naive Bayesian kernel estimation procedure used in [2] and
replicated here uses a Gaussian kernel partly because it has
desirable smoothness properties.
 The accuracy of the naive Bayesian algorithm also suffers where the sum is over all nodes sending connections to node
from irrelevant and redundant features. Following the procedure in the hidden layer, as well as another node, the bias node, which
of [2], we used a fast correlation-based filter (FCBF), described is not included in the explicit architecture of the network. The
in [34], as well as a variation of a wrapper method in deter- bias node is taken to have constant output 1 and is included
mining the value of the threshold. to allow for additive constants in the activation function. The
 In FCBF, the value of a feature is measured by its correlation activation functions are chosen to be nonlinear, to enable the
with the class-of-membership and with other valuable features. network to model any nonlinearities present in the problem. We
The goodness of a feature is improved if it is highly correlated will use the hyperbolic tangent function
with the class, yet not correlated with any other good features.
Using the procedure described at length in [2, Sec. 4.4], the total
number of features is reduced to a selection of ten described in (2)
Table III. Noteworthy is the feature total number of RTT samples, a curious feature that is part of the output of the tcp- Other choices include a sigmoid function
trace utility; this value counts the number of valid estimations or a radial basis function network.2 Derivatives of
of RTT that tcptrace can use [30] in its computation of the (2), which will be required in the Bayesian training algorithms
RTT estimate. described in Section V-A, are well defined.
 In our problem, we interpret the value of the th node in the
 V. CLASSIFICATION NEURAL NETWORKS output layer , as being related to the probability that the class
 of the flow is , given the weights and the inputs of a flow. The
 We shall use multilayer perceptron classification networks to properties of a probability distribution require that
assign classification probabilities to the flows. (See [35] and ref- and for normalization. We apply the softmax filter
erences therein for background; a Bayesian treatment is pro- to this layer to ensure that the activations in the output
vided in [36].) layer behave like a probability distribution
 Fig. 1 shows a typical perceptron network with one hidden
layer. The first layer contains the inputs, which in our problem
are the 246 features described in Section III. The final layer
contains the outputs, and in our problem these relate to the ten
classes of membership to which a flow may belong. Intervening 2Here, the structure of the network is slightly different. The nodes in the
layers are described as hidden. There may be any number of x
 hidden layer have activations g ( ) = exp (( 0 x0w ) =2 ) where x is
hidden layers, comprising any number of nodes. The nodes in the vector of inputs.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

 We now interpret and note that the filter ensures a similar [36]. The log likelihood is equivalent to the loss funcpositive, normalized distribution over the classes. Thus, given a tion, and the log prior behaves like the regularizer. However, the
network architecture , a set of param- Bayesian approach has certain advantages including the geneters , which are the weights of the network, and a set of 246 eration of error bars on the weights from the posterior. Other
inputs for a flow , we now have defined a likelihood parameters in the prior (regularizer), such as in (5), are also
function for the classification problem chosen consistently and the evidence may be computed and used for model selection. The experiments in this
 paper are conducted using the software package MemSys developed for this purpose by maximum entropy data consultants
 [37].
where Some preprocessing of features is required prior to input as
 training data. We rescale features linearly, so that the mean of
 the training data is 0 and the standard deviation is 0.5. This is
 Class (3) done because the neural network contains a nonlinear activation
 function [the function of (2)] which is of order 1. This
 For a particular input vector, the output vector of the net- rescaling is performed so that the variance of the inputs is of a
work is determined by feedforward calculation. We progress similar scale to that of the nonlinearity in (2). It has been shown
sequentially through the network layers, from inputs to outputs, from the performance and the evidence of similar networks that
calculating the activation of each node, until we calculate the a standard deviation of 0.5 is optimal. In network training, this
activation of the output nodes. transformation is stored so that the inputs of the testing set can
 In this paper, we restrict ourselves to zero and single-lay- be rescaled for prediction.
ered networks. There are two reasons for this simplification. In Section IV, we defined our likelihood function for the
First, it is believed that single-layer networks contain enough classification for a number of hypotheses , given the pastructure to solve the classification problem to adequate accu- rameters (3). We now infer the maximum a posteriori
racy. Second, the Bayesian training algorithms described in probability (MAP) best estimates for the weights of the neural
Section V-A are much more robust with zero and single-layer network , which will ultimately be used for class prediction.
networks. Each network architecture we consider is thus of the The weights are the unknown parameters in the likelihood,
form where can be zero (no hidden layer) or and we require a prior distribution on them . A common
positive (three layer network with nodes in the single-hidden choice of prior on the weights of such networks is the Gaussian
layer). prior. However, we have no bias for one particular neural network or another, and wish to consider as broad a choice of
A. Bayesian Network Training weights as possible. Gaussian distributions are of the form
 with . The maxent prior be-
 Network training consists of choosing the best weights of the haves like and converges more slowly to
network for a particular problem. In supervised learning, we use zero for extreme values of than the Gaussian. The maxent
a training set to teach the network, and the problem is analogous prior is seen as a more appropriate choice than the Gaussian
to that of fitting a function to a set of data. equivalent since it is less constraining on “large” values of the
 A common approach is to define a loss function between weights, which may be required to build an accurate classifier.
the outputs or predictions of a network evaluated on some Examination of the evidence also reveals that maxent priors protraining inputs, and the targets , which are the actual values vide better solutions in many problems.
those outputs take on the training set inputs. The predictions de- We thus initially choose the maximum entropy prior
pend on the choice of the weights, and we write .
The total loss is defined as

 (4)
 where the entropy is defined over both positive and negative
 values of the weights via
 The aim is now to minimize the loss in (4) with respect to
subject to some constraints of a regularizer , which avoids
overfitting to the training set. Using Lagrange multipliers, we
thus aim to minimize

 (5) The prior contains two parameters and . Here, is called
 the default level and is chosen to be 0.15.3 We will drop any
 We use a wholly Bayesian approach. We assign a prior to the dependence of the prior on this parameter, as it is found to make
weights and construct a posterior over these unknowns using 30.15 is chosen when the scale of the data is such that the standard deviation
Bayesian theorem. It can be shown that the two approaches are of the inputs is 0.5.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 231

very little difference. The hyperparameter has a much greater
effect on training, and we keep it in the formulation at this stage.
 Bayesian theorem can be written as

 (6)

which yields

 (7)

 By writing the neural network classification likelihood in (3)
as Fig. 2. Error rate versus number in the hidden layer.

 Class
 classification scheme, which we now use to predict the classes
 of the Internet flows found in the data set.
the likelihood in (7) becomes the product of the for
each flow in the training set 4
 B. Choosing the Architecture
 We must decide what network architecture is most applicable
 (8) in this problem. We are restricted to MLP networks with zero
 or one hidden layer, since the MemSys algorithm typically fails
where the product runs over each member of the training set . on networks with two or more hidden layers. It would be de-
Here, and are the class and features of the th flow in . sirable to conduct experiments on a variety of architectures (or
 The prior contains a parameter . This is known as a nuisance hypotheses ) and calculate the corresponding evidences
parameter. We could assign its own prior and integrate . This would allow us to choose “the most probit out of the posterior so that we have a distribution independent able” hypothesis. However, the integrals involved in
of are over many dimensions and numerical computation proved
 unfeasible. Instead, we use cross validation: We train nets with
 different structures on a subset of the data, and calculate the classification error (the testing error) on another set of data. We consider networks with between 0 and 30 nodes in the hidden layer
 (0 being a network with no hidden layer).
 However, in view of the optimization algorithms described
 Testing error is a function of the network and the training/
later, we prefer to retain the parameter at this stage. The nortesting sets, so in the cross-validation test, we use the same
malized posterior distribution is thus
 training and testing data for each architecture. We use a single
 set of training data consisting of classified flows from 10% of
 the data from the first trace. The test set is a further 10% of the
 (9) data from this trace (distinct from the training data). The network training algorithm described in Section V-A was run to
 Equation (9) provides a posterior distribution over the find the MAP values of the weights for each architecture, and
weights of the network for each value of . We use the con- the predictions calculated for the flows in the testing set. Fig. 2
jugate gradient algorithm in the MemSys environment to find shows the testing error. The errors for networks with more than
the MAP values of the weights. We interpret the MAP weights seven nodes in the hidden layer are all similar, and lie between
as corresponding to the most likely neural network given the 0.86 and 0.92. Any of these architectures would be suitable, but
hypothesis (neural network architecture). The algorithm is it was decided to use the value at the minimum, which is 10.
quite involved and is described further in [37]. The search of Some further justification can be provided by the presence of
the weight and space is conducted first by holding at a ten classes in the problem. The number in the hidden layer prolarge constant value and evaluating the MAP in space. The vides the dimension of the hidden space. This is the nonlinear
derivatives of are evaluated, is reduced, and the algorithm projection of the input space via the map created by the weights
is repeated. A stopping value of is found where the posterior and activation function in the first to second layer of the netis thus maximized. work. Having a dimension greater than or equal to the number
 We have thus inferred the most probable value of the weights of classes could provide the necessary complexity to accurately
of the neural network given some training data. This defines a classify all classes of traffic.
 We will now proceed with a variety of experiments to test the
 D
 4We interpret the training set as comprising logically independent samples
 accuracy and properties of the classification scheme, including
from the likelihood distributions. The probability of the whole sample thus factorizes into the product of individual likelihoods above. first a comparison with the naive Bayesian method.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

 TABLE IV
 ERROR RATES WHEN TRAINING AND TESTING WITHIN TRACES 1 AND 2, AND WHEN USING TRACE 1 TO TRAIN AND TRACE 2 TO TEST

 TABLE V
 ACCURACY FOR DIFFERENT SIZES OF TRAINING SET

 VI. NAIVE BAYESIAN AND NEURAL NETWORK COMPARISON in the case of the neural network) degree of accuracy. The
 composition of the traffic has changed during the eight months
 For both methods, naive Bayesian, and results gained using
 between Traces 1 and 2, but not so much as to make the classes
the Bayesian neural network, we do not use the server port
 unpredictable using the features, and we achieve accuracies
number as a feature to describe flows of network traffic.
 around 95% for the neural network. Indeed, we consider this
 For the naive Bayesian experiments, we use the best approach
 95% success rate the headline result of the paper, since this
of [2] naive Bayesian combined with a kernel-estimate method
 accuracy was achieved in the near realistic situation of using a
to provide an improved model of each feature and a reduced set
 training set from eight months prior to the training set.
of ten features, selected using the FCBF approach.
 For the neural network, we use an MLP with ten nodes in VII. NEURAL NETWORK INVESTIGATION
a single-hidden layer, trained using the MemSys algorithm de-
 The neural network provides a likelihood which is not sepscribed in Section V-A.
 arable over the input features. In this section, we will further
 We use three experiments to compare of the methods. The
 investigate the behavior of the neural network as the training set
first experiment tests classification accuracy within trace 1. 50%
 and other factors are varied. Here, we will concentrate on flow
of the data is chosen randomly as training data, and the reaccuracy, but we believe we would obtain similar results and inmaining 50% used to test. The experiment is repeated five times,
 sights using packet, or byte metrics, as the figures obtained for
using different randomly chosen training sets of the same size
 different metrics in Section VI are very similar.
and the standard deviation across the repeated experiments computed. The second experiment is identical to the first but Trace A. Makeup of the Training Set
2 is used in place of Trace 1. The third experiment uses training
 In the experiments in Section VI, we used training sets of the
data created using (a sample of) Trace 1, and tests on the whole
 order of hundreds of thousands of flows. For Bayesian neural
of Trace 2. It is not possible to train on the entire set from Trace
 networks, this required the use of hundreds of megabytes of
1 due to memory limitations. We select 50% of the flows from
 memory and provided for a training time of the order of tens
Trace 1 for use as training data. Again, we choose this data ranof hours. It would be desirable to use smaller training sets, if
domly, run the experiment five times, and indicate the mean acpossible.
curacy along with the error margin representing standard devi-
 As the first investigation, the third experiment previously deation across the set of experiments.
 scribed was conducted using 0.1%, 1%, and 10% of the data
 We use three separate metrics to evaluate the success of the
 in Trace 1 to train, and the whole of Trace 2 to test. The accutwo classifiers. The first of these is the accuracy derived acracies, along with the time taken for the training algorithm to
cording to the classification of the objects (the TCP flows). This
 converge5 are shown in Table V for these and the corresponding
is the metric used to choose the neural network architecture. The
 experiment using 50% of the training data. Experiments were
second and third metrics are computed based upon the number
 repeated five times. The mean is given along with the standard
of packets and the number of bytes of data carried by each flow.
 deviation (as error range).
The results of the experiments evaluated using the three metrics
 It appears that we cannot reduce the size of training set
are shown in Table IV.
 without reducing the accuracy of the classifier, at least with
 In all cases, the neural network outperforms the naive
 the size of training sets used in this paper. The training time
Bayesian classifier. The accuracies of the first two experiments
 taken for the larger set is almost 39 h, but this is not larger than
are higher than the third, for both methods. This shows that we
are able to classify traffic that is homogeneous to a high ( 99% 5The algorithm is run on a single 2.2-GHz Intel Celeron-based host.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 233

 TABLE VI
 CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY VERSUS COMPOSITION OF THE TRAINING SET
 (TRAINING AND TESTING WITHIN TRACE 1)

 Fig. 3. Average class accuracy versus class training size (training and testing
 within both traces).

 TABLE VII
 CLASS ACCURACIES ACHIEVED WITH 2441 FLOWS PER CLASS
 (TRAINING AND TESTING WITHIN BOTH TRACES)

the time required to classify the training data, as discussed in
Section III.
 Fig. 4. “Www” class accuracy and average class accuracy as “www” flows are
 The classification accuracies produced so far are derived on increased in the training set.
a flow basis over the whole test set. However, the accuracies of
the classes within the test set vary greatly. Table VI shows the The average class accuracy has increased in these experiaccuracies for one of the neural networks in experiment 1 from ments, and the training set size (and hence training time) has
Section VI, along with the make up of Trace 1. reduced greatly. The accuracy increased roughly logarithmi-
 Clearly some of the accuracies are very low (or even zero) cally with the training size, at least for the training sizes used
and the average class accuracy is only 68.8%. The accuracies in this experiment, except the very small set with ten flows per
for the classes vary with the number of instances of that class in class. We were able to achieve an accuracy of 95.5% across all
the training data. The “www” class makes up 87% of the flows flows when both training and testing within Traces 1 and 2 comin the data set.6 and has the highest accuracy among the classes bined. However, we are limited to around 2441 training data
at 99.8%. Indeed, it is the high accuracy for this class which for each class in this set. Given the higher accuracies shown in
ensures a high overall accuracy of 99.3%. Table VI, it is reasonable to expect that higher class accuracies
 If we are interested in other criteria for classification, for in- would be achieved if more training data of the sparse classes
stance if we were only interested in a single class of flows, such were available to us. This would indeed be the case if we were
as “mail” flows, or if we wanted to maximize the average class to hand-classify more of the traces selectively, since only a proaccuracy unweighted by the number of flows, then the above portion was hand-classified as described in Section III.
network is surely not optimal and we may wish to choose a dif- Next, we wish to investigate what happens when we hold the
ferent composition of training data. training sizes of all other classes constant at the 2441 level, and
 To maximize the average class accuracy, we try a network increase the proportion of “www” flows in the training set. We
with the same proportion of training data for each class. We use expect the “www” class accuracy to increase, but at what cost
both Traces 1 and 2 here as training and testing data and, for to the accuracies of the other classes? Fig. 4 illustrates how the
practicalities sake, we omit the “Gm,” “MM,” and “Int” classes “www” accuracy increases as the accuracy of the other classes
from our analysis since the number of instances is minimal. We decreases.
also vary the total number of training data logarithmically and As expected, the “www” class accuracy does increase (up to
observe the effect on the accuracy. The results are shown in 99.9% when using about 238 k flows), but at a cost to the average
Fig. 3. The accuracies per class for the larger training set are class accuracy. However, when using larger numbers of training
also shown in Table VII. data for the other classes ( 2400), we are still able to retain
 6While the “www” class is well represented in flows, it represents less in respectable ( 90%) class accuracies for the remaining classes,
terms of data packets (23%) and data bytes (22%). in contrast to the results in Table VI.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

B. Interpretation of a Training Set as a Prior on the
Composition of the Network Traffic
 The makeup of the hand-classified traffic in Trace 1 is very
skewed among certain classes (Table VI). In particular, 87% of
the objects are “www” flows and over 97% of the flow objects
are made up of three of the ten classes. Training on an unadjusted data set does give high accuracies over the whole set,
but low accuracies on some classes. As we have shown, accuracies for a given class depend on the number of that class in the
training data, and also the proportion of the total training data
made up by that class.
 If the aim of the classifier is to maximize the average class
accuracy, it is optimal to use a training set made up of equal
amounts of each class. Similarly, if accurate classification of a Fig. 5. Average class accuracy changes with number of inputs.
given class is more important than another, this should be represented in the makeup of the training data. In fact, it is not nec- (input) layer of a neural network, we see that the magnitude of
essary to alter the makeup of the training set per se, since we the weights associated with each input node determines how
can alter the terms in the likelihood in (8) correspondingly. It is much the input value of that node affects the activation of the
possible to bias each member of the training set by an amount nodes in the next layer. If all the weights are zero for a partic-
 . If a flow is present times then the contribution ular node, that input will have no effect on the activations in
to the likelihood from these flows is . Thus, if we the next layer, or, hence, on all activations in the network. Thus,
wish to bias single flows of a particular type by an amount the output classification probabilities are not influenced by that
each, we alter the likelihood to be node, and, hence, the input has no classification power. Conversely, if the weights for a given input node are much larger
 than all the other input nodes, the classification probabilities will
 (10) depend solely on that node, and we need consider only that one
 input. Thus, the quantity of interest we evaluate is
 corresponds to no biasing, and if then (10)
recovers the original likelihood as we would expect. Signal
 If we are aiming to maximize the accuracy over all flows, it
is optimal to use a training set with classes in proportion to the subject to input layer
expected frequency of the classes in the test set. In the example where the sum is over all weights associated with the input node
of using Trace 1 to train the network to classify Trace 2, which , in the first layer of the network.
is the traffic from the same site eight months later, it could be Inspection of this quantity revealed that a small number of
reasonable to assume the composition of traffic will be similar. inputs had a relatively large signal compared to the other in-
This may not be reasonable to assume, but in the absence of puts (this quantity had a skewed distribution). It was decided to
information to the contrary it is rational. If the user of the neural observe how the classification accuracy changed when different
network believes there is a greater occurrence of a given class, numbers of inputs where used, using the signal quantity as a crithen that user should be free to choose a training set [or bias terion for input exclusion. The training set used contained equal
the set as in (10)] that gives greater weight to that class. The numbers (2441) of classes from Traces 1 and 2 (omitting the
situation is analogous to the use of a prior that allows the user “Gm,” “MM,” and “Int” classes as in VII-A), and the test set is
to incorporate additional information in the inference problem the remainder of the traces. The figure of interest is the average
posed in the problem. class accuracy over the classes. For each of the neural networks,
 Thus, in the process of deciding what training set to use, or the inputs omitted were the ones with the lower “signal.” The
how to bias each flow in the training set, the user must consider experiments were started with very low numbers of inputs (4, 8,
two things: What linear function of the class accuracies should 16 ) and the results are shown in Fig. 5.
be maximized, and second, if there is any available information For small numbers of inputs, the accuracy is reduced drasabout the composition of the test set. tically from the previous experiments. The accuracy increases
 rapidly to the 95% region, and for all networks with inputs 128
C. Reducing the Number of Inputs it lies within error bars of the 95.1% figure obtained with 246
 In this section, we aim to reduce the number of features in inputs. These results imply that a network with 128 inputs is
the classifier. Each of the current 246 features take a finite time sufficient for this classification problem.
to compute. Reducing the number of inputs to the network These results have an important implication for the nature of
would reduce the training time and make real life applications network traffic: Aside from such obvious information as server
faster and easier to implement. To identify the inputs having port information, other flow features can provide an equally efthe greatest predictive power, we examine the weights of one fective identification of the Internet application. Table III proof the trained neural networks. The feedforward calculation of vides insight into what constitutes the 20 “important” inputs.
the output vector given an input vector, described in Section V, The majority of these values are derived directly by observing
defines how the input values influence the outputs. In the first one or more TCP/IP headers using a tool such as tcptrace
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 235

 TABLE VIII
 CONFUSION TABLE OF THE CLASSIFIER

 TABLE IX
 ENTROPY MATRIX OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR PREDICTION OF ONE CLASS, GIVEN ANOTHER

[30] or performing simple time analysis of packet headers. We probability distribution over the classes. We study the entropy
suggest that the ability to accurately derive such information of this distribution, defined by
about the causal application has important ramifications. An example is the provision of secure private network services where
it is desirable to reduce the leakage of information. Clearly,
anonymized IP address and port data may not be sufficient to
disguise an Internet application. Shannon [38] showed that behaves like the inverse of in-
 From our two feature-reduction methods, we can compare formation; this quantity is maximized for a uniform distribution
features that provide the best discrimination power when used in and minimized (at zero) for a “delta” funca feature-independent setting (naive Bayesian) and when used in tion corresponding to certainty ( some , ).
the correlated-feature setting (Bayesian neural network). Upon We now examine the entropy of the distributions when the net
comparing each reduction, as shown in Table III, we note a lim- makes both correct and incorrect predictions.
ited overlap and a number of significant differences. A full study Tables VIII and IX relate to a network trained on equal numof the correlation of prediction of features and specific classes bers of the classes from Traces 1 and 2, and tested on these
is left for future work, but values such as those dependent upon traces. The three infrequent classes were omitted. Table VIII is
the RTT will be subject to change depending upon the site mon- a confusion table, showing the percentage occurrences of the
itored; the precise impact of this upon their functionality as a flow classes amongst those with predictions for a given flow.
feature deserves clarification. For example, 89.2% of the instances where “www” was predicted were correct, and the remaining 10.8% of instances are
 spread out among other classes. Also, Table IX is a matrix of
 average entropies for the distributions for each class predicted,
D. Additional Information From the Likelihood Distributions given the actual class of the flow. The diagonal elements of this
 entropy matrix are the average entropies of the distributions for
 The probability distribution implied by the neural network which the predictions are correct. It is interesting to compare this
likelihood, given some input data, has an interesting structure. number with others on the same row (where the same class was
It is expected that, when a false prediction is made, the proba- predicted, but incorrectly). The other numbers are higher except
bility distribution from the likelihood will yield some extra in- in the case where “www” is predicted, but the class is actually
formation about the quality of that prediction. As discussed in “Db.” A higher entropy indicates that the distributions are closer
Section V, the network gives ten numbers which form a to uniform and less sharply peaked. A distribution with a lower
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 6. Average class error rates versus rejected predictions, based on entropy.

entropy is one where the network is more “sure” of the predic- It can be shown [39] that the maximum value of the posterior
tion it is making. It is pleasing to observe that when the network evidence for the parameter in the prior is achieved when a
makes a false classification it is less sure of that guess. Indeed, quantity is unity where is defined as
the average on diagonal elements is 0.15, much lower than the
value of 0.85 for off diagonal entropies for misclassified flows.7
 In a classification situation in which false predictions are to
be minimized, the entropy of the distribution can be used to re- where is a quantity related to the “good degrees of freedom”
ject a prediction. Given a flow, we may have a maximum value of the likelihood , evaluated on the training data. As discussed
of the distribution of the classes but given a high entropy of in Section V-A, the algorithm works by holding initially at
 , we can discard that prediction and infer that the classifier a high level, calculating the MAP of the marginalized posteis unable to predict the class accurately for that flow. An experi- rior over the weights, and reducing , until increases to one.9
ment was conducted in which the percentage of prediction rejec- However, for the larger training sets, sometimes settles down
tions (based on entropy) was varied, and the accuracy recorded. to a value less than one.10 When this occurs, we use the values of
Again, we used the network trained on equal numbers of the the weights which maximized the posterior for the value of this
classes from Traces 1 and 2 and tested on these traces, using , thus obtained. Maxent and Bayesian theorem tells us that this
average class error as our performance metric. Fig. 6 shows may not be the most probable value of to use. However, the
how the error changes with the percentage of rejections allowed, value of is a parameter in the prior which is related to the varialong with the error among the population of rejected predic- ance of the distribution. When is less than one, is higher than
tions. The error rate falls as the rate of rejections increases. Also, the theoretical optimal value, suggesting that the weights will be
the proportion of errors amongst those predictions rejected is constrained to values too close to zero.11 Since the values of
much higher then the classifier error rate (typically 40% versus obtained when the algorithm fails in this way are of the order of
around 4%), demonstrating that, on average, we are discarding magnitude of the desired value (typically 0.5 compared with 1),
much worse quality predictions. These results confirm the extra this is not a catastrophic failure; we have indeed obtained good
information conveyed by the likelihood distribution, and show results. However, the mathematics is warning us that there is a
that this information has utility.8 better value for and hence for the weights, if we had an algorithm powerful enough to find it.
E. Weakness We show how varies with the number of iterations of the
 algorithm, along with the classification accuracy, in the case in
 The posterior function of the weights (9) is very complicated.
 which the net converges (Fig. 7) and when it does not (Fig. 8).
For a network with 100 inputs, ten nodes in the hidden layer,
 High accuracies are achieved before reaches unity in the case
and ten outputs, there are 1120 weights. The conjugate graof convergence, and later iterations of the algorithm
dient MemSys algorithm is, therefore, maximizing a function
 increase the accuracy only marginally. In the case where converin over 1000 dimensions. It is a credit to the power of the softgence does not occur, the accuracy ceases to increase before
ware that this can be achieved, but for larger training sets (above
 reaches its maximum of just above 0.6. This suggests the accu-
50 000 flows), where the posterior is very complicated (a term
 racy would not increase significantly if a Bayesian were to be
is included that arises from the product of each of the training
 achieved. Otherwise, there could be evidence in favor of using
data), the algorithm may not converge to the Bayesian stopping
 smaller sets of training data to ensure the algorithm did concriteria.
 verge. However, the experiments conducted in Section VII-A
 7The entropy of these distributions must lie between 0 (delta function) and
log(10) ' 2:3 (uniform distribution). 9In practice, the algorithm is halted when > 0:9.
 10For all the experiments in the paper, this value was above 0.25 and most
 8Curves were also plotted using the maximum value of the likelihood distribution as a criterion. The shapes of the curves were very similar, as expected were above 0.5.
since the entropy of these distributions will be closely related to the height of 11The prior is uniform for zero and sharply peaked around the origin for
the peak. large .
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 237

 was increased in size by an order of magnitude, the neural network training time would take longer than the manual classification process and become the limiting factor, at least when using
 the 2.2-GHz processor. Also, larger sets would require several
 gigabytes of RAM; each flow with 246 features requires roughly
 1 kB.
 Third, the classification scheme has only been verified as
 successful on a single network, and when training and testing
 within that network. We make no claims about the stability of
 the composition of network traffic, or the difference of traffic
 between sites, but it is reasonable to suppose that new types of
 flows will arise over time. It would be interesting to test the networks trained in this paper on categorized traffic from other sites
Fig. 7. and the accuracy changing with successive iterations in the case and from further time periods. Indeed, this technique could give
where achieves unity.
 useful insight into the evolution of network traffic composition,
 and differences between sites.
 Finally, the reduction of the feature set requires comment.
 The step of choosing predictive inputs (Section VII-C) by inspection of the weights was somewhat ad-hoc. This process
 could be made more automatic by the use of a different prior
 on the weights. Automatic relevancy detection (ARD) priors
 have been used to infer weights of neural networks for prediction problems [40], [41]. These priors are Gaussian priors of the
 form where the ’s are allowed to vary for each
 weight (or subsets of weights). In training, weights which are
 relevant are identified via the corresponding , and the others
 are switched off. As discussed, the reduction in inputs will speed
 up computation of the feature set, making a packaged product
 quicker and more efficient. Despite being of mathematical in-
Fig. 8. and the accuracy changing with successive iterations when the network does not converge to Bayesian . terest, we do not believe that using the ARD approach would increase classification accuracy. It would, however, provide a rigorous and efficient method for reducing the feature space which
did show that accuracy increased with training set size, and this would cut down the time taken to classify and process the traffic
does not depend on whether Bayesian is achieved. and train the network.

 VIII. NOTE ON THE METHOD AND RESULTS IX. CONCLUSION
 In this paper, we have applied a technique, suitable for This paper has demonstrated the successful application of a
network traffic classification on real networks, in situations Bayesian trained neural network to Internet classification on
where the IP (host) address and application port number are not data from a single site for two days, eight months apart. Our
available. We have shown that the classification neural network, main findings are as follows.
with Bayesian inferred weights, is an accurate classifier for this • A sophisticated Bayesian trained neural network is able
problem, and is superior to the naive Bayesian method of [2]. to classify flows, based on header-derived statistics and
We draw attention to several points which will be of interest no port or host (IP address) information, with up to 99%
in applying the technique to a product which could classify accuracy for data trained and tested on the same day, and
network traffic in a wider range of environments. 95% accuracy for data trained and tested eight months
 First, the accuracy of the scheme was recorded as 99% when apart. Further, the neural network produces a probability
training and testing on data from the same day. This figure drops distribution over the classes for a given flow. The entropy
to 95% when testing on traffic eight months later. It is reasonable of this distribution is (negatively) correlated with preto suppose that the accuracy will increase as the dates approach diction accuracy, and can be used as a rejection criteria
each other, since the training data is then more similar to the for the predictions. Accuracy is further improved when a
testing data. proportion of predictions may be rejected. The accuracy
 Second, the use of more training data could improve the ac- values significantly improve upon those from a naive
curacy. Table V shows that the accuracy increases with the size Bayesian method [2] and compare favorably with the
of the training data, with no leveling off for any of the sizes of 50%–70% figure reported using the IANA port list [7].
set available to us. The benefits of higher accuracy with larger By providing high accuracies without access to packet
training data would have to be considered against the costs of payloads or sophisticated traffic processing this technique
longer training times. Training times of up to 39 h were recorded offers good results as a low-overhead method with potenfor our largest set using a single 2.2-GHz processor. If the set tial for real-time implementation.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS, VOL. 18, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

 • A wider ranging insight from our work is the comparison of ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 the best quality features for either the naive Bayesian or the
 The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees
 Bayesian neural network classification methods. A small
 and the Editor-in-Chief M. Polycarpou for their useful and
 number of certain features carry high significance regardilluminating comments, D. Zuev, N. Taft, J. Crowcroft, and
 less of the classification scheme. There is some overlap
 D. Mackay for their instructive feedback and observations,
 in features of high importance to either method, although
 G. Gibbs, T. Granger, I. Pratt, C. Kreibich, and S. Ostermann
 the ordering of relative importance has changed between
 for their assistance in gathering the traces and providing tools
 methods. A clear opportunity exists for further study of the
 for trace processing, J. Skilling for all his hard work in writing
 traffic features.
 MemSys, and A. Garrett and R. Neill for proofreading and
 • Finally, features derived from packet headers, when
 editing this paper.
 treated as interdependent can provide an effective method
 for the identification of network-based applications. This
 final conclusion cannot be overstated; the premise of our REFERENCES
 work was that the activity of a network user (in terms
 [1] Y. Zhang, M. Roughan, C. Lund, and D. Donoho, “An information-theof applications) was reversible without the benefit of oretic approach to traffic matrix estimation,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
 IP (host) address or port information. We consider that Karlsruhe, Germany, Aug. 2003, pp. 301–312.
 our work, alongside that of others (e.g., [9] and [24]), [2] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using
 Bayesian analysis techniques,” in Proc. ACM Sigmetrics, 2005, pp.
 shows that, even with the removal of port and IP address, 50–60.
 data-anonymization may not hide the application in use. [3] A. Lakhina, M. Crovella, and C. Diot, “Mining anomalies using traffic
 Future Work: There are a number of areas in which future feature distributions,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2005, pp. 217–228.
 [4] D. Moore, K. Keys, R. Koga, E. Lagache, and K. C. Claffy, “CoralReef
work would further confirm the suitability of this technique and software suite as a tool for system and network administrators,” in Proc.
potentially. LISA 2001 15th Syst. Adm. Conf., Dec. 2001, pp. 133–144.
 An evaluation of our approach on further sources of classified [5] C. Logg and L. Cottrell, Characterization of the Traffic Between SLAC
 and the Internet (July 2003) [Online]. Available: http://www.slac.standata from this and other sites will give insight into the stability ford.edu/comp/net/slac-netflow/html/SLAC-netflow.html
of the technique, and also the diversity and structure of Internet [6] T. Karagiannis, A. Broido, M. Faloutsos, and K. Claffy, “Transport
traffic itself. We anticipate that trained neural networks have a layer identification of P2P traffic,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., Sicily,
 Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 121–134.
“half life” property, so that the classification accuracy declines [7] A. W. Moore and D. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification
over time as the composition of Internet traffic changes. Testing of network applications,” in Proc. 6th Passive Active Meas. Workshop
on data from later times will give an indication of the retraining (PAM), Mar. 2005, vol. 3431, pp. 41–54.
 [8] T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos, “Blinc: Multilevel
interval, and of the robustness of the classifiers over very long traffic classification in the dark,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, 2005, pp.
periods. 229–240.
 We acknowledge that the half life property of any classifica- [9] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service
 mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic
tion model implies that a suitable enhancement may be to com- classification,” in ACM SIGCOMM Internet Meas. Conf., Sicily, Italy,
bine attributes of supervised and unsupervised training. Such 2004, pp. 135–148.
an approach would be particularly suitable when faced with a [10] A. McGregor, M. Hall, P. Lorier, and J. Brunskill, “Flow clustering
 using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. 5th Passive Active Meas.
new form of traffic not available for hand classification. Such a Workshop (PAM), Apr. 2004, vol. 3015, pp. 205–214.
method may combine the advantages of the present method with [11] S. Zander, T. Nguyen, and G. Armitage, “Automated traffic classifithe possibilities of the approach raised by McGregor et al. [10]. cation and application identification using machine learning,” in 30th
 Annu. IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN 30), Sydney, Australia,
The potential offered by the fusion of classification methods is Nov. 2005, pp. 220–227.
a conspicuous area for future work. [12] F. Hernández-Campos, A. B. Nobel, F. D. Smith, and K. Jeffay, “Sta-
 We have highlighted the difference between feature impor- tistical clustering of internet communication patterns,” in Proc. 35th
 Symp. Interface Comput. Sci. Stat., Comput. Sci. Stat., Jul. 2003, vol.
tance for different classification methods. Further work will 35, pp. 1–16.
provide a valuable insight into the interaction of classification [13] A. Soule, K. Salamatian, N. Taft, R. Emilion, and K. Papagiannaki,
process with features. Also, as was noted in Section III, the “Flow classification by histograms or how to go on Safari in the Internet,” in Proc. ACM Sigmetrics, New York, NY, Jun. 2004, pp. 49–60.
definition of each object may significantly influence the classi- [14] Y. Gu, A. McCallum, and D. Towsley, “Detecting anomalies in
fication process; the study of this interaction should provide a network traffic using maximum entropy estimation,” in Proc. Internet
further valuable contribution. Meas. Conf., Berkeley, CA, Oct. 2005, pp. 345–350.
 [15] K. Papagiannaki, N. Taft, Z. Zhang, and C. Diot, “Long-term fore-
 This paper has used the Bayesian neural network approach casting of internet backbone traffic,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol.
for offline classification, but we believe this process can be re- 16, no. 5, pp. 1110–1124, Sep. 2005.
fined through the selection of optimum features and appropriate [16] M. Mandjes, I. Saniee, and A. L. Stolyar, “Load characterization and
 anomaly detection for voice over IP traffic,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.,
algorithmic optimization. Specific issues of implementation and vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1019–1026, Sep. 2005.
a study of the relevant optimization space is for further work in [17] H. Hajji, “Statistical analysis of network traffic for adaptive faults dethis topic. tection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1053–1063, Sep.
 2005.
 Finally, we recognize a useful development in formalizing the [18] K. Xu, Z.-L. Zhang, and S. Bhattacharyya, “Profiling internet backbone
identification of the predictive descriptors from the whole set of traffic: behavior models and applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
features. Training using ARD priors on the weights could be 2005, pp. 169–180.
 [19] A. F. Atiya, M. A. Aly, and A. G. Parlos, “Sparse basis selection: new
performed, where the inputs with little or no information are results and application to adaptive prediction of video source traffic,”
automatically switched off. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1136–1146, Sep. 2005.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
AULD et al.: BAYESIAN NEURAL NETWORKS FOR INTERNET TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 239

 [20] L. Mé and C. Michel, Intrusion Detection: A Bibliography Supélec, [39] S. F. Gull, “Developments in maximum entropy data analysis,” in
 Rennes, France, Tech. Rep. SSIR-2001-01, Sep. 2001. Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods, J. Skilling, Ed. Dor-
 [21] C. Kruegel, D. Mutz, W. Robertson, and F. Valeur, “Bayesian event drecht, Germany: Kluwer, 1989, pp. 53–71.
 classification for intrusion detection,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Comput. Se- [40] D. J. C. MacKay, “Bayesian non-linear modelling for the prediction
 curity Appl. Conf. (ACSAC), Las Vegas, NV, Dec. 2003, pp. 14–23. competition,” ASHRAE Transactions, vol. 100, pt. 2, pp. 1053–1062,
 [22] V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in 1994, Amer. Soc. Heating, Refrigeration, Air-conditioning Engineers.
 real-time,” Comput. Netw. (Amsterdam, The Netherlands), vol. 31, no. [41] ——, “Probable networks and plausible predictions—a review of
 23–24, pp. 2435–2463, 1999. practical Bayesian methods for supervised neural networks,” Network:
 [23] M. Roesch, “Snort—lightweight intrusion detection for networks,” in Comput. Neural Syst., vol. 6, pp. 469–505, 1995.
 USENIX 13th Syst. Adm. Conf. (LISA), Seattle, WA, 1999, pp. 229–238.
 [24] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, Discriminators for use in flow-based classification (2005), Intel Research Tech. Rep.
 [25] A. Moore, J. Hall, C. Kreibich, E. Harris, and I. Pratt, “Architecture Tom Auld studied mathematics at Cambridge University, Cambridge, U.K., in
 of a network monitor,” in Passive Active Meas. Workshop (PAM), La 1994, and theoretical physics at Imperial College, London, U.K., in 1998. He
 Jolla, CA, Apr. 2003, pp. 77–86. returned to academia in 2004 to study for a doctoral degree at Cambridge Uni-
 [26] J. Padhye and S. Floyd, “Identifying the TCP behavior of web servers,” versity under Professor S. Gull’s supervision. The title of his thesis is “Applicain Proc. SIGCOMM 2001, San Diego, CA, Jun. 2001, pp. 287–298. tions of Bayesian Neural Networks.”
 [27] J. Postel, Transmission Control Protocol (IETF), RFC 793, Sep. 1981. He most recently worked as a Derivatives Trader at an investment bank in
 [28] K. C. Claffy, H.-W. Braun, and G. C. Polyzos, “A parameterizable London. He became interested in machine learning and neural networks due to
 methodology for internet traffic flow profiling,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas their potential to model and predict market behavior.
 Commun., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1481–1494, Oct. 1995.
 [29] N. G. Duffield, J. T. Lewis, N. O’Connell, R. Russell, and F. Toomey,
 “Entropy of ATM traffic streams,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol.
 13, no. 6, pp. 981–990, Aug. 1995.
 [30] S. Ostermann, tcptrace (2003) [Online]. Available: http://www.tcp- Andrew W. Moore (M’86) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Monash
 trace.org University, Australia, in 1993 and 1995, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from
 [31] D. Zuev and A. W. Moore, “Traffic classification using a statistical the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., in 2001.
 approach,” in Proc. 6th Passive Active Meas. Workshop (PAM), Mar. He was recently appointed an Academic Fellow with the Department of Com-
 2005, vol. 3431, pp. 321–324. puter Science, Queen Mary, University of London, London, U.K. Prior to that,
 [32] J. Hall, I. Pratt, and I. Leslie, “The effect of early packet loss on web he was an Intel Research Fellow at the University of Cambridge Computer Labpage download times,” in Proc. Passive Active Meas. Workshop (PAM), oratory. His interests include the identification of network-based applications
 Apr. 2003, pp. 159–170. and the related issues of network measurement-monitoring. He also works on
 [33] M. P. Wand and M. C. Jones, Kernel Smoothing. London, U.K.: the problems associated with data processing and storage and in bringing op-
 Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1994. tical-switching to the system-area network.
 [34] L. Yu and H. Liu, “Feature selection for high-dimensional data: a fast
 correlation-based filter solution,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
 (ICML), 2003, pp. 856–863.
 [35] C. M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. London, Stephen F. Gull has been a member of the teaching staff at the Cavendish Lab-
 U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1995. oratory, Cambridge University, Cambridge, U.K., since 1975. His research in
 [36] D. J. C. MacKay, Bayesian methods for neural networks: Theory radio astronomy brought him up against “the image processing problem”: In
 and applications (1997) [Online]. Available: http://www.infer- 1978, he and G. Daniell published their joint paper on the maximum entropy
 ence.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/cpi_short.pdf method (MEM). During the next few years, he found himself applying MEM to
 [37] S. F. Gull and J. Skilling, Quantified maximum entropy: Memsys5 a wide variety of physical problems, within both academia and also industry. In
 users’ manual (1999) [Online]. Available: http://www.maxent.co.uk/ 1981, he and another radio astronomer J. Skilling, founded Maximum Entropy
 documents/MemSys5_manual.pdf Data Consultants (MEDC) to exploit these opportunities. He is now a Professor
 [38] C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Commu- of Physics at Cambridge University and a Fellow of St John’s College, Camnication. Chicago, IL: Univ. Illinois Press, 1949. bridge, U.K., as well as Managing Director of MEDC.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.