Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Ain Shams Engineering Journal
 journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com

Encrypted network traffic classification based on machine learning
Reham T. Elmaghraby a,b,⇑, Nada M. Abdel Aziem b, Mohammed A. Sobh a,
Ayman M. Bahaa-Eldin c
a
 Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University Cairo, Egypt
b
 Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime Transport-Arab League, Egypt
c
 Misr International University, On Leave from Ain Shams University, Egypt

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: Encrypted traffic is an essential part of maintaining the security and privacy of data transmission. It plays
Received 19 April 2023 an important role in keeping our networks secure by preventing attackers from intercepting confidential
Revised 22 May 2023 information, which they may access without authorization; However, its effectiveness relies heavily on
Accepted 18 June 2023
 accurate classification techniques being applied correctly, so we can differentiate between legitimate
Available online 06 July 2023
 users’ activities versus those attempting malicious activity within the networks’ boundaries. Encrypted
 network traffic is becoming increasingly common in modern communication systems, presenting a challenge for effective network management and security. To address this challenge, machine learning models
 have been employed to classify encrypted traffic but with limited success due to the lack of clear visibility
 into packet contents and an inability to inspect their content. For the sake of tackling this issue, more effective research has begun on developing machine learning models for classifying encrypted payloads without relying on inspecting their contents directly. This research will investigate how features like packet
 length, time stamps or transport layer security (TLS) and encrypted payload information can be used as
 input features when attempting classification tasks, instead of analyzing unencrypted content directly
 from packets themselves which would otherwise be impossible given the current technology constraints.
 The evaluation process will focus on assessing different model architectures, as well as feature selection
 techniques that yield improved results over the existing approaches. In this paper, we proposed three
 approaches to identify encrypted traffic and classify different applications such as browsing, VOIP, file
 transfer and video streaming. The first two techniques consist of two stages: the first stage is either a neural network or a bi-directional LSTM, and the second stage is a selection of different classification techniques, namely Random Forest, Support vector machine, Linear regression, and K-nearest neighbor. The
 final result is achieved using an ensemble voting technique. As for the third technique, the network packets are grouped together by Source IP, destination IP and session time before feeding them into three different combinations of LSTM networks; either coupled with convolution 1D or 2D layers, or without. Like
 the first two techniques, the final result is achieved by means of ensemble voting. Through extensive comparison between the three approaches, The first approach yielded the highest accuracy. However, the performance of the second and third techniques in terms of time complexity was superior. The achieved
 accuracies were 96.8%, 95.2% and 96.5% for the proposed techniques, respectively.
 Ó 2023 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University
 This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

 1. Introduction

 More technologies are developed due to the rapid increase in
 the needs of societies. IOT [1] and network traffic classifications
 ⇑ Corresponding author. are examples of these innovative technologies that
 E-mail address: rehamelmaghraby@aast.edu (R.T. Elmaghraby). researchers focus on them.
Peer review under responsibility of Ain Shams University. Network traffic classification and recognition is an important
 task for maintaining cyberspace security. With the rapid development of the Internet, network applications and protocols emerge
 in an endless stream, making the types of network traffic more
 Production and hosting by Elsevier complex and diverse [2]. This poses certain obstacles to effective

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2023.102361
2090-4479/Ó 2023 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

management of such networks. To address this issue, advanced Overall, these techniques demonstrate how effective deep
techniques are needed to accurately classify different types of net- learning techniques can be at accurately recognizing patterns
work traffic so that appropriate measures can be taken for manag- within different types of online activities, such as web browsing,
ing it effectively. email exchange, video streaming, etc. This allows us to better
 Advanced technologies used for classifying various kinds of net- understand user actions while also helping protect against maliwork traffic have been developed over time with improved level of cious activities taking place online.
accuracies, as well as better classification into distinct classes [3]. This research might introduce an ensemble voting technique
 Network traffic classification has become more challenging between combination of existing machine learning algorithms,
because of the emergence of secure networks that have encrypted and capture new dataset that includes a new features and network
payloads, across all digital platforms today [4]. These security fea- conditions than previous datasets. Alternatively, the research
tures provide a robust foundation upon which other systems can might present a comprehensive evaluation of existing techniques
be established in order to guarantee reliable performance while for encrypted traffic classification, highlighting their strengths
minimizing any potential threats posed by malicious adversaries. and weaknesses and proposing new directions for future research.
Therefore, organizations are increasingly investing in this technol- The objective of this research is to provide reliable and efficient
ogy to ensure optimal safety conditions within their respective methods for encrypted payload traffic classification that can
infrastructures, which renders the classification of such traffic enhance network security and management.
more challenging. On the other hand, these security features mask This paper is organized into five sections that highlight our conthe configuration of these networks and make it harder to provide tribution. The first section presents an introduction to secured netdifferent services, such as firewall, QoS, Access control, etc. work traffic and the most common challenges in classifying them.
 To address this issue, researchers have developed techniques It also presents different techniques that are used to overcome
for analyzing encrypted traffic without decrypting it. These tech- prevalent issues and successfully classify them. In the second secniques vary from statistical analysis and machine learning to tion, a literature review that covers the history of machine learning
protocol-specific analysis, which allow them to classify different is presented. In the third section, data preprocessing methods are
types of encrypted communication based on different parameters illustrated by means data flow diagrams that provide an overview
such as packet size or frequency patterns [4]. of the procedures of classifying encrypted traffic. The proposed
 Classifying encrypted traffic is a complex process that requires a algorithm is explained in the fourth section. Finally, the experithorough investigation and deep analysis of various methods. Sta- mental results are discussed in the fifth section.
tistical analysis, machine learning, and deep learning are three
common methods used to classify encrypted traffic. When it comes
to the accurate classification of encrypted network traffics, each of 2. Literature survey
the aforementioned method has its own advantages and
disadvantages. In [12] K. Ali, A. Tariq, and H. Abbas present an overview of var-
 Statistical analysis involves analyzing the statistical properties ious deep learning techniques used for encrypted network traffic
of the data to identify various patterns that can be used for classi- classification. They also propose a new architecture that uses confication purposes. This method assumes that different types of traf- volutional neural networks (CNNs) to classify encrypted traffic. The
fic have different statistical properties (e.g. entropy) which can be proposed architecture achieved a classification accuracy of 97% on
identified by inspecting packet size or other features associated the benchmark dataset.
with the different types of communication protocols being ana- Lu et al. [13] presented a combination of Bidirectional LSTM and
lyzed [5]. RF achieved an accuracy of 96.7%.
 Supervised machine learning techniques [6] use labeled data- In Zhou et al. [14] presented a combination of Bidirectional
sets consisting of both plaintext (non-encrypted) and ciphertext LSTM and KNN achieved an accuracy of 96.4%.
(encrypted) samples that are fed into a trained algorithm to distin- Wang et al. [15] using a combination of LSTM and CNN2D
guish the different characteristics between them, for classification achieved an accuracy of 92.2%.
purposes. This allows for greater accuracy compared with the In [16] authors S. Ali, M. Arfeen, and S. Rehman explore the use
aforementioned traditional statistical approaches, especially since of machine learning techniques for encrypted traffic classification.
it does not require prior knowledge about the employed encryp- They compare the performance of various models such as decision
tion algorithms. trees, random forests, and support vector machines (SVMs). Their
 Deep learning [7] is a powerful tool for identifying patterns and results showed that SVMs outperformed other models with an
classifying traffic. This method relies on the assumption that deep accuracy of 99%.
neural networks can learn complex patterns in data. Long Short- In [17] authors A. Al Rawi, A. Al Saffar, and M. Al-Adhami pro-
Term Memory (LSTM) and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) pose a hybrid approach that uses statistical analysis and machine
are two other types of deep learning architectures that are com- learning techniques for encrypted traffic classification. Their
monly used, according to the literature, to classify encrypted traf- approach achieved an accuracy of 98% on the benchmark dataset.
fic. These techniques demonstrated the superiority of these In [18] authors M. Amin, X. Liu, and A. Al-Dhelaan investigate
methods in recognizing hidden patterns within data sets. Tradi- the use of deep learning techniques for encrypted traffic classificational methods may fail or struggle due to lack of information or tion. They evaluate the performance of several deep learning modcomplexity involved in encryption algorithms used by attackers/ els, including CNNs and long short-term memory (LSTM) networks.
hackers. Their results show that the LSTM network outperforms other mod-
 LSTM [8] is a type of recurrent neural network designed to han- els with an accuracy of 99.5%.
dle sequential data, such as time series analysis, speech recogni- In [19] F. Hussain, M. Ismail, and A. Khan explore the use of
tion, and natural language processing tasks, and CNNs [9] are machine learning techniques for encrypted traffic classification.
another type of neural network specifically designed to work with They compare the performance of various models such as decision
image [10] or video [11] data by detecting spatial features in the trees, k-nearest neighbors, and SVMs. Their results show that the
input information. SVM model outperforms other models with an accuracy of 97%.

 2
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

 Zhaolei et al. [20] proposed an algorithm for encrypted traffic ple mobile applications simultaneously from encrypted data
called Byte Feature Convolution Network (BFCN) based on BERT sources.
and CNN. This model consists of two modules: the packet encoder
module and the CNN module, which takes global traffic features 3. Data flow and preprocessing
through its attention mechanism, as well as byte-level local features in traffic through convolutional operations respectively. The 3.1. Data flow
authors used the ISCX dataset to evaluate their model’s performance, achieving a high recall, precision accuracy and F1 score Encrypted traffic classification is an important tool for network
compared to other deep packet models using 1D CNN only. security and monitoring. By analyzing encrypted network traffic,
 Similarly Xinyi Hu et al. [21], presented a CLD Net model that organizations can determine the type of application or service
combines convolutional neural network with LSTM layers in order being used on their networks. This helps them to better understand
to enhance classification performance over unknown encrypted how their networks are being utilized, identify potential threats,
network traffics such as VPNs or Skype applications etc..The and take appropriate action if necessary.
authors also tested their approach against ISCX public dataset The data flow of encrypted traffic classification begins with capobtaining 98% accuracy for VPN detection while 92% accuracy turing the encrypted packets using a capture tool such as Wirewas achieved when recognizing Skype’s specific application layer shark. The captured packets are then examined to identify any
protocol. protocol or port numbers associated with encryption services like
 Wei Wang et al. [22] proposed an end-to-end encrypted traffic HTTPS (port 443) and SSH (port 22). Once identified, various techusing 1D convolution neural networks. This method merges fea- niques such as deep packet inspection statistical analysis machine
ture selection, feature extraction and classifier into a single frame- learning algorithms signature-based matching can be used to claswork, allowing for more efficient classification of network traffic sify the type of application or service that is in use on a given netdata. The paper uses the public ISCX non-VPN – VPN dataset which work segment. Finally, results from this process can be reported for
includes multiple types of traffic such as email, chat, streaming further analysis and may even trigger automated actions such as
VOIP file transfer and P2P protocols. The experiments conducted blocking malicious activity when necessary.
in this paper concluded that the four methods performed better
than existing state-of-the art methods when it comes to encryption
 3.2. Data preprocessing
detection accuracy rate with false positives being reduced by up to
17%. Furthermore, these results were obtained without any prepro-
 Data preprocessing is an important step in any machine learncessing or manual feature engineering steps which further
 ing algorithm. It ensures that the data set is properly formatted
enhances its efficiency as well as cost effectiveness due to its autoand ready for analysis. Before entering a data set into proposed
mated nature. Moreover, this model is able to detect different
 algorithms, it must first go through a process of data preprocessing
types of encrypted flows simultaneously while still maintaining
 to ensure accuracy and reliability of the results.
high accuracy rates across all categories making it suitable for real
 The first step in this process involves dividing the dataset into
world applications where various type of flows are expected
 two parts: packets part and information part. The encrypted packconcurrently.
 ets are then converted from hexadecimal form to decimal form so
 Kun Zhoe [23] et al. proposed a method that combined entropy
 that they can be used by machine learning networks more easily.
estimation with artificial neural networks to evaluate the perfor-
 In addition, some features such as flags style (UDP or TCP) as well
mances of random forests, support vector machine, logistic regresas source IP address and destination IP address may consist of
sion and naïve Bayes for traffic classification. Network traffic is
 strings which need to be categorized accordingly before further
classified as plaintext or encrypted using entropy estimation on a
 processing can take place. Furthermore, these addresses must also
dataset from the Canadian Institute for cybersecurity. The results
 be converted from string format to integer values so they can be
showed an improved accuracy compared to traditional methods
 used by machines effectively during calculations later on down
when using this combined approach.
 the line.. Finally, both parts are concatenated together along with
 Lulu Guo et al. [24] further developed two models based on
 four class types which have been added after categorization has
deep learning; convolutional autoencoders (CAE) and convolutaken place (as shown in Fig. 1).
tional neural networks (CNN), which are used to classify non-
 In conclusion, proper data preprocessing is essential when
VPN and VPN traffic in real time while also identifying VPN
 using proposed algorithms for machine learning purposes since it
encrypted traffic accurately. To test their methods, they utilized
 helps prepare datasets for further analysis while ensuring accuracy
public ISCXVPN 2016 data set as input into both CAE model and
 throughout all stages involved in its preparation stage. This allows
CNN model respectively. The overall identification accuracy rate
 us to gain better insights about our datasets without having any
was 99.8% for CAE model and 92.92% for CNN Model, demonstratissues related with incorrect formats or unreliable results due too
ing that these approaches were effective at classifying network
 poor initial formatting done beforehand.
traffics into different categories accurately in real time
applications.
 Madushi H. Pathmaperuma et al. [25] recently developed a con- 4. Proposed model
volutional neural network (CNN) to detect user activities on mobile
applications such as YouTube, Facebook, Messenger and Gmail. This section will discuss the details of the proposed techniques
This model uses a time window-based approach to divide the and how they are designed for achieving maximum effectiveness.
encrypted traffic flow activity into segments for more accurate It is divided into three techniques that each consist of multiple
analysis of user behavior on these apps. CNN can differentiate stages. Fig. 2 shows the flowchart of the proposed model with
between trained and untrained in-app activities beyond what is the three techniques.
known about the type of activity taking place within an app itself.
After filtering out unknown traffic, this method has achieved an 4.1. First technique
average accuracy rate of 88% while achieving 92% classification
accuracy after filtering is complete - making it one of the most reli- It is an effective method for preprocessing data before entering
able methods available for detecting user behaviors across multi- it into a machine-learning model. The first stage in this technique
 3
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

 Fig. 3. First Technique: Ensemble of neural Network and Different Classifications.

 and Support Vector Machine (SVM). In the last stage, the result is
 Fig. 1. Data preprocessing. achieved by means of ensemble voting as shown in Fig. 3.

 4.2. Second technique

 It follows largely similar stages of first technique but differs
 slightly by replacing Bidirectional-LSTM instead of neural network
 in the first stage. The last layer before the output of a neural network is an important part of the process. This layer captures a lot
 of information about what it has learned from training data, which
 can be used to make predictions. By concatenating this captured
 layer with other information parts, four different classification
 algorithms - Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), K-
 Nearest Neighbor (KNN) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) –
 can be used for further analysis. The final result is achieved by

 Fig. 2. Proposed model flow chart.

is to shuffle the table, as sequence does not play a role during training. The table then needs to be divided into two parts: encrypted
packets and information. The encrypted packet part entered into
a neural network consisting of four layers- an input layer, two hidden layers and an output layer of four class types. The last layer
before the output layer of the neural network is captured. Then
captured layer is concatenated with the information part before
it is entered into four different classification algorithms: Random
 Fig. 4. Second Technique: Ensemble of Bidirectional LSTM and Different
Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) Classifications.

 4
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

means of ensemble voting, which combines all four models’ out- mal performance from our model at any given point in time when
puts into one overall prediction or decision outcome, as shown in deployed on production environment.
Fig. 4. This technique has been found useful when dealing with
large datasets or complex problems where traditional methods
 5. Experimental and results
may fail due to their limited capacity or capability of processing
data effectively. Additionally, using Long Short Term Memory net-
 5.1. DataSet description
works can lead more accurate results than conventional models
because they have memory cells that allow them store previous
 Encrypted traffic classification datasets are an important tool in
inputs better which helps them understand patterns from experitraining machine learning models to automatically classify
ence thus leading more reliable predictions.
 encrypted network traffic. These datasets typically consist of network packet captures, where each packet includes the payload data
4.3. Third technique and metadata such as source and destination IP addresses, protocol, port number, and time stamp. In order to accurately train these
 In the last technique, data preprocessing tables are processed in models on this data set there must be a variety of features included
a different way, TCP records are selected only without using UDP that can help identify the different types of packets being sent over
records due to its high reliability and containing time stamp fea- the network [26].
ture that indicates the begun and end of each session. Packets Common features used in encrypted traffic classification dataand information are divided into groups depending on source IP, sets include Protocols (such as TCP/IP or UDP), Port Numbers
destination IP, time stamp and class type. For each group of pack- (which designate which application is sending or receiving a parets, the maximum value (max), minimum value (min) and mean ticular message), Packet Lengths (in bytes), Time Stamp for when
standard deviation (SD) is calculated. This grouped information each packet was captured, Source/Destination IP Addresses so that
along with the grouped encrypted packets is then concatenated messages can be routed properly across networks; TLS Version
to feed into three types of machine learning networks - Bidirec- information for any packets using Transport Layer Security prototional LSTM consisting of two layers; CNN 1D followed by an LSTM cols; and finally Class Labels which indicate what type of content
layer; and CNN 2D followed by an LSTM layer. is contained within a given packet.
 To ensure that all groups have equal sized packet sizes for train- Dataset captured divided into four classes with total number of
ing purposes padding will be applied to reshape the packets 33,286 packets could have 29,957 packets for training and 3329 for
accordingly before entering them into these networks for further testing number of packets in each class shown in Table 1.
processing. The concatenated features will also be shuffled before- In the above table, we can observe that there are almost no UDP
hand so as to create randomness in order to prevent overfitting Packets and only TCP packets when it comes to file transfer and
during the training phase. The final result is achieved by means VOIP. This is because TCP provides a reliable delivery mechanism
of ensemble voting, which combines three network’s outputs into for data packets by ensuring they are delivered in the same order
one overall prediction or decision outcome as shown in Fig. 5. as they were sent. The downside of this approach, however, is that
 All results obtained from these tests can then help us assess it requires additional header information which leads to higher
how well our network performs against varied input datasets & overhead compared to UDP.
allow us make necessary changes if needed so that we obtain opti- Overall, we can see how employing TCP instead of UDP makes
 sense especially when dealing with critical applications like File
 Transfer And VoIP where reliability takes precedence over efficiency. By utilizing TCP’s ability To ensure Data Is Delivered In
 The Same Order As It Was Sent, We Can Ensure That All Necessary
 Information Is Transferred Correctly Without Any Loss Of Quality
 Or Accuracy During Transmission Across Networks. That’s why in
 approach 3 while grouping the packets and information as mentioned TCP file only are used.

 5.2. Evaluation

 Evaluating and validating two-class problems typically involves
 the formulation of four cases: true positive (TP), false positive (FP),
 true negative (TN) and false negative (FN). TP is when a given sample that should be classified as a positive result is correctly identified as such, whereas FP occurs when an expectedly negative
 sample is incorrectly labeled as being positive. TN corresponds to
 the successful identification of a negatively labeled sample, while

 Table 1
 Dataset Classes and Number of Packets.

 Label in Confusion Class Number of Number of
 Matrix packets (TCP) packets (UDP)
 0.0 Browsing 8635 3040
 1.0 File Transfer 13,599 34
 (FT)
 2.0 Voice over IP 1173 None
 (VOIP)
Fig. 5. Third Technique: Ensemble of LSTM and LSTM and conv1D and LSTM and
 3.0 YouTube 1573 5232
Conv2D.

 5
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

FN refers to mislabeling an expectedly positively classified
example.
 To assess performance in these scenarios, four metrics are utilized: accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score. Accuracy [27] measures how many samples were correctly classified out of all
tested examples; it can be used for both two-class problem evaluation or multi class problem assessment with macro accuracy representing the proportion correct relative to total samples evaluated
as shown in equation (1):
 TP þ TN
accuracy ¼ ð1Þ
 TP þ TN þ FP þ FN
 Precision [28] evaluates what fraction of predicted positives
were correct; this metric works best for imbalanced datasets
where one class dominates another numerically speaking as shown
in equation (2):
 TP Fig. 7. Confusion Matrix Logistic Regression first technique.
Precision ¼ ð2Þ
 TP þ FP
 Recall [29] looks at what percentage of actual positives was successfully identified by our model; this measure helps us understand how well our algorithm performs on more balanced
datasets with equal numbers from each classification group present in training data sets as shown in equation (3).
 TP
Recall ¼ ð3Þ
 TP þ FN
 Finally, F1 score [30] combines both precision & recall into one
single value which gives us insight into overall performance across
multiple classes simultaneously as shown in equation (4):
 recall  precesion 2TP
F1  score ¼ 2x ¼ ð4Þ
 recall þ precision 2TP þ FP þ FN

5.3. Results and analysis

 The results of our analysis regarding deep learning algorithms
 Fig. 8. Confusion Matrix KNN first technique.
for classifying encrypted traffic are promising. Our algorithm
achieved an average accuracy of 95%, indicating that its ability to
classify the underlying applications even when the network traffic
is encrypted. We evaluated its performance using a dataset containing 33,286 packets from various applications such as web
browsing, file transfer and VoIP. By analyzing the data, we were
able to determine that our algorithm had a good precision of
0.96, a recall of 0.94 and an F1 score of 0.95. This suggests that
deep learning can be used to successfully classify different types
of network traffic even when they are encrypted.
 The confusion matrices of the four classification models for the
first technique are shown in Figs. 6, 7, 8 and 9 and the performance
metrics are presented in Table 2. The matrices show the number of

 Fig. 9. Confusion Matrix SVM first technique.

 true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives
 for each class in the classification.
 Table 2 demonstrates the effectiveness of the suggested
 machine learning techniques for predicting the four different
 classes that represent different network applications. The table
 shows that the random forest model outperformed all other models with an accuracy score of 99.6%, along with average values of
 Fig. 6. Confusion Matrix RF first technique.

 6
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

Table 2
First Technique Results Metrics.

 Classification Technique Accuracy Class precision recall F1-Score
 RF 99.60% Browsing 1 0.94 0.97
 FT 1 0.99 1
 VOIP 0.99 1 1
 YouTube 1 1 1
 Average 1 0.96 0.98
 LR 90.20% Browsing 0.77 0.33 0.47
 FT 0.82 0.78 0.8
 VOIP 0.85 0.92 0.89
 YouTube 0.98 0.98 0.98
 Average 0.85 0.75 0.78
 KNN 97.60% Browsing 1 1 1
 FT 0.98 0.9 0.94
 VOIP 0.95 0.99 0.97
 YouTube 1 1 1
 Average 0.98 0.97 0.97
 SVM 94% Browsing 0.97 0.63 0.81
 FT 0.91 0.83 0.87
 VOIP 0.89 0.96 0.92
 YouTube 1 0.99 0.99
 Average 0.94 0.86 0.89

1.00, 0.96 and 0.98 for precision, recall and F1 score, respectively.
In addition to the results achieved from Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) also
performed well, with accuracy scores of 94% and 97.6%, respectively. As for the Logistic Regression (LR) Classifier, it yielded the
lowest accuracy of 90.2%, along with average values for the precision, recall and F1 of 0.85, 0.75 and 0.78, respectively. Despite its
lower performance, it is worth noting that LR still provided some
useful insights into our data set which can be further explored in
future experiments or research projects related to network classification tasks using ML algorithms. Finally, after performing the
ensemble voting, the calculated overall accuracy was 98%.
 As for the second classification technique, employing the bidirectional LSTM, its performance metrics are shown in Table 3,
and the confusion matrices are illustrated in Figs. 10, 11, 12 and
13. The results show that from among all techniques, the KNN
technique was able to achieve the highest accuracy of 100%, along
with an average precision, recall and F1-score values of 1.00, 1.00 Fig. 10. Confusion Matrix RF Second technique.
and 1.00, respectively. The results reflect its superiority over the
other techniques such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random the LR technique had a precision, recall and F1-score of 0.49, 0.48
Forest (RF) and Logistic Regression (LR) which had accuracies of and 0.46, respectively. The results of the ensemble voting stage
85.8%, 97.5% and 72%, respectively. The performance metrics of gave an accuracy of 95.2%.

Table 3
Second Technique Results Metrics.

 Classify network Accuracy Class Precision recall F1-Score
 RF 97.5% Browsing 0.97 0.84 0.90
 FT 0.97 0.96 0.96
 VOIP 0.96 0.98 0.97
 YouTube 0.97 0.84 0.90
 Average 0.97 0.94 0.95
 LR 72% Browsing 0.00 0.00 0.00
 FT 0.53 0.16 0.25
 VOIP 0.75 0.79 0.77
 YouTube 0.71 1.00 0.83
 Average 0.49 0.48 0.46
 KNN 100% Browsing 1.00 1.00 1.00
 FT 1.00 1.00 1.00
 VOIP 1.00 1.00 1.00
 YouTube 1.00 1.00 1.00
 Average 1 1 1
 SVM 85.8% Browsing 0.00 0.00 0.00
 FT 0.89 0.65 0.75
 VOIP 0.74 0.91 0.81
 YouTube 0.96 0.99 0.98
 Average 0.647 0.637 0.63

 7
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

 nique are shown in Figs. 14, 15 and 16. Moreover, these techniques
 were also able to accurately classify web browsing and video
 streaming applications with average precision and recall scores
 of 0.97and 0.99, respectively. The results confirm that they are also
 very effective at classifying traffics on application level.
 On the other hand, when using a combination of an LSTM network along with conv1D, it was observed that it could accurately
 classify VoIP application with precision, recall and F1-score of
 0.75, 0.8 and 0.78 respectively. However, its performance dropped
 significantly when trying to identify file transfer or web browsing
 activities – resulting in much lower accuracy rates than what was
 previously achieved through either Bidirectional LSTMs or those
 combined with CNN2D as shown in Table 4. For this technique,
 the ensemble voting resulted in an overall accuracy of 97%. Ultimately, it can be concluded that all three techniques have their
 own advantages according to the targeted application (e.g. VOIP,
 Web Browsing, etc), therefore, selection of the appropriate tech-
 Fig. 11. Confusion Matrix Logistic Regression Second technique. nique must be done carefully before employing it in any project.
 Table 5 presented the comparison between the accuracy of
 some techniques in the proposed model with some previous
 related works.

 6. Discussion

 This section discussed the reasons for using proposed machine
 learning techniques and the importance of combining them with
 classification networks.
 First, the neural network and Bidirectional-LSTM network used
 to learn high-level features from the encrypted traffic data, while
 the SVM or RF or KNN or LR used to make the final classification
 decision based on these features. The combination of LSTM with
 other machine learning models such as SVM, KNN, LR, and RF has
 been shown to be effective for encrypted traffic classification.
 Encrypted traffic datasets often suffer from class imbalance, with
 some classes having many more samples than others. This can
 make it difficult for a single model to learn to distinguish between
 the different classes. By combining multiple models, it can balance
 Fig. 12. Confusion Matrix KNN Second technique.
 the strengths and weaknesses of each model to better handle this
 imbalance. It also improves robustness, by combining multiple
 models, it can be able to handle changes in network conditions
 or the introduction of new applications and protocols.
 The use of Bidirectional LSTMs alone in encrypted traffic classification has several advantages, including the ability to capture
 long-term dependencies, robustness to noise and variability, ability to handle variable-length input sequences, automatic feature
 extraction, and ability to handle complex and nonlinear relation-

 Fig. 13. Confusion Matrix SVM Second technique.

 Finally, for the third technique, the dataset was divided to different sessions by grouping the records depending on various features such as time stamp, SrcIP and DstIP as mentioned in the
section above. This technique uses a combination of different deep
learning networks to classify traffic at various levels, such as Bidirectional LSTM, and LSTM concatenated with CNN-2D and CNN-1D.
The results obtained from these methods had accuracies of 94%,
98% and 71%, respectively. The confusion matrices for this tech- Fig. 14. Confusion Matrix Bidirectional LSTM.

 8
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

 Table 5
 Comparison of accuracy between proposed model and previous related work.

 Technique Accuracy Proposed model
 [11] Bidirectional LSTM combined with RF 96.7% 97.5%
 [12] Bidirectional LSTM combined with KNN 96.4% 100%
 [13] LSTM combined with CNN2D 92.2% 98%

 into sessions depending on packet timing (timestamp) and packet
 direction (SrcIP and DstIP). On the other hand, when LSTM combined with CNN1D may not be as effective for encrypted traffic
 classification as other architectures, such as LSTM combined with
 CNN2D.
 At Last, more than machine learning are tried on the captured
 dataset and the chosen techniques achieved higher accuracy of
 classifying the network applications.

 Fig. 15. Confusion Matrix LSTM and CNN-1D.

 7. Conclusion

 This research has demonstrated the feasibility of using machine
 learning models for encrypted payload traffic classification. It has
 shown that various features, such as packet length, time stamps,
 TLS information and encrypted payload can effectively contribute
 to accurate classification. This research results combining different
 deep learning techniques such as neural network and LSTM with
 other traditional algorithms like RF, KNN LR and SVM, and combining LSTM with CNN can significantly improve the accuracy of classification models.
 Some proposed models require minimal computational
 resources while achieving high accuracy rates compared to state
 of art methods. Furthermore, results indicate that by taking into
 account different features able to achieve better performance.
 The results of this research have shown that the proposed models achieved high accuracy rates in classifying encrypted payload
 traffic. The ensemble of the first technique achieved an accuracy
 Fig. 16. Confusion Matrix LSTM CNN 2D. rate of 96.7%, while the second and third techniques both achieved
 95.2% and 96% respectively. This is a significant finding as it provides new opportunities to improve network security and manageships. They can also be combined with other types of neural net- ment by developing more accurate classification systems for this
works, such as CNNs, to further improve their performance. But type of data traffic.
it may also be prone to overfitting, especially if the training data In addition, this research has also provided valuable insights
is imbalanced or noisy. into combining different machine learning techniques to develop
 LSTM combined with CNN2D In the context of encrypted traffic better classification systems for encrypted payloads with higher
classification, it can be used to capture the spatial patterns in the accuracy rates than traditional. Further investigation should be
encrypted traffic, such as packet size, packet timing, and packet made into using other features that could help strengthen these
direction, which can be indicative of different applications and pro- types of networks even further, such as incorporating deep learntocols. As in the third technique the dataset records are divided ing techniques or exploring different feature selection strategies

Table 4
Third Technique Results Metrics.

 Classify network Accuracy Class precision recall F1-Score
 Bidirectional LSTM 94% Browsing 0.96 0.79 0.87
 FT 0.92 0.81 0.86
 VOIP 0.88 0.96 0.92
 YouTube 1 1 1
 Average 0.94 0.89 0.912
 LSTM + CNN1D 71% Browsing 0.00 0.00 0.00
 FT 0.44 0.14 0.21
 VOIP 0.75 0.80 0.78
 YouTube 0.72 0.97 0.83
 Average 0.47 0.477 0.455
 LSTM + CNN2D 98% Browsing 0.99 1.00 1.00
 FT 0.97 0.92 0.94
 VOIP 0.95 0.98 0.97
 YouTube 1.00 1.00 1.00
 Average 0.978 0.975 0.977

 9
R.T. Elmaghraby, N.M. Abdel Aziem, M.A. Sobh et al. Ain Shams Engineering Journal 15 (2024) 102361

which may lead to improved performance metrics compared to [26] Cai Y, Zhang W, Zhang F, Wang X. A machine learning approach to traffic
 classification in encrypted communication. In: 2019 IEEE 19th International
existing solutions.
 Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT). Chengdu, China: IEEE;
 2019. p. 212–6.
 [27] Huang Y, Li Y, Qiang B. Internet traffic classification based on min-max
Declaration of Competing Interest ensemble feature selection. In: Proceedings of the 2016 international joint
 conference on neural networks (IJCNN). Vancouver, BC, Canada; July 2016. p.
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- 3485–3492.
 [28] Lotfollahi M, Zade RSH, Jafari Siavoshani M, Saberian M. Deep packet: a novel
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning. Soft Comput
to influence the work reported in this paper. 2020;24:1999–2012.
 [29] Shi H, Li H, Zhang D, Cheng C, Cao X. An efficient feature generation approach
 based on deep learning and feature selection techniques for traffic
References classification. Comput Netw 2018;132:81–98.
 [30] Zhang Z, Kang C, Fu P, Cao Z, Li Z, Xiong G. Metrie learning with statistical
 features for network traffic classification. In: Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
 [1] Tahmasseby S. The implementation of smart mobility for smart cities: a case
 36th International Performance Computing and Communications Conference
 study in Qatar. J Urban Technol 2019;26(3):87–103.
 (IPCCC), San Diego, CA, USA; December 2017. p. 1–7.
 [2] Dainotti A, Amato A, Pescape A, Ventre G. Characterization of encrypted and
 VPN traffic using time-related features. Comput Netw 2014;64:19–31.
 [3] Wang S, Zhang Y, Jiang X, Li Y, Li G. Deep flow: deep learning-based encrypted
 traffic classification with internet of things applications. IEEE Trans Ind Inf Reham Taher Elmaghraby: Graduated from Arab
 2019;15(2):764–72. academy for science technology and maritime
 [4] Singh K, Kumar N, Garg S. Encrypted traffic classification using deep packet transport- Cairo branch in 2003. She achieved her
 inspection and machine learning. J Netw Comput Appl 2019;131:1–14. masters at Arab Academy for Science and Technology in
 [5] Alshammari R, Zincir-Heywood AN, Heywood MI. Statistical analysis of
 2009. She liked reading and attending conferences. Her
 encrypted network traffic for the purpose of classification. J Netw Comput
 field of interests is Cryptography, IOT, Machine Learning
 Appl 2017;84:11–22.
 [6] Wang J, Liu Y, Chen Z, Yang J. Encrypted traffic classification using machine and Network Security
 learning techniques. IEEE Access 2017;5:21017–27.
 [7] Chen X, Gao X, Chen J, Zhang Y. Encrypted traffic classification using deep
 learning techniques. IEEE Access 2018;6:52145–55.
 [8] Zou Y, Zhang H, Zhao W. Encrypted traffic classification based on long shortterm memory. J Ambient Intell Hum Comput 2020;11(12):5171–81.
 [9] Wu J, Sun X, Zhang Y, Huang T. Encrypted traffic classification based on
 convolutional neural network. IEEE Access 2020;8:171304–13.
[10] Kandel J, Avraham T, Cohen-Or D. Brightness as an augmentation technique for
 image classification. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision Nada M. Abdel Aziem: Graduated from Arab academy
 and Pattern Recognition Workshops 2016;2016:9–16. doi: https://doi.org/
 for science technology and maritime transport- Cairo
 10.1109/CVPRW.2016.5.
 branch in 2010. She achieved her PhD at Ain Shams
[11] Razak MA, Alias NA, Yusoff YM, Ahmad SA. Physiological-based driver
 University in 2021. She liked reading and attending
 monitoring systems: a scoping review. IEEE Access 2021;9:9192–210. doi:
 https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3052424. conferences. Her field of interests is computer networks,
[12] Ali K, Tariq A, Abbas H. Encrypted traffic classification using deep learning IOT, Machine Learning and Data Security
 techniques. In: 2019 2nd International Conference on Computer Applications
 & Information Security (ICCAIS). IEEE; 2019. p. 1–6.
[13] Lu W, Zhang Y, Jiang X, Li Y, Li G. Encrypted traffic classification based on deep
 bidirectional LSTM and random forest. IEEE Access 2020;8:36571–81.
[14] Zhou Y, Liu X, Hu Q, Zhong Z. Encrypted traffic classification with bidirectional
 LSTM networks. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Global Communications
 Conference (GLOBECOM). Waikoloa, HI, USA: IEEE; 2019. p. 1–6.
[15] Wang J, Jia L, Liu X, Zhou Y. Encrypted traffic classification using convolutional
 neural networks with attention mechanism. IEEE Access 2019;7:24513–25.
[16] Ali S, Arfeen M, Rehman S. Classification of encrypted and unencrypted traffic
 Mohamed A. Sobh: Mohamed A. Sobh is a Professor of
 using machine learning techniques. In; 2020: International Journal of
 Computer and System Engineering, Ain Shams Univer-
 Computer Science and Network Security (IJCSNS), vol. 20(2), p. 47–55.
[17] Al Rawi A, Al Saffar A, Al-Adhami M. Encrypted traffic classification using sity. He received his B.Sc., M.Sc. and PhD. in Computer
 statistical analysis and machine learning techniques. In: Proceedings of the Engineering from Ain Shams University in 1996, 2001,
 2017 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE and 2007 respectively. His fields of research are Simu-
 Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical lation and Modeling - Computer Programming - and
 and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData); 2017. p. Computer Security.
 538–543. doi: 10.1109/iThings-GreenCom-CPSCom-SmartData.2017.96.
[18] Amin M, Liu X, Al-Dhelaan A. Using deep learning for encrypted traffic
 classification: an evaluation study. In: 2019 international conference on
 computational science and computational intelligence (CSCI); December 2019.
 p. 129–34. doi: 10.1109/CSCI49375.2019.00030.
[19] F.Hussain, M. Ismail, and A. Khan, ‘‘Encrypted Traffic Classification Using
 Machine Learning Techniques,” in 2018 International Conference on Advances
 in Computing, Communication Control and Networking (ICACCCN), Sept. 2018,
 pp. 101-105. DOI: 10.1109/ICACCCN.2018.8685265.
[20] Shi Z, Luktarhan N, Song Y, Tian G. BFCN: A Novel Classification Method of Ayman M. Bahaa-Eldin: Misr International University,
 Encrypted Traffic Based on BERT and CNN. Electronics 2023. On Leave from Ain Shams University, Egypt, ayman.ba-
[21] Xinyi Hu, Chunxiang Gu, Wei F. CLD-net: a network combining CNN and LSTM haa@eng.asu.edu.eg, Ayman M. Bahaa-Eldin is a profor internet encrypted traffic classification. Machine learning for security and fessor, Computer and Systems Eng. Dept. Ain Shams
 communication Networks 2021. University. Prof. Bahaa-Eldin received his B.Sc., M.Sc.
[22] Wang Wei, Zhu Ming, Wang Jinlin, Zeng Xuewen, Yang Zhongzhen. End to end and PhD. in Computer Engineering from Ain Shams
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural University in 1995, 1999, and 2004 respectively. He was
 networks. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and a visiting professor in several local and international
 Security Informatics (ISI); 2017. universities. He was appointed as the managing director
[23] Zhou K, Wang W, Chenhuang Wu, Teng Hu. Practical evaluation of encrypted of the Egyptian Universities Network (EUN), The Egyptraffic classification based on a combined method of entropy estimation and
 tian National Research and Education Network (NREN)
 neural networks. ETRI J 2019.
 from 2010 until 2014. His fields of research are Cryp-
[24] Guo L, Qianqiong Wu, Liu S, Duan M, Li H, Sun J. Deep learning-based real-time
 tography, Computer Networks, and Computer and Network Security. He published
 VPN encrypted traffic identification methods. J Real Time Image Process 2020.
[25] Pathmaperuma MH, Rahulamathavan Yogachandran, Dogan Safak, Kondoz more than 80 papers in refereed international journals and conferences, managed
 Ahmed. CNN for user activity detection using encrypted in-app mobile data. and participated in several national and international research projects, and par-
 Future Internet 2022. ticipated in the reviewing process of many international journals and conferences.

 10