Benchmarking Two Techniques for Tor Classification
 Flow Level and Circuit Level Classification

 Khalid Shahbar A. Nur Zincir-Heywood
 Faculty of Computer Science
 Dalhousie University
 Halifax, Canada
 {Shahbar, Zincir}@ cs.dal.ca

 Abstract— Recently, many internet users, who seek This means the collection of the encrypted TCP
anonymity, use Tor, which is one of the most popular anonymity communication between the user and the relay can be in the
software solutions. Tor provides this anonymity by hiding the user machine, the relay machine, or the ISP.
identity of the user from the destination that the user aims to
reach. It also hides the user activities into encrypted cells. In this Our work provides a benchmarking study for the
work, we investigate up to what level we can define what the user classification of Tor user activities. Furthermore, we extend the
in Tor is doing. To this end, we extended on the previous work to prior work [1] for classifying Tor circuits to achieve high
classify the user activities using information extracted from Tor classification accuracy, and aim to classify Tor flows with high
circuits and cells. Moreover, we developed a classification system accuracy even without having access to the relay.
to identify user activities based on traffic flow features. Our
results show that flow based classification can reach up to the The reminder of this paper is structured as follows. Section
accuracy of the cell level classification as well as being more II presents the related work. Tor background is reviewed in
flexible. section III. Features used in both the Flow and the Circuit level
 classification are explained in section IV. Experiments
 Keywords—Tor traffic classification; Traffic Flow; Tor performed and the results obtained are presented in sections V
Circuits and VI, respectively. Finally, conclusions are drawn and the
 future work is discussed in section VII.
 I. INTRODUCTION
 Tor provides its users with anonymity by hiding their
browsing activities and locations. This level of anonymity II. RELATED WORK
achieved by relaying the users activities through three Tor
 In [1], Alsabah et al. used ML algorithms to classify the
nodes. When the user connects to the first relay, the first relay
 application used by Tor’s users. The applications are
knows the IP address of this user. The user activities stay
 Browsing, Streaming and BitTorrent. Because Tor traffic is
encrypted while moving from the first relay to the second one,
 encrypted, they used the circuit level and the cell level
and from the second one to the third one. The third relay sends
 information to do the classification. The circuit level
the user activities on behalf of the user without any information
 information includes the circuit lifetime and the amount of data
regarding the identity of the user.
 transferred by the circuit. The cell level information includes
 In this work, we aim to analyze the amount of information the inter arrival time of the cells and their statistics. The
that can be extracted from the encrypted Tor traffic without classification includes online and offline classification. The
decrypting the traffic. To explore this, we propose to employ online classification uses the cell level information to classify
machine learning (ML) algorithms. To this end, we employ the circuit while it is in use. The offline classification uses both
two different approaches for the classification of user activities. the cell and the circuit level information to classify the circuit.
The first approach is the Flow level classification. It depends In terms of accuracy, the best result they achieved in the offline
on analyzing the TCP communication between the user and the classification is 91%, whereas the best results achieved in the
relay to predict the type of user activities in the encrypted online classification is 97.8%.
traffic. The second approach is the Circuit level classification.
 In [2], a simulated Tor network is used to differentiate
The encrypted circuits have characteristics that can be
 between encrypted traffic and Tor traffic. The simulated
extracted and calculated to classify the type of traffic in the
 network contains three directory servers and fifteen relays.
circuits. The main difference between the Flow level
 Salenium browser (a Firefox add-on) is used to gather a sample
classification and the Circuit level classification is the level of
 of thirty website browsing traces. To do the comparison
access to Tor network. The Circuit level classification requires
 between the two types of encrypted traffic, HTTPS traffic is
having access to the relay node, itself [1]. That means only the
 gathered alone for a period of two weeks then followed by
one who runs the relay can gather the required statistics about
 HTTP traffic over the simulated Tor network for two weeks.
the circuit. On the other hand, the Flow level classification
 Lastly, an HTTPS over the simulated network is gathered also
requires access to anywhere between the user and the relay.
 for two weeks. In total, around 25 GB of data collected for the

 Authorized licensed use limited ©2014
 978-1-4799-4521-4/14/$31.00 IEEEUniversity. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 to: Tsinghua
three different tests. Each sample is 1 MB in size, so to build
the whole captured data set, mergecap is used. Different ML
algorithms (Random forest, J4.8 and Adaboost) were employed
via Weka [21]. Their results showed that more than 90% of the
HTTP and HTTPS traffic over Tor network could be detected
with a false positive rate of 3.7%.
 In [3], a support vector machine (SVM) classifier is used
with the websites’ fingerprints to show that Tor and JAP are
not providing total anonymity. Volume, time and direction of
the traffic are the features in SVM. In the closed world (set of
known websites), the training data set consists of browsing
different websites using a computer running Debian
distribution in Tor network or JAP and logging the features
using TCPdump. Chickenfoot Firefox plugin is used to
automate the browsing and retrieving activities. The data set Fig. 1. The Sequence for Establishing a Tor Circuit.
contains 775 websites with 20 instances for each of them. On
the other hand, in the open world (unknown websites) part of
their experiments, the training data set includes 4000 URL
chosen from the 1 million most popular websites provided by
Alexa [15]. Another 1000 URLs are added to the test data. The III. TOR BACKGROUND
features used in both data sets are: (i) Packets size (52 bytes):
the size of the packet that contains the ACK between the Tor is a publicly available software that is built to provide
sender and the receiver; (ii) Size marker: a special text label users with anonymization when using the Internet. Tor
that shows the change in the direction of the packet. It is used Network depends on the volunteers who run their machines as
to sum up all packets in the same direction; (iii) HTML relay nodes to forward other users’ traffic through Tor. The
marker: to distinguish between each HTML request and to user starts by establishing a virtual circuit. This circuit consists
check the size of the requested site; (iv) Rounded transmitted of three relays. A directory server is used to get the addresses
bytes: the number of all transmitted packets in both directions of available routers and their keys to encrypt the data. User
(rounded in increments of 10,000); (v) Number of markers: data is encrypted with three layers of encryption. First, data are
grouping the packet size for all packets of a flow in one encrypted with the last relay (exit router) key then the middle
direction; (vi) Occurring packet size: the number of each site’s relay and finally, by the first relay (entry router). This way, the
packets in both directions; (vii) Percentage of Incoming entry router only knows the source of the data. The middle
Packets; and (viii) Number of packets. Using these features router(s) only knows where to get the encrypted data and
improves the results of detecting closed world websites from where to send them, but nothing about the source of the data or
3% to 55% in Tor network and from 20% to 80% in JAP the destination of them. Finally, the exit router knows the
compared to other related works. In the open world data set, destination of the data, but knows nothing about the source.
the detection is 73% with 0.05% false positive rate. This ensures that the whole path is not known by any of the
 three nodes (routers) on the Tor network.
 In [4], authors use traffic analysis to discover the identity of
the user using the Tor network. The analysis depends on the The user and the relay use encrypted TLS connections to
size of the packet transmitted on the network from the web communicate. Circuits and cells are the components for Tor
server through the router to the user. Tor has a fixed cell size communication. The circuit is a virtual path from the user
but the packet size can vary. So they used padding with one bit machine to the last relay (the exit relay). Inside the circuit the
to mark the packets so that they could be traced back at the data are packed into cells. Each cell contains the identifier of
receiver side. The authors report that ten packets are enough to the circuit it belongs. The circuit ID is unique in the connection
get a reasonable detection with low false positive. The length between the user and the relay. Through the path, the circuit ID
of the padding will force the Tor router to use the known is not the same.
number of cells. The Tor cell size is 512 bytes, which means if Figure 1 shows the sequence for establishing the circuit.
the data size is more than 512 bytes then it needs to be When the user wants to send data through Tor, he/she starts by
fragmented to fit into the cell size. This enables the authors to establishing a circuit. The circuit establishment starts from the
mark the client who receives these cells as the client has access user to the first relay in a CREATE cell. When the circuit is
to the server. During the path from the server to the client, established, the relay sends back the CREATED cell to the
packets may face congestion, retransmission or any normal user. The user then extends the circuit to the second relay by
traffic behavior that affects the receiver to detect the encoded using the RELAY_EXTEND cell. The first relay sends the
bit. To solve such problems, delay is used between buffered CREATE cell to the second relay. The second relay responds
packets before sending them. By setting the delay interval to back with the CREATED cell when the circuit is established
400 ms, the authors achieved a detection rate of 90% with 4% between the first and the second relay. The first relay replies
false positive rate. back to the user with the RELAY_EXTENDED cell to inform
 the user that the circuit path is now up to the second relay.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 2. Browsing Circuits Data Rate - Different colors show the rate for Fig. 3. Streaming Circuits Data Rate - Different colors show the rate for
 different circuits. different circuits.

Then in the same way, the user extends the circuit to the exit
relay. After the circuit is established between the user and the
exit relay, the user is ready to send the data into
RELAY_DATA cells.
The data travel in both directions between the user and the exit
relay. This is only an overview of how the circuit is established
in Tor to start sending the data. There are other forms and
versions of command and relay cells explained in detail in [6].
 Even though the cells in the circuit are encrypted, they have
different behaviors and characteristics according to the type of
the traffic they carry. Cells timing, the number of downlink Fig. 4. BitTorrent Circuit Data Rate - Different colors show the rate for
cells, the number of uplink cells, and the number of cells in the different circuits.
duration of the circuit vary based on the type of the traffic in
the cells. There is a directly proportional relation between the
type of traffic and the number of cells that flow in the circuit. stay high in numbers compared to the web browsing or the
The higher the amount of data the higher the number of cells. streaming. However, because the number of the downlink cells
The uplink cells that flow from the user to the relay depend on are high in BitTorrent, the rate decays with time.
how the application acts to send data requests.
 Figure 2 shows how the rate of uplink cells to the downlink
cells changes with time in web browsing circuits. In most of
the circuits, the rate reaches to its maximum value. This rate
only stays for a short period then it starts to decay quickly. The IV. CLASSIFICATION FOR TOR
rate then starts to fluctuate up and down until it reaches a very A. Circuit Level Classification
low rate. This observation shows conformity with normal web
 This approach depends on using statistics extracted from
browsing requests where the user enters a URL and waits for
 the Circuits and their Cells to classify the user activities in the
the web site to download then enters another URL and so on.
 Tor traffic without decrypting the traffic. It is similar to the
The amount of data in the requests sent is lower than the
 work done in [1] but we extended it with the following
amount of data downloaded from the web sites themselves.
 attributes:
This causes the rate to decay with time.
 Figure 3 shows how the rate behaviors differ for the video 1) Cells per circuit life time: The amount of data delivered
streaming circuits. The rate is higher than the web browsing. by a circuit is a good indication about the type of traffic carried
The decay period is longer and smoother. The rate then stays in by the circuit. But without considering the time the circuit is
a certain range for the rest of the circuit duration time. The alive, this indication might be misleading. For example, two
BitTorrent circuits show yet another behavior in the rate as circuits might deliver the same amount of data in two different
shown in Figure 4. In this case, the rate reaches to 100 and durations. As shown in Figure 5, the number of streaming
decays slowly. The circuits duration is longer than both the circuits and BitTorrent circuits are both high compared to the
web browsing and the video streaming. BitTorrent uplink cells number of browsing circuits. The circuit life time is what
 distinguishes between them.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 5. The Number of Cells During Circuit Life Time. Fig. 6. The Rate of Downlink Cells to Uplink Cells During the Circuit Life
 Time.

 2) Uplink Cells: Relays’ cells are transferred in both TABLE I. FLOW EXPORTERS ATTRIBUTES
directions; uplink and downlink. BitTorrent seems to transmit
 Number of Selected
higher amount of uplink cells than the browsing or streaming Tool Number of Attributes
 Attributes
applications. In other words, number of cells required to send a Tranalyzer2 91 62
request might be a good indicator of the type of traffic running Tcptrace 88 50
on the Tor network.
 3) The Rate of the Downlink Cells to the Uplink Cells:
Even though the uplink data is a good indication about the type 1) Tranalyzer2: This is an open source tool that generates
of traffic the circuit has, the rate of the uplink to the downlink flows from a captured traffic file or directly by working on the
is also important. If the circuit life time is long enough, it could network interface. It is based on the libpcap library. Its output
transmit considerable amount of uplink cells even if it is used can be exported directly to a text file without the need for an
for browsing. However, most of the time, the rate will vary external collector [8]. The output depends on the type of
based on the type of traffic no matter how long the life of the plugins enabled when using Tranalyzer2 to analyze the
circuit is. Figure 6 shows the rate of the downlink cells to the captured traffic. Choosing the proper plugins is important to
uplink cells with the circuit life time. generate the features that are useful for the classification task.
 More information about Tranalyzer2 and other flow exporters
 4) Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA): can be found in [9].
Intuitively, we think that EWMA is a good indicator because it
can differentiate between two circuits when both have the same 2) Tcptrace: This is a tool used to do a TCP analysis. It can
life time. We used the following formula to calculate the handle different types of captured traffic formats. Different
EWMA of the cells [7]: connection graphs can be drawn using Tcptrace. The output
 can be exported to a text file and a csv file [10]. The attributes
 vary based on the tools used. Each one of them generates
 different number of attributes. The number of attributes
 ̅ = ̅ + (1 − ) depends on the options (plugin) enabled in the tool itself.
 Selecting which attributes to include in the classification of Tor
 is very important.
 Where x is the current average. ̅ is the previous It should be stated here that we captured the traffic on our
average. x is the current measurement. α is a factor that own Tor node and labelled only our own traffic since that is the
indicates the weight for the old value, 0 ≤ α < 1. only ground truth known to us. We differentiate our own traffic
 using the IP address.
 The flow between the client and the node contains many
 other information that are used by the flow exporters to
B. Flow Level Classification generate the attributes. For example, the IP address, the port
 This approach employs the traffic flows between the node number, the MAC address, time when the flow starts or ends,
and the client to classify the user activities in the Tor traffic. the sequence number and any information related to the
We used two flow exporting tools to generate the flows and to physical client but not the data between the client and the node.
extract the attributes of the flows between the client and the Table I shows the number of attributes that Tranalyzer2 and
Tor node: Tcptrace provide in the first column. Second column shows the
 number of attributes selected by the classifiers from the full set

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
provided. Tor uses TCP protocol to establish the connection the circuits log and the cells log. To maintain the privacy of
between the user and the relay. So in this work, the attributes other users, circuits related to the other users using our node
that are based on any protocol other than the TCP protocol are have not been logged.
excluded. Furthermore, the source port number, the destination
port number, the source IP address and the destination IP
address attributes are also excluded in the set we used. The IP 2) Flow Level Classification Data
address is used to label the user activity, since we know which PCAP network traces are collected in the entry node
IP address runs which application on our testbed. Last but not machine for the duration of the experiment (10 hours). The
the least, we do not employ any payload level information in required connection information are the traffic between our
our attribute set. entry node and each client. To keep the privacy of other users
 who use our node, a filter is applied to the capturing so only
 connections from our clients are logged. For the duration of the
 V. EXPERIMENTS experiment, we captured 4.2 GB of data.
A. Setup
 In our experiments, we set up a testbed with three clients. C. Evaluation Metrics
These three clients are used to automatically generate the three To obtain a clear picture about the results, we use the same
traffic types: Browsing, Streaming and BitTorrent. All the metrics, namely accuracy and F-measure, as used by [1]. This
clients are configured to use our node as the only entry node. also enables a comparison between the two approaches:
 We used iMacro [11] to automate the Browsing and the
Streaming activities. Both of them start by searching for
random words generated using the English alphabets. They
pick randomly one of the sites returned for the search made. In ( ) ( )
case of Browsing, the iMacro script picks one of the search Accuracy =
 ( )
results, it navigates through the site by clicking a random
hyperlink existing on the web site. It keeps moving from one
link to another. For each link, the client will stay for a random ( )
period of time on that page then move again to another link. Precision = ( ) ( )

 The setting is similar in the streaming activities. The script
will move from one video to another. The time spent for ( )
watching a video or moving from a link to another is set Recall = ( ) ( )
randomly. The difference between the time set in the browsing
and the streaming is that the streaming random time is little
longer than the browsing time setting. Deluge [12] is used as
the BitTorrent software. We used a proxy to be an interface
 ∗ ∗
between the clients’ traffic and the Tor node. The socket port in F-Measure =
Tor is enabled to listen for the proxy requests.
 Tor source code is edited to log only incoming circuit
creation requests from our clients. The IP address of each client
is used to enable the logging and also to label the circuit as one
of the three traffic types. This keeps the privacy of the users
who use our node on the Tor network. D. Classification Algorithms
 We used four supervised ML algorithms: Naïve Bayes,
 Bayes Net, C4.5 and Random Forest. Naïve Bayes is a simple
B. Data Collection algorithm based on Bayes theorem. Naïve Bayes [16] does not
 1) Circuit Level Classification Data take into consideration relations between variables while Bayes
 The circuit level classification is based on the cells statistics Net [17] is more general form that makes connections between
per circuit to distinguish between each traffic type. Tor source the related variables. C4.5 [18] is a pruned decision tree based
code is edited to relate each circuit to its source IP. Even for on the information gain of the attributes. Random Forest [19]
the relay cells where Tor will switch the circuit ID, we make depends on building multiple decision trees to enhance the
Tor logging this ID in its previous circuit ID not the new decision making. A more detailed information about each one
switched ID. This way we keep track of the uplink and the of these well-known classifiers can be found in [20]. We have
downlink cells related to each class. The log for each circuit used Weka [21] to implement each of the classifiers with its
contains the circuit ID, the class, the time when the circuit is default parameters.
created, and the time when the circuit is destroyed. Cells’ log
contains the class and the circuit ID each cell belongs to, the
cell arrival time, and the direction of the cell. The attributes we
need in the circuit level classification are then extracted from

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE II. CIRCUIT LEVEL CLASSIFICATION RESULTS

 Classifier Accuracy F-Measure
 Browsing Streaming BitTorrent
Bayes net SPLIT 98.6% 0.99 0.97 1
 CV 87.7% 0.89 0.82 0.98
 Naïve SPLIT 98.6% 0.99 0.97 1
 Bayes CV 94.5% 0.95 0.88 1
 C4.5 SPLIT 100% 1 1 1
 CV 93.2% 0.94 0.83 1
 RF SPLIT 97.2% 0.98 0.97 0.96
 CV 94.9% 0.96 0.88 1

 VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
 Fig. 7. Circuit Level Classification Accuracy.
A. Circuit Level Classification Results
 We used the circuit level classification with the use of the
cell attributes in this approach. The data set consists of 60%
browsing, 20% streaming and 20% BitTorrent activities. Table TABLE III. FLOW LEVEL CLASSIFICATION RESULTS - UNIFORM CLASSES
II shows the results for the circuit level classification. In this Classifier Accuracy F-Measure
case, accuracy reaches to 100% when using C4.5 classifier Browsing Streaming BitTorrent
with 70% of the instances as a training set. When 10-Fold Bayes SPLIT 100% 1 1 1

 TRANALYZER2
cross-validation is used, the best accuracy was ~95% using the net CV 99.2% 0.99 0.99 1
random forest classifier. Figure 7 shows the results for the Naïve SPLIT 94.7% 0.98 0.91 0.94
 Bayes CV 93.3% 0.98 0.90 0.93
circuit level classification for all the classifiers using the 70-30
 C4.5 SPLIT 98.7% 0.98 0.98 1
training/testing split and the 10-fold cross validation. CV 97.2% 0.96 0.98 0.98
 RF SPLIT 98.7% 0.98 0.98 1
 CV 98.8% 0.99 0.98 0.99
B. Flow Level Classification Results Bayes SPLIT 97.4% 1 0.96 0.96
 net CV 97.7% 0.98 0.97 0.99
 In this case, data set consists of the uniform distribution of
 TCPTRACE

 Naïve SPLIT 97.4% 0.96 1 0.96
the three classes. The number of flows is approximately the Bayes CV 92.2% 0.96 0.89 0.92
same for each class. Even though the amount of data C4.5 SPLIT 94.87% 0.96 0.92 0.97
transferred by the Streaming and BitTorrent circuits are larger CV 96.1% 0.96 0.95 0.98
than the browsing circuits. Table III shows the results when RF SPLIT 97.4% 1 0.96 0.97
using the uniform distribution of the three classes. The results CV 97.7% 0.99 0.96 0.98
are 88% to 100% when using 70% of the instances as the
training set. When using the 10-Fold cross-validation, results In [1], the accuracy was 91% when using functional tree with
are 86% to 99%. 10-Fold Cross-Validation. The classification level used was at
 It should be noted here that the data set employed in [1] circuit level. In our work, we achieved 100% by using the
consisted of 60% browsing instances, 20% streaming instances circuit level classification with the extended attribute set and
and 20% BitTorrent instances. Those authors generated such a also when using the Flow level classification. For the circuit
data set to mimic the traffic distributions of Tor users. To make level classification, we achieved this result when using C4.5
our results comparable to theirs, we downsampled our data to with 70% training set. For the Flow level classification, we got
generate a data set with the same distributions. Table IV shows 100% accuracy when using Bayes Net, Naïve Bayes and
the results when our data set consists of the same distributions Random Forest classifiers with 70% training data. We also
as [1]. In this case, our results still show high accuracy in both achieved the same result when using Bayes Net classifier with
the split and the 10-Fold cross-validation evaluations. Bayes 10-Fold Cross-Validation.
Net classifier achieved 100% in both the split and the 10-Fold We believe that the achieved improvement in the circuit
cross-validation evaluations. Figure 8 shows the accuracy for level classification compared to the result in [1] is due to the
all the three classifiers when using the 10-Fold cross-validation features added to the classification. The BitTorrent circuits
evaluations. tend to have longer lifetime than the browsing circuits. There is
 a small percentage of the BitTorrent circuits that stay active for
 a short time period and then they are destroyed. These circuits
C. Accuracy make the BitTorrent’s circuit behavior look similar to the
 Table V shows a comparison between the best results browsing’s circuit behavior. Therefore, adding the number of
achieved in our work and in [1]. Our results show that we cells transferred during the circuit lifetime as an attribute to the
improved the performance by 9%. attribute set in our work enables the circuits to be more
 distinguishable. On the other hand, in the browsing circuits the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE IV. FLOW LEVEL CLASSIFICATION RESUTLS-DOWNSAMPLED
 CLASSES

 Classifier Accuracy F-Measure
 Browsing Streaming BitTorrent
 Bayes SPLIT 100% 1 1 1
 net
TRANALYZER2

 CV 100% 1 1 1
 Naïve SPLIT 100% 1 1 1
 Bayes CV 95.7% 0.99 0.89 0.91
 C4.5 SPLIT 97.6% 0.98 1 0.93
 CV 99.3% 0.99 1 0.98
 RF SPLIT 100% 1 1 1
 CV 98.6% 1 0.96 0.96
 Bayes SPLIT 81.8% 0.95 0.71 0.73
 net CV 93.3% 0.98 0.84 0.90
TCPTRACE

 Naïve SPLIT 77.3% 0.95 0.55 0.71
 Bayes CV 82.3% 0.94 0.60 0.73 Fig. 8. Flow Level Classification Accuracy using Cross-Validation.
 C4.5 SPLIT 81.8% 0.82 0.91 0.73
 CV 92.0% 0.94 0.83 0.94
 RF SPLIT 90.9% 1 0.83 0.83
 CV 94.7% 0.98 0.86 0.93
 TABLE V. METHODS USED TO ACHIEVE THE BEST ACCURACY

 Accuracy
 91%
amount of data per circuit fluctuates between high and low Results in
values based on the user’s browsing habits and the website [1] Circuit Level Classification
content. The same applies to the BitTorrent circuits where not Functional Tree
 10-Fold Cross-Validation
all circuits transfer high amounts of data. Consequently, being 100%
able to differentiate between the combined uplink and the
downlink data per circuit improves the classification accuracy. Circuit Level Classification
Therefore, we added the uplink data alone as an attribute to C 4.5 Classifier
address this issue. While adding the uplink data is a good 70% training set
indication, there is similarity between the browsing circuits and 100%
the streaming circuits in the number of uplink cells. Here, it is
useful to employ the rate of downlink to the uplink cells as an Our Flow Level Classification
 Results Bayes Net, Naïve Bayes and Random Forest classifiers
attribute to improve the classification performance. In short, 70% training set
we believe that the attribute set that we propose is enabling us
 100%
to incorporate these important properties of the traffic that we
aim to analyze and classify. Flow Level Classification
 Bayes Net classifiers
 Moreover, it should be noted here there is a direct 10-Fold Cross-Validation
connection between the classification process itself and the
user privacy. To the best of our knowledge there is no publicly
available Tor data set. This is because for such studies, one
needs to capture (collect) the data on the wire. For this reason,
we generated and captured the traffic as explained above. The challenge in the flow level classification is in dealing
 The circuit level classification requires access to the with the similarities in the traffic at the flow level. Therefore,
traffic generated by the connections between the user machine the selection of the attribute set makes a difference in the
and the Tor relay. In the circuit level classification, the access performance of the classification. Capturing similar data in
 circuit level classification (the way we did) that are ready to be
to the relay itself is required. That means classification at the
 classified by the ML algorithms requires additional efforts
circuit level has its limitations in terms of who can employ it.
 compared to the flow level classification data. The circuits and
However, flow level classification does not have these cells information in the Tor code maintain a certain level of
limitations. From the availability prospective, the flow level privacy for the Tor's users. For instance, Cells statistics
classification is easier to apply compared to the circuit level attribute (CELL_STAT) that are introduced in Tor version
classification. The tools used in the flow level classification 0.2.5.2-alpha are only available when Tor is working in the test
are available online. These tools include traffic capturing mode. This mode works only when TestingTorNetwork value
(such as Tcpdump or Wireshark) and flow exporters to is set in Tor configuration file as described in Tor control
generate the flow statistics (such as Tcptrace or Tranalyzer2). protocol [13].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 That means using this feature will work only in private REFERENCES
networks not the live Tor network. STEM [14] also can
provide the user with information about Tor. It provides a [1] M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s performance
library for the user to communicate with Tor using Tor control using real-time traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
protocol. It can generate useful information about the circuit conference on Computer and communications security, Raleigh, USA,
and bandwidth usage and so on, but for the same previous 2012, pp. 73-84.
example, STEM cannot retrieve the cells statistics by using [2] J. Barker, P. Hannay, and P. Szewczyk, "Using traffic analysis to
CELL_STAT event unless Tor is working in the test mode. identify the second generation onion Router," in the 9th IFIP
 International Conference on embedded and ubiquitous computing,
 In terms of the size of the data used by the two approaches, Melbourne, AUS, 2011, pp.72-78.
the flow level classification data is larger than the circuit level [3] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, ”Website
classification data. The information in the circuit level is fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in
 Proceedings of the 10th annual ACM workshop on Privacy in the
gathered in the form of a text file where each line represents electronic society, Chicago, USA, 2011, pp.103-104.
information about a circuit or a cell. Although the number of [4] Z. Ling, J. Luo,W. Yu, and X. Fu, "Equal-sized cells mean equal-sized
records is large because of the large number of cells in each packets in Tor?," in Proceedings IEEE ICC,2011, pp.1 -6
circuit, still in a text file this will come to a small size [5] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: the secondcompared to PCAP files. However, for both approaches, when generation onion router,” in Proceedings of the 13th conference on
the data are converted to a form that the classier understands USENIX Security Symposium - Volume 13. USENIX Association, 2004,
then the size becomes very small. pp. 21–21.
 [6] R. Dingledine, and N. Mathewson. Tor protocol specification [Online].
 Available:
 https://gitweb.torproject.org/torspec.git?a=blob_plain;hb=HEAD;f=torspec.txt
 [7] Exponentially weighted moving average [Online]. Available:
 http://lorien.ncl.ac.uk/ming/filter/filewma.htm
 VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [8] TRANALYZER2 [Online]. Available: http://tranalyzer.com/
 [9] F. Haddadi, and N. Zincir-Heywood. Benchmarking the Effect of Flow
 In this research, we used machine learning algorithms to Exporters and Protocol Filters on Botnet Traffic Classification [Online].
classify Tor traffic by using two different approaches: circuit Available: https://www.cs.dal.ca/research/techreports/cs-2014-02
level classification and flow level classification. The results [10] TCPTRACE [Online]. Available: http://www.tcptrace.org/
show that a high accuracy can be achieved using both [11] iMacros [Online]. Available: http://imacros.net/overview
approaches. The circuit level classification uses the data [12] DELUGE [Online]. Available: http://deluge-torrent.org/
captured (collected) at Tor’s relay machine. In contrast, the [13] Tor control protocol [Online]. Available:
flow level classification uses the data that are captured https://gitweb.torproject.org/torspec.git?a=blob_plain;hb=HEAD;f=cont
(collected) anywhere between the user and the Tor’s relay rol-spec.txt
machine. Access to the relay machine is not essential in the [14] STEM [Online]. Available: https://stem.torproject.org/
flow level classification. This enables a very flexible approach [15] Alexa [Online]. Available: http://www.alexa.com/topsites
to analyze the traffic. [16] G. John, and P. Langley, "Estimating continuous distributions in
 bayesian classifiers," in Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on
 For future work, we aim to use these approaches to classify Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, San Mateo, USA,1995, pp. 338-
the user activities online. For both approaches, this will require 345.
changes to the attribute set. Therefore, further investigation [17] G. Cooper, and E. Herskovits, “A Bayesian method for constructing
will be necessary. Bayesian belief networks from databases,” in Proceedings of the
 Seventh conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Los
 Angeles, USA, 1991, pp.86-94.
 [18] J. Ross Quinlan, C4.5: Program for Machine Learning, Morgan
 Kaufmann Inc., San Francisco, CA, 1993.
 [19] L. Breiman, Random Forests, Machine Learning, vol.45, no.1, pp.5-32,
 2001.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [20] P. Flach, Machine Learning: The Art and Science of Algorithms that
 This research is supported by the Natural Science and Make Sense of Data, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY,
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) grant, and 2012.
is conducted as part of the Dalhousie NIMS Lab at [21] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I.
 Witten,”The WEKA data mining software: an update,” SIGKDD
http://projects.cs.dal.ca/projectx/. Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10-18, 2009.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.