INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF NETWORK MANAGEMENT
Int. J. Network Mgmt 2014; 00:1–24
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/nem

 A Survey of Methods for Encrypted Traffic
 Classification and Analysis

 Petr Velan∗† , Milan Čermák, Pavel Čeleda, Martin Drašar
 Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

 SUMMARY

With the widespread use of encrypted data transport network traffic encryption is becoming a standard
nowadays. This presents a challenge for traffic measurement, especially for analysis and anomaly detection
methods which are dependent on the type of network traffic. In this paper, we survey existing approaches
for classification and analysis of encrypted traffic. First, we describe the most widespread encryption
protocols used throughout the Internet. We show that the initiation of an encrypted connection and the
protocol structure give away a lot of information for encrypted traffic classification and analysis. Then, we
survey payload and feature-based classification methods for encrypted traffic and categorize them using an
established taxonomy. The advantage of some of described classification methods is the ability to recognize
the encrypted application protocol in addition to the encryption protocol. Finally, we make a comprehensive
comparison of the surveyed feature-based classification methods and present their weaknesses and strengths.
Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received . . .

KEY WORDS: encrypted traffic; monitoring; network; traffic classification; traffic analysis; machine
 learning; encryption protocols

 1. INTRODUCTION

Network visibility is becoming a necessity in current networks. Security, traffic provisioning, and
failure detection are the prime reasons to deploy traffic measurement. Yet, measurement has other
uses and new ones are still being discovered. For instance, application performance can be measured
using the data from the application layer. Information about certain applications can also be used to
detect attacks and intrusions on the application level. In contrast to this, the need for protection of
transmitted data and user privacy is rapidly increasing. It is for this reason that, the encryption of
transmitted data is increasingly used. The ratio of encrypted traffic has recently been rising steeply
as common Internet services become protected [62]. This change poses a challenge to currently
used methods for traffic measurement, for which the identification and analysis of network traffic
becomes more difficult.

∗
 Correspondence to: Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Botanická 68a, Brno, Czech Republic
†
 Email: velan@ics.muni.cz

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

 Before any further analysis of encrypted network traffic can be done, the traffic needs to be
identified. Statistical and behaviour-based application identification methods are less affected by
encryption than deep packet inspection methods. Therefore, a lot of attention has been given to
these methods, which are also considered to be privacy-conscious. However, information can event
be extracted from encrypted connections, mainly from the session’s initiation.
 The goal of this survey is to provide a comprehensive overview of methods for classifying
and analysing encrypted traffic. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work which
comprehensively summarizes available approaches for encrypted traffic classification and analysis.
Although there has been a lot of research on traffic classification in the past decade [25, 58, 71, 20,
32], most of the existing surveys do not explicitly consider research which targets encrypted traffic.
A recent survey by Cao et al. [21] describes the fundamentals of encrypted traffic classification. It
briefly introduces recent advances and challenges in this field. However, the survey covers only a
few methods of traffic classification and does not provide any comparison or assessment of these
methods. Moreover, while traffic classification is an important part of network monitoring, there are
other methods for analysing encrypted traffic which need to be taken into consideration.
 To achieve this goal, we have produced a survey of methods for classifying and analysing
encrypted traffic in journals, conference papers, proceedings of specialized workshops and
technical reports. We studied works presented in selected computer science journals, mainly the
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Computer Networks, International Journal of Network
Management and Transactions on Network and Service Management. We also surveyed
international conferences such as IMC, PAM, CISDA, CNSM, IM and NOMS over the period 2005-
2014. Other methods were found in references provided by the surveyed papers and in papers that
referenced them.
 The contribution of our work is four-fold. First, we describe several of the most widely used
encryption protocols to show their packet structure and standard behaviour in a network. This
information forms the basis of all classification protocols which use either a specific packet structure
or a communication pattern to identify the protocol. Second, we investigate what information is
provided by these encryption protocols. Most protocols negotiate encryption algorithms in cleartext, these data can be monitored, e.g., to reveal the use of weak ciphers. Third, we describe how
the structure of encryption protocols can be used to detect these protocols in a network. Traffic
classification algorithms using such information are presented and we describe several open-source
tools which implement these algorithms. Fourth, we provide an extensive survey of behaviour-based
methods for encrypted traffic classification. We show that surprisingly detailed information can be
obtained using these methods. In specific cases, even the content of the encrypted connection can be
established. To describe and categorize the classification methods, we use the taxonomy of Khalife
et al. [48].
 Over the last decade, many statistical and machine learning algorithms have been applied to
the problem of traffic classification. However, authors use different methodological data sets to
evaluate their methods and the results are therefore not directly comparable. Most of the methods use
supervised or semi-supervised machine learning algorithms to classify flows and even determine the
application protocol of the flow. Most methods target encryption protocols such as SSH, SSL/TLS
and encrypted BitTorrent.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 3

 This paper is organized into seven sections. Section 2 explains the principles of several widely
used encryption protocols. Section 3 describes what information can be obtained from encrypted
traffic using specific knowledge of the encryption protocols. Section 4 describes the traffic
classification taxonomy used in this article. Section 5 describes traffic classification methods based
on the specific knowledge of encryption protocols. Section 6 surveys papers on the classification of
encrypted traffic using statistical and behavioural methods. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper
and provides directions for future research.

 2. A DESCRIPTION OF ENCRYPTION PROTOCOLS

This section provides a description of chosen encryption protocols. We selected the most widely
used protocols to demonstrate the basic principles and show different approaches for secure data
transport. Our choice of encryption protocols was also influenced by protocols which are the most
commonly used in research of encrypted traffic classification. We shall describe IPsec, TLS, SSH,
BitTorrent and Skype protocols in this section. All these protocols provide confidentiality using
encryption and they usually offer authentication of communication peers, data integrity, replay
protection and non-repudiation. We shall describe the use of these protocols, their fundamental
properties, the structure of encrypted packets, and the type of exchanged data. The information
provided in this section will serve as the basis for the next sections of this paper.
 Almost all the presented encryption protocols can be divided into two main phases: the
initialization of the connection and the transport of encrypted data. The first phase can be further
divided to an initial handshake, an authentication and a shared secret establishment. During the first
phase, algorithm capabilities are usually exchanged, communication parties are authenticated and
secret keys are established. These keys are then used for encrypting transferred data in the second
phase. This general protocol scheme is depicted in Figure 1, which, with minor modifications, can
be applied to almost any protocol providing confidential data transfer.

 Confirmation
 Initial Authentication and shared Authenticated and encrypted
 handshake secret establishment data exchange

 Time
 Unencrypted initialization Encrypted data transport

 Figure 1. A general scheme of network security protocols.

 The protocols presented in this section are listed in order of their position in the ISO/OSI reference
model [43]. IPsec protocol suite, which operates on the network layer is described first, followed
by TLS and SSH protocols on the presentation layer. BitTorrent and Skype protocols represent the
application layer and they implement their own protocols for secure data transmission.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
4 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

2.1. Internet Protocol Security

Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) is a framework of open standards for ensuring authentication,
encryption and data integrity on the network layer. Due to its location on the network layer, IPsec
can protect both the data within the packet and also L3 information (e.g., IP addresses) in each
packet [33]. The main advantage of using IPsec is securing the network connection without the
necessity of modifying any application on the clients or servers. However, it provides less control
and flexibility for protecting specific applications.
 IPsec follows the general scheme depicted in Figure 1. The first phase is represented by the
Internet Key Exchange Version 2 (IKEv2) protocol [45]. IPsec uses an UDP protocol on the port
500 through which all messages covering the initial handshake, the authentication and the shared
secret establishment run. Two protocols could be used in the second phase of IPsec: Authentication
Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). In the initial version of IPsec, the ESP
protocol providing data confidentiality did not include authentication, so ESP and AH were used
together. Nowadays, the current version of ESP contains authentication and AH has become less
significant, although it is still used to authenticate portions of packets that ESP cannot manage.

 Authenticated fields

 Original IP AH/ESP ESP ESP
 (a) Data
 header header trailer auth.

 Encrypted fields
 Authenticated fields

 New IP AH/ESP Original IP ESP ESP
 (b) Data
 header header header trailer auth.

 Encrypted fields

 Figure 2. The IPsec packet structure in (a) the transport mode and (b) the tunnel mode.

 The ESP protocol is the main protocol of IPsec. It provides data confidentiality,
origin authentication, connectionless integrity, an anti-replay service, and limited traffic flow
confidentiality [46]. ESP adds a header and a trailer to each transferred packet, see Figure 2,
placed according to the transport mode used. The ESP and AH protocols can operate in two modes:
transport and tunnel. In the tunnel mode, a new IP header is created for each packet with endpoints
of the tunnel as the source and destination addresses; the original IP header is used in the transport
mode.

2.2. Transport Layer Security

Transport Layer Security (TLS) [28] is based on the Secure Sockets Layer version 3 (SSLv3)
protocol [34] and provides transport level security directly on top of the TCP protocol. Specifically,
it provides confidentiality, data integrity, non-repudiation, replay protection and authentication
through digital certificates. The TLS is currently one of the most common protocols for securing
network communication. It is mainly used for securing HTTP, FTP, SMTP sessions, as well as for
Virtual Private Networks or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The protocol design is layered

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 5

and consists of different sub-protocols, as well as configurable and replaceable cryptographic
algorithms [55].
 The main part of TLS is the Record Protocol [28], which acts as an envelope for application data
as well as TLS messages. In the case of the application data, the Record Protocol is responsible for
dividing the data into optionally compressed fragments. The addition of fragments to the record is
complemented by Message Authentication Code (MAC). For more details, see Figure 3. Depending
on the selected security algorithms, a fragment and MAC are encrypted together and sent as one
TLS record. A packet may contain more than one record to avoid sending multiple short packets.

 IP TCP TLS
 header header records

 AuthenticatedSfield

 ContentS Padding
 Version Length Data MAC
 type (blockSciphers)

 EncryptedSfields

 Figure 3. The TLS Record packet format.

 During the first phase of a TLS connection, communication parties are usually authenticated
(more often we can see only server authentication) using an X.509 certificates chain [24], as shown
in the general scheme in Figure 1. Alternatively, a previous connection can be resumed without
authentication. TLS messages exchanged during this phase are unencrypted and do not contain
MAC until the shared keys are established and confirmed. In the second phase, these keys are used
directly by the Record Protocol, which is based on the selected algorithms ensuring communication
security.

2.3. Secure Shell Protocol

In a similar fashion to the TLS protocol, the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol [70] exists as a separate
application on top of TCP. This protocol uses a client-server model where the server usually listens
to the TCP port 22. SSH was originally designed to provide a remote login access to replace
unsecured Telnet connections. Nowadays, it can be used not only for a remote login and a shell,
but also to allow file transfers using the associated SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) [35] and a
Secure Copy (SCP) [60] protocol, or by Virtual Private Networks (VPN). The SSH protocol provides
user and server authentication, data confidentiality and integrity and, optionally, compression.

 IP TCP Packet Padding
 Data Padding MAC
 header header length length

 Authenticated and encrypted fields

 Figure 4. The SSH protocol packet format.

 SSH consists of three protocols, of which the most important is the Transport Layer Protocol,
which provides the establishment of the whole connection and its management. It defines the SSH

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
6 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

packet structure, which is depicted in Figure 4. The MAC code is computed on a plaintext payload
together with the packet length, the padding and a continuously incremented sequence number
not present in the packet itself. Other SSH protocols are the User Authentication Protocol and the
Connection Protocol for multiplexing multiple logical communications channels [66].
 Each SSH connection passes through the same phases which were depicted in Figure 1. In the first
phase, a TCP connection is established and information about preferred algorithms is exchanged.
During authentication, a server sends its public key which must be verified by the client (using a
certification authority or manually through a different channel). The shared keys are subsequently
established and confirmed. All following packets are then encrypted and authenticated.

2.4. BitTorrent

BitTorrent [36] is an application protocol based on the principle of peer-to-peer network
communication for sharing large amounts of data over the Internet. Originally, the protocol did not
ensure any type of network communication security. Once the popularity of this protocol increased,
some Internet Service Providers (ISP) started to limit this type of traffic. As a response to this,
the Message Stream Encryption (MSE) algorithm [12], also known as Protocol Encryption (PE),
was introduced. It serves as an obfuscation algorithm to make BitTorrent traffic identification more
difficult. In addition to obfuscation, the mechanism also ensures some level of confidentiality and
authentication for communicating peers.
 The MSE protocol specification [12] describes MSE as a transparent wrapper for bidirectional
data streams over TCP which prevents passive eavesdropping and thus protocol content
identification. MSE is also designed to provide limited protection against active man-in-the-middle
attacks and port scanning by requiring a weak shared secret to complete the handshake. The major
design goal was payload and protocol obfuscation, not peer authentication and data integrity. Thus,
it does not offer protection against adversaries which already know the necessary data to establish
connections (that is the IP/port/shared secret/payload protocol).
 The first general phase of the MSE protocol follows a TCP three-way handshake and starts with
a newly generated Diffie-Hellman (DH) public key exchange (together with random data padding
for better obfuscation). The shared key is computed by the DH key and combined with hashed
information about the requested data which acts as a pre-shared secret. The packet’s payload is
completely encrypted by a RC4 stream cipher after successfully confirming the shared key.

2.5. Skype

Skype [63] is a peer-to-peer based VoIP application providing not only video chat and voice calls,
but also an instant messaging and file exchange service. As the protocol used is not publicly known,
it is not possible to accurately describe its specific details. The main reason for this is network data
obfuscation to make the detection of Skype traffic more difficult, which is similar to the BitTorrent
protocol.
 The Skype protocol operates over both UDP and TCP protocols depending on network
characteristics. If the network has no restrictions, the application usually sends data traffic over
UDP and the signalling traffic over TCP [1]. If UDP cannot be used (for example a firewall prevents
users from using such a protocol), Skype sends both the signalling and the data traffic over TCP.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 7

When TCP is used, the connection is usually established over port 80 or 443, which masks Skype
traffic as standard web traffic.
 Skype uses the TLS protocol over the TCP port 443 and a proprietary protocol over port 80 [1]
for securing and obfuscating generated traffic with each communicating peer. TLS is also used in
communication with other Voice over IP solutions, where it is used for protecting Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP) messages [64]. Skype uses a proprietary protocol for communication over UDP. To
offer a reliable connection, UDP packets contain an unencrypted header with a frame ID number
and function mode fields. The encryption in UDP connections is used only for obfuscation and not
for confidentiality; therefore, there is no generated shared secret, only a proprietary key expansion
algorithm. UDP connections do not follow the general scheme in Figure 1, because encrypted data
are directly transferred without an initialization phase.

 3. INFORMATION EXTRACTION FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

Network monitoring is one of the main pillars of network security. If the appropriate data is
collected, it is possible to detect network attacks and trace attackers, detect security policy
violations and monitor network applications performance. If encrypted traffic is used, the possibility
of information extraction is significantly limited. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain some
information from this traffic, primarily from the unencrypted initialization phase, but also from the
encrypted transport phase. This section begins with a description of the initialization phase, which
is then followed by a description of methods which use traffic feature analysis to gain information
from the transport phase.

3.1. The Unencrypted Initialization Phase

Almost all network protocols ensure secure data transfer by means of encryption containing an
unencrypted initialization phase, as depicted in Figure 1. Because the data exchanged at this stage
are not encrypted, they can be easily extracted and used for monitoring network traffic. Generally,
two types of information common to most protocols can be extracted during this phase. The first
type covers the connection itself, and its properties exchanged in the initial handshake. The second
type covers communicating peers’ identifiers which are exchanged in the authentication phase.
 During the initial handshake, parameters of a connection are negotiated, such cipher suites
and which protocol version is used. This dynamic setting of the connection properties enables
backward compatibility for different versions of software or is used to set a different level of
security based on established security policies. Some examples of this are data authentication and
compression in addition to encryption itself. The list of possible identifications, with references to
algorithm specification for IPsec, TLS, SSH and other protocols, can be found in IANA Protocol
Registries [40]. All of this information can be used for proper connection characterization and
correct parsing of other packets in the rest of the connection.
 One interesting use of the information from the initial handshake is presented by client
fingerprinting based on the provided cipher-suites. A large amount of cipher-suites types exists,
which usually are not all implemented by the client’s applications. Therefore, each application
specifies the supported cipher-suites and also prefers using them during the initial handshake.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
8 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

This makes it possible to passively distinguish specific operating systems, web browsers and other
applications, together with their versions, based only on the cipher-suites which they use. An
example of such client fingerprinting, based on the SSL/TLS initial handshake, is presented by
applications from SSL Labs [61] and p0f module [54].
 The authentication phase represents the second source of information which can be easily
extracted from secured network traffic. Unique identifiers of one or both communicating peers,
optionally supplemented by additional data about them, are exchanged during this phase. For
example, in the authentication phase of the SSH protocol, the server sends its public key to the user.
The user must validate the key and verify that the server knows the appropriate private key [70].
Since this information is almost unique for each SSH server, it is possible to detect server changes
or man-in-the-middle attacks on them by passive network traffic monitoring.
 A very good example of extracting information from communication peers is demonstrated by
monitoring the authentication phase of the SSL/TLS protocol. The server, and optionally even the
client, sends their X.509 certificates [24] to each other to verify their identities in this phase. This
certificate contains a public key signed by the certification authority which is supplemented with
information about the peer and issuer. More detailed content of such certificates is shown in Figure 5.

 •xVersionx,xv4
 X.509 certificate •xSerialxNumberx,x.x(RTTb(8(...8....d=)f
 Version •xAlgorithmxId,x8747MW.788(RWT78787RxNshaWithRSAEncryption0
 Certificatexserialxnumber •xIssuerx,
 Certificatexalgorithmxidentifier xxxxrdnSequence,xRxitemsxNid1at1commonName*MSITxMachinexAuthxCAx49
 forxcertificatexissuer2sxsignature xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxdc*redmond9dc*corp9dc*microsoft9dc*com0
 Issuer •xValidityx,
 ValidityxPeriod xxxxnotBeforex,xutcTime,x8W1.W1.Tx48,R),WTxNUTC0
 Subject xxxxnotAfterx,xutcTime,x8)1.W1.Mx48,R),WTxNUTC0
 Subject •xSubjectx,xrdnSequence,x8xitemxNid1at1commonName*37pipe7skype7com0
 Algorithmxidentifier
 public1key •xSubjectxPublicxKeyxInfox,
 Public1keyxvalue xxxxalgorithmxNrsaEncryption0
 information
 Issuerxuniquexidentifier xxxxsubjectPublicKey,x(.M4.8.a.4M4.8.8..T)RbMTdc777
 Optional Subjectxuniquexidentifier •xExtensionxNid1ce1keyUsage0x,
 ExtensionxFields xxxxExtensionxId,x47R74T78RxNid1ce1keyUsage0
 Certificatexauthority2sxdigitalxsignature xxxxKeyUsage,xb.xNdigitalSignature9xkeyEncipherment9xdataEncipherment0
 •xSignature,xWW8.Wb(b88cb)=4e.fbaafdWRRe777

 Figure 5. Example of Skype X.509 certificate.

 Monitoring passive certificates enables not only the identification of communicating peers but
also the ability to check whether these certificates are valid and contains proper security algorithms
to fulfil local security policies. SSL/TLS certificate properties were studied by Holz et al. [38] who
revealed a great number of invalid certificates and some which were shared between a large number
of hosts. Holz et al’s work was followed by Durumeric et al. [30] who mainly focused on assessing
certification authorities. Certificate monitoring can also be used to detect malicious software trying
to hide its activities by connecting with their command and controls centres using the SSL/TLS
protocol [65].
 Even though information extraction from encrypted traffic is not a computationally intensive
process, it can provide valuable information. For example, extracting the Server Name Indication
(SNI) [17] can be used by a home router’s firewall to filter traffic. The unencrypted initialization
phase is often used to recognize encrypted traffic and, the authentication information might be
utilized to detect and prevent man-in-the-middle attacks on a network-wide level.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 9

3.2. The Encrypted Data Transport Phase

Information about network traffic can be extracted from encrypted data which is transported
between communicating parties. Packets exchanged during the transport phase usually contain only
information about the packet itself, such as the length and the authentication field which are not
useful for monitoring network traffic. Nevertheless, two methods do exists to obtain more suitable
data.
 The first method uses direct traffic decryption, which is possible to perform only if the shared
secret of the connection is known. Therefore, decryption can be used in networks on the servers’
side where organizations know the private key of the connected server. However, such decryption
would be impossible if algorithms wee used which ensure forward secrecy [39].
 The second method is based on the extraction of traffic features. An example of such an analysis
is presented by Miller et al. [56] who monitor the size of TLS encrypted packet sequences. Based
on their data, together with various predictive models, they are able to identify a specific web page
and deduce its content even though the traffic is encrypted. A similar approach was also used by
Koch and Rodosek [49] for analysing SSH traffic. Another example of using traffic features is the
work by Hellemons et al. [37], which focused on intrusion detection in SSH traffic. Encrypted traffic
features could also be used for classifying encrypted traffic, which is described in Section 6.

 4. A TAXONOMY FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHODS

The first step in analysing network traffic is identifying the type of traffic measured. Network traffic
classification methods are used for this purpose based on the knowledge of the protocol packet
structure, communication patterns, or a combination of both.The recognition of the TLS protocol,
described in Section 2, may be seen as an example of this. This protocol can be identified based on
the knowledge of the packet structure, especially the unencrypted packet parts such as the content
type, the version and the length. Similarly, the protocol can be identified by analysing its behaviour,
e.g., the knowledge of a number and an approximate size of packets sent during the unencrypted
initialization phase.
 To present the current state of research on encrypted traffic classification in a comprehensive
manner, we use a taxonomy of classification methods. We choose the multilevel taxonomy by
Khalife et al. [48], which provides a detailed categorization of traffic classification methods.
This taxonomy is uniquely descriptive and allows us to efficiently categorize all our surveyed
classification methods. Figure 6 shows an overview of the taxonomy levels. On the topmost level,
the authors distinguish between classification input, technique and output. The input determines
the traffic’s characteristics, which are used for classification (e.g., packets or flows). The technique
describes the core of the classification method, which may be, among others, payload inspection, a
statistical method or a machine learning method. The output then describes how the traffic objects
(packets or flows) map to traffic classes (application types or application protocols). The traffic
classes are of a different granularity. Some methods allow identification of application protocols
(e.g., HTTP), and some are more fine grained to detect, for example, a Google search or a Facebook
chat.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
10 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

 Traffic Payload
 Payload Inspection

 Graphical Techniqque
 Graphlets

 Motifs
 Graphical
 Host Traffic

 Traffic features' measurement Level
 Host Social

 Classification TECHNIQUE
 Community Cluster
 Community Networks
 Classification Method

 Classification OUTPUT
 Classification INPUT Application
 Basic Type

 Statistical Method
 Internet Traffic

 Statistical

 Traffic Objects

 Traffic Classes
 Host Host Application
 Heuristics Protocol
 Traffic Simple
 Properties Statistical Application
 Profiles Software
 Flow Flow
 Fine-

 Machine Learning Algorithm
 Supervised Grained

 Packet Anomaly
 Non Packet
 Statistical
 Machine Supervised
 Learning
 Semi
 Supervised

 RL

 Hybrid & Hybrid & Hybrid &
 Miscellaneous Miscellaneous Miscellaneous

 Figure 6. A multilevel taxonomy of traffic classification methods [48].

 Classification Input
 Traffic Payload use of application data
 Host Community graph metrics (diameter, connection degree)
 Traffic Properties Host number of connections, opened ports
 (Measurement Level)
 Flow flow size, flow duration
 Packet packet sizes, inter-arrival times
 Hybrid & Miscellaneous combination of inputs, external knowledge

 Table I. Classification input level.

 Classification Technique
 Payload Inspection DPI, examination of first N bytes
 Graphlets relationship between features (ports, addresses)
 Graphical
 Motifs patterns of communication
 Techniques
 Social Networks graph of communication
 Basic Statistical probability density functions of e.g. packet sizes
 Statistical Heuristics port-based classification
 Method Profiles host profiling, usage of packet sizes and direction
 Supervised Hidden Markov Models, Naive Bayes, k-nearest
 Machine Learning neighbour, support vector machine
 Algorithm
 Non-Supervised clustering of unlabeled traffic, k-nearest neighbour
 Semi-Supervised clustering of mixed traffic, k-nearest neighbour
 Reinforcement Learning -
 Hybrid & Miscellaneous combination of methods, external knowledge

 Table II. Classification technique level.

 Tables I, II and III provide examples for each of the input, technique and output category. The
input and technique tables have the most general categories in the left column, some of which are
divided into more specific subcategories. The classification output table is divided horizontally into
traffic objects and classes. The objects describe what is being classified, in other words, whether it is

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 11

 Classification Output
 Traffic Objects
 Host Community host community is assigned a class, e.g., community of HTTP servers
 Host host is assigned a class
 Flow flow is assigned a class
 Packets packet is assigned a class
 Traffic Classes
 Traffic Cluster bulk or small transactions
 Application Type game, browsing, chat
 Application Protocol HTTP, HTTPS, FTP
 Application Software client software such as Mail client, FTP client or web browser
 Fine-Grained Skype voice call, Google search, Facebook chat
 Anomaly port scan, brute-force attack
 Hybrid & Miscellaneous combination of outputs or classes, external knowledge

 Table III. Classification output level.

each packet, whole flow or a host. Traffic classes describe the type of classification being performed
by a specific algorithm.

 5. PAYLOAD-BASED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES FOR ENCRYPTED
 TRAFFIC

Almost every network traffic encryption protocol has a specific packet format that differs from
others, as was described in Section 2. Thus, with knowledge of these formats it is possible to
distinguish and identify individual protocols by inspecting the packet payload. It is for this purpose
that, string or regular expression matching algorithms are used witch a specific protocol patterns.
Some examples of contemporary classification tools which use payload inspection are discussed in
more detail in the first part of this section. The second part presents current research papers which
focus on comparing these tools in terms of their performance and success rate.

5.1. Payload-Based Classification Tools

Most network traffic classification tools address all network protocols and not only the encrypted
ones. The following examples represent the most widely used tools for classifying network traffic.
Most of these tools are also able to distinguish specific network applications, mainly in unencrypted
traffic. In terms of the taxonomy, these tools mostly use the Payload Inspection technique on the
Traffic Payload classification input to map Flows to Application Protocols.
 PACE [42] is a commercial classification library written in C, which uses pattern matching
augmented by heuristics, behavioural and statistical analysis. In addition to standard protocol and
application recognition, it is able to identify obfuscated protocols such as BitTorrent or Skype.
According to its website, PACE is able to identify thousands of network applications and protocols.
 Cisco Network Based Application Recognition (NBAR) [22] is another example of a commercial
tool for classifying network traffic. This tool is primarily used on Cisco routers for quality and
security purposes. According to its authors, NBAR is also able to recognize stateful protocols and
non-TCP and non-UDP IP protocols.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
12 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

 nDPI [27] is an open-source classifier forked from the (currently closed) project OpenDPI, which
was in turn derived from PACE. nDPI analyzes at most eight packets from each connection for
classifying traffic, however each packet is examined separately. If the connection contains multiple
matches, then the most detailed match is returned. For encrypted traffic recognition, nDPI contains
only a SSL decoder that extracts the host name from the server certificate. Using these names, nDPI
is able to identify specific network applications.
 Libprotoident [2] is an open-source C library for classifying traffic. In contrast to the previous
tools, Libprotoident inspects only the first four bytes of a packet payload for each direction. This
makes it much faster but reduces its detection accuracy. The classification uses a combined approach
of pattern matching, payload size, port numbers and IP matching.
 L7-filter [23] is an open-source classifier for Linux which is designed to classify traffic on the
application layer. The initial phase of classification is based on non-payload data such as port
numbers, IP protocol numbers, the number of transferred bytes, and so forth. Payload data are
analysed with regular expressions during the second phase. One disadvantage of the l7-filter is that
it contains a database with old patterns which was last updated in 2011.

5.2. A Comparison of Classification Tools

A comparison of the presented open-source tools was introduced by Finsterbusch et al. [32].
They prepared a data set containing the traffic of 14 different network protocols such as DNS,
HTTP, BitTorrent, and SMTP(S) to compare the tools. Using this data set, they measured
classification accuracy, memory usage, CPU utilization, and the number of packets required for
proper classification. The comparison showed, amongst other results, that nDPI is not able to classify
the BitTorrent protocol with more than a 43 % true positive rate, although it detects SSL/TLS
with 100 % accuracy. The Libprotoident tool had the highest classification accuracy of the whole
analysed traffic, which was able to classify DNS, HTTP, SIP and e-mail protocols with 100 %
accuracy. Libprotoident also needs the least number of packets on average for classifying real-time
traffic. Based on the comparison by Finsterbusch et al., we can say that Libprotoident is the most
appropriate tool for classifying payload-based traffic, although it is more CPU intensive than the
other tools.
 Another comparison of the tools was carried out by Bujlow et al. [18]. They compared all of the
previously presented tools. They prepared a publicly available data set for the comparison which
contained encrypted and unencrypted network traffic from 17 application protocols, 25 network
applications and 34 web services. Their results show that PACE and Libprotoident are the most
accurate tools. Nevertheless, the Libprotoident tool was the only classifier able to identify all the
encrypted protocols which were tested. Their results were generally very similar to those in the
comparison by Finsterbusch et al.
 In general, the payload-based classification tools use regular expression matching algorithms to
identify the encrypted traffic. The main difference between the tools is how much data they need to
examine and whether they need both directions of the connection for the classification.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 13

 6. FEATURE-BASED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES FOR ENCRYPTED
 TRAFFIC

This section surveys feature-based classification methods which specialize in encrypted traffic.
These methods do not require any knowledge of the encryption protocol packet structure. Instead,
they use specific protocol communication patterns to classify encrypted traffic. These methods
are based on the specific protocol differences described in Section 2, such as packet and flow
features of unencrypted initialization or the encrypted data transport phase. This approach provides
greater generalization and allows these methods to work with new versions and types of encryption
protocols without the modification of underlying algorithms.
 The taxonomy specified in Section 4 is used to describe the individual methods. Apart from the
properties defined by the taxonomy, we also provide information about data sets used for evaluating
these methods. This is especially important when additional evaluation is to be performed by other
groups to verify the results of the authors. While the taxonomy provides a traffic class for classifying
the application protocol, this is sometimes too coarse for our purposes. Most classification methods
not only identify the encryption protocol, but also the underlying encrypted application protocol.
As both cases belong to the application protocol traffic class, we provide further explanation in the
description of each classification method.
 A slight drawback of flow-based classifiers is in performing classification often after the flow has
expired. This prevents the possibility of a real-time response, which has led several research groups
to research real-time classification using flow-features. Their methods are also included with the
others in Table IV and differentiated by a column describing whether the classification is done in
real-time or not.
 Almost 250 discriminators (flow or packet features) are identified by Moore et al. [57], which
can be used to classify flow records. The authors do not propose any specific classification method
themselves, however, most of the classification algorithms use a subset of these discriminators for
identifying traffic. In terms of the taxonomy, the authors provide a list of traffic features which are
used to infer the category of the traffic’s properties for the classification input.
 Most of the feature-based traffic classification methods use statistical or machine learning
methods. These methods are comprehensively described in [3]. Port-based classification was used
in the past to associate applications with network connections, but the accuracy of this method is
decreasing with the increased use of dynamic ports and applications evading firewalls. Despite the
decreased accuracy, port numbers are often utilized as one of the packet features. Furthermore,
port-based classification is still quite often used to establish a ground truth for traffic classification
experiments.
 For easier orientation, we present the surveyed papers grouped by the class of their traffic
classification algorithm. Most of the papers employ Supervised Machine Learning Methods
(Section 6.1), Semi-Supervised Machine Learning Methods (Section 6.2) and Basic Statistical
Methods (Section 6.3). The rest combine more than one method and are therefore gathered in
a Hybrid Methods category (Section 6.4). For each surveyed paper, we specify the classification
technique, classification output, and the data sets used in the description of the classification process
itself. Table IV in Section 6.5 provides a summary of the papers with all of the mentioned properties
properly categorized.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
14 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

6.1. Supervised Machine Learning Methods

Sun et al. [67] propose a hybrid method for classifying encrypted traffic. First, the SSL/TLS protocol
is recognized using a signature matching method. A Naive Bayes machine learning algorithm is
then applied to identify the encrypted application protocol. The authors use a combination of public
and private data sets to evaluate their method. Background traffic is taken from a public data set,
BitTorrent, eDonkey, HTTP, FTP, Thunder and GRE application protocols. The signature based
recognition of SSL/TLS protocols was tested on HTTPS, TOR, ICQ and other protocols. The
identification of the underlying protocol was tested only for TOR and HTTPS protocols.
 Okada et al. [59] analyzed changes in flow features due to encryption. They created a training
data set with HTTP, FTP, SSH, and SMTP application protocols encrypted using PPTP and IPsec
tunnels. The authors assessed 49 flow features and analyzed which of them are strongly correlated
in normal and encrypted traffic. The correlated features were then used to infer functions which
transform the features between normal and encrypted traffic. Therefore, standard classifiers can be
used to classify the traffic after the transformation. The authors verified their method using several
modifications of the Naive Bayesian classifier.
 Arndt and Zincir-Heywood [11] also concentrated on the classification of encrypted traffic
and compared C4.5, k-means and Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) to this end. The
classification of the SSH protocol was used as an example in their study. The authors focused on
the accuracy and robustness of the algorithms. Stability was tested using three different public and
private data sets for teaching and evaluating the methods. Multiple different flow export settings
were tested as well. Altogether, 46 flow features were used in the evaluation, however, a different
subset was used by each algorithm. The C4.5 algorithm provided the best robustness, although the
MOGA had a very low false positive rate when used on the same data set as it was trained on. The
C4.5 was recommended for forensic analysis by law enforcement since it is applicable on a variety
of networks.
 Alshammari and Zincir-Heywood have published several papers [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] on traffic
classification using various supervised machine learning methods. They focused on recognising
SSH, Skype, and in one case, Gtalk traffic using flow features without port numbers, IP addresses or
payloads. A set of 22 flow features was mostly used, although in one case the authors selected the
features using genetic programming. Public data sets are used as well as a private data set generated
on a test-bed network. The ground truth for public data sets was gained from port numbers, and
the private data set includes the payload and was labelled with a commercial packet classification
tool. The following algorithms for traffic classification were compared: AdaBoost, RIPPER, Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Naive Bayes, C4.5 and Genetic Programming.
 Kumano et al. [52] investigated real-time application identification in encrypted traffic. IPsec and
PPTP encryption were applied to web, interactive and bulk transfer flows to create an evaluation
data set. C4.5 and SVM algorithms were utilized to classify the application on these data sets.
The authors then tested the accuracy of the classification using a different number of packets from
the start of the flows. They measured the impact of using fewer packets on the flow features and
proposed using features which show the least change to classify applications at an early stage.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 15

6.2. Semi-Supervised Machine Learning Methods

Bernaille and Teixeira [16] used traffic clustering to detect applications encrypted by SSL. Their
method has three steps. First, they detected SSL connections using a clustering algorithm (Gaussian
Mixture Model) on packet sizes and directions of initial packets of a connection. The first three
packets and 35 clusters provide good accuracy in detecting SSL traffic. After the SSL traffic is
identified, the first data packets of the connections are identified. The sizes of the data packets
are used by a clustering algorithm to detect an underlying application in the third step. However,
the packet sizes are modified in the last step to allow for encryption overhead. The evaluation of the
proposed method is done on traffic traces from live networks and a manually generated packet trace.
The data sets contain HTTP, POP3, FTP, BitTorrent and eDonkey application protocols encrypted
using SSL. The authors also show that using a combination of clustering and port numbers to
differentiate between applications in clusters provides better results than clustering alone.
 Maolini et al. [53] identify SSH traffic and determine underlying protocols (SCP, SFTP, HTTP)
using a k-means algorithm. Only three packet features are used: the direction, the number of
bytes and the timestamps of each packet. Their private data sets are created from artificial traffic
and contain HTTP, FTP, POP3 and SSH protocols. Control packets such as TCP handshake,
retransmitted packets and ACK only packets are removed from statistics as they negatively affect
the precision. Authors use only first 3-7 packets to achieve a real-time identification.
 Backquet et al. [13, 14] use a Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm to select a flow feature subspace
and parameters for a clustering algorithm which detects encrypted traffic. The second work employs
a hierarchical k-means algorithm to increase the identification’s accuracy. The authors evaluate both
approaches on a private data set captured at a university campus. SSH is used as a representative
of encrypted traffic and the ground truth is gained from the payload of the captured packets.
Based on previous works, the authors argue that the feature selection and number of clusters
highly affect the overall accuracy. Therefore, the authors selected four objectives for the genetic
algorithm: cluster cohesiveness, cluster separation, the number of clusters and the amount of used
flow features. The results show (a) that only 14 from a total of 38 flow features were used by
the best-performing algorithm and (b) that using a hierarchical k-means algorithm increases the
identification performance.
 Bar-Yanai et al. [15] combined k-means and k-nearest neighbour clustering algorithms to
construct a new, real-time classifier for encrypted traffic. The resulting classification algorithm has
the light weight complexity of the k-means algorithm and accuracy of the k-nearest neighbour
algorithm. They claim the method is fast, accurate and robust in regard to encryption, asymmetric
routing and packet ordering. A labelled data set was prepared from generated samples of the traffic
and the classification of the data set was done using payloads of the packets. Flows shorter than 15
packets were removed from the data set, since real-time classification for such short flows is not of
practical use. If available, the first 100 packets were used for the classification. The authors stress
that their method is applicable in a real-time environment and tested their implementation on an
ISP link. The application protocols classified are HTTP, SMTP, POP3, Skype, eDonkey, BitTorrent,
Encrypted BitTorrent, RTP and ICQ.
 Zhang et al. [72] propose an improvement to the k-means clustering algorithm. Using harmonic
mean to reduce the impact of random initial clustering centres, the authors are able to increase

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
16 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

the accuracy of the k-means clustering algorithm for classifying encrypted traffic. The authors test
their approach on two data sets. The first contains only data labelled SSH and non-SSH, the second
contains traffic from Skype, QQ, SSH, SSL and MSN protocols. However, the selection of the data
sets and the selection of flow features used for classification were not justified in the paper.
 Du and Zhang [29] used a k-means algorithm to discern traffic of three BitTorrent clients. Flow
and packet header features, such as IP addresses, ports, numbers and the length of packets, were
taken into consideration. The authors generated the traffic manually and, therefore, their data sample
contains only traffic from three clients. The authors highlight that the method is fast and simple and
that it can be used to identify the traffic in real-time.

6.3. Basic-Statistical Methods

De Montigny-Leboeuf [26] described the process of identifying traffic using flows and flow features.
The author showed how to derive the flow features he uses and how to use them to identify the
application type (e.g., interactive typing, data transfer) and block ciphers. Moreover, the author
provides a list of recognition criteria for HTTP and HTTPS web browsing traffic, IMAP, POP,
SMTP, SSH, Telnet, rlogin, FTP command and data, MSN chat and TCP audio streams. A subset of
39 traffic features was used to identify each application.
 Wang et al. [68] computed entropy from packet payloads and used it for classifying traffic. They
differentiate between eight different traffic classes: text, picture, video, audio, Base64 encoded
text, Base64 encoded image, compressed and encrypted. The entropy is computed on chunks of
different lengths and the authors used a support vector machine algorithm for selecting feature. The
computation of the entropy for four different chunk lengths was found to be sufficient for accuracy
and performance. The most difficult task was to separate encrypted and compressed traffic. The
authors provided an additional heuristic to distinguish these categories using frequencies of four-bit
characters. The data sets used are manually obtained from captured network communication and
processed to contain traffic from all classes.
 Korczynski and Duda [50] designed a method called Statistical Protocol Identification to identify
types of communication (voice call, SkypeOut, video conference, chat, file upload, file download)
in Skype traffic. Nine flow features were selected using forward selection which evaluates how a
given feature improves the classification performance. A private, artificially created data set with
Skype traffic was used. Other traffic with SSL, SSH, HTTP, SCP, SFTP, VoIP, BitTorrent and other
services, was used to test the robustness of the method. The authors reported high accuracy in their
method, although the distinction between voice and video traffic remains a difficult problem.
 Amoli and Hamalainen [10] described a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) capable of
detecting attacks in encrypted network traffic in real-time. The NIDS has two engines, the first one
uses network change measurement to detect changes in a time-series, such as DoS and DDoS. The
first engine clusters the data to lessen the load on the second engine. The goal of the second engine
is to detect the bot master behind the attack. The second engine clusters the prepared data to obtain
the behaviour of the attackers and compares it with historical data. The authors used the detected
anomalies to identify the botnet masters.
 Korczynski and Duda [51] proposed using stochastic fingerprints based on Markov chains for
identifying application traffic in SSL/TLS sessions. The method is payload-based and uses statistical
information from SSL/TLS headers. The authors tested their method on twelve representative

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 17

 srcIP dstIP srcPort dstPort srcIP dstIP srcPort dstPort srcIP dstIP srcPort dstPort srcIP dstIP srcPort dstPort

 135 135 80

 1025 ATTACK

 ATTACK
 2745 WEB(TCP)
 ATTACK GAMES(UDP)
 6129

 Figure 7. A visual representation of transport-layer interactions for various applications [44].

applications such as Twitter, Skype and Dropbox. The Markov chain fingerprints are based on
protocol specific distributions of packets in time. Data sets were captured from real traffic, contain
only SSL/TLS traffic and were not published. The ground truth was obtained by inspecting domain
names of the SSL/TLS traffic. The authors discovered that many protocol implementations differ
from the RFC specification, which required them to adjust the fingerprints.

6.4. Hybrid Methods

Karagiannis et al. [44] focused on host-based classification. Their method uses only information
from the network level and therefore is not affected by transport layer encryption (e.g. TLS). The
authors classified the behaviour of the hosts on social, functional and application levels, without
access to packet payloads or headers. Each level was classified independently and a cross-level
classification was performed afterwards. Particular applications were represented using graphlets,
see Figure 7, which are representations of the application’s behaviour. The authors then used
heuristics to refine the classification. The ground truth for captured data sets was established by
using a signature-based payload classification. Without using transport layer information, only the
following traffic classes were identified: web, p2p, data (FTP, database), network management
(DNS, SNMP, NTP), mail (SMTP, POP, IMAP), news (NNTP), chat (IRC, AIM, MSN messenger),
streaming and gaming.
 Wright et al. [69] worked on a classification of traffic in encrypted tunnels. Multiple flows can
be wrapped in a single flow representing the encrypted tunnel. The information from the packet
headers was not applicable, therefore the authors used only packet sizes, timing and communication
direction. A k-nearest neighbour classifier was used for classification when all TCP connections
in a set carried the same application protocol. When TCP connections carried different application
protocols, the authors used Hidden Markov Models. The authors also demonstrated that it is possible
to determine the number of flows in an encrypted tunnel. The port numbers were used to obtain a
ground truth for the captured data set. The authors argue that mislabelled data only decreased the
efficiency of their classification algorithm and therefore the real accuracy would be even higher
than the reported one. The classifiers were able to detect the following application protocols: HTTP,
HTTPS, SMTP, AIM, FTP, SSH, Telnet.
 Koch and Rodosek [49] proposed a system for detecting interactive attacks using SSH. Packet
sizes, IP addresses and packet inter-arrival times were used to create clusters of packets which
were likely to match a SSH command and its corresponding response. The SSH protocol was
recognized based on the port number, and individual commands were identified from the clusters.
Following this, sequences of commands were evaluated and possible malicious sequences were

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
18 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

reported. The system allows for the customization of malicious sequences’ definitions using a subgoals characterization. Each sub-goal maps to a malicious event, such as data gathering or system
manipulation. The results from the evaluation of the proposed method show that such identification
is possible.
 Khakpour and Liu [47] used an entropy of packet payloads for classifying traffic. The authors
showed how to compute the entropy of files and how to modify the formula for on-the-fly
computation. Several entropy values were computed for each packet. CART and support vector
machine (SVM) methods were used for a subsequent classification based on the computed
values. Their results demonstrated that SVM methods provide comparable accuracy with less false
positives. The authors argue that it is necessary to exclude application layer headers such as HTTP
response or picture headers. The reason for this is that computing entropy on the headers leads to
a bias and misclassification of a packet. Therefore, a cut-off threshold was used to strip application
headers from unknown protocols. The traffic was first classified into three categories: text, encrypted
or binary. The authors also postulated that the classification can be more fine-grained and they
investigated the classification of application protocols. Then, they demonstrated that it is possible to
determine an encryption algorithm with a higher accuracy than random guessing, which they found
surprising.

6.5. A Summary of Machine Learning and Statistical Encrypted Traffic Classification

We have provided a summarizing overview of the feature-based traffic classification papers and
methods they use in Table IV. Where a method belongs to multiple categories, it is not marked as a
hybrid, but all the categories are listed instead. We find this approach more descriptive than using a
hybrid category as defined by the taxonomy.
 Most surveyed methods use flow or packet header features as an input for the classification
techniques. The authors of [6, 9] compare the results gained by utilizing packet header features
and flow features. They show that using both sets of features can result in faster and more accurate
classification algorithms. Nevertheless, using all the available traffic features does not necessarily
lead to the best classification performance as demonstrated by the authors of [4].
 The column Number of features shows how many flow or packet header features were used in
each method. Some methods used different subsets of the features for different algorithms, and this
is denoted by the ⊆ mark. Moreover, some of the methods used a feature selection algorithm to
select the best combination of features from the entire feature set. These methods are marked in
the Feature selection column. For this case, the Number of features column represents the initial
number of features.
 Most classification algorithms are based on machine learning. The category of supervised
machine learning algorithms is represented by Hidden Markov Models, RIPPER, AdaBoost,
Support Vector Machines, C4.5 and Naive Bayes. Several works [5, 7, 8, 9] compare these
algorithms to establish which is the best for the task of classifying traffic. The C4.5 algorithm
performs the best in several cases, however, genetic programming is reported to achieve the
best results in [9]. The second most common algorithm category is the semi-supervised machine
learning, which is dominated by clustering algorithms. The k-means algorithm is the most frequent
in this category, and the k-nearest neighbour comes second. The popularity of k-means is due to
its variability, which allows it to be fine-tuned for various purposes. It is often combined with

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 Input Technique Output Data set

 Traf. Properties Statis. Machine

 Method(s) Ground truth

 Sup.
 Artificial

 Basic
 Heuristic

 Host Com.
 Host
 Flow
 Packet
 Graphlets

 Feature selection

 Publication year
 Number of features
 Non Sup.
 Semi Sup.

 Payload Ins.

 Traf. Payload
 Real

 Real-time identification

 Encrypted protocol ident.
 Public

 Reference
 Private
 [26] 2005 3 3 ⊆ 39 3 F → AP, AT 3 3 port
 [44] 2005 3 3 3 – 3 3 3 H → AT 3 3 3 signature

Prepared using nemauth.cls
 [69] 2006 3 3 3 3 3 HMM, k-nearest neighbor F → AP 3 3 3 port
 [16] 2007 3 3 3 Gaussian Mixture Model P → AP 3 3 3 3 signature, known
 [5] 2007 3 22 3 AdaBoost, RIPPER F → AT 3 3 3 – port, known
 [53] 2009 3 3 3 k-means F → AP 3 3 3 3 known
 AdaBoost, RIPPER, SVM,
 [7] 2009 3 22 3 F → AP 3 3 3 port, signature
 Naive Bayes, C4.5

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 [6] 2009 3 3 ⊆ 30 3 RIPPER, C4.5 F → AT 3 3 3 signature, known
 AdaBoost, C4.5,
 [4] 2009 3 39 3 3 F → AP 3 3 signature, port
 Genetic Programming
 [13] 2009 3 38 3 3 k-means, Genetic Programming F → AP 3 3 signature
 AdaBoost, C4.5,
 [8] 2010 3 3 22 3 F → AP 3 3 3 3 signature, known
 Genetic Programming
 [15] 2010 3 17 3 k-nearest neighbor, k-means F → AP 3 3 3 signature, known
 [67] 2010 3 3 6 3 3 Naive Bayes F → AP 3 3 3 3 known
 [49] 2010 3 – 3 3 F → FG 3 – –
 [14] 2011 3 38 3 3 (hierarchical) k-means F → AP 3 3 signature
 [68] 2011 3 7 3 3 Entropy F → AT 3 3 3 3 known
 [59] 2011 3 49 3 3 Naive Bayes F → AP 3 3 3 known
 [11] 2011 3 ⊆ 46 3 3 C4.5, k-means, MOGA F → AP 3 3 3 signature, port
 AdaBoost, C4.5,
 [9] 2011 3 3 61 3 3 F → TP 3 3 3 signature, port
 Genetic Programming
 [50] 2012 3 9 3 3 Statistical Protocol Identification F → AP 3 3 3 known
 [72] 2013 3 22 3 k-means F → AP 3 3 3 signature
 [29] 2013 3 3 7 3 k-means F → AS 3 3 known
 [47] 2013 3 10 3 3 3 Entropy, SVM, CART F → AT, AP 3 3 3 3 known
 Change point detection,
 [10] 2013 3 3 23 3 3 F → A – –
 Clustering
 [52] 2014 3 29 3 3 C4.5, SVM F → AT 3 3 3 3 known
 [51] 2014 3 3 – 3 Markov chains F → AP 3 3 3 signature

 A Anomaly AP Application Protocol AS Application Software T Application Type
 Output column legend:
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS

 H Host F Flow FG Fine-Grained TP Traffic Payload

 DOI: 10.1002/nem
Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
 19

 Table IV. A summary table of cited papers and methods they use to detect encrypted traffic.
20 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

genetic algorithms to find the best setting. The authors of [68, 47] use the entropy of packet
payloads to classify traffic. Using simple statistical properties of the traffic is the third most
common classification method. Other methods are rarely used, mainly because they cannot learn
from labelled traffic and therefore require too much effort to set up.
 The SSH protocol is heavily used as a classification example. The authors of [4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11,
13, 14, 72] test their methods for recognising SSH and non-SSH traffic. Maiolini et al. [53] take the
classification one step further and identify the type of traffic encapsulated in a SSH connection. The
authors of [16, 51, 67] use SSL/TLS traffic and identify underlying application protocols. Since the
SSL/TLS protocol is more general and is used to encrypt various types of traffic, the complexity
of identification is higher than for SSH. Another very popular protocol for identification is Skype,
which is addressed by the authors of [7, 9, 50, 51].
 Some of the methods focus only on identifying encrypted traffic, whereas others try to identify
the underlying application protocol. The methods which perform a more thorough analysis to
gain information about the application protocol are indicated in the column Encrypted protocol
identification.
 Because all methods, with the exception of [44], classify whole flows and rely mostly on flow
features, they are rarely able to classify traffic in real-time. However, the authors of [15, 16, 52, 53,
68] achieved near real-time classification by extracting features of only a fixed number of packets in
a flow. They argue that the first packets carry enough information for classification. Using a higher
number of packets increases accuracy, therefore it is possible to strike a balance between accuracy
and early identification.
 The Data set columns describe whether the data used to evaluate the presented methods was taken
from a live network (Real) or generated by a tool (Artificial). We also identify if the data sets were
publicly available (Public), were made available by the authors (Published) or kept undisclosed as
they contain sensitive information (Private). If more than one data set was used for each evaluation,
we simply performed an union of the data set descriptions. The Ground truth column indicates how
the ground truth was obtained for each data set. Common methods are based on port numbers or
signatures, which use the packet payload. When the data sets are generated manually, the ground
truth is known in advance.
 The classification accuracy reported by authors of the surveyed methods depends heavily on the
data sets used. All authors use their own private data sets which are seldom published. Such methods
simply cannot be compared without repeating the experiments on a common data set. The authors
of [5, 7, 9, 11, 67, 72] also used publicly available data sets which were either labelled beforehand,
using payload when available, or simply labelled using port numbers. A combination of data sets is
often used to test the robustness of the methods.
 The surveyed methods show that a lot of effort was put into classifying encrypted traffic. We
believe that there are several points that should be taken into account in any future research in this
field. First, identifying encrypted traffic is not enough. The identification of the underlying protocol
is the real challenge. Second, a SSL/TLS protocol should be used as the reference protocol, as it
can contain much more complex traffic than the SSH protocol. Finally, the traces used should be
labelled and made available to other researchers. Following these points does not limit the scope of
future research, however, it simplifies the comparison of the presented approaches and allows others
to verify the results more easily.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 21

 7. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we presented an overview of current approaches for the classification and analysis
of encrypted traffic. First, we selected a number of the most widely used encryption protocols
and described their packet structure and standard behaviour in a network. Second, we focused on
information which is provided by encryption protocols themselves. We found that the initiation
phase often provides information about the protocol version, ciphers used, and the identity of at least
one communicating party. Such information can be used to monitor and enforce security policies in
an organization. We also discovered that the use of information from the unencrypted parts of an
encrypted connection for a network anomaly detection is only briefly investigated by researchers.
Information about communicating parties can be leveraged to discern the type of encrypted traffic.
For example, the list of supported cipher suites provided by a client when establishing a secure
connection can help to identify the client. We believe that the use of unencrypted parts from the
initiation of an encrypted connection should be explored in more detail.
 Before starting the analysis of the encrypted network traffic, it is necessary to identify it. Thus,
we surveyed approaches to classifying network traffic. These, were, first payload-based methods
which use knowledge of a packets’ structure and feature-based methods which use characteristics
specific to the protocol flow. For the payload-based classification, there are several open-source
traffic classifiers which can identify encrypted traffic using pattern matching. The initiation of a
communication often has a strictly defined structure, therefore, the patterns can be constructed for
specific protocols. The main difference between various classifiers is that some of them require
traffic from both directions of the communication to correctly classify the flows.
 Feature-based traffic classifiers have been intensively researched over the last decade. Many
statistical and machine-based learning methods have been applied to the task of traffic classification.
Despite this, there are no conclusive results to show which method has the best properties. The main
reason is that the results depend heavily on the data sets used and the configuration of the methods.
We have applied the multilevel taxonomy of Khalife et al. [48] and categorized existing methods.
Our results show that most of the authors use private data sets, sometimes in combination with
public ones. For this reason, the individual results are not directly comparable. Most of the methods
use supervised or semi-supervised machine learning algorithms to classify flows and even determine
the application protocol of a given flow. Most methods target encryption protocols, such as SSH,
SSL/TLS and encrypted BitTorrent, and use similar methods. However, there are also some novel
works which apply innovative approaches to refine the classification up to deriving the content of
the encrypted connections.
 Most authors of feature-based classification methods claim that their approach is privacy sensitive
as it does not require the traffic payload. However, privacy issues are much wider. In 2013, the
Cyber-security Research Ethics Dialog & Strategy Workshop [19] started a discussion about the
influence of cyber-security research on the privacy of Internet users. Researchers need to keep
in mind that their research activities have a significant impact on infrastructure security, network
neutrality and privacy of end users.
 In the past, internet protocols were not designed with security considerations in mind. The recent
interest in privacy has motivated the IETF to reconsider this approach and discuss the privacy
aspects of the protocols. Discussions held in [41] revealed that monitoring privacy issues are of great

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
22 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

concern. This discussion resulted in a new RFC [31], where the IETF clearly states that pervasive
monitoring is considered to be an attack. The document suggests that the IETF’s protocols should
be hardened against such monitoring. It is clear that the struggle between the demand for privacy
and the need for security is still beginning.

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This material is based on the work supported by the Security Research for the Needs of the State 2010-2015
programme funded by the Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic.

 REFERENCES

 1. D. Adami, C. Callegar, S. Giordano, M. Pagano, and T. Pepe. Skype-Hunter: A real-time system for the detection
 and classification of Skype traffic. International Journal of Communication Systems, 25(3), February 2011.
 2. S. Alcock and R. Nelson. Libprotoident: Traffic Classification Using Lightweight Packet Inspection. Online article,
 2012. Accessed: 2014-11-26.
 3. E. Alpaydin. Introduction to Machine Learning. The MIT Press, 2nd edition, 2010.
 4. R. Alshammari, P.I. Lichodzijewski, M. Heywood, and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. Classifying SSH Encrypted Traffic
 with Minimum Packet Header Features Using Genetic Programming. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference
 Companion on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference: Late Breaking Papers, GECCO ’09, pages
 2539–2546, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
 5. R. Alshammari and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. A Flow Based Approach for SSH Traffic Detection. In Systems, Man
 and Cybernetics, 2007. ISIC. IEEE International Conference on, pages 296–301, Oct 2007.
 6. R. Alshammari and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. A Preliminary Performance Comparison of Two Feature Sets for
 Encrypted Traffic Classification. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Computational Intelligence
 in Security for Information Systems CISIS’08, volume 53 of Advances in Soft Computing, pages 203–210. Springer
 Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
 7. R. Alshammari and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. Machine learning based encrypted traffic classification: Identifying
 SSH and Skype. In Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications, 2009. CISDA 2009. IEEE
 Symposium on, pages 1–8, July 2009.
 8. R. Alshammari and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. An Investigation on the Identification of VoIP traffic: Case study on
 Gtalk and Skype. In Network and Service Management (CNSM), 2010 International Conference on, pages 310–
 313, Oct 2010.
 9. R. Alshammari and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. Can encrypted traffic be identified without port numbers, IP addresses
 and payload inspection? Computer Networks, 55(6):1326 – 1350, 2011.
10. P.V. Amoli and T. Hamalainen. A Real Time Unsupervised NIDS for Detecting Unknown and Encrypted Network
 Attacks in High Speed Network. In Measurements and Networking Proceedings (M N), 2013 IEEE International
 Workshop on, pages 149–154, Oct 2013.
11. D.J. Arndt and A.N. Zincir-Heywood. A Comparison of Three Machine Learning Techniques for Encrypted
 Network Traffic Analysis. In Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications (CISDA), 2011
 IEEE Symposium on, pages 107–114, April 2011.
12. Azureus Software Inc. Message Stream Encryption. Vuze Wiki. Web page, May 2014. Accessed: 2014-10-31.
13. C. Bacquet, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, and M.I. Heywood. An Investigation of Multi-objective Genetic Algorithms
 for Encrypted Traffic Identification. In Computational Intelligence in Security for Information Systems, volume 63
 of Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, pages 93–100. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
14. C. Bacquet, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, and M.I. Heywood. Genetic Optimization and Hierarchical Clustering Applied
 to Encrypted Traffic Identification. In Computational Intelligence in Cyber Security (CICS), 2011 IEEE Symposium
 on, pages 194–201, April 2011.
15. R. Bar-Yanai, M. Langberg, D. Peleg, and L. Roditty. Realtime Classification for Encrypted Traffic. In
 Experimental Algorithms, volume 6049 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 373–385. Springer Berlin
 Heidelberg, 2010.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
 A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS 23

16. L. Bernaille and R. Teixeira. Early Recognition of Encrypted Applications. In Proceedings of the 8th International
 Conference on Passive and Active Network Measurement, PAM’07, pages 165–175, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
 Springer-Verlag.
17. S. Blake-Wilson, M. Nystrom, D. Hopwood, J. Mikkelsen, and T. Wright. Transport Layer Security (TLS)
 Extensions. RFC 4366 (Proposed Standard), April 2006. Obsoleted by RFCs 5246, 6066, updated by RFC 5746.
18. T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros. Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for traffic
 classification. Computer Networks, 76(0):75 – 89, 2015.
19. CAIDA. Cyber-security Research Ethics Dialog & Strategy Workshop, May 2013. Accessed: 2014-12-03.
20. A. Callado, C. Kamienski, G. Szabo, B. Gero, J. Kelner, S. Fernandes, and D. Sadok. A Survey on Internet Traffic
 Identification. Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, 11(3):37–52, rd 2009.
21. Z. Cao, G. Xiong, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, and L. Guo. A Survey on Encrypted Traffic Classification. In Lynn Batten, Gang
 Li, Wenjia Niu, and Matthew Warren, editors, Applications and Techniques in Information Security, volume 490 of
 Communications in Computer and Information Science, pages 73–81. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.
22. Cisco Systems, Inc. Network Based Application Recognition (NBAR). Web page, 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-25.
23. ClearFoundation. l7-filter. Web page, October 2013. Accessed: 2014-11-26.
24. D. Cooper, S. Santesson, S. Farrell, S. Boeyen, R. Housley, and W. Polk. Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure
 Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile. RFC 5280 (Proposed Standard), May 2008. Updated by
 RFC 6818.
25. A Dainotti, A Pescape, and K.C. Claffy. Issues and Future Directions in Traffic Classification. Network, IEEE,
 26(1):35–40, January 2012.
26. A. De Montigny-Leboeuf. Flow attributes for use in traffic characterization. Communications Research Centre
 Canada, Tech. Rep, 2005.
27. L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano. nDPI: Open-source high-speed deep packet inspection.
 In Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2014 International, pages 617–622,
 August 2014.
28. T. Dierks and E. Rescorla. The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2. RFC 5246 (Proposed
 Standard), August 2008. Updated by RFCs 5746, 5878, 6176.
29. Y. Du and R. Zhang. Design of a Method for Encrypted P2P Traffic Identification Using K-means Algorithm.
 Telecommunication Systems, 53(1):163–168, 2013.
30. Z. Durumeric, J. Kasten, M. Bailey, and J.A. Halderman. Analysis of the HTTPS Certificate Ecosystem. In
 Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Internet Measurement Conference, IMC ’13, pages 291–304, New York,
 NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
31. S. Farrell and H.b Tschofenig. Pervasive Monitoring Is an Attack. RFC 7258 (Best Current Practice), May 2014.
32. M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and K. Hanssgen. A Survey of Payload-Based Traffic
 Classification Approaches. Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, 16(2):1135–1156, Second 2014.
33. S.E. Frankel, K. Kent, R. Lewkowski, A.D. Orebaugh, R.W. Ritchey, and S.R. Sharma. SP 800-77. Guide to IPsec
 VPNs. Technical report, National Institute of Standards & Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 2005.
34. A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher. The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0. RFC 6101 (Historic),
 August 2011.
35. J. Galbraith and O. Saarenmaa. SSH File Transfer Protocol draft-ietf-secsh-filexfer-13.txt. Internet-Draft, July
 2006.
36. D. Harrison. Index of BitTorrent Enhancement Proposals. Web page, October 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-27.
37. L. Hellemons, L. Hendriks, R. Hofstede, A. Sperotto, R. Sadre, and A. Pras. SSHCure: A Flow-Based SSH
 Intrusion Detection System. In Dependable Networks and Services, volume 7279 of Lecture Notes in Computer
 Science, pages 86–97. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
38. R. Holz, L. Braun, N. Kammenhuber, and G. Carle. The SSL Landscape: A Thorough Analysis of the X.509 PKI
 Using Active and Passive Measurements. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet
 Measurement Conference, IMC ’11, pages 427–444, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
39. L. Huang, S. Adhikarla, D. Boneh, and C. Jackson. An Experimental Study of TLS Forward Secrecy Deployments.
 Internet Computing, IEEE, 18(6):43–51, November 2014.
40. IANA - Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. Protocol Registries. Web page, 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-28.
41. IETF. IETF 88 Proceedings, Technical Plenary, 2014. Accessed: 2014-12-03.
42. ipoque GmbH. PACE 2.0. Web page. Accessed: 2014-11-25.
43. ISO. ISO/IEC 7498-1:1994 Information technology – Open Systems Interconnection – Basic Reference Model: The
 Basic Model. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2 edition, November 1994.
44. T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos. BLINC: Multilevel Traffic Classification in the Dark. In
 Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem
24 PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR

 Communications, SIGCOMM ’05, pages 229–240, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
45. C. Kaufman, P. Hoffman, Y. Nir, and P. Eronen. Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2). RFC 5996
 (Proposed Standard), September 2010. Updated by RFCs 5998, 6989.
46. S. Kent. IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). RFC 4303 (Proposed Standard), December 2005.
47. A.R. Khakpour and A.X. Liu. An Information-Theoretical Approach to High-Speed Flow Nature Identification.
 Networking, IEEE/ACM Transactions on, 21(4):1076–1089, Aug 2013.
48. J. Khalife, A. Hajjar, and J. Diaz-Verdejo. A multilevel taxonomy and requirements for an optimal trafficclassification model. International Journal of Network Management, 24(2):101–120, 2014.
49. R. Koch and G.D. Rodosek. Command Evaluation in Encrypted Remote Sessions. In Proceedings of the 2010
 Fourth International Conference on Network and System Security, NSS ’10, pages 299–305, Washington, DC,
 USA, 2010. IEEE Computer Society.
50. M. Korczynski and A. Duda. Classifying Service Flows in the Encrypted Skype Traffic. In Communications (ICC),
 2012 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1064–1068, June 2012.
51. M. Korczynski and A. Duda. Markov Chain Fingerprinting to Classify Encrypted Traffic. In INFOCOM, 2014
 Proceedings IEEE, pages 781–789, April 2014.
52. Y. Kumano, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I Oka. Towards real-time processing for application
 identification of encrypted traffic. In Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), 2014 International
 Conference on, pages 136–140, Feb 2014.
53. G. Maiolini, A. Baiocchi, A. Iacovazzi, and A. Rizzi. Real Time Identification of SSH Encrypted Application Flows
 by Using Cluster Analysis Techniques. In Luigi Fratta, Henning Schulzrinne, Yutaka Takahashi, and Otto Spaniol,
 editors, NETWORKING 2009, volume 5550 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 182–194. Springer Berlin
 Heidelberg, 2009.
54. M. Majkowski. SSL fingerprinting for p0f. Web page, June 2012. Accessed: 2014-11-28.
55. C. Meyer. 20 Years of SSL/TLS Research An Analysis of the Internet’s Security Foundation. PhD thesis, Ruhr-
 University Bochum, February 2014.
56. B. Miller, L. Huang, A.D. Joseph, and J.D. Tygar. I Know Why You Went to the Clinic: Risks and Realization of
 HTTPS Traffic Analysis. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies, volume 8555 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
 pages 143–163. Springer International Publishing, 2014.
57. A. Moore, M. Crogan, and D. Zuev. Discriminators for use in flow-based classification. Technical report, Queen
 Mary, University of London, 2005.
58. T.T.T. Nguyen and G. Armitage. A Survey of Techniques for Internet Traffic Classification Using Machine
 Learning. Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, 10(4):56–76, October 2008.
59. Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I Oka. Application Identification from Encrypted Traffic Based on
 Characteristic Changes by Encryption. In Communications Quality and Reliability (CQR), 2011 IEEE International
 Workshop Technical Committee on, pages 1–6, May 2011.
60. J. Pechanec. How the SCP protocol works. Jan Pechanec’s Weblog. Weblog post, July 2007. Accessed: 2014-10-
 30.
61. Qualys, Inc. HTTP Client Fingerprinting Using SSL Handshake Analysis. Web page, 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-
 28.
62. Sandvine, Inc. Global Internet Phenomena Report 1H 2014, May 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-25.
63. Skype and Microsoft. Skype. Web page, 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-25.
64. Skype Limited. Skype ConnectTM Requirements Guide. Online, 2011. Accessed: 2014-11-01.
65. sslbl.abuse.ch. SSL Blacklist. Web page, 2014. Accessed: 2014-11-28.
66. W. Stallings. Protocol Basics: Secure Shell Protocol. The Internet Protocol Journal, 12(4), December 2009.
67. G. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, and C. Li. An Novel Hybrid Method for Effectively Classifying Encrypted
 Traffic. In Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2010), 2010 IEEE, pages 1–5, Dec 2010.
68. Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Guo, and S. Li. Using Entropy to Classify Traffic More Deeply. In Networking, Architecture
 and Storage (NAS), 2011 6th IEEE International Conference on, pages 45–52, July 2011.
69. C.V. Wright, F. Monrose, and G.M. Masson. On Inferring Application Protocol Behaviors in Encrypted Network
 Traffic. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 7:2745–2769, December 2006.
70. T. Ylonen and C. Lonvick. The Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer Protocol. RFC 4253 (Proposed Standard),
 January 2006. Updated by RFC 6668.
71. M. Zhang, W. John, KC Claffy, and N. Brownlee. State of the Art in Traffic Classification: A Research Review. In
 PAM ’09: 10th International Conference on Passive and Active Measurement, Student Workshop, 2009.
72. M. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, and G. Lu. Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on an Improved Clustering
 Algorithm. In Trustworthy Computing and Services, volume 320 of Communications in Computer and Information
 Science, pages 124–131. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls DOI: 10.1002/nem