Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related
 Features

 Gerard Draper-Gil, Arash Habibi Lashkari, Mohammad Saiful Islam Mamun and Ali A. Ghorbani
 University of New Brunswick, Fredericton NB E3B 5A3, New Brunswick, Canada

Keywords: Traffic Classification, Encrypted Traffic Characterization, Flow Time-based Features, VPN Traffic Characterization, Flow Timeout Value.

Abstract: Traffic characterization is one of the major challenges in today’s security industry. The continuous evolution
 and generation of new applications and services, together with the expansion of encrypted communications
 makes it a difficult task. Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) are an example of encrypted communication service
 that is becoming popular, as method for bypassing censorship as well as accessing services that are geographically locked. In this paper, we study the effectiveness of flow-based time-related features to detect VPN traffic
 and to characterize encrypted traffic into different categories, according to the type of traffic e.g., browsing,
 streaming, etc. We use two different well-known machine learning techniques (C4.5 and KNN) to test the accuracy of our features. Our results show high accuracy and performance, confirming that time-related features
 are good classifiers for encrypted traffic characterization.

1 INTRODUCTION require identifying both the application itself and the
 specific task associated with it. Very few traffic classi-
Traffic classification technologies have received in- fication techniques in the literature address this chalcreased attention over the last decade due to the im- lenging trends (Wang et al., 2014; Rao et al., 2011;
plementation of mechanisms for network quality of Coull and Dyer, 2014).
service (QoS), security, accounting, design and engi- In early 90’s, the initial traffic classification techneering. The networking industry as well as the re- niques associated transport layer ports with specific
search community have dedicated many efforts to the applications, a simple and fast technique. But, its low
research of these technologies and came up with sev- accuracy and unreliability rendered the development
eral classification techniques (Callado et al., 2009). of Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) approaches. The
However, the continuous expansion of Internet and DPI approach analyzes packets and classifies them
mobile technologies are creating a dynamic environ- according to some stored signature or pattern. Howment where new applications and services emerge ev- ever, DPI techniques that require payload examinaery day, and the existing ones are constantly evolv- tion are not computationally efficient, specially over
ing. Moreover, encryption is becoming pervasive in high-bandwidth network. Moreover, they are often
today’s Internet, serving as a base for secure commu- circumvented by encapsulated, encrypted, or obfusnications. This constant creation, evolution, and se- cated traffic that precludes payload analysis.
curization of applications makes traffic classification Selecting effective and reliable features for traffic
a great challenge for the Internet research community. analysis is still a serious challenge. Generally speak-
 Traffic classification can be categorized based on ing the classification of network traffic falls mainly
its final purpose: associating traffic with encryp- into two categories: flow-based classification, using
tion (e.g., encrypted traffic), protocol encapsulation properties such as flow bytes per second, duration per
(e.g., tunneled through VPN or HTTPS); accord- flow, etc. and packet-based classification, using proping to specific applications, (e.g., Skype), or accord- erties such as size, inter-packet duration of the first (or
ing to the application type (e.g., Streaming, Chat), n) packets, etc.
also called traffic characterization. Some applications In this paper, we focus on analyzing regular en-
(e.g., Skype, Facebook) support multiple services like crypted traffic and encrypted traffic tunneled through
chat, voice call, file transfer, etc. These applications a Virtual Private Network (VPN). The characteriza-

 407
Draper-Gil, G., Lashkari, A., Mamun, M. and Ghorbani, A.
Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related Features.
DOI: 10.5220/0005740704070414
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP 2016), pages 407-414
ISBN: 978-989-758-167-0
Copyright c 2016 by SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda. All rights reserved
ICISSP 2016 - 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy

tion of VPN traffic is a challenging task that remains extract P2P application behaviour. Coull et al (Coull
to be solved. VPN tunnels are used to maintain the and Dyer, 2014) present a study on the iMessage proprivacy of data shared over the physical network tocol to identify the type of device. In (Rao et al.,
connection holding packet-level encryption, therefore 2011), Rao et al. propose a network characteristics
making very difficult to identify the applications model for two of the most most popular video streamrunning through these VPN services. ing services, Netflix and YouTube. In (Mauro and
 Longo, 2015), Mauro and Longo propose a method
 Our Contribution in this paper is twofold. First, to detect encrypted WebRTC traffic. Mamun et al.
we propose a flow-based classification method to (Mohammad S.I. Mamun and Ghorbani, 2015) procharacterize encrypted and VPN traffic using only posed a method to identify enrypted traffic by meatime-related features. Moreover, we reduce the com- suring the entropy of the packet’s payload. Sherry et
putational overhead by reducing the set of features al. (Sherry et al., 2015) propose a DPI system that
to a set that can be extracted with low computational can inspect encrypted payload without decrypting it,
complexity (Kim et al., 2008; Li et al., 2009). And therefore maintaining the privacy of the communicasecond, we generate and publish an extensive labeled tions, but it can only process HTTPS traffic.
dataset of encrypted traffic, with 14 different labels A number of machine learning classification
(7 for regular encrypted traffic and 7 for VPN traffic). methods based on flow (Bernaille and Teixeira, 2007;
We choose only time-related features to expedite the Moore and Zuev, 2005) and packet-based (Iliofotou
efficiency and to ensure an encryption independent et al., 2007; Karagiannis et al., 2005) features have
traffic classifier. been proposed in the literature to identify traffic accurately. However, traffic classification for the en-
 The remainder of this paper is organized as fol- capsulated protocols (e.g., using Proxy server or VPN
lows: Section 2 presents an overview of encrypted tunnels) that are mainly used for hiding the identities
traffic classification. In Section 3 we describe the of the users for privacy reasons, are challenging and
dataset. In Section 4 describes the experiments hence are not widely explored in the literature. Howexecuted on the captured dataset, while Section 5 ever, recently, Heywood et al. in (Aghaei-Foroushani
presents and discusses the results obtained. Finally, and Zincir-Heywood, 2015) proposed a data driven
Section 6 presents the conclusions and future work. classifier to identify traffic coming from clients behind a proxy server using traffic flow information.
 To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
2 RELATED WORK propose a method to characterize VPN traffic in a
 broad sense, identifying 7 different traffic categories.
Studies on packet size and flow based traffic classification were started in early 90’s by Paxson et al.
in (Paxson, 1994; Paxson and Floyd, 1995), where 3 DATASET GENERATION
some statistical features like packet length, interarrival times and flow duration were supposed to be To create a representative dataset we captured real
suitable to trace protocols. Later Belzarena et al. in traffic generated by our lab members. We created ac-
(Gómez Sena and Belzarena, 2009) and Li et al. in (Li counts for users Alice and Bob in order to use services
et al., 2009) used the statistics from the first few pack- like Skype, Facebook, etc. In Table 1 we provide the
ets of the flow to gain efficiency. Moreover, in order to complete list of different types of traffic and appliexpedite the classification efficiency in a high-scale, cations included in our dataset. For each traffic type
high speed network, Nucci et al. in (Yeganeh et al., (VoIP, P2P, etc...) we captured a regular session and
2012) and Pescap et al. in (Aceto et al., 2010) pro- a session over VPN, therefore we have a total of 14
posed a signature based traffic identification scheme. traffic categories: VOIP, VPN-VOIP, P2P, VPN-P2P,
Although they reduced the time to classify the flows, etc. Following, we give a detailed description of the
they failed to detect unknown or manually created sig- different types of traffic generated:
natures.
 Traffic characterization techniques are not widely Browsing: Under this label we have HTTPS traffic
addressed in the current literature. Moreover, most generated by users while browsing or performing
of them focus on specific application type or devices. any task that includes the use of a browser. For in-
Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2014) proposed a model to stance, when we captured voice-calls using hangcharacterize P2P traffic. They extracted features from outs, even though browsing is not the main activmultiple flows and aggregated flows into clusters to ity, we captured several browsing flows.

408
 Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related Features

 Table 1: List of Captured protocols and applications.
 Traffic Content
 Web Browsing Firefox and Chrome
 Email SMPTS, POP3S and IMAPS
 Chat ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook and Hangouts
 Streaming Vimeo and Youtube
 File Transfer Skype, FTPS and SFTP using Filezilla and an external service
 VoIP Facebook, Skype and Hangouts voice calls (1h duration)
 P2P uTorrent and Transmission (Bittorrent)

 Table 2: List of time based features.
 Feature Description

 duration The duration of the flow.
 fiat Forward Inter Arrival Time, the time between two packets sent forward direction (mean, min, max, std).
 biat Backward Inter Arrival Time, the time between two packets sent backwards (mean, min, max, std).
 flowiat Flow Inter Arrival Time, the time between two packets sent in either direction (mean, min, max, std).
 active The amount of time time a flow was active before going idle (mean, min, max, std).
 idle The amount of time time a flow was idle before becoming active (mean, min, max, std).
 fb psec Flow Bytes per second.
 fp psec Flow packets per second.

Email: The traffic samples generated using a Thun- cations.
 derbird client, and Alice and Bob Gmail ac-
 The traffic was captured using Wireshark and tcpcounts. The clients were configured to dedump , generating a total amount of 28GB of data.
 liver mail through SMTP/S, and receive it using
 For the VPN traffic, we used an external VPN service
 POP3/SSL in one client and IMAP/SSL in the
 provider and connected to it using OpenVPN. To genother.
 erate SFTP and FTPS traffic we also used an external
Chat: The chat label identifies instant-messaging ap- service provider and Filezilla as a client.
 plications. Under this label we have Facebook and
 Hangouts via web browser, Skype, and IAM and
 ICQ using an application called pidgin.
Streaming: The streaming label identifies multimedia applications that require a continuous and
 steady stream of data. We captured traffic from
 Youtube (HTML5 and flash versions) and Vimeo
 services using Chrome and Firefox.
File Transfer: This label identifies traffic applications whose main purpose is to send or receive
 files and documents. For our dataset we captured
 Skype file transfers, FTP over SSH (SFTP) and Figure 1: Characterization Scenarios.
 FTP over SSL (FTPS) traffic sessions.
VoIP: The Voice over IP label groups all traffic generated by voice applications. Within this label 4 EXPERIMENTS
 we captured voice-calls using Facebook, Hangouts and Skype. We have defined two different scenarios A and B,
P2P: This label is used to identify file-sharing pro- depicted in Figure 1. As described in Section 3, we
 tocols like Bittorrent. To generate this traffic we have used 4 different flow timeout values to generate
 downloaded different .torrent files from a public our datasets, and we have chosen 2 machine learning
 a repository (archive.org) and captured traffic ses- algorithms (C4.5 and KNN). Therefore, we will
 sions using the uTorrent and Transmission appli- have to execute each experiment 8 times. We have

 409
ICISSP 2016 - 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy

designed a total of 3 experiments, 2 for scenario A
and one for scenario B:

Scenario A: The objective of this scenario is to characterize encrypted traffic with VPN identification,
e.g. we will distinguish between voice-calls (VOIP)
and voice-calls tunneled through VPN (VPN-VOIP).
As a result we will have 14 different types of traffic,
7 regular types of encrypted traffic and 7 VPN types
of traffic. In this Scenario we do the characterization
in two steps. First, we distinguish between VPN and
Non-VPN traffic and then we characterize each type
of traffic separately (VPN and Non-VPN). In order to
do this, we have divided our dataset in two different
datasets: one with regular encrypted traffic flows and (a) Scenario A VPN Precission and Recall
the other one with VPN traffic flows.

Scenario B: In this Scenario, we use a mixed dataset
to do the characterization in one step. The input of
our classifier is regular encrypted traffic and VPN
traffic, and as output we have the same 14 different
categories (Section 3).

4.1 Flow and Features Generation

We use a common definition of flow, where a flow is
defined by a sequence of packets with the same values for {Source IP, Destination IP, Source Port, Destination Port and Protocol (TCP or UDP)}. Flows (b) Scenario A NON-VPN Precission and Recall
are considered to be bidirectional (forward and reverse directions) as in most of the reviewed papers Figure 2: Scenario A-1: VPN detection.
(e.g.,(McGregor et al., 2004; Zander et al., 2005;
Bernaille et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2006; Palmieri Heywood, 2015). In this paper, we study several flow
and Fiore, 2009)). Along with the flow generation timeout (ftm) values with their corresponding classiwe have to calculate the features associated with each fier accuracy on the same dataset. In particular, we set
flow. Many papers in the literature use a tool called the duration of flows to 15,30,60 and 120 seconds.
NetMate to generate flows and features, but as part In our experiments, the classifier has a response
of our work we have developed our an application, time of (FT + FE + ML) seconds, where FT is the
ISCXFlowMeter. It is written in Java and gives us customized flow-time, FE is the feature extraction
more flexibility in terms of choosing the features we time and ML is the machine learning algorithm
want to calculate, adding new ones, and also hav- time to perform classification. It has been obing a better control of the duration of the flow time- served that the maximum accuracy is achieved with
out. ISCXFlowMeter generates bidirectional flows, (FT = 15s) for all the classifiers. In the current
where the first packet determines the forward (source implementation, we have found that the average
to destination) and backward (destination to source) delay attained is approx. (FT + FE + ML =
directions, hence the statistical time-related features 15 + .001 + .01(kNN) or 1.26(C4.5) =
are also calculated separately in the forward and re- 15.011 sec (kNN) or 16.261 sec (C4.5) ) for
verse direction. Note that TCP flows are usually ter- the VPN classifier and (FT + FE + ML =
minated upon connection teardown (by FIN packet) 15 + .001 + .01(kNN) or 1.49(C4.5) =
while UDP flows are terminated by a flow timeout. 15.011 sec (kNN) or 16.491 sec (C4.5) ) for
The flow timeout value can be assigned arbitrarily the traffic type classifier.
by the individual scheme e.g., 600 seconds for both As previously mentioned, we focus on time-
TCP and UDP in (Aghaei-Foroushani and Zincir- related features. When choosing time-related fea-

410
 Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related Features

 (a) ScenarioA VPN Precision (b) ScenarioA VPN Recall

(c) ScenarioA Non-VPN Precision (d) ScenarioA Non-VPN Recall

 (e) ScenarioB VPN Precision (f) ScenarioB VPN Recall

(g) ScenarioB Non-VPN Precision (h) ScenarioB Non-VPN Recall

 Figure 3: Precision and Recall of traffic characterization.

 411
ICISSP 2016 - 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy

tures, we consider two different approaches. In the Where the TP is the number of instances correctly
first approach we measure the time, e.g. time be- classified as A, FP is the number of instances incortween packets or the time that a flow remains active. rectly classified as A, and FN is the number of in-
In the second approach, we fix the time and measure stances incorrectly classified as Not-A.
other variables, e.g., bytes per second or packets per
second. In Table 2 we provide the complete list of
features extracted in this work. As one can see form
Table 2, except the duration, which shows the total
 5 ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS
time of one flow, there are six groups of features.
 In the Figures 2 and 3 we can see the Precision and
The first three groups are namely: -fiat, -biat, and -
 Recall of the different results. Overall C4.5 and KNN
flowiat, and are focused respectively on the forward,
 had similar results, although C4.5 performed a little
backward and bi-directional flows. The fourth and
 better. But interestingly the results present a depenfifth groups of features, are calculated regarding to the
 dance on the flow-timeout value selected. Therefore
idle-to-active or active-to-idle states and are named -
 we have chosen to focus the attention on these result.
idle and -active. Finally, the last group focuses on the
 For each flow tiemout value we have two different
size and number of packets per second and is named
 representations (two lines) one of them corresponds
-psec feature.
 to the C4.5 result and the other one to the KNN.

4.2 Machine Learning Approaches 5.1 Analysis of Scenario A
To execute the experiments we used Weka (Hall et al., In the Figure 2 we have the Precision (Pr) and Recall
2009), a well known tool that implements different (Rc) results of the first part of the scenario A, where
machine learning algorithms. We used its default we classify traffic into VPN and Non-VPN. We can
settings with 10 fold cross validation. Although Weka see that there is a direct relation between flow timeout
includes many different algorithms for clustering (ftm) values and the performance of the classifiers. In
and classifying, regarding to the previous research particular, the Precision (Pr) of the C4.5 VPN traffic
work and the human readability, we have selected classifier decreases from 0.890 using 15 seconds to
two algorithms from the supervised and unsupervised 0.86 using 120 seconds, and the Pr for Non-VPN traffamilies: C4.5 decision tree and KNN. fic decreases from 0.906 to 0.887. We can see a similar behavior in the case of the KNN algorithm, where
C4.5 Decision Tree: Developed by Ross Quinlan, the Pr for VPN traffic decreases from 0.848 to 0.815,
this algorithm is one of the most popular classi- and from 0.846 to 0.837 in the case of Non-VPN traffication techniques in machine learning and data fic. The best results are achieved using the C4.5 algomining. It is based on the concept of Information rithm and 15s ftm: 0.89 for VPN and 0.906 for Nonentropy. The algorithm requires a set of training VPN. This means that, using time-related features we
pairs {inputs-output} where the output is the corre- can distinguish VPN from Non-VPN with a 15s delay
sponding class. Both numerical and categorical data (the time it takes to build a flow). These results show
are supported, and the result is presented as a tree, that when using time-related features for VPN and
making it readable for humans. Non-VPN traffic classification, using shorter timeout
 values improve the accuracy rate.
KNN: The K-Nearest Neighbors algorithm is one of The second part of scenario A focuses on the charthe most simple algorithms in machine learning. It is acterization of VPN and Non-VPN traffic (see Figure
based on similarity measures, thus it depends on the 3 parts a,b,c,d), separately. The input is classified acmetric used to calculate the distance between exam- cording to the traffic categories defined in Section 3.
ples. The output of the classification is a class mem- Again, the results for shorter ftm values are better than
bership, which is determined according to the major- the results for larger values, although with a few exity vote of its K nearest neighbours. ceptions in the case of the VPN classifier (Figures 3a,
 To evaluate the quality of our classification pro- 3b), like VPN-MAIL where the best result is obtained
cesses, we will use two common metrics: Precision with an ftm of 30s. In the case of the Non-VPN clas-
(Pr) or Positive Predictive value and Recall (Rc) or sifier (Figures 3c, 3d) this trend can be clearly seen.
Sensitivity. The best results (average Pr) are obtained with
 C4.5 and 15s of ftm: 0.84 and 0.89 for the VPN and
 TP TP Non-VPN classifiers respectively. Moreover, the av-
 Pr = T P+FP Rc = T P+FN
 erage Pr for all traffic categories is higher than 0.84,

412
 Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related Features

which means that time-related features are good clas- REFERENCES
sifiers to characterize encrypted and VPN traffic.
 Aceto, G., Dainotti, A., de Donato, W., and Pescape, A.
5.2 Analysis of Scenario B (2010). Portload: Taking the best of two worlds in
 traffic classification. In IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops, INFOCOM 2010,
In this Scenario all encrypted and VPN traffic are pages 1–5. IEEE.
mixed together in one dataset, and the objective is Aghaei-Foroushani, V. and Zincir-Heywood, A. (2015). A
to characterize the traffic without previously dividing proxy identifier based on patterns in traffic flows. In
VPN from Non-VPN traffic, therefore we will have IEEE 16th International Symposium on High Assur-
14 types of traffic: 7 encrypted and 7 VPN traffic ance Systems Engineering, HASE 2015, pages 118–
categories. The results are shown in Figure 3 (parts 125. IEEE.
e,f,g,h). Bernaille, L. and Teixeira, R. (2007). Early recognition
 of encrypted applications. In Proceedings of the 8th
 In this case, we cannot see the pattern ’shorter International Conference on Passive and Active Nettimeout - better accuracy’ as clear as in the previ- work Measurement, PAM’07, pages 165–175, Berlin,
ous scenario (5.1). For example using the C4.5 al- Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
gorithm the Pr of VPN-Browsing, VPN-Mail, and Bernaille, L., Teixeira, R., Akodkenou, I., Soule, A., and
Mail with 15 sec is 0.771, 0.739, 0.671 respectively, Salamatian, K. (2006). Traffic classification on the fly.
values lower than the 0.809, 0.786, 0.79 obtained ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
with 120 sec. The KNN results are similar, the Pr 36(2):23–26.
of VPN-Browsing, VPN-Chat, and VPN-Mail traf- Callado, A., Kamienski, C., Szabo, G., Gero, B., Kelner, J.,
fic categories is (0.691, 0.501, 0.688) for 15s. ftm, Fernandes, S., and Sadok, D. (2009). A survey on internet traffic identification. Communications Surveys
smaller than the Pr obtained with 120 sec (0.743, & Tutorials, IEEE, 11(3):37–52.
0.501, 0.688). On the other hand, the highest aver- Coull, S. E. and Dyer, K. P. (2014). Traffic analysis of
age Pr from the different ftm values is around 0.783 encrypted messaging services: Apple imessage and
for C4.5 and 0.711 for KNN algorithms, around 0.5 beyond. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
points lower that the best values from Scenario A. Review, 44(5):5–11.
 Gómez Sena, G. and Belzarena, P. (2009). Early traffic classification using support vector machines. In Proceedings of the 5th International Latin American Network-
6 CONCLUSIONS ing Conference, LANC ’09, pages 60–66, New York,
 NY, USA. ACM.
In this paper we have studied the efficiency of time- Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann,
related features to address the challenging problem of P., and Witten, I. H. (2009). The weka data mining
characterization of encrypted traffic and detection of software: An update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
VPN traffic. We have proposed a set of time-related Newsletter, 11(1):10–18.
features and two common machine learning algo- Iliofotou, M., Pappu, P., Faloutsos, M., Mitzenmacher, M.,
 Singh, S., and Varghese, G. (2007). Network monirithms, C4.5 and KNN, as classification techniques. toring using traffic dispersion graphs (tdgs). In Pro-
Our results prove that our proposed set of time-related ceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on
features are good classifiers, achieving accuracy lev- Internet Measurement, IMC ’07, pages 315–320, New
els above 80%. C4.5 and KNN had a similar perfor- York, NY, USA. ACM.
mance in all experiments, although C4.5 has achieved Karagiannis, T., Papagiannaki, K., and Faloutsos, M.
better results. From the two scenarios proposed, char- (2005). Blinc: Multilevel traffic classification in the
acterization in 2 steps (scenario A) vs. characteri- dark. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on
zation in one step (scenario B), the first one gener- Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communications, SIGCOMM ’05,
ated better results. In addition to our main objective, pages 229–240, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
we have also found that our classifiers perform better Kim, H., Claffy, K., Fomenkov, M., Barman, D., Faloutwhen the flows are generated using shorter timeout sos, M., and Lee, K. (2008). Internet traffic classifivalues, which contradicts the common assumption of cation demystified: Myths, caveats, and the best pracusing 600s as timeout duration. As future work we tices. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conplan to expand our work to other applications and ference, CoNEXT ’08, pages 11:1–11:12, New York,
types of encrypted traffic, and to further study the NY, USA. ACM.
application of time-based features to characterize en- Li, W., Canini, M., Moore, A. W., and Bolla, R. (2009). Efcrypted traffic. ficient application identification and the temporal and
 spatial stability of classification schema. Computer
 Networks: The International Journal of Computer and
 Telecommunications Networking, 53(6):790–809.

 413
ICISSP 2016 - 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy

Mauro, M. D. and Longo, M. (2015). Revealing encrypted tion using machine learning. In Proceedings of the The
 webrtc traffic via machine learning tools. In Proceed- IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks 30th
 ings of the 12th International Conference on Security Anniversary, LCN ’05, pages 250–257, Washington,
 and Cryptography, SECRYPT ’15, pages 259–266. DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.
 SciTePress.
McGregor, A., Hall, M., Lorier, P., and Brunskill, J. (2004).
 Flow clustering using machine learning techniques.
 In Passive and Active Network Measurement, volume
 3015 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
 205–214. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Mohammad S.I. Mamun, N. S. and Ghorbani, A. A. (2015).
 An entropy-based encrypted traffic classification using machine learning. In Proceedings of the 17th
 International Conference on Information and Communication Security, ICICS 2015, Berlin, Heidelberg.
 Springer-Verlag.
Moore, A. W. and Zuev, D. (2005). Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis techniques. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of
 Computer Systems, SIGMETRICS ’05, pages 50–60,
 New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Palmieri, F. and Fiore, U. (2009). A nonlinear, recurrencebased approach to traffic classification. Computer Networks: The International Journal of Computer and
 Telecommunications Networking, 53(6):761–773.
Paxson, V. (1994). Empirically derived analytic models of
 wide-area tcp connections. IEEE/ACM Transactions
 on Networking, 2(4):316–336.
Paxson, V. and Floyd, S. (1995). Wide area traffic: The
 failure of poisson modeling. IEEE/ACM Transactions
 on Networking, 3(3):226–244.
Rao, A., Legout, A., Lim, Y.-s., Towsley, D., Barakat, C.,
 and Dabbous, W. (2011). Network characteristics of
 video streaming traffic. In Proceedings of the Seventh COnference on Emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies, CoNEXT ’11, pages 25:1–
 25:12, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Sherry, J., Lan, C., Popa, R. A., and Ratnasamy, S. (2015).
 Blindbox: Deep packet inspection over encrypted traffic. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on
 Special Interest Group on Data Communication, SIG-
 COMM ’15, pages 213–226, New York, NY, USA.
 ACM.
Wang, D., Zhang, L., Yuan, Z., Xue, Y., and Dong,
 Y. (2014). Characterizing application behaviors for
 classifying p2p traffic. In International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, ICNC’14, pages 21–25. IEEE.
Williams, N., Zander, S., and Armitage, G. (2006). A
 preliminary performance comparison of five machine
 learning algorithms for practical ip traffic flow classification. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
 Review, 36(5):5–16.
Yeganeh, S., Eftekhar, M., Ganjali, Y., Keralapura, R., and
 Nucci, A. (2012). Cute: Traffic classification using
 terms. In 21st International Conference on Computer
 Communications and Networks, ICCCN ’12, pages 1–
 9. IEEE.
Zander, S., Nguyen, T., and Armitage, G. (2005). Automated traffic classification and application identifica-

414