See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327399393

A Survey on Tor Encrypted Trafﬁc Monitoring

Article in International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications · January 2018
DOI: 10.14569/IJACSA.2018.090815

CITATIONS READS
12 466

4 authors, including:

 Mohamad Amar Irsyad Mohd Aminuddin Zarul Fitri Zaaba
 University of Science Malaysia University of Science Malaysia
 7 PUBLICATIONS 48 CITATIONS 68 PUBLICATIONS 636 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE

 All content following this page was uploaded by Mohamad Amar Irsyad Mohd Aminuddin on 30 May 2020.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

 A Survey on Tor Encrypted Traffic Monitoring
 Mohamad Amar Irsyad Mohd Aminuddin1, Darshan Singh Mahinder Singh4
Zarul Fitri Zaaba*2, Manmeet Kaur Mahinderjit Singh3 Centre for Drug Research
 School of Computer Sciences School of Computer Sciences
 Universiti Sains Malaysia, Universiti Sains Malaysia,
 11800 USM, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia 11800 USM, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia

 Abstract—Tor (The Onion Router) is an anonymity tool that Tor’s user access. Therefore, there are few has focused on the
is widely used worldwide. Tor protect its user privacy against privacy disclosure based on identifying application
surveillance and censorship using strong encryption and information of traffic in the Tor network [10]. This approach
obfuscation techniques which makes it extremely difficult to would allow for the Tor traffic to be monitored in large scale
monitor and identify users’ activity on the Tor network. It also and real-time. Although it is not directly deanonymized the
implements strong defense to protect the users against traffic user activity on the Tor network, learning the application
features extraction and website fingerprinting. However, the information that being used by the users in the Tor network is
strong anonymity also became the heaven for criminal to avoid a part of the Tor privacy concern [33]. This security
network tracing. Therefore, numerous of research has been
 monitoring capabilities could be achieved using machine
performed on encrypted traffic analyzing and classification using
machine learning techniques. This paper presents survey on
 learning classification technique similar to the classification of
existing approaches for classification of Tor and other encrypted encrypted traffic on the surface web.
traffic. There is preliminary discussion on machine learning Even though machine learning classification for encrypted
approaches and Tor network. Next, there are comparison of the traffic has been studied intensively [17], [48]-[50], the process
surveyed traffic classification and discussion on their of applying these studied to classify the Tor traffic is
classification properties. remarkably challenging due to valuable traffic features that
 obtained from previous study are irrelevant in the context of
 Keywords—Encrypted traffic monitoring; Tor; machine
learning; security; survey
 Tor network and Tor itself developed with strong anonymity
 protection [31].
 I. INTRODUCTION The main objective of this paper is to survey the
 Tor (The Onion Router) is a well-known anonymity application of machine learning techniques for encrypted Tor
network globally [1]. The popularity of Tor is undeniable as traffic classification and several latest clearnet encrypted
the Tor’s users increase up to two million just in year of 2017 traffic classification studies. Based on the results of the
alone [2] and currently there are more than four million users investigation, we will discuss and compared comprehensively
worldwide. Similar with other anonymity project such as I2P on those machine learning techniques and its operation.
[3] and FreeNet [4], Tor primary goal is to provide users with
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
privacy protection and anonymous access to the Internet. This
 will be discussion on the technical background of traffic
will facilitate the Internet users with mechanism to hide their
 encryption on the Tor network. In Section 3, we discuss the
activity thus protecting their privacy to some extent, i.e. to
 fundamental of machine learning in traffic classification.
hide the source, the destination, and the nature of the
 Section 4 contain the discussion of studies on machine
communication, other than encrypting the content itself [35].
 learning techniques. Section 5 contains the comprehensive
Although there are lots of good usage practice, Tor however
 comparison and consideration on these surveyed techniques.
are also dual-use networks just like other technology such as
 Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.
BitTorrent (where users are not only use it to share free
materials, they also share copyrighted materials) since it has II. TOR BACKGROUND
been exploited for illegal activities purposes [5]-[8].
 A. Onion Routing
 Due to the complexity nature of the Tor encrypted traffic,
the research community has put considerable effort on As Tor created to provide anonymity services that allow
analyzing the Tor security especially on the possibility of people to improve their privacy and security on the Internet, it
deanonymizing the Tor users [11]-[15]. These researches have is run by group of volunteer-operated servers around the
focused on decoy traffic [12], exit router logging [11], attack world. The main backbone of Tor network is the distributed
on identifying Tor relays [14] and investigation on exit relays relay server (Tor node) which providing the onion routing
trustworthiness [15]. Although the result is promising, but capabilities. Onion routing is a concept of anonymous
these techniques lack of security monitoring proficiencies on communication over a computer network where the messages
the Tor network. In security monitoring perspective, the Tor are encapsulated in multiple layers of encryption [18]. The
traffic in general should be monitored and analyzed to obtain encrypted data is transmitted through series of Tor nodes
useful knowledge such as information on the website that (current Tor implementation use three nodes [1]) which is
 called as a Tor circuit. Each of the node will decrypt a layer of

 113 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

encryption to uncover the next destination of the traffic destination accessible by the right party and no third party
without the knowledge on whether the source of the traffic is could involve or do modification to these messages without
coming from a Tor client or from another Tor node. Only the the right party awareness. Other than Tor, TLS is widely use
exit (third) node know the true destination of the messages. in the network environment to secure the data transfer; for
Hence, there are no node that has both information on the example, as web browsing, email, instant messaging, and
source and destination of the messages. voice-over-IP (VoIP).
 Fig. 1 shows the Tor circuit example. Notice that the The knowledge on TLS protocol mechanism is very
connection between the exit node and destination server does crucial in Tor traffic classification. Fig. 2 shows the Tor traffic
not encrypted. This is because Tor provide traffic encryption layer. Tor will divide communication messages into several
mechanism while the messages are in the Tor network [19]. fixed size packets which called as cell [22]. Then, these cells
The moment that messages go out of the Tor network, it is up are processed and transformed into TLS records. These
to the users whether the traffic is encrypted or not. As an records than will be fragmented into the TCP packets before it
example, if a user accesses a HTTPS (Hyper Text Transfer will be send to another Tor node. These traffic layer
Protocol Secure) websites, not only the communication is mechanism enable features extraction of the traffic at three
encrypted in the Tor network, but also encrypted outside of different levels for the machine traffic classification process as
the Tor network through the HTTPS. If the user accesses an each layer has certain header information that are not
unsecure HTTP website, the communication is encrypted only encrypted [33].
in the Tor network and no encryption provided outside of the
Tor network (situation in Fig. 1).

 Fig. 2. Tor traffic layer [22].

 III. MACHINE LEARNING
 In computer science, machine learning is a technique that
 enable computer to learn from experience with data using
 statistical techniques rather than explicitly being programmed.
 In computer security, machine learning has been utilized in
 lots of area such as traffic classification, anomaly detection,
 spam detection, malware identification and entity
 classification [23].

 Fig. 1. Tor circuit example. Fig. 3 shows traffic classification taxonomy. Below is the
 discussion of broad categories of machine learning
B. TLS approaches, classification input features, classification output
 classes and evaluation metric of classification algorithms.
 The encrypted communications inside the Tor network
heavily relied on the TLS (Transport Layer Security). (TLS) is
a cryptographic protocol designed to provide secure
communication over the network [20] which could be
considered as the successor of the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
[21]. TLS is located between the Transport Layer and the
Application Layer in the TCP/IP Model Layer. Other than
encryption, the fundamental of TLS is the used of X.509
certificates as the verification features of with whom they are
communicating, asymmetric cryptography to authenticate
those entity and symmetric session key as the key to encrypt
the data transfer between the entity. In addition, TLS use
Record Protocol [20], which acts as a wrapper that responsible
for dividing messages into several fragments. These fragments
than will be paired with its corresponding Message
Authentication Code (MAC). These procedures are important
to ensure that the messages transferred from source to the Fig. 3. Traffic classification taxonomy.

 114 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

A. Machine Learning Approaches  Application software (AS) – Web browser, Mail client
 There are three broad approaches of machine learning in  Fine-grained (FG) – Facebook site, YouTube video,
traffic monitoring which are supervised, semi-supervised and Skype call, Windows update.
unsupervised. In traffic classification, different approach
produces different result, effectiveness and reliability depend D. Evaluation Metrics
on its target and the dataset that being used as the input. As lot of researches has been carried on machine learning
 Supervised learning used sets of pre-training data (data techniques for traffic classification, these researches need to
that are labelled based on certain traffic features) to train the be evaluated and compared with established findings. To
algorithms on classification of the traffic. The example of evaluate the outcome of each machine learning method for
supervised learning algorithms is K -Nearest Neighbors (k- traffic classification, several important metrics are used [16]
NN) [24], Bayesian Network [25], Decision Tree [26] and which are accuracy, F-Measure, True Positive Rate (TPR),
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [27]. The main advantage is False Positive Rate (FPR), precision and recall.
that it produces low false rate of classification. Yet, it might IV. TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES
become challenging in providing complete sets of pre-training
data and might require long training time. This section surveys on machine learning approaches of
 traffic classification. The discussion will be divided into two
 Semi-supervised learning is similar to the supervised, but main categories which are encrypted traffic classification that
it does not utilize complete pre-training data. Instead the pre- work on the Tor network and latest encrypted traffic
training data is only partial labelled data. The main advantage classification on non-Tor network. Table I shows summary of
is that there are less sets of pre-training data need to be cite papers and machine learning method on traffic
provided. However, the accuracy might be a huge issue classification.
especially in classification various kind of encrypted
application traffic. A. Traffic Classification on Tor
 Unsupervised learning in the other hand use mainly for Alsabah et al. [31] proposed and evaluated DiffTor that
data clustering without any pre-training data. The example of classify real-time Tor circuit using machine learning
unsupervised learning algorithms is Fuzzy C-means [28] and algorithms. The main intention of this study is to improve the
K-means [29]. Despite the ease of usage as no training data is performance of the Tor network using classification process
required, it commonly utilized for traffic clustering process that assigns distinct classes of services on each application
rather than for encrypted traffic classification. One of the main traffic in the Tor circuit. Based on their observation, different
usage of unsupervised traffic clustering is in anomaly applications have different time and throughput requirements.
detection which is work well with unlabelled traffic [29], [47], Therefore, the chosen attributes are circuit lifetime, amount of
[51]. data transfer, cell inter-arrival times and number of recent
 cells sent are selected to classify the Tor traffic. The authors
B. Classification Input confirmed that their experiments managed to classify Tor
 The pre-training data that will be used to train supervised circuit which being generated on the live Tor network with
or semi-supervised algorithms are fundamentally important in extremely high accuracy.
receiving the best output of traffic classification. Thus, Similar classification technique carried out by [32] that
selection of input data need to be done carefully and focus on circuit and traffic flow classification. The circuit
thoroughly. The Tor traffic classification input data could be classification retrieved data at Tor’s relay server and the flow
segmented into three categories. classification retrieved data that are transmitting anywhere
  Circuit – Circuit lifetime, Cell inter-arrival times, Cells between relay server and Tor’s user. This flow classification
 per circuit life time, Uplink Cells and The Rate of the approach does not require any access on the relay server
 Downlink Cells to the Uplink Cells. which make it much more flexible that the circuit
 classification approach. For circuit level classification,
  Flow – Flow segment size, round trip time, duration. attributes such as cells per circuit lifetime, Uplink cells, rate of
 Downlink cells to Uplink cells and Exponentially Weighted
  Packet – Packet length, frequency, header. Moving Average (EWMA) are chosen. For flow level
C. Classification Output classification, the authors use two flow exporting tools
 Based on the classification input, there are several types of (Tranalyzer2 and Tcptrace) which able to generate flows and
classification output could be obtained. The best output is the extract the attributes of the flows. The author managed to
fine-grained level which has the most detailed information on perform study on four machine learning algorithms which are
the classified traffic. Naïve Bayes, Bayesian Networks, C4.5 and Random Forest.
 There is study on application classification attack on Tor
  Traffic cluster (TC) – Tor, Bulk/small transactions,
 network [33] which identify and classify the application types
  Application type (AT) – Streaming, browsing, inside the Tor network traffic. The identification is based on
 torrenting. application behaviour that characterized by traffic flow
 features such as burst volumes and directions. The authors
  Application protocol (AP) – HTTPS, FTP, P2P define burst as successive packets in between two packets sent
 on the opposite direction. Based on Tor’s design features

 115 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

which utilize round-robin fashion for Tor scheduling, the authors use 40 features including total packets, total bytes,
relation between burst volumes and burst directions could be smallest packet size, largest packet size, minimum (including
utilized as the critical features in classifying the Tor traffic. maximum and mean) amount of time between two packet and
This research utilized unsupervised K-means and Multiple duration of flow. Due to the proven variation of traffic
Sequence Alignment (MSA) to pre-treat sample data and features of HTTPS and Tor network, the study outcome is a
Profile Hidden Markov Model to build model and classify the fine grained output of traffic classification (classify which
application type of the Tor traffic. traffic related to which website).
 Lingyu et al. [34] proposed hierarchical classification that Cuzzocrea et al. [44] also presented technique that
exploits decision tree algorithm for Tor traffic identification identifies Tor-related traffic that generated on a host. Hence, it
and Tri-Training algorithm for Tor traffic segmentation. Tri- could detect whether a user is using Tor application. The
Training algorithm is a semi-supervised machine learning identification process uses supervised classification based on
algorithm which utilize co-training technique [52]. It has traffic flows features. Similar to others Tor network
certain advantages such as it requires low number of training classification [35] and [43], the chosen attributes are 23
data than supervised methods, does not require cross- including flow duration, flow bytes per second, flow intervalidation and no restriction on base classifier. Rather than arrival time and flow active time. This study had been carried
focus on cell-based attributes like in [31] and [32], this study out on six machine algorithms with the most accurate result is
had focus on packet-based attributes which are packet length J48 (C4.5) approach.
entropy, 600-byte packet frequency, zero data packet
frequency (first 10) and average packet interval time. The B. Traffic Classification on Non-Tor Network
result shows high accuracy classification which could be Fu et al. [39] has developed CUMMA, a system that use
achieved due to the hierarchical instrument. machine learning for in-App service usage classification on
 encrypted traffic in mobile messaging apps. This system
 There is also classification study based on Anon17 dataset learning model is based on temporal dependencies, user
[30] that uses four classifier approaches (Naïve Bayes, behavioural patterns and network traffic characteristics. It also
Bayesian Network, C4,5 and Random Forest) [35]. The public works closely on time series classification and features
dataset contains traffic from three popular anonymity services segmentation. The traffic features extraction including packet
(Tor [1], I2P [3] and JonDonym [30]). The authors performed length related features (such as descriptive statistics, variances
three level of classification beginning with Anon Network in directions, and hopping counts) and time delay related
(Tor, I2P, JonDonym), Traffic Type (Normal, Tor Apps, I2P features (such as time interval for consecutive packet). The
Apps) and Application (Tor, Streaming, Torrent, Browsing). outcome of this project shows that CUMMA enable service
The result of these experiment shows that all classification usage identification and application usage behaviour detection
levels on these anonymity services could be identified and (text, picture, audio note, stream video call) based on
distinguished with high accuracy. There are 81 extracted encrypted traffic classification.
features for classification including flow direction, packet
length, inter-arrival time, IP header features and number of Another supervised research for encrypted traffic from
connections during traffic flow lifetime. This experiment is [40] has proposed an attribute-aware classification that
unique from others since it uses dataset that are publicly utilized second-order Markov Chain algorithm. Second-order
available. However, due to the dataset is only recently Markov Chains is required in order to determine state
available, there lack of studies that utilize the same dataset transition probabilities. This study also proposes modelling
currently. process using application attribute bigram that able to increase
 second-order Markov Chains state diversity. The study
 Soleimani et al. [38] has focus on identification of Tor attained better discernment accuracy and diverse application
pluggable transports using machine learning techniques. Tor fingerprints through the leverage of the attribute bigram
pluggable transport is a bridge from the Internet into the Tor (Certificate and first Application Data packets). This
network which considered as the technique to bypass the experiment manages to classify the encrypted traffic based on
worldwide Tor censorship operation [45]. This experiment the detection of website traffic-attribute which could be
proceeds on three plugin techniques which are Obfs3, Obfs4, considered as fine grained output.
and ScrambleSuit. Using supervised learning, the
identification of these plugins could be executed with only Sun et al. [41] has studied on incremental SVM (ISVM)
first 10-50 packets inspection in real-time. The authors utilize model that focus on enabling quick and high-frequency of
statistical flow features such as flow size (both direction), classifier update with reduced training cost of memory and
mean size of packet sent (both direction) and standard CPU. The essential different on ISVM is that the original
deviation of packet sizes (both direction). training data is removed and only holds the Support Vectors
 (SVs) produced in latest updating process which overcome the
 Based on local network observer of Tor traffic dataset, traditional SVM weaknesses. They also proposed AISVM, an
[43] has analysed and found that standard HTTPS traffic ISVM with attenuation factor through the use of weight on
(related to top monitored sites on Alexa) and Tor network has each SVs to maximize the usage of information on SVs
variations that could be classified using the machine learning updating process. The outcome of this study illustrates that
technique. The authors generate traffic using virtual machines both proposed model shows similar classification accuracy
with two different instances. One with HTTPS traffic and the with traditional SVM but with significant reduced updating
other is Tor-based traffic (both access similar website). The process.

 116 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

 Fan et al. [36] has study on the machine learning Another novel fingerprinting technique (through sampling
classification that emphasizes traffic in Software Define of Application Protocol Data Units exchange patterns) for
Networking (SDN). SDN [46] is a new network paradigm that traffic classification has been proposed by [42]. The studied
provide simplification of network management and support technique is simple to be implemented with minimal resource
for exponential traffic growth on mobile cellular network. The requirement. The principal of this technique is to provide high
feature selection (such as port number, number of unique data efficient sampling strategy that applied by single Content
bytes, maximum segment size and initial window bytes) Addressable Memory (CAM) filtering rule based on zerotechniques had been use as the manipulated variable in this length TCP packet flows. This classification technique isn’t
study as different combination of selected features produced affected with network transmission issues such as
different classification accuracy. This study employs SVM fragmentation, loses and congestion. The author also
and K-means clustering for the traffic classification process. suggested that for UDP traffic, analogous fingerprinting
The outcome shows that K-means are effectively clustering scheme should be utilized to attain the same accuracy in TCP.
new type of traffic; however, it has lower accuracy than
supervised SVM approach. V. DISCUSSION AND COMPARISON
 Another SVM learning approach has been carried out by We have provided the summarize overview on the
[37] that focus on real-time traffic classification. The author encrypted traffic classification using machine learning
proposed SSP-SVM based on principal component analysis approaches. Most surveyed studies use flow and packet
(PCA) and scaling dataset to extract and verify traffic features. features as the input for the traffic classification technique.
It adapts the reduction on feature dimension, lower features The authors of [35] manage to do classification based on both
redundancy and higher features generalization. They also flow and packet features using public dataset [30] that are
utilize improved particle swarm optimization algorithm to focus on the anonymity services traffic. There is also traffic
automatically produce optimal parameter for kernel function. classification based on circuit features [31], [32] that could be
The outcome performance shows that two-class and multi- considered one of specialized machine learning process on the
class classifier work effectively on traffic classification Tor network. This is because, the Tor circuit is only exist in
compared to the traditional SVM. the Tor network, thus it could be experimented and analysed
 entirely in the Tor network.
 TABLE I. SUMMARY TABLE OF CITE PAPERS AND MACHINE LEARNING METHOD ON TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

 Traffic Learning Methods Data set
 Properties

 Second-order Markov Chain
 Publication Year

 Tor compatible
 Support Vector Machine
 Hidden Markov model
Reference

 Real-time
 Bayesian Networks

 Output
 Semi-Supervised

 Random Forest
 Decision Trees
 Unsupervised

 Tri-Training
 Supervised

 Naïve Bayes
 AdaBoost

 K-Means

 Private
 Circuit

 Packet

 Public
 Flow

 C4.5

[31] 2012 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AT
[32] 2014 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AT
[43] 2015 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ TC,FG
[33] 2015 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AP
[39] 2016 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AS,FG
[34] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ TC,AP
[35] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ TC,AT
[36] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AT
[37] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AP
[40] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ FG
[44] 2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ TC
[38] 2018 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AP
[41] 2018 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ AP
[42] 2018 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ FG

 117 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

 Due to the complexity of encrypted traffic, most of the  Training time – When data set is huge, the training
surveyed research focuses on supervised machine learning time of this data might be an important consideration as
which required pre-training dataset to classify the traffic. The it might result the training time taken to be from several
studies by [33], [36] utilized unsupervised machine learning minutes to few hours. Encrypted traffic classification
solely for traffic clustering rather than traffic classification. with shorter training time is much more preferred.
Despite study by [34] managed to classify encrypted traffic
using semi-supervised learning, this learning practice could be  Computational resource – Very accurate algorithm
achieved with the presence of hierarchical classification that utilized very high computational resource might not
approach. be suitable in certain traffic classification circumstances
 especially in real-time classification environment.
 The most popular machine learning methods are the C4.5 Therefore, encrypted traffic classification algorithm
followed by the SVM. These two methods generally produce needs to have acceptable computational requirement for
most accurate result. However, it might not be the best more efficient processing resources.
algorithm on most of encrypted traffic environment. Naïve
Bayes, Bayesian Networks and Random Forest also produce  Number of features – Commonly, the more extracted
satisfactory accuracy when the features are adequate and features that available, the better accuracy of encryption
reliable. traffic classification. However, it might become a
 bottleneck on the algorithm training time process. There
 Traditional non-Tor encrypted traffic classification has the are also features that will reduce the accuracy of the
privilege of accessing important attribute such as source and encrypted traffic classification which need to be
destination IP address and port number to learn and classify avoided.
the traffic accurately. However, in Tor network, these
attributes are impractical as the source and destination info are  Number of parameters – Number that affect algorithm
no longer the accurate attribute as it has been hidden by the behavior, such as number of iterations, error tolerance
onion routing mechanism. Hence, a lot of other attributes are and options between variants. These parameters are
used for classifying the Tor encrypted network traffic. very important in getting the effective and accurate
 result since different settings could significantly impact
 The real-time column in Table I shows that whether the the encrypted traffic classification outcome.
classification process could be applied on real-time data.
Although accurate detection is very important, some traffic VI. CONCLUSION
classification such as anomaly detection [47] required real- In the past, traffic classification using machine learning
time classification process to make it useful most of the time. approaches was not important. With the emerging traffic
Hence, heavy computational and slow traffic classification is encryption and anonymity services such as Tor, machine
impracticable in real-time environment. learning technique for encrypted traffic classification should
 The dataset column in Table I shows the source of data be considered as the prominent approaches on identifying this
whether it was publicly available or privately collected. Tor traffic.
Traffic classification on public dataset would allow In this paper, we presented an overview of machine
researchers to closely compared their accuracy and learning classification for Tor encrypted traffic. We begin
performance result with other published work. However, due with discussion on Tor technical background and machine
to limited availability of dataset that involve Tor network, learning background. Then there is discussion on surveyed
most of the studies that focus on Tor network produced their papers, summarize table of the discussed papers and
own dataset. comparison on the machine learning approaches. To sum up,
 Compared to the traditional machine learning research there still lots of things could be further investigated and
[17], current researches on encrypted traffic classification improved in the machine learning classification process to
using machine learning approach produced various type of discover the truth of privacy protection on the Tor network.
output that could be further analysed and refined. Study by REFERENCES
[39], [40], [42], [43] managed to perform encrypted traffic [1] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: The Secondclassification that identify traffic with fine granularity output Generation Onion Router,” SSYM’04 Proc. 13th Conf. USENIX Secur.
of information. Symp., pp. 21–22, 2004.
 [2] Tor Project, Users – Tor Metrics, 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2018, from
 To this end, there is no algorithm that performs the best in https://metrics.torproject.org/userstats-relay-country.html?start=2017-
all condition. Different algorithm has different capabilities and 01-1&end=2018-01-1&country=all&events=off
efficiency depending on its classification objective, [3] I2P: The Invisible Internet Project. Retrieved 26 March 2018, from
implementation strategy and training dataset. Therefore, there https://geti2p.net/
are several considerations factor that need to be taken while [4] FreeNet. Retrieved 26 March 2018, from https://freenetproject.org
choosing the right machine learning algorithm [9]. [5] M. Spitters, F. Klaver, G. Koot, and M. Van Staalduinen, “Authorship
 Analysis on Dark Marketplace Forums,” Proc. - 2015 Eur. Intell. Secur.
  Accuracy – Despite the most accurate algorithm is very Informatics Conf. EISIC 2015, pp. 1–8, 2016.
 important, the processing time might be a huge [6] FTR Team, 2016. Cybercrime and the Deep Web. Trend Micro Security
 bottleneck. In some cases, approximation of traffic News. Retrieved 1 March 2018, from https://www.trendmicro.com/
 classification is acceptable. cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelligence/white-papers/wp-cybercrimeand-the-deep-web.pdf

 118 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

[7] J. Aldridge and R. Askew, “Delivery dilemmas: How drug cryptomarket [28] J. Bezdek, 1981. Pattern recognition with fuzzy objective function
 users identify and seek to reduce their risk of detection by law algorithms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA (1981)
 enforcement,” Int. J. Drug Policy, vol. 41, pp. 101–109, 2017. [29] H. Li, “Research and Implementation of an Anomaly Detection Model
[8] J. Broséus, D. Rhumorbarbe, M. Morelato, L. Staehli, and Q. Rossy, “A Based on Clustering Analysis,” 2010 Int. Symp. Intell. Inf. Process.
 geographical analysis of trafficking on a popular darknet market,” Trust. Comput., pp. 458–462, 2010.
 Forensic Sci. Int., vol. 277, pp. 88–102, 2017. [30] Jondos GmbH. (2018). JonDo – the IP changer. Retrieved 13 April
[9] How to choose algorithms for Microsoft Azure Machine Learning, 2018, from https://anonymous-proxy-servers.net/en/jondo.html
 Microsoft Azure, 2018. Retrieved 30 March 2018, from [31] M. Alsabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor ’ s Performance
 https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/studio/ using Real-time Traffic Classification Categories and Subject
 algorithm-choice Descriptors,” Proc. 2012 ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., pp. 73–
[10] I. Sanchez-Rola, D. Balzarotti, and I. Santos, “The Onions Have Eyes: A 84, 2012.
 Comprehensive Structure and Privacy Analysis of Tor Hidden [32] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Benchmarking Two
 Services,” Proc. World Wide Web Conf., pp. 1251–1260, 2017. Techniques for Tor Classification,” Comput. Intell. Cyber Secur., pp. 1–
[11] D. McCoy, K. Bauer, D. Grunwald, T. Kohno, and D. Sicker, “Shining 8, 2014.
 light in dark places: Understanding the tor network,” Lect. Notes [33] G. He, M. Yang, J. Luo, and X. Gu, “A novel application classification
 Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes attack against Tor,” Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp., vol. 27, pp. 5640–
 Bioinformatics), vol. 5134 LNCS, pp. 63–76, 2008. 5661, 2015.
[12] S. Chakravarty, G. Portokalidis, M. Polychronakis, and A. D. [34] J. Lingyu, L. Yang, W. Bailing, L. Hongri, and X. Guodong, “A
 Keromytis, “Detecting traffic snooping in tor using decoys,” Lect. Notes Hierarchical Classification Approach for Tor Anonymous Traffic,”
 Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Softw. Networks, pp. 239–243, 2017.
 Bioinformatics), vol. 6961 LNCS, pp. 222–241, 2011.
 [35] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, and A. Pescape, “Anonymity
[13] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Application Services Tor, I2P, JonDonym: Classifying in the Dark,” Proc. 29th Int.
 identification from encrypted traffic based on characteristic changes by Teletraffic Congr. ITC 2017, vol. 1, pp. 81–89, 2017.
 encryption,” 2011 IEEE Int. Work. Tech. Comm. Commun. Qual.
 Reliab. CQR 2011, 2011. [36] Z. Fan and R. Liu, “Investigation of machine learning based network
 traffic classification,” 2017 Int. Symp. Wirel. Commun. Syst., pp. 1–6,
[14] P. Mittal, A. Khurshid, J. Juen, M. Caesar, and N. Borisov, “Stealthy 2017.
 traffic analysis of low-latency anonymous communication using
 [37] J. Cao, Z. Fang, G. Qu, H. Sun, and D. Zhang, “An accurate traffic
 throughput fingerprinting,” Proc. 18th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun.
 Secur. - CCS ’11, p. 215, 2011. classification model based on support vector machines,” Int. J. Netw.
 Manag., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2017.
[15] P. Winter et al., “Spoiled onions: Exposing malicious Tor exit relays,”
 Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. [38] M. H. M. Soleimani, M. Mansoorizadeh, and M. Nassiri, “Real-time
 Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 8555 LNCS, pp. 304–331, 2014. identification of three Tor pluggable transports using machine learning
 techniques,” J. Supercomput., pp. 1–18, 2018.
[16] A. Mishra, “Metrics to Evaluate your Machine Learning Algorithm”,
 Towards Data Science, 2018. Retrieved 1 April 2018, from [39] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service Usage
 https://towardsdatascience.com/metrics-to-evaluate-your-machine- Classification with Encrypted Internet Traffic in Mobile Messaging
 learning-algorithm-f10ba6e38234 Apps,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–2864,
 2016.
[17] P. Velan, M. Cermák, Pavel Celeda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of
 methods for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. [40] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of Encrypted
 Manag., vol. 25, pp. 355–374, 2015. Traffic with Second-Order Markov Chains and Application Attribute
 Bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1830–
[18] D. Goldschlag, M. Reedy, and P. Syversony, “Onion Routing for 1843, 2017.
 Anonymous and Private Internet Connections,” Network, pp. 1–5, 1999.
 [41] G. Sun, T. Chen, Y. Su, and C. Li, “Internet Traffic Classification Based
[19] Phobos (2010). Plaintext over Tor is still plaintext, Tor Blog. Retrieved on Incremental Support Vector Machines,” Mob. Networks Appl., pp.
 10 March 2018, from https://blog.torproject.org/plaintext-over-tor-still- 1–8, 2018.
 plaintext
 [42] J. Kampeas, A. Cohen, and O. Gurewitz, “Traffic Classification Based
[20] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) on Zero-Length Packets,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 4537,
 Protocol Version 1.2,” RFC 5246 (Proposed Standard), Internet no. c, pp. 1–14, 2018.
 Engineering Task Force, Aug. 2008, updated by RFCs 5746, 5878,
 6176. [43] A. Almubayed, A. Hadi, and J. Atoum, “A Model for Detecting Tor
 Encrypted Traffic using Supervised Machine Learning,” Int. J. Comput.
[21] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Netw. Inf. Secur., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 10–23, 2015.
 Protocol Version 3.0,” RFC 6101 (Historic), Internet Engineering Task
 Force, Aug. 2011. [44] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Martinelli, F. Mercaldo, and G. Vercelli, “Tor Traffic
 Analysis and Detection via Machine Learning Techniques,” IEEE Int.
[22] A. Lazarenko and S. Avdoshin, “Anonymity of Tor: Myth and Reality,” Conf. Big Data, pp. 4392–4398, 2017.
 Proc. 12th Cent. East. Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Russ. - CEE-SECR ’16,
 pp. 1–5, 2016. [45] Tor Project, Tor: Pluggable Transports, 2018. Retrieved 15 April 2018,
 from https://www.torproject.org/docs/pluggable-transports.html.en
[23] R. Marty, AI and Machine Learning in Cyber Security – Towards Data
 Science, Formulated.by, 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018, from [46] ONF, Software-Defined Networking (SDN) Definition - Open
 https://towardsdatascience.com/ai-and-machine-learning-in-cyber- Networking Foundation, 2018. Retrieved 15 April 2018, from
 security-d6fbee480af0 https://www.opennetworking.org/sdn-definition/
[24] S. Manocha and M. A. Girolami, “An empirical analysis of the [47] S. Omar, A. Ngadi, and H. H. Jebur, “Machine Learning Techniques for
 probabilistic K-nearest neighbour classifier,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., Anomaly Detection: An Overview,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 79, no.
 vol. 28, no. 13, pp. 1818–1824, 2007. 2, pp. 975–8887, 2013.
 [48] Z. Chen, L. Ruan, J. Cao, Y. Yu, and X. Jiang, “TIFAflow: Enhancing
[25] R. E. Neapolitan, “Learning Bayesian Networks,” Prentice Hall, vol. 6,
 no. 2, p. 674, 2003. traffic archiving system with flow granularity for forensic analysis in
 network security,” Tsinghua Sci. Technol., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 406–417,
[26] J. R. Quinlan (1993). C4.5: programs for machine learning. Log Altos, 2013.
 CA, Morgan Kaufmann
 [49] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, G. Wei, and L. T. Yang,
[27] V. N. Vapnik, “An overview of statistical learning theory.,” IEEE Trans. “Internet traffic classification using constrained clustering,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 988–99, 1999. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2932–2943, 2014.

 119 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
 Vol. 9, No. 8, 2018

[50] S. S. L. Pereira, J. L. De Castro E Silva, and J. E. B. Maia, “NTCS: A Supervised Anomaly Detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–
 real time flow-based network traffic classification system,” Proc. 10th 262, 2014.
 Int. Conf. Netw. Serv. Manag. CNSM 2014, pp. 368–371, 2015. [52] Z.-H. Zhou and M. Li, “Tri-training: exploiting unlabeled data using
[51] N. Goernitz, M. M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward three classifiers,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 17, no. 11, pp.
 1529–1541, Nov. 2005.

 120 | P a g e
 www.ijacsa.thesai.org
 View publication stats