How Far Can We Push Flow Analysis to Identify
 Encrypted Anonymity Network Traffic?
 Khalid Shahbar A. Nur Zincir-Heywood
 Faculty of Computer Science
 Dalhousie University
 Halifax, Canada
 {Shahbar, Zincir}@ cs.dal.ca

 Abstract— Anonymity networks provide privacy to the users that users trade information internally. Such a network is not
 by relaying their data to multiple destinations in order to reach optimized to browse Internet web sites. The supported
 the final destination anonymously. Multilayer of encryption is applications on these networks are different, such as browsing,
 used to protect the users’ privacy from attacks or even from the file sharing, IRC, web hosting, etc. One type of difference is the
 operators of the stations. In this research, we showed how flow operators of the networks; some anonymity networks count on
 analysis could be used to identify encrypted anonymity network volunteers to provide the service to the users. Others use
 traffic under four scenarios: (i) Identifying anonymity networks companies to provide the service. In addition, the threat models
 compared to normal background traffic; (ii) Identifying the type of these networks are not the same based on their design. What
 of applications used on the anonymity networks; (iii) Identifying
 could be a threat to one of these networks might not form any
 traffic flow behaviors of the anonymity network users; and (iv)
 Identifying / profiling the users on an anonymity network based
 threat to the others.
 on the traffic flow behavior. In order to study these, we employ a Tor [1] [15], JonDoNym [2] and I2P [3] are the three wellmachine learning based flow analysis approach and explore how known anonymity networks that we included on the proposed
 far we can push such an approach. data set. Tor provides the users with anonymity by passing the
 traffic through three stations (nodes). These nodes run by
 Keywords— Dataset; Tor; I2P; JonDonym; Traffic Flow; volunteers shared their bandwidth with the anonymity network.
 Anonymity
 The selection of these nodes is done by a protocol called path
 I. INTRODUCTION selection protocol. The users get the list of the currently
 available nodes on the networks from directory authorities
 Anonymity networks aim to provide the users with some servers. The path that the users use is not fixed, it continuously
 level of privacy. These networks enable the users on the Internet keeps changing. The user has the option to define the first or the
 to freely access websites or run applications on the Internet last node on the path instead of counting on the path selection
 without revealing their identity to any site that observes the protocol to select the nodes.
 network. In addition, anonymity networks hide the users’
 identity from the final destination (web server). Some of the JonDonym provides anonymity service to the users by
 most used and known anonymity networks are Tor [1], passing the traffic through multiple stations (Mixes). The path
 JonDonym [2], and I2P [3]. (cascade) on the JonDonym network is fixed. The user can select
 the cascade that will relay the traffic but cannot change the
 Anonymity networks (services) have much in common in mixes on the path. This is due to the difference in design of the
 more than one aspect. They provide services to the users on the anonymity networks. The mix on the JonDonym network
 Internet while keeping their identity hidden. In addition, most of multiplexes traffic from different users and sends it to the next
 the time, anonymity services provide anonymity to the users by mix on the cascade.
 forwarding the users’ traffic through multiple stations until the
 users' data reach to their destination. During this journey, the The Invisible Internet Project (I2P) is a packet switched
 data are encrypted multiple times. This way, the users’ data stay network that uses multilayer encryption to provide anonymity to
 anonymous where each station during the journey knows only its users. The path (Tunnels) on the I2P network is
 part of the information. Therefore, it becomes difficult to trace unidirectional. The user builds an encrypted tunnel to the final
 the users’ data in these networks. destination to send messages using the created tunnel (outbound
 tunnel). The messages travel in one direction only; therefore,
 At the same time, these networks have differences between messages from destination to the sender must use another tunnel
 them. They differ in the design; this includes how the data is (inbound tunnel). Tunnels on the I2P networks are used for
 forwarded between the stations, the type of the encryption used, communication and management. By default, the users on the
 the way to manage the networks, the protocol to select the I2P network share bandwidth by participating on building I2P
 stations, the operators of the stations, and other details regarding Tunnels. The user has the option to reduce or increase the
 the design. On the other hand, these networks have different amount of participation on building I2P Tunnels.
 goals under the design and different supported applications
 within the networks. For example, the anonymity networks The connection between the user and any of these anonymity
 could be designed specifically to browse the Internet websites networks is not hidden. These networks aim to provide
 anonymously. Others could be designed to be a private network anonymity to the user, but they do not hide that the user is

 978-1-5386-3416-5/18/$31.00©2018 Crown

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 connecting to such anonymity network. Therefore, blocking information to classify the circuit while it is in use. The offline
 these anonymity networks is possible. Thus, Tor employed classification used both the cell and the circuit level information
 different obfuscation techniques (Pluggable Transports) to hide to classify the circuit. In terms of accuracy, the best result they
 the connection to the Tor network. The implemented pluggable achieved in the offline classification was 91%, whereas the best
 transports are Scramblesuit [9], Flashproxy [10], Obfs3 [11], results achieved in the online classification was 97.8%.
 Meek [12], Format-transforming encryption (FTE) [13].
 Furthermore, JonDonym offers two options to resist the network In terms of the data set used on anonymity networks studies,
 blockage: TCP/IP forward and Skype tunnel. Both could be used researches in this filed used simulation environments to generate
 to connect the user to the JonDonym network if the network is the data or collected the data from the anonymity network. Bauer
 blocked. On the I2P network, the obfuscation options are et al. [7] presented a Tor network emulation tool, namely
 considered but not implemented yet. ExperimenTor. The tool provides a test environment for the Tor
 researchers by modeling Tor routers, bandwidth, users, and
 Anonymity networks have differences in the design, the applications. The ExperimenTor tool is available as standalone
 applications they support, the main goal of the network and how and a VMware image that has the tool installed and configured.
 the network resists censorship. In addition, the encryption
 employed in anonymity networks prevents using payload There are many other researches on Tor, JonDonym, and I2P
 anonymity networks [16] [17] [18] [19] where researchers used
 analysis to perform traffic analysis. On the other hand, flow
 analysis deals with statistical information extracted from the their own data to conduct their research. In this work, we also
 header of the traffic without the need to deal with the encryption. collect our own data on three anonymity tools, namely Tor,
 Therefore, in this paper, we explore the boundaries of flow JonDonym, and I2P. Furthermore, we make this dataset,
 analysis employment in anonymity network analysis. Anon17, publicly available for further research.

 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Related work III. DATASET AND FLOW ANALYSIS
 is reviewed in Section II. The Anon17 data set and the flow Flow analysis calculates statistical information extracted
 analysis approach used in this research are discussed in Section from the header of the packet to describe the communication
 III. Section IV presents the use of flow analysis to identify between two parties. The following sections describe how the
 anonymity networks. Section V presents the analysis of anonymity network data was collected and the flow exporter tool
 identifying the type of application on the anonymity network was used to generate the flows.
 traffic. Whereas Section VI presents the analysis for identifying
 the traffic flows of users as well as user profiles. Finally, A. Anon17
 conclusions are drawn, and the future work is discussed in There are many studies conducted on these anonymity
 Section VII. networks. The researches include a wide range of aspects related
 to the anonymity field such as improving the design, performing
 II. RELATED WORK attacks on the anonymity network, analyzing the users’ behavior
 Flow analysis is applied in many researches to solve on the anonymity network, studying the performance and delay,
 different types of problems. One of the applications of using revealing the users’ identity, and many others.
 flow analysis is encrypted traffic classification. Anonymity In some of the anonymity researches, the used data are
 networks traffic is based on multiple layers of encryption. collected in a simulated environment. Others used real data
 Therefore, flow analysis is studied to identify anonymity collected by the researchers themselves. The most common
 networks. Barker et al. [8] collected Tor data using a simulated issue that faces researchers in the anonymity field is that these
 environment. The goal of their research is to study the possibility anonymity networks provide anonymity to the users; thus,
 to differentiate between encrypted traffic and Tor traffic. The collecting the data and making it publicly available might affect
 data included HTTP and HTTPS traffic over the simulated Tor the privacy of users of the anonymity tools. Therefore, the
 network and HTTPS traffic. NetAI was used to export flows researches on the anonymity field count on data collected from
 from the captured traffic. The exported flows were analyzed a simulated environment or collected by the researchers
 using three machine learning algorithms namely, Random themselves.
 Forest, J4.8, and Adaboost. The result showed that it is possible
 to differentiate between Tor and encrypted traffic with more Anon17 [14] is the dataset we used in this work to identify
 than 90% accuracy. anonymity networks. Anon17 is collected at the NIMS lab [6]
 between 2014-2017 in a real network environment. The dataset
 Machine learning algorithms are also used to identify the is labeled based on the information that we could extract from
 type of application running anonymously on an anonymity the anonymity networks while collecting the data. For example,
 network. Alsabah et al. [17] used Naïve Bayes, Bayesian in the Tor network, the IP addresses of the Tor nodes are
 Networks, and Decision Tree algorithms to classify the available. Therefore, whenever we collect data related to a node
 application used by Tor’s users. The applications are Browsing, on the Tor network, we use the IP address to label this traffic as
 Streaming and BitTorrent. Given that Tor traffic is encrypted, “Tor”. The same applies for all the labeling in our data as
 they used the circuit level and the cell level information to do detailed below. We did not use any application classification
 the classification. The circuit level information included the tools to label our data. Instead, we used the ground-truth that we
 circuit lifetime and the amount of data transferred by the circuit. know to label all the traffic in Anon17. The port number was
 The cell level information included the cells inter arrival time used only to label the background traffic collected by other
 and their statistics. The classification included online and offline research group. The background traffic was classified into
 classification. The online classification used the cell level

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 multiple applications / protocols to investigate the ability to contain flows for the Eepsites Tunnels in addition to the Tunnels
 distinguish between the anonymity traffic and different used for the management of the I2P network and tunnels used to
 background application. share bandwidth such as the Exploratory and the Participating
 Tunnels.
 Anon17 contains data for three popular and well-known
 anonymity networks: Tor, JonDonym, and I2P. We provide 5) I2PApp0BW
 these data and make it publicly available without affecting the This dataset is similar to the I2Papp80BW; the difference is
 privacy of the users. To this end, the IP addresses of the users that the amount of shared bandwidth is set to 0%. This will
 have been removed. The payload information only used for reduce the amount of management traffic flows on each class.
 statistical measurement and then are removed. This is because
 we aim to provide a publicly available anonymity dataset that 6) I2PUsers
 could be used to study the aforementioned anonymity tools. The This dataset contains the traffic flows for three users on the
 dataset includes several applications used on these anonymity I2P network. The classes are named PC1, PC2, and PC3. The
 networks and also includes several obfuscation techniques that dataset I2PUsers is the same dataset used in I2PApp80BW. The
 are used on some of these networks. Therefore, the dataset could difference is that the data is classified differently. Instead of
 be used for multiple types of researches. labeling the dataset based on the application; the dataset is
 labeled based on the user traffic. Therefore, any class on this
 The following details the content of Anon17 used in this dataset will contain the three applications used on the
 paper and our previous works: I2Papp80BW dataset. For example, the PC1 flows contain
 1) Tor flows for the machine of the first users when the users used
 The Tor dataset contains Tor traffic. The traffic includes the Eepsites, jIRCii, and I2Psnark on the I2P network.
 circuit establishment and the user activities on the Tor network 7) I2PApp
 such as browsing the Internet websites. The Tor traffic does not This dataset contains traffic flows for the same three
 include any obfuscated traffic. The data collected from multiple applications used in I2PApp80BW. The difference is that this
 machines in NIMS labs while using Tor to browse Internet web dataset contains separate classes for the management tunnels.
 pages. The total number of classes on this dataset is five: Eepsites,
 2) TorApp jIRCii, I2Psnark, Exploratory Tunnels, and Participating
 The TorApp dataset contains flows for three machines Tunnels. Therefore, the application tunnels do not contain any
 (computers) running three applications on the Tor network management tunnels flows.
 (Browsing, Video streaming, and File sharing). Therefore, there 8) JonDonym
 are three classes on the TorApp dataset (Browsing, streaming, The JonDonym dataset contains traffic flows for the
 and BitTorrent). The Browsing class contains connection flows JonDonym network as well as traffic flows for the whole free
 between a user and an entry node on the Tor network when the mixes in the JonDonym network [14].
 user is using Tor to browse different Internet websites. The
 Streaming class is the connection flows between the user and the B. Flow Exporter
 entry node when the user is watching videos on Tor. The last We used Tranalyzer [4] to extract the flows from the PCAP
 class, the BitTorrent class contains flows between the user and files we captured in the NIMS lab. Tranalyzer has 92 features
 the first node when the user is using Torrent files on the Tor based on the plug-ins used such as Number of bytes sent,
 network Number of bytes received, Statistics about the Inter-arrival time,
 and Number of connection etc. Some of the unrelated features
 3) TorPT are removed from the dataset such as the ICMP features and
 The TorPT dataset contains flows for Tor pluggable VLAN features because they do not provide useful information
 transports. The TorPT has five classes: Obfs3, Meek, for our purposes. IP addresses and payloads of the packets are
 Flashproxy, FTE, and Scramblesuit. The TorPT is collected by also removed from the dataset to protect the privacy of the users.
 connecting to the pluggable transports form the NIMS lab and In the dataset, the values of some features might have zeros. For
 capture the traffic. The Obfs3 is collected from two different example, the I2P network works on both TCP and UDP.
 Obfs3 bridges. The Scramblesuit traffic is collected by Therefore, if the I2P data set contains UDP connections then all
 connecting to 22 different Scramblesuit servers. This is to ensure the TCP related features will have zero values.
 that we include the effect of changing the flow behavior that
 Scramblesuit pluggable transport aims to achieve. Tranalyzer has both the flow exporter and the flow collector
 integrated into the Tranalyzer. Figure 1. Shows the setup for
 4) I2PApp80BW collecting the data in Anon17.
 These traffic flows are collected while running three
 applications on the I2P network. The applications (classes) are The data is formatted into arff file format used in the open
 Eepsites (the websites browsing on the I2P network), jIRCii source data mining software tool, Weka [5]. Table I summarizes
 (Internet Relay Chat (IRC) plugin on the I2P network), and the features included in Anon17 dataset.
 I2Psnark (the file sharing plugin on the I2P network). The
 bandwidth sharing on the I2P client is set to default which is
 80% sharing rate of the user bandwidth. In this dataset, each
 class contains the application flows in addition to the
 management traffic flows. For example, the Eepsites flows

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 IV. IDENTIFYING ANONYMITY NETWORKS
 In this section, the flow analysis is used to identify an
 anonymity network among different background traffic. The
 selected anonymity network to be studied using flow analysis in
 this section is JonDonym. The JonDonym data employed in this
 analysis is the JonDonym part from the Anon17 dataset. The
 data of JonDonym are collected from three machines at NIMS
 lab by connecting to all the free cascades on the JonDonym
 network. For a background traffic, LBNL/ICSI [20] data set are
 employed as the background traffic. It contains network traces
 collected from more than 100 hours of activities for several
 thousands of hosts. The data size is 11 GB. The data are publicly
 available in a PCAP form. The data are distributed over several
 small PCAP files. For this analysis, a total of 211,370 flows are
 Fig. 1. Anon17 Flow Analysis. extracted from around 1.5 GB. Table II shows the result of the
 JonDonym traffic with the background traffic. The results show
 TABLE I. ANON17 DATASET FEATURES that JonDonym flows can be distinguished from background
 Features Description traces with a high accuracy level (99.99%).
 Flow direction, time, and TABLE II. RESULTS FOR JONDONYM FLOW ANALYSIS.
 dir time_first, time_last, duration
 duration of the flow
 TP Rate FP Rate Precision F-Measure
 numPktsSnt numPktsRcvd JonDoNym 0.997 0 1 0.998
 numBytesSnt numBytesRcvd
 Counting of Packets and
 minPktSz maxPktSz avePktSize pktps BackGround 1 0.003 1 1
 Bytes
 bytps pktAsm
 LBNL/ICSI
 bytAsm
 Accuracy 99.99%
 ip_mindIPID ip_maxdIPID ip_minTTL The IP Header related
 ip_maxTTL ip_TTL_Chg ip_TOS features such as TOS, TTL
 ip_flags ip_Opt ip_OptCnt etc.
 tcp_PSeqCnt tcp_SeqSntBytes
 The next part of the analysis is performed by labeling the
 tcp_SeqFaultCnt tcp_PAckCnt background data to application/protocol names based on the port
 tcp_FlwLssAckRcvdBytes number. The background data contains a vast number of
 tcp_AckFaultCnt tcp_InitWinSz applications and protocols. Some of the application or the
 tcp_AveWinSz tcp_MinWinSz protocols appear just a few times while others have a high
 tcp_MaxWinSz tcp_WinSzDwnCnt number of appearances in the data. Therefore, the top appeared
 The TCP Header related
 tcp_WinSzUpCnt
 tcp_WinSzChgDirCnt tcp_AggrFlags
 features such as Window applications on the data are labeled with their application name,
 tcp_AggrAnomaly tcp_AggrOptions
 size, sequence number etc. the rest are labeled as others. Thus, instead of having one class,
 tcp_MSS tcp_WS tcp_OptCnt tcp_S- namely background, the data will have 12 classes namely,
 SA/SA-A_Trip tcp_S-SA-A/A-A_RTT HTTP, HTTPS, IMAPS, SNMP, NetBIOS-SSN, DNS, POP3,
 tcp_RTTAckTripMin LPD, EPMAP, SMTP, SSH, and other. Table III shows the
 tcp_RTTAckTripMax results of the applications and JonDonym analysis. The results
 tcp_RTTAckTripAve tcpStates
 dropped by 2% compared to the previous analysis where all the
 Counting of number of background traffic flows were grouped into one class.
 connections between source
 connSrc connDst connSrc<->Dst
 and destination/ source to V. IDENTIFYING THE OBFUSCATED ANONYMITY
 different destinations. NETWORK TRAFFIC
 min_pl max_pl mean_pl The flow analysis could be used to explore the behavior of
 low_quartile_pl median_pl the anonymity network when anti-censorship techniques are
 upp_quartile_pl iqd_pl mode_pl
 range_pl std_pl stdrob_pl skew_pl Packet length statistics used on these networks. Tor pluggable transports systems work
 exc_pl to provide access to the Tor network in adversarial (censorship)
 environments. Most of the pluggable transports tools
 concentrate on hiding the content of the packets in a way that
 min_iat max_iat mean_iat makes it hard for the adversaries when using deep packet
 low_quartile_iat median_iat inspection (DPI) to detect the connection to the bridges. But DPI
 upp_quartile_iat iqd_iat mode_iat Inter arrival time statistics is not the only method used to detect Tor traffic. The active
 range_iat std_iat stdrob_iat skew_iat
 exc_iat nfp_pl_iat ps_iat_histo probing and the flow analysis are some of the other popular
 methods used to detect Tor traffic. In our previous analysis [21],
 TrafficType The classes we demonstrated the resistance of Tor pluggable transports

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 against network traffic flow analysis techniques. Table IV shows three computers to connect to our configured node on the Tor
 the result of the flow analysis of Tor pluggable transports with network and collected the flow of these three applications. The
 different background traffic from our previous works. The flow analysis is then employed to identify the type of
 pluggable transport traffic includes FTE, Scramblesuit, Meek, application running on the Tor network. The flows are extracted
 Flashproxy, and Obfs3. The pluggable transports related traffic using both Tranalyzer and Tcptrace. Four machine learning
 could be found in the Anon17 datasets, under TorPT. The algorithms namely C4.5, Naïve Bayes, Random Forest, and
 background traffic includes HTTP, HTTPS, SSH, BitTorrent, Bayesian Network are used in the analysis of these three
 and Encrypted BitTorrent. In this case, the results show 97%. applications. Table IV shows the results of the four classifying
 TABLE III. RESULTS OF APPLICATIONS AND JONDONYM FLOW
 algorithms for the two employed flow exporters. The accuracy
 ANALYSIS is between 92% - 99% based on the machine learning algorithm
 and the flow exporter used. Table V shows the results of the
 TP Rate FP Rate Precision F-Measure
 Tranalyzer flow analysis against different background traffic.
 HTTP 0.986 0.013 0.981 0.984 The flows of the three applications on Tor are included in
 HTTPS 0.897 0.004 0.919 0.908
 Anon17 and called TorApp.
 IMAPS 0.88 0.001 0.900 0.888
 SNMP 0.998 0.000 0.996 0.997
 TABLE V. RESULTS FOR THE FLOW ANALYSIS OF TOR PLUGGABLE
 NETBIOS-SSN 0.974 0.002 0.971 0.972 TRANSPORTS AGAINST DIFFERENT BACKGROUND TRAFFIC
 DNS 0.997 0.000 0.998 0.998
 POP3 0.982 0.000 0.969 0.975 TP FP Pre- F-
 LPD 0.998 0.000 0.998 0.998 Class Rate Rate cision Measure
 EPMAP 0.993 0.000 0.988 0.990 % % % %
 SMTP 0.948 0.000 0.961 0.955 HTTP 99 0.1 99 99
 SSH 0.455 0.000 0.613 0.522 Background HTTPS 94 0 95 95
 OTHER 0.973 0.006 0.976 0.974 SSH 99 0 99 99
 Traffic
 JonDonym 0.999 0.000 1.000 1.000 BT 94 2.5 84 89
 Accuracy 97.99%
 BTecr 89 0.9 96 92
 FTE 99 0 99 99
 Pluggable Scramble
 98 0.1 92 95
 Transports suit
 TABLE IV. APPLICATIONS ANALYSIS ON THE TOR NETWORK Meek 99 0 99 99
 Traffic Flash
 99 0.1 99 99
 proxy
 Classifier Accuracy F-Measure Obfs3 99 0 99 99
 Browsing Streaming BitTorrent
 Overall
 Bayes net Correctly
 99.2% 0.99 0.99 1
 TRANALYZER2

 Classified 97%
 Naïve Bayes Instances
 93.3% 0.98 0.90 0.93
 C4.5
 97.2% 0.96 0.98 0.98
 Random Forest B. Bandwidth and Applications Analysis on the I2P
 98.8% 0.99 0.98 0.99 Network.
 Bayes net I2P network uses unidirectional tunnels for the outgoing and
 97.7% 0.98 0.97 0.99
 incoming traffic. The default setting on the I2P network enables
 TCPTRACE

 Naïve Bayes
 92.2% 0.96 0.89 0.92 bandwidth participations. This means that users on the I2P
 C4.5 networks share their bandwidth to build tunnels that could be
 96.1% 0.96 0.95 0.98 used by other I2P’s users. The default setting is 80% bandwidth
 Random Forest participating. In our previous work [22], we studied the effect of
 97.7% 0.99 0.96 0.98
 sharing bandwidth on the anonymity of I2P network using the
 flow analysis. We set up three machines to connect to the I2P
 network and collect data. Browsing, File downloading, and IRC
 VI. IDENTIFYING APPLICATIONS ON ANONYMITY are the three applications each machine run while collecting the
 NETWORKS data. The data is included in Anon17 and called I2P80BW. The
 The flow analysis could be used to identify the applications bandwidth participation is then disabled, and the threeon the anonymity networks. In our previous works, we studied applications data collection is repeated. In Anon17, this part is
 the possibility to identify the application on two well-known called I2P0BW. The accuracy when using the flow analysis for
 anonymity networks (Tor [1] and I2P [3]). The following the applications classification on the I2P networks shows low
 sections show the finding on identifying applications on accuracy when the bandwidth participation is high. On the other
 anonymity networks. hand, when the bandwidth participation is disabled, then the
 accuracy improved. The labeling in the I2P80BW and I2P0BW
 A. Applications Classification on the Tor Network ignores that the tunnels on the I2P are used for data and also for
 Browsing, Video streaming, and BitTorrent are the three managing the network. Therefore, the flows for any of the three
 applications we studied in our previous work [21]. We set up applications are not pure application flows but also includes
 flows that belong to the management of the network. Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 another experiment is conducted to collect data from the same [2] Project: AN.ON – Anonymity [Online]. Available: http://anon.inf.tuthree machines and for the same three applications where the dresden.de/index_en.html.
 management tunnels are separated from the data. This part of the [3] The Invisible Internet Project (I2P) [Online]. Available:
 https://geti2p.net/en/
 data is called I2Papp. It contains five classes, three for the
 [4] TRANALYZER2 [Online]. Available: http://tranalyzer.com/
 applications and two for the management part as explained in
 our previous work [22]. [5] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I.
 Witten,”The WEKA data mining software: an update,” SIGKDD
 C. User Profiling on the I2P network Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10-18, 2009.
 [6] NIMS: Network Information Management and Security Group [Online].
 The same data used in section B is used to study flow Available: https://projects.cs.dal.ca/projectx/
 analysis for profiling users on the I2P network. Instead of [7] K. Bauer, M. Sherr, D. McCoy, D. Grunwald, “ExperimenTor: a testbed
 labeling the data based on the applications, the data is labeled for safe and realistic tor experimentation,” in Proceedings of the 4th
 based on the machine. In this set of experiments, each machine conference on Cyber security experimentation and test, p.7-7, August 08,
 represents a different user. The I2PUsers in Anon17 represents 2011, San Francisco, CA
 the data for user profiling we used explore how far user profiling [8] J. Barker, P. Hannay, and P. Szewczyk, "Using traffic analysis to identify
 can be pushed on the I2P network. I2PUsers contains three the second generation onion Router," in the 9th IFIP International
 Conference on embedded and ubiquitous computing, Melbourne, AUS,
 classes, one for each machine. Table VI shows the results when 2011, pp.72-78.
 using the flow analysis for both applications classification and [9] P. Winter, T. Pulls, and J. Fuss. “ScrambleSuit: A Polymorphic Network
 users profiling when the bandwidth participating is disabled. Protocol to Circumvent Censorship,” In Workshop on Privacy in the
 Electronic Society, Berlin, Germany, 2013. ACM.
 TABLE VI. APPLICATIONS CLASSIFICATION AND USERS PROFILING ON [10] D. Fifield, N. Hardison, J. Ellithrope, E. Stark, R. Dingledine, D. Boneh,
 THE I2P NETWORKS
 and P. Porras, “Evading Censorship with Browser-Based Proxies,” In
 PETS, 2012.
 Number of Accuracy (%) [11] Obfs3. [Online]. Available: https://gitweb.torproject.org/pluggable-
 Instances transports/obfsproxy.git/tree/doc/obfs3/obfs3-protocol-spec.txt
 Traffic Profiling 195,081 73.7 [12] Meek. [Online]. Available:
 Traffic Profiling – TCP Only 40,075 65.6 https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/meek
 Traffic Profiling – UDP Only 155,006 75.7 [13] K. Dyer, S. Coull, T. Ristenpart and T. Shrimpton, “Protocol
 User Profiling 195,081 66.7 Misidentication Made Easy with Format-Transforming Encryption,"
 User Profiling – TCP Only 40,075 81.7 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu- nication Security,
 User Profiling – UDP Only
 CCS'13, pp. 61-72, ACM, 2013.
 155,006 63.2
 [14] Anon17: Anonymity Networks Dataset. [Online]. Available:
 https://web.cs.dal.ca/~shahbar/data.html
 VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [15] Tor project: Anonymity online. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.torproject.org/
 In this paper, we showed the potential of using the flow [16] A. Chaabane, P. Manils and M. A. Kaafar, "Digging into Anonymous
 analysis and its applications on the identification of the Traffic: A Deep Analysis of the Tor Anonymizing Network," 2010 Fourth
 anonymity networks. The flow analysis has high accuracy in International Conference on Network and System Security, Melbourne,
 identification of the encrypted anonymity networks. We VIC, 2010, pp. 167-174.
 employed the flow analysis in three main categories: (i) [17] M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s performance
 using real-time traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
 identifying the anonymity networks and the ability to conference on Computer and communications security, Raleigh, USA,
 differentiate any encrypted traffic from encrypted anonymity 2012, pp. 73-84.
 networks traffic; (ii) identifying the obfuscated anonymity [18] B. Westermann, D. Kesdogan, “Malice versus AN.ON: possible risks of
 network traffic within the encrypted traffic; and (iii) applications missing replay and integrity protection,” in Proceedings of the 15th
 profiling using the flow analysis. In our experiments, the international conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
 accuracy varies based on the applications, the anonymity 2011, Gros Islet, St. Lucia.
 network, and the user’s configuration when using the anonymity [19] P. LIU, L. WANG, Q. TAN, Q. LI, ,X. WANG, and J. SHI, “Empirical
 Measurement and Analysis of I2P Routers”. Journal of Networks, North
 network. Furthermore, Anon17 is presented in this paper and America, 9, sep. 2014.
 made publicly available. Anon17 contains the traffic samples for
 [20] Ruoming Pang, Mark Allman, Vern Paxson, and Jason Lee, “The devil
 three anonymity networks: Tor, JonDonym, and I2P. For future and packet trace anonymization,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
 work, we will expand Anon17 to include additional applications Communication Review, 36(1):29{38, 2006.
 running on these anonymity networks. [21] K. Shahbar, and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Benchmarking two techniques
 for Tor classification: Flow level and Circuit level classification,”. in
 REFERENCES IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Cyber Security, 2014.
 [22] K. Shahbar, and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Effects of shared bandwidth on
 [1] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: the second- anonymity of the I2P network users,” In 38th IEEE Symposium on
 generation onion router,” in Proceedings of the 13th conference on Security and Privacy Workshops, 2nd International Workshop on Trafic
 USENIX Security Symposium - Volume 13. USENIX Association, 2004, Measurements for Cybersecurity (WTMC 2017), May 2017.
 pp. 21–21.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:05:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.