See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325354230

On blockchain and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities

Article in Future Generation Computer Systems · May 2018
DOI: 10.1016/j.future.2018.05.046

CITATIONS READS

2,054 7,996

5 authors, including:

 Cristian Martín Enrique Soler
 University of Malaga University of Malaga
 44 PUBLICATIONS 3,329 CITATIONS 34 PUBLICATIONS 2,184 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE

 Manuel Díaz
 University of Malaga
 313 PUBLICATIONS 16,738 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE

 All content following this page was uploaded by Cristian Martín on 14 June 2018.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 On blockchain and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities

 Ana Reyna∗, Cristian Martı́n, Jaime Chen, Enrique Soler, Manuel Dı́az
 Department of Languages and Computer Science, University of Málaga, Boulevar Louis Pasteur 35, 29071 Málaga, Spain

Abstract
In the Internet of Things (IoT) vision, conventional devices become smart and autonomous. This vision is turning into a
reality thanks to advances in technology, but there are still challenges to address, particularly in the security domain e.g.,
data reliability. Taking into account the predicted evolution of the IoT in the coming years, it is necessary to provide
confidence in this huge incoming information source. Blockchain has emerged as a key technology that will transform
the way in which we share information. Building trust in distributed environments without the need for authorities is a
technological advance that has the potential to change many industries, the IoT among them. Disruptive technologies
such as big data and cloud computing have been leveraged by IoT to overcome its limitations since its conception, and
we think blockchain will be one of the next ones. This paper focuses on this relationship, investigates challenges in
blockchain IoT applications, and surveys the most relevant work in order to analyze how blockchain could potentially
improve the IoT.
Keywords: internet of things, blockchain, smart contract, trust

1. Introduction The IoT visualizes a totally connected world, where
 things are able to communicate measured data and in-
 The rapid evolution in miniaturization, electronics and teract with each other. This makes possible a digital
wireless communication technologies have contributed to representation of the real world, through which many
unprecedented advances in our society. This has resulted smart applications in a variety of industries can be dein an increase in the number of suitable electronic devices veloped. These include: Smart homes, Weareables, Smart
for many areas, a reduction in their production costs and cities, Healthcare, Automotive, Environment, Smart waa paradigm shift from the real world into the digital world. ter, Smart grid, etc. IoT solutions are being deployed in
Therefore, the way in which we interact with each other many areas, optimizing production and digitizing indusand with the environment has changed, using current tech- tries. IoT applications have very specific characteristics,
nology to gain a better understanding of the world. The they generate large volumes of data and require connec-
Internet of Things (IoT) has emerged as a set of technolo- tivity and power for long periods. This, together with the
gies from Wireless Sensors Networks (WSN) to Radio Fre- limitations in memory, computer capacity, networks and
quency Identification (RFID), that provide the capabilities limited power supply pose a high number of challenges.
to sense, actuate with and communicate over the Internet
[1]. Nowadays, an IoT device can be an electronic device The huge expansion of the IoT has to be supported
from a wearable to a hardware development platform and by standard mechanisms and protocols in order to reduce
the range of applications where it can be used encompass the existing heterogeneity in the field. This heterogenemany areas of the society. The IoT plays a central role ity leads to vertical silos and reduces the adoption of the
in turning current cities into smart cities, electrical grids IoT. However, aside from the heterogeneity and integrainto smart grids and houses into smart homes, and this is tion challenges present in the IoT, the trustworthiness of
only the beginning. According to various research reports, its data is also an important issue to bear in mind. Nowathe number of connected devices is predicted to reach any- days, we trust in the information of financial entities and
where from 20 to 50 billion by 2020 [2] mainly due to the the government among others, but can we be sure that
vast number of devices that the IoT can place on the scene. the information provided by them and by other external entities, such as IoT companies, has not been tampered/altered/falsified in any way? This is a difficult ques-
 I Fully documented templates are available in the elsarticle pack- tion to answer in centralized architectures. Untrusted entiage on CTAN. ties can alter information according to their own interests,
 ∗ Corresponding author

 Email addresses: reyna@lcc.uma.es (Ana Reyna),
 so the information they provide might not be completely
cmf@lcc.uma.es (Cristian Martı́n), hfc@lcc.uma.es (Jaime Chen), reliable. This brings about the need to verify that the
esc@lcc.uma.es (Enrique Soler), mdr@lcc.uma.es (Manuel Dı́az) information has never been modified.
Preprint submitted to Future Generation Computer Systems June 14, 2018
 One way to provide trustworthiness in IoT data is guaranteed in applications that go beyond the cryptocurthrough a distributed service trusted by all its participants rencies. Blockchain has revolutionized trustworthiness of
that guarantees that the data remains immutable. If all information as well. For instance, this technology has been
participants have the data and they have the means to ver- used in voting systems by government entities, renting and
ify that the data have not been tampered with since the data storage among others [4].
first definition, trustworthiness can be achieved. Moreover, In this paper the current challenges of IoT and
having a system that guarantees data reliability would al- blockchain and the potential advantages of their combined
low governments to share and securely transfer informa- use will be analyzed.
tion with citizens. Disruptive applications in this area will be highlighted in
 In many areas where an exhaustive traceability of as- addition to a review of the available blockchain platforms
sets during their life cycle is required by regulations, data to address these challenges.
immutability becomes a key challenge. Concretely, Eu- The main contributions of the paper are:
ropean Union (EU) regulations require food producers to
trace and identify all raw materials used in the elaboration 1. Survey on blockchain technology, analyzing its unique
of their food products in addition to the final destination features and open challenges.
of each of them. For example, in the case of a large food 2. Identification and analysis of the different ways of incompany with thousands of manufacturing suppliers and tegrating IoT and blockchain.
millions of clients, the information needs to be digitized 3. Study of challenges, potential benefits and open issues
and its processing automated to comply with regulation. of the integration of blockchain and IoT.
One example of strong regulation in terms of traceability is 4. Study of existing blockchain-IoT platforms and applithe pork supply, regulated in many countries. In this sce- cations.
nario, in addition to tracing the raw material used in pig 5. Evaluation and comparison of the performance of diffeed and treatments and the final destination of the pork, ferent blockchains in an IoT device.
the transportation of the animals between factories must
also be registered by law. These scenarios involve many The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
participants, some of them still relying on non-automated introduces the blockchain technology and analyzes its main
information handling methods. In the case of food contam- challenges. In Section 3 IoT and blockchain integration is
ination, which has been an important issue for the world addressed, analyzing the challenges that this integration
population’s health throughout history, information that involves. A state of the art in blockchain platforms for IoT
is lost or difficult to find implies delays in the location of and IoT-blockchain applications is presented in Section 4.
the problem’s focus. This can also result in the public’s Lastly, our conclusions and future work are presented in
mistrust of the contaminated products and a large decrease Section 5.
in their demand. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is estimated that every year around 600 2. Blockchain
million people in the world suffer illness from eating contaminated food, of which 420,000 die from the same cause The problem of trust in information systems is ex-
[3]. So, missing or inaccessible information can affect food tremely complex when no verification nor audit mechasecurity and customer health. In these kinds of scenarios nisms are provided, especially when they have to deal with
the IoT has the potential to transform and revolutionize sensitive information, such as economic transactions with
the industry and society, digitizing the knowledge so that virtual currencies. In this context, Satoshi Nakamoto, in
it can be queried and controlled in real time. This tech- 2008 [5] presented two radical concepts that have had a
nology can be used to improve current processes in many great repercussion. The first of these is Bitcoin, a virtual
areas such as cities, industry, health and transportation. cryptocurrency that maintains its value without support
 Although the IoT can facilitate the digitization of the from any centralized authority or financial entity. Rather,
information itself, the reliability of such information is still the coin is held collectively and securely by a decentrala key challenge. In this sense, a new technology that ized P2P network of actors that make up an auditable
was born as the first decentralized cryptocurrency has the and verifiable network. The second of the concepts, whose
potential to offer a solution to the data reliability prob- popularity has gone even further than the cryptocurrency
lem: Bitcoin, which has revolutionized the mechanisms in itself, is blockchain.
money transfers. The Bitcoin cryptocurrency, and many of Blockchain is the mechanism that allows transactions to
its upcoming variants, can be globally transferred without be verified by a group of unreliable actors. It provides a
financial entities and foreign exchanges, with a digital and distributed, immutable, transparent, secure and auditable
nontransferable wallet. Bitcoin is supported by a proto- ledger. The blockchain can be consulted openly and fully,
col that details the infrastructure responsible for ensuring allowing access to all transactions that have occurred since
that the information remains immutable over time. This the first transaction of the system, and can be verified
protocol is known as the blockchain. It has been applied and collated by any entity at any time. The blockchain
to many other areas, and the information immutability is protocol structures information in a chain of blocks, where
 2
each block stores a set of Bitcoin transactions performed terms, a smart contract refers to the computer protocols
at a given time. Blocks are linked together by a reference or programs that allow a contract to be automatically exto the previous block, forming a chain. ecuted/enforced taking into account a set of predefined
 To support and operate with the blockchain, network conditions. For example, smart contracts define the applipeers have to provide, the following functionality: routing, cation logic that will be executed whenever a transaction
storage, wallet services and mining [6]. According to the takes place in the exchange of cryptocurrency. In smart
functions they provide, different types of nodes can be part contracts, functions and conditions can be defined beyond
of the network. Table 1 summarizes the most common the exchange of cryptocurrencies, such as the validation of
node types in the Bitcoin network. assets in a certain range of transactions with non-monetary
 The routing function is necessary to participate in the elements, which makes it a perfect component to expand
P2P network, this includes transaction and block propaga- blockchain technology to other areas. Ethereum [8] was
tion. The storage function is responsible for keeping a copy one of the pioneer blockchains to include smart contracts.
of the chain in the node (the entire chain for full nodes, and Today smart contracts have been included in the majoronly a part of it for light nodes). Wallet services provide ity of existing blockchain implementations, such as Hypersecurity keys that allow users to order transactions, i.e., ledger [9], a blockchain designed for companies that allows
to operate with their Bitcoins. Finally the mining func- components to be deployed according to the needs of users
tion is responsible for creating new blocks by solving the (smart contracts, services or consultations among others)
proof of work. The nodes that perform the proof of work with the support of large companies such as IBM, JP Mor-
(or mining) are known as miners, and they receive newly gan, Intel and BBVA.
generated bitcoins, and fees, as a reward. The concept of All of this has contributed to the expansion of blockchain
proof of work is one of the keys to enable trustless consen- technology to a large number of areas where the feasus in blockchain network. The proof of work consists of tures offered by this technology are needed: reliability,
a computationally intensive task that is necessary for the immutability and auditability. In fact, blockchain is curgeneration of blocks. This work must be complex to solve rently one of the top research topics of recent times, with
and at the same time easily verifiable once completed. more than 1.4 billion dollars invested by startups alone in
 Once a miner completes the proof of work, it publishes the first 9 months of 2016 according to PwC [10].
the new block in the network and the rest of the network
verifies its validity before adding it to the chain. Since 2.1. Challenges
the generation of blocks is carried out concurrently in the Although the key idea of blockchain is simple, its implenetwork, the block chain may temporarily fork in different mentation poses a great number of challenges. This section
branches (produced by different miners). This discrep- introduces the main ones that its use brings about.
ancy is solved by considering that the longest branch of
blocks is the one that will be considered as valid. This, to- 2.1.1. Storage capacity and Scalability
gether with the intensive nature of the block generation Storage capacity and scalability have been deeply quesprocess provides a novel, distributed-trustless-consensus tioned in blockchain. In this technology, the chain is almechanism. It is very computationally expensive for a ma- ways growing, at a rate of 1MB per block every 10 minutes
licious attacker to modify a block and corrupt the block in Bitcoin, and there are copies stored among nodes in the
chain since the rest of the trusted miners would outrun the network. Although only full nodes (a node that can fully
attacker in the block generation process and therefore the validate transactions and blocks) store the full chain, stortrusted branch of blocks will invalidate the one generated age requirements are significant. As the size grows, nodes
by the attacker. In technical terms, in order for a manipu- require more and more resources, thus reducing the syslated block to be successfully added to the chain, it would tem’s capacity scale. In addition, an oversized chain has
be necessary to solve the proof of work faster than the rest negative effects on performance, for instance, it increases
of the network, which is computationally too expensive- it synchronization time for new users.
requires having control of at least 51% of the computing Transaction validation is a key component of the disresources in the network. Due to the large computational tributed consensus protocol as nodes in the blockchain
capacity needed to modify the blockchain, the corruption network are expected to validate each transaction of each
of its blocks is practically impossible. This means that, block. The number of transactions in a block and the
even if the participants are not completely honest about time between blocks, modulate the computational power
the use of Bitcoin, a consensus is always reached in the required and this has a direct effect on transaction confirnetwork as long as most of the network is formed by hon- mation times. Hence, the consensus protocol has a direct
est participants. The solution proposed by Nakamoto was effect on the scalability of blockchain networks.
a great revolution in the reliability of unreliable actors in Taking into account the trust model of Bitcoin and its
decentralized systems. More details about the blockchain scalability limitations, Bitcoin-NG [11] proposes a new
architecture can be found in [5, 7]. Byzantine-fault-tolerant blockchain protocol which im-
 Blockchain has also provided a technology where the proves the consensus latency with respect to Bitcoin. Liteconcept of smart contract can be materialized. In general coin [12] is technically identical to Bitcoin, but features
 3
 Table 1: Bitcoin nodes and functionality
 Wallet Storage Mining Routing
 x x x x Bitcoin core
 x x Full node
 x x x Solo miner
 x x Light wallet

faster transaction confirmation times and improved stor- 5 or 6. This takes between 20 and 40 minutes on average
age efficiency thanks to the reduction of the block genera- [22]. There is a large variance in the confirmation time
tion time and the proof of work, which is based on scrypt, since it depends on many factors. In fast payment scenara memory intensive password-based key derivation func- ios the trader cannot afford this wait. Therefore, in these
tion. GHOST [13] is intended to improve the scalability scenarios, double-spend attacks are still possible.
of Bitcoin by changing its chain selection rule. Off-chain Similarly, race attacks can work in these scenarios. To
solutions [14] are intended to perform transactions off the carry out this attack the user sends a transaction directly
chain, increasing the bandwidth at the same time as it in- to the merchant, who accepts the transaction too quickly.
creases the probability of losing data. Another proposal Then the user sends multiple conflicting transactions to
suggests reducing the propagation delay [15] in the Bit- the network transferring the coins of the payment to himcoin protocol, however it can compromise the security of self. The second transaction is more likely to be confirmed,
the network. Rather than increasing the scalability on and the merchant is cheated. Similarly, the Finney [23] atblockchain, BigchainDB [16] adds blockchain characteris- tack is a more sophisticated double spend, since it requires
tics to a big data distributed database. BigchainDB com- the participation of a miner.
bines the high throughput and low latency characteris- The well-known attacks Denial of Service(DoS), Man in
tics of big data distributed databases with the immutabil- the Middle (MitM) or Sybil can also obstruct the network
ity and decentralized system of blockchain. Another im- operation. Most P2P protocols and IoT infrastructures are
portant development is the Inter Planetary File System vulnerable to these kinds of attacks, since they strongly
(IPFS) [17]. IPFS is a protocol designed to store decen- rely on communications. In the eclipse attack [24], attralized and shared files enabling a P2P distributed file tackers can monopolize a node’s connections, isolating it
system to make the web safer, faster and more open. IPFS from the rest of the network and altering the view of the
is intended to increase the efficiency of the web at the same network for this node.
time as it removes duplication and tracks version history Code updates and optimization in blockchain networks
for each file. are usually supported by part of the cryptocurrency community and are intended to improve their underlying pro-
2.1.2. Security: Weaknesses and threats tocols. These improvements are known as soft and hard
 The Bitcoin protocol has been thoroughly analyzed [18], forks in blockchain terminology. On the one hand, soft
and various vulnerabilities and security threats have been forks provide an update of the software protocol that recdiscovered. ognizes backward-compatibility with the previous blocks.
 The most common attack is the 51% attack or majority This requires an upgrading of the majority of the minattack [19]. ers to the new software. However, upgraded functionality
 This attack can occur if a blockchain participant is able can also be rejected by the majority of the nodes keeping
to control more than 51% of the mining power. In this situ- to the old rules. On the other hand, hard forks bring a
ation he/she can control the consensus in the network. The radical change to the protocol, with no compatibility with
boom and fast evolution of mining pools (with GHash.io4 previous blocks and transactions. Consequently, all the
temporarily reaching 51% of the Bitcoin mining power in nodes have to upgrade to the latest update, and nodes
2014), has increased the probability of this attack hap- with older versions will no longer be accepted. The compening, which in turn could compromise the integrity of munity can be divided when a hard fork happens, result-
Bitcoin. In addition, the authors in [20] discuss the pos- ing in two different forks of the network. Hard forks can
sibility of reaching a majority of mining power through also be cancelled if they have not built sufficient consenbribery. The solo mining incentive or P2P mining would sus like SegWit2x [25]. Noted examples of that division
help alleviate this problem. Many other consensus mecha- are Ethereum and Ethereum Classic; and Bitcoin, Bitcoin
nisms proposed for blockchains are also susceptible to ma- Cash and Bitcoin Gold. The aforementioned hard forks
jority attacks, especially those that centralize the consen- have progressed at the same time as the original networks
sus among a limited number of users. and nowadays they are competing with each other. Nodes
 The double-spend attack consists in spending the same and users have to decide on a version, and the fork continucoin twice[21]. In Bitcoin a transaction should be consid- ity will depend on these decisions. Hence forks, especially
ered confirmed only after the block where the transaction hard ones, can divide the community into two completely
is stored has a certain depth in the blockchain, typically different blockchains and this can represent a risk to the
 4
blockchain users. CoinJoin in order to increase security; CoinSwap [35] that
 A common problem of virtual currencies, beyond the proposes a four-transactions mechanism based on the incontroversy surrounding their real value, is the problem of clusion of intermediaries that receive coins and make the
coin loss. If the wallet key is forgotten, there is no mech- payment with unconnected coins; and Blindcoin [36] that
anism to operate with these coins. It has been estimated increases the anonymity of the mixing server. In general,
that 30% of bitcoins are lost. these attempts to increase anonymity in Bitcoin typically
 Finally, quantum computing could be seen as a threat embrace the idea of maintaining a deregulated Bitcoin,
to Bitcoin, since the computing power of these computers and are therefore usually accused of encouraging illicit accould break the security of digital signatures. Further- tivities, such as the acquisition of illegal products on the
more, technology progresses over time and every day new Darknet or money laundering.
bugs and security breaches are discovered. These improve- In order to increase privacy, data in the blockchain
ments and bugs can compromise public blockchains with can be encrypted. Hawk [37] stores encrypted transacencrypted data since blockchain data is immutable. tions. The Hawk compiler is responsible for translating the generic code written by programmers into cryp-
2.1.3. Anonymity and Data Privacy tographic primitives that enable information anonymity
 Privacy is not enforced in the Bitcoin protocol by design. in transactions. The Enigma project [38], in addition to
A key feature of Bitcoin is its transparency. In blockchain encryption, splits data into unrecognizable chunks and diseach transaction can be checked, audited and traced from tributes them through the network, in a way that no node
the system’s very first transaction. This is indeed an un- ever has access to the data. It uses a decentralized offheard of new level of transparency that doubtlessly helps chain distributed hash-table (DHT) accessible through the
to build trust. However this transparency has a knock- blockchain to store data references.
on effect on privacy, even though there is no direct rela- The problem of privacy in private blockchains can be
tionship between wallets and individuals, user anonymity tackled differently, since by definition they must provide
seems to be compromised despite the mechanisms that Bit- authentication and authorization mechanisms. However,
coin provides, such as pseudonymous and the use of mul- even inside a private blockchain, participants want to pretiple wallets. In this sense, some effort has been made to serve the privacy of their data. Quorum [39] for instance,
provide stronger anonymity features in Bitcoin. On the is a private permissioned blockchain based on Ethereum
other hand not just open virtual currencies, but many ap- that uses cryptography to limit the visibility of sensitive
plications based on public blockchain technology require a data and segmentation to increase privacy of data. Multihigher level of privacy in the chain, specifically those that chain [40] integrates user permissions to limit visibility and
deal with sensitive data. to introduce controls over which transactions are allowed
 Popular attempts to tackle the anonymity problem in and which users can mine. Rockchain [41] is also based
Bitcoin are Zerocash [26] and Zerocoin [27] which propose on Ethereum and follows a data-centric approach, where
that Bitcoin extensions have completely anonymous trans- public calculations can be performed on private data, accuactions, hiding the sender, the receiver and the information mulative results can be obtained preserving data privacy.
itself. Monero [28] uses a ring of signatures to make trans- This approach offers a distributed file system that allows
actions untraceable, so that they cannot be easily traced users to manage data privacy through smart contracts in
back to any given person or computer. Ethereum. Hyperledger Fabric [9] provides a distributed
 Similarly, transaction mixing services or tumblers, pro- and scalable ledger focused on enterprise environments.
vided by Bitcoin Fog [29] and Bit Laundry can increase To provide blockchain networks with privacy control, Hythe anonymity. These services break up transactions into perledger Fabric provides an identity control service and
smaller payments and schedule them to obfuscate trans- access control lists through private channels where users
actions for a fee. However, these kinds of services are said can control and restrict the access to their shared informato be prone to theft. Likewise, the coin-mixing approach, tion in the network. Thanks to this mechanism, members
originally proposed in CoinJoin [30] helps to anonymize of the network know each other through their public iden-
Bitcoin. The idea is that users agree on joint payments, tities, but they do not have to know the information that
so that it can no longer be assumed that transaction inputs it is shared in the network.
are from the same wallet. However the previous negotia- Another approach to tackle data privacy is to store sention required between users, typically performed by mixing sitive data outside the chain, commonly referred to as the
servers, could lack the required anonymity depending on off-chain solution [42]. This kind of solution favors systhe implementation. Later, this approach inspired Dark tems that manage large amounts of data, since it would
Wallet [31], a browser plugin that allows completely pri- be impractical to store them inside the blockchain. In advate anonymous Bitcoin transactions; Dash [32], known dition, they are particularly suitable for systems that deal
as the first cryptocurrency focused on anonymity and pri- with highly sensitive data that should have a tighter acvacy; MixCoin [33], that adds cryptographic accountabil- cess control, such as health care applications. In this way
ity mechanisms and randomized mixing fees to increase the public blockchain can be used to store anchor data, so
security; CoinShuffle [34] that proposes a modification of that proof to verify the integrity and time stamps of data is
 5
available. Users can verify data without relying on author- thentication, security and trust in oracles have to be proities, just by checking the blockchain, and data are safely vided [45].
stored outside. Obviously, these off-chain sources must be The advantages of smart contracts do not come without
fault tolerant and should not introduce bottlenecks or sin- cost, as they are vulnerable to a series of attacks [46, 47, 48]
gle points of failure. In [43] the authors propose using a that bring new exciting challenges. Delegating contract ex-
Kademlia, a well-known DHT to store key-value pairs (user ecution to computers brings with it some problems, since it
identities and permissions) to access, control and storage makes them vulnerable to technical issues such as hacking,
data. In [44] a pointer and a hash to validate the data bugs, viruses or communication failures. Bugs in contract
obtained are stored in the chain. In this way, the data in coding are especially critical because of the irreversibly and
the chain are links to the private data, and the hash is the immutable nature of the system. Mechanisms to verify and
mechanism that verifies that the information obtained has guarantee the correct operation of smart contracts are necnot been altered. Access control mechanisms for off-chain essary for them to be widely and safety adopted by clients
sources are provided to ensure that only authorized parties and providers. The formal validation of the contract logic,
can access the information. The information can therefore and its correctness are research areas where contributions
be obtained from external sources in a secure and verified are expected to be made in the years to come [49].
way with blockchain. In addition, real-life contracts usually have clauses or
 conditions that are not quantifiable. In this sense, there
 is still a lot of work to be done in order to model the
2.1.4. Smart contracts
 conditions of the contracts in smart contracts, so that they
 In 1993, Nick Szabo defined the smart contract as “A are representable and quantifiable for a machine to execute
computerized transaction protocol that executes the terms them. Additionally, efforts to provide tools for users to be
of a contract”. One of the key features of a smart contract able to specify and understand smart contracts are needed
is that it has a way to enforce or self-execute contractual [50].
clauses. Until the emergence of blockchain technology, this
was technologically unviable. Blockchain has turned out
to be the ideal technology to support smart contracts. In 2.1.5. Legal issues
addition, smart contracts have contributed significantly The absence of a central authority, the non-existent
to the momentum of blockchain, moreover this coupling minting entity, and therefore the total dearth of censorhas led to a second generation of blockchains, commonly ship in Bitcoin is an attractive and at the same time danknown as Blockchain 2.0. The combination of automat- gerous peculiarity. Bitcoin users are commonly accused of
ically executed contracts in a trusted environment with- using the network for fraudulent purposes, and thus the
out centralized control promises to change the way current technology is suspected of promoting or facilitating illegal
business is done. conduct. Bitcoin, as the first decentralized cryptocurrency
 Basically, the smart contract code is stored on the has generated a lot of dispute [51]. On the one hand, with
blockchain, and each contract is identified by a unique ad- regard to its value, some experts claim it is a fraud [52]
dress, and for users to operate with it, they just send a and that it will totally collapse [53], while at the same time
transaction to this address. The correct execution of the others estimate that its value will reach 100.000 dollars in
contract is enforced by the blockchain consensus protocol. 10 years [54]. The European Central Bank, has warned of
Smart contracts introduce a set of advantages such as cost its volatility risk but have also admitted its potential as a
reduction, speed, precision, efficiency, and transparency financial innovation [55]. However, with regard to the lack
that have fostered the appearance of many new applica- of governance, many countries are developing new laws in
tions in a wide variety of areas. Although Bitcoin offers an attempt to regulate the use of virtual currencies (a map
a basic scripting language, it has turned out to be insuf- of Bitcoin regulation status is available at [56]). This sitficient, which has led to the emergence of new blockchain uation creates a lot of uncertainty, and seems to be the
platforms with integrated smart contract functionality. reason behind its recent fall [57].
 The most prominent smart contract blockchain plat- Banks and governments will have their say as to whether
form is Ethereum [8]. Ethereum is a blockchain with a or not the currency becomes legal tender. Legal implicabuilt-in Turing-complete programming language, that al- tions in the context of currencies is an important concern,
lows the definition of smart contracts and decentralized as they can directly and negatively affect blockchain apapplications. The code in Ethereum’s contracts is written plications based on that currency.
in “Ethereum virtual machine code”, a low-level, stack- Many private and permissioned blockchain applications
based bytecode language. have recently emerged. These are blockchains that grant
 Frequently, financial smart contracts require access to write permissions to a predefined peer or set of peers. This
data about real-world states and events. This data is pro- can bring some benefits to authorization and authenticavided by the so-called oracles. These entities are crucial tion mechanisms, for instance key recovery or transaction
for the successful integration of smart contracts within the redemption, and can also contribute to simplifying the
real world, but they also create more complexity, since au- problem of privacy and to reducing transaction latency.
 6
In fact, interesting market opportunities have arisen in in- while defending against double-spend attacks, and theresurance coverage for Bitcoins that would no longer be nec- fore are an essential part of blockchain technology. The
essary if the authorities handled this responsibility. The final goal is to achieve consensus in a distributed network
threat of mining pools controlling the network, together without central authorities and with participants who do
with other vulnerabilities, favors the development of such not necessarily trust each other.
blockchains, and governments are obviously interested in The consensus based on the proof of work (PoW), which
a regulated and controlled use of this technology in many has worked so successfully in Bitcoin, forces miners to solve
applications. However, this means that the trustless net- a computationally-intensive easily-verifiable task in order
work will regress to a third-party trust network, losing to create a new block. Once solved, the solution is pubpart of its essence. In addition, this can potentially create lished and the new block is added to the chain. The new
bottlenecks if solutions include centralized entities. The block is spread across the network and the rest of the parfeatures of these blockchains are closer to the features of ticipants verify it and append it to its local blockchain
distributed databases. copy. This process can simultaneously occur in different
 On the other hand, the key to increasing confidence in parts of the network. This is why the chain is in fact a
this technology could be the involvement of governments tree. There are several, valid branches existing simultaand / or large consortiums of companies in their develop- neously in the blockchain network. When peers append
ment. Ongoing initiatives in this direction will be helpful a new block, they also have to check that the branch is
[58, 59]. Currently, personal information is distributed the one with the most accumulated work (difficulty), that
among different entities: government, universities, com- is, the longest chain which is assumed to be the valid
panies and so on. The information is spread across many one. This allows consensus to be achieved quickly. A
entities and accessing it is time consuming, even when said key drawback is that PoW makes Bitcoin dependent on
entities answer to the same authority, e.g., the government. energy consumption. The aforementioned 51% attack is a
This leads to obstacles in accessing information in addition potential attack on the Bitcoin protocol. Additionally, the
to a lack of a trustworthy service that guarantees the in- incentives in PoW are unexpectedly promoting centralizaformation. A trustworthy and global identity service with tion as the proliferation of mining pools confirm. This
the information of each person would be disruptive at the together with the mint reduction, reward diminution and
present time. Nevertheless, each country has its own laws fee increase could compromise the system [64] in the fuand regulations. ture. Certainly, PoW has certain drawbacks such as high
 Initiatives such as Alastria [60] aim to involve multi- latency, low transaction rates and high energy expenditure
ple entities in the development of a national regulated that makes it unsuitable for many applications. As stated,
blockchain, from public notaries to universities and pri- the latency, or block frequency of 10 minutes may also be
vate companies. They plan to enable a public and legal impractical in many scenarios. Despite this, some platwallet for each person. Companies can also be part of forms do use or have adapted PoW, such as NameCoin,
the network. Therefore, each personal wallet could be a LiteCoin, Ethereum, DogeCoin and Monero. Primecoin,
digital proof of possessions, companies where he/she has for instance, mitigates the energy loss by proposing useful
worked, college degrees and so on. This information could computationally-intensive tasks, such as the prime numbe used in a legal and trustworthy way for many services. bers search that can have applications alongside.
For instance, in the case of a job interview, candidates Not surprisingly many attempts to change PoW have recould share their college degrees and work experience in- cently been proposed, probably underestimating the comformation with the interviewers. This information is re- plexity that this change implies, nevertheless it is not clear
liable and verifiable by definition. These initiatives are if they expose the security properties in the same way as
the key to expanding blockchain inside government insti- PoW. The most popular alternative approach to consensus
tutions, and the first step in creating a common and reg- in blockchain is the Proof of Stake (PoS). It is based on
ulatory framework for blockchain systems. Moreover, this the fact that those users who own more coins, are more
could also facilitate the administrative transactions of the interested in the survival and the correct functioning of
population to obtain their information, the data trans- the system, and therefore are the most suitable to carry
fer between countries, the reduction of corrupt informa- the responsibility of protecting the system. Basically, the
tion and a seamless integration between population, com- idea behind using PoS is to move the opportunity costs
panies, government and universities. However, this also from outside the system to inside the system. The albrings about an easy way to obtain highly private infor- gorithm randomly determines the user responsible for the
mation, so the privacy and security considered in the rest creation of each block, based on the number of coins he/she
of the paper should necessarily go hand in hand with these owns. A common critique is that this approach does not
initiatives. provide incentives for nodes to vote on the correct block
 (known as the nothing-at-stake problem). Additionally,
2.1.6. Consensus it is negative in the sense that it promotes enrichment of
 Consensus mechanisms [61, 62, 63] are responsible for the rich. PoS was originally used by Peercoin and later in
the integrity of the information contained in blockchain, Nextcoin, Nxt [65], Crave and Ethereum. A variant of PoS
 7
is the Delegate PoS (DPoS) of BitShares, Monax, Lisk or is used in Hyperledger and Multichain. SIEVE [73], treats
Tendermint. In BitShares [66], a number of selected wit- the blockchain as a black box, executing operations and
nesses validate signatures and time stamps of transactions comparing the output of each replica. If there are diverby including them in blocks. The election is performed gences between the replicas, the operation is not validated.
by voting, and each time a witness successfully produces Another variant of the PBFT is the Byzantine agreement
a block it is rewarded. This approach allows delegates to Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA). In FBA each parset the block latency, block size and confirm transactions ticipant maintains a list of trusted participants and waits
in just a second. for these participants to agree on a transaction before be-
 The Leased Proof of Stake (LPoS) allows users to lease ing considered liquidated. It is used in Ripple [74]. Stellar
funds to other nodes, so that they are more likely to [75] is another variant that employs the quorum and parbe selected for block creation, increasing the number of tial quorum concept. The quorum is a set of nodes, enough
electable participants, and therefore reducing the proba- to reach an agreement, the partial quorum is a subset of
bility of the network being controlled by a single group of a quorum with the ability to convince another given node
nodes. Rewards are proportionally shared. about the agreement. HDAC [76] is a system, currently
 The Proof of Burn (PoB) [67] proposes burning coins, being implemented, which proposes an IoT Contract &
that is, sending them to a verifiable unspendable address, M2M Transaction Platform based on Multichain. HDAC
in order to publish a new block. Like PoW, PoB, is hard is specially tailored to IoT environments. It uses the ePow
to do and easy to verify, but in contrast requires no en- consensus algorithm whose main goals are to motivate the
ergy consumption. In addition, PoB has some economic participation of multiple mining nodes and to prevent eximplications that contribute to a more stable ecosystem. cessive energy waste.
 Nem’s [68] approach to consensus, called Proof of Im- Finally, the HC Consensus, proposed in Hydrachain, is
portance (PoI), associates an importance value with each based on a list of validators of which no more than oneaccount, in this way building a reputation system in the third are unreliable.
network. The chance of being chosen to create a block To sum up, consensus mechanisms in public blockchains
depends on this value, the computation of it also takes have been widely proposed but poorly, formally proved. It
into account the number of coins and the number of trans- is mandatory to understand the guarantees they offer and
actions performed. In other words, productive network their vulnerabilities prior to using them [77]. In this sense,
activity is also rewarded, not just the amount, promoting the research community together with the industry have to
the useful behavior of the users. work towards the validation of these mechanisms in order
 Other extended variants are the activity test (PoA), a to demonstrate their legitimacy. To the contrary, private
hybrid approach that combines both PoW and PoS, and blockchains have adopted formal well-known solutions, but
the Elapsed Time Test (PoET) developed by IBM that the limited list of participants in these blockchains also
uses a random choice of manager to mine each block based limit the diversity and potential of applications.
on runtimes within reliable execution environments. The
Proof of Capacity (PoC) [69], also known as proof of storage or space, uses available hard drive space instead of 3. IoT and blockchain integration
computing resources. This approach is used in Permacoin,
SpaceMint and Burstcoin. The IoT is transforming and optimizing manual pro-
 Private blockchains have specific features, since the cesses to make them part of the digital era, obtaining volnumber of participants is usually lower than public umes of data that provides knowledge at unheard of levels.
blockchains and are semi-reliable. They are usually reg- This knowledge is facilitating the development of smart
istered in the system with a predefined set of permissions. applications such as the improvement of the management
These systems, therefore, require specific consensus mech- and the quality of life of citizens through the digitization of
anisms that fit these characteristics. services in the cities. Over the last few years, cloud com-
 Some of these alternative mechanisms are Paxos [70], de- puting technologies have contributed to providing the IoT
veloped by Lamport and Microsoft based on state machine with the necessary functionality to analyze and process
replication; Chubby [71], based on the former and devel- information and turn it into real-time actions and knowloped by Google, which is defined as a distributed blocking edge [1]. This unprecedented growth in the IoT has opened
service. These approaches have the advantage that they up new community opportunities such as mechanisms to
are adaptations of formal algorithms, and therefore their access and share information. The open data paradigm
features have been formally proved. RAFT [72] which sep- is the flagship in these initiatives. However, one of the
arates key elements of consensus such as choice of leaders, most important vulnerabilities of these initiatives, as has
record replication and security, and forces a greater degree occurred in many scenarios, is the lack of confidence. Cenof consistency to reduce the number of states that need to tralized architectures like the one used in cloud computing
be considered. The Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance have significantly contributed to the development of IoT.
(PBFT) algorithm, which is based on state machine repli- However, regarding data transparency they act as black
cation and replicate voting for consensus on state change, boxes and network participants do not have a clear vision
 8
of where and how the information they provide is going to uniquely identifies actual data that was provided by a
be used. device. Additionally, blockchain can provide trusted
 The integration of promising technologies like IoT and distributed authentication and authorization of decloud computing has proven to be invaluable. Likewise, vices for IoT applications [81]. This would represent
we acknowledge the huge potential of blockchain in rev- an improvement in the IoT field and its participants.
olutionizing the IoT. Blockchain can enrich the IoT by
 • autonomy: blockchain technology empowers nextproviding a trusted sharing service, where information is
 gen application features, making possible the developreliable and can be traceable. Data sources can be idenment of smart autonomous assets and hardware as a
tified at any time and data remains immutable over time,
 service [82, 83]. With blockchain, devices are capable
increasing its security. In the cases where the IoT informaof interacting with each other without the involvetion should be securely shared between many participants
 ment of any servers. IoT applications could benefit
this integration would represent a key revolution. For infrom this functionality to provide device-agnostic and
stance, an exhaustive traceability in multiple food proddecoupled-applications.
ucts is a key aspect to ensure food safety. Food traceability
could require the involvement of many participants: man- • reliability: IoT information can remain immutable
ufacturing, feeding, treatment, distribution, and so on. A and distributed over time in blockchain [84]. Particdata leak in any part of the chain could lead to fraud and ipants of the system are capable of verifying the auslow down the processes of the search for infection which thenticity of the data and have the certainty that they
can seriously affect citizen’s lives and incur huge economic have not been tampered with. Moreover, the technolcosts to companies, sectors and countries in the case of ogy enables sensor data traceability and accountabila foodborne outbreak [78]. A better control in these ar- ity. Reliability is the key aspect of the blockchain to
eas would increase food safety, improving the data sharing bring in the IoT.
between participants and reducing the search time in the
 • security: information and communications can be
case of a foodborne outbreak, which can save human lives.
 secured if they are stored as transactions of the
Moreover, in other areas such as smart cities and smart
 blockchain [85]. Blockchain can treat device message
cars, sharing reliable data could favor the inclusion of new
 exchanges as transactions, validated by smart conparticipants in the ecosystems and contribute to improve
 tracts, in this way securing communications between
their services and their adoption. Therefore, the use of
 devices. Current secure standard-protocols used in
blockchain can complement the IoT with reliable and sethe IoT can be optimized with the application of
cure information. This has started to be recognized as
 blockchain [86].
mentioned in [79], where blockchain technology is identified as the key to solve scalability, privacy, and reliability • market of services: blockchain can accelerate the
problems related to the IoT paradigm. creation of an IoT ecosystem of services and data mar-
 From our point of view IoT can greatly benefit from the ketplaces, where transactions between peers are posfunctionality provided by blockchain and will help to fur- sible without authorities. Microservices can be easther develop current IoT technologies. It is worth noting ily deployed and micro-payments can be safety made
that there are still a great number of research challenges in a trustless environment [87, 88, 89]. It would imand open issues that have to be studied in order to seam- prove IoT interconnection and the access of IoT data
lessly use these two technologies together and this research in blockchain.
topic is still in a preliminary stage.
 More specifically, improvements that this integration • secure code deployment: taking advantage of
can bring include (but are not limited to): blockchain secure-immutable storage, code can be
 safety and securely pushed into devices [80, 90]. Man-
 • decentralization and scalability: the shift from a ufacturers can track states and updates with the highcentralized architecture to a P2P distributed one will est confidence [85]. IoT middlewares can use this funcremove central points of failures and bottlenecks [80]. tionality to securely update IoT devices.
 It will also help prevent scenarios where a few pow-
 Another aspect to take into account is related to the
 erful companies control the processing and storage of
 IoT interactions, i.e., the communication between the unthe information of a huge number of people. Other
 derlying IoT infrastructure. When integrating blockchain,
 benefits that come with the decentralization of the arit needs to be decided where these interactions will take
 chitecture are an improvement of the fault tolerance
 place: inside the IoT, a hybrid design involving IoT and
 and system scalability. It would reduce the IoT siblockchain, or through blockchain. Fog computing [91]
 los, and additionally contribute to improving the IoT
 has also revolutionized the IoT with the inclusion of a new
 scalability.
 layer between cloud computing and IoT devices and could
 • identity: using a common blockchain system partic- also facilitate this integration. Below, these alternatives
 ipants are able to identify every single device. Data (shown in Figure 1) are described together with their adprovided and fed into the system is immutable and vantages and disadvantages:
 9
 Figure 1: Blockchain IoT interactions

• IoT-IoT: this approach could be the fastest one in where mining can take place in the same way as other
 terms of latency, and security since it can work of- initiatives that use IoT devices [92, 93] (Figure 1.c).
 fline. IoT devices have to be able to communicate
 with each other, which usually involves discovery and In a typical IoT deployment, limited-resource devices
 routing mechanisms. Only a part of IoT data is stored are used as end nodes that communicate with a gateway
 in blockchain whereas the IoT interactions take place that is responsible for forwarding sensor data to upper laywithout using the blockchain (Figure 1.a). This ap- ers (cloud or server). When integrating blockchain, if end
 proach would be useful in scenarios with reliable IoT nodes have to interact with the blockchain, cryptographic
 data where the IoT interactions are taking place with functionality could be provided in IoT devices. This is
 low latency. key to realize IoT autonomy, which comes at a cost of
 a more sophisticated hardware and higher computational
• IoT-Blockchain: in this approach all the interacexpense (in Section 4.1.1 an evaluation of the cost of ustions go through blockchain, enabling an immutable
 ing blockchain in IoT devices is presented). Integrating
 record of interactions. This approach ensures that all
 gateways in these solutions is also plausible, in the same
 the chosen interactions are traceable as their details
 way as traditional deployments do, however the benefits
 can be queried in the blockchain, and moreover it inof using blockchain in this way are fewer. Despite the excreases the autonomy of IoT devices. IoT applications
 pansion of blockchain, it would make no sense to use it in
 that intend to trade or rent such as Slock.it can levermany applications, where databases provide enough funcage this approach to provide their services. Neverthetionality. Deciding when it is worth using a blockchain
 less, recording all the interactions in blockchain would
 will mainly depend on the requirements of the applicainvolve an increase in bandwidth and data, which is
 tion. For instance, when high performance is required,
 one of the well-known challenges in blockchain (Figblockchain alone may not be the right solution, but a hyure 1.b). On the other hand, all IoT data associbrid approach could be applied to optimize it. In [94]
 ated with these transactions should also be stored in
 the authors present a methodology to identify whether a
 blockchain.
 blockchain is useful depending on problem requirements.
• Hybrid approach: lastly, a hybrid design where Next we focus on how this can be technically achieved for
 only part of the interactions and data take place in IoT devices.
 the blockchain and the rest are directly shared be- Alliances between well-known companies have started
 tween the IoT devices. One of the challenges in to appear, like the Trusted IoT Alliance [59], to bridge
 this approach is choosing which interactions should the gap between the IoT and blockchain. Also there
 go through the blockchain and providing the way to are an increasing number of devices with integrated
 decide this in run time. A perfect orchestration of blockchain capabilities available on the market such as
 this approach would be the best way to integrate [92, 93, 95]. EthEmbedded [92] enables the installation of
 both technologies since it leverages the benefits of Ethereum full nodes on embedded devices such as Raspblockchain and the benefits of real-time IoT interac- berry Pi, Beaglebone Black and Odroid. Raspnode [93]
 tions. In this approach fog computing could come into and Ethraspbian [96] both support the installation of Bitplay and even cloud computing, to complement the coin, Ethereum and Litecoin full nodes on a Raspberry Pi.
 limitations of blockchain and the IoT. For example, [95] Antrouter R1-LTC [95] is a Wi-Fi router that also enfog computing involves fewer computationally-limited ables mining Litecoin. Therefore, this type of router could
 devices such as gateways and it is a potential place be installed in smart homes and be part of a fog comput-
 10
ing ecosystem. Raspnode also enables wallet support for must be equipped with this functionality. Incorporating
Bitcoin and Litecoin. As stated by Raspnode, mining can blockchain into the IoT is challenging. Some of the idenbe done on IoT devices, but it would be useless. Mining tified challenges are presented in this section.
has become a specialized task for certain hardware (ASIC
chips) and it is useless to try it on IoT devices. That is 3.1.1. Storage capacity and Scalability
the main reason why there is little work on mining for
 As stated, storage capacity and scalability of blockchain
IoT devices. There is still a lot of research to be done for
 are still under debate, but in the context of IoT apenabling a wide integration of IoT devices as blockchain
 plications the inherent capacity and scalability limitacomponents. Table 2 shows a summary of the surveyed
 tions make these challenges much greater. In this sense,
IoT devices to be used as part of blockchain platforms.
 blockchain may appear to be unsuitable for IoT applica-
 Full nodes must store the entire blockchain (currently
 tions, however there are ways in which these limitations
more than 150 and 46 GB in Bitcoin and Ethereum, recould be alleviated or avoided altogether. In the IoT,
spectively) for a full validation of transactions and blocks,
 where devices can generate gigabytes (GBs) of data in real
thus their deployment can be very limited in IoT devices.
 time, this limitation represents a great barrier to its inte-
As stated, mining would be useless in the IoT due to its
 gration with blockchain. It is known that some current
specific requirements. The consensus protocol could be
 blockchain implementations can only process a few transrelaxed to facilitate the inclusion of IoT devices, however
 actions per second, so this could be a potential bottleneck
this could compromise the security of the blockchain implefor the IoT. Furthermore, blockchain is not designed to
mentation. This could be used in consortium blockchains
 store large amounts of data like those produced in the
where consensus prototols are relaxed. In the deploy-
 IoT. An integration of these technologies should deal with
ment of lightweight nodes the authenticity of the transthese challenges.
actions is validated without having to download the en-
 Currently, a lot of IoT data are stored and only a limtire blockchain, therefore they can contribute to blockchain
 ited part is useful for extracting knowledge and generating
and are easy to run and maintain in IoT devices. These
 actions. In the literature different techniques to filter, nornodes can be used in the IoT to be part of the blockchain
 malize and compress IoT data with the aim of reducing
network, reducing the gap between the two technologies.
 them have been proposed. The IoT involves embedded
This always has to be backed up with full nodes to validate
 devices, communication and target services (blockchain,
transactions and blocks. Nevertheless, many blockchains
 cloud), thus savings in the amount of data that the IoT
do not yet provide support for lightweight nodes as is the
 provides can benefit multiple layers. Data compression
case of Ethereum, which it is under development. In any
 can lighten transmission, processing tasks and storage of
case, blockchain could be used as a external service to prothe high volume of IoT data generated. Normal behaviors
vide a secure and reliable storage.
 do not usually require extra, necessary information, unlike
 One clear alternative to the integration of blockchain
 anomalous data.
with the IoT is the integration between the IoT and cloud
 Last but not least, blockchain, and especially its concomputing [1]. This integration has been used in the last
 sensus protocol which causes its bottleneck, could also be
few years to overcome the IoT limitations of: processing,
 adapted to increase the bandwidth and decrease the lastorage and access. However, cloud computing usually
 tency of its transactions thereby enabling a better tranprovides a centralized architecture, which in contrast to
 sition to the IoT demostrated by the case of Bitcoin-NG
blockchain, complicates reliable sharing with many partic-
 [11].
ipants. The integration between blockchain and the IoT
is intended to address previous limitations in addition to
maintaining realiable data. Fog computing aims to dis- 3.1.2. Security
tribute and bring the computing closer to end devices, fol- IoT applications have to deal with security problems at
lowing a distributed approach like blockchain. This can different levels, but with an additional complexity due to
incorporate more powerful devices than the IoT such as the lack of performance and high heterogeneity of devices.
gateways and edge nodes, which can then be reused as In addition, the IoT scenario comprises a set of properties
blockchain components. Therefore, fog computing could that affect security, such as mobility, wireless communicaease the integration of the IoT with blockchain. tion or scale. An exhaustive analysis of security in IoT is
 beyond the scope of this paper but detailed surveys can
3.1. Challenges in blockchain-IoT integration be found in [97, 98, 99, 100].
 This section studies the main challenges to be addressed The increasing number of attacks on IoT networks, and
when applying blockchain technology to the IoT domain. their serious effects, make it even more necessary to cre-
The integration of blockchain technology with the IoT is ate an IoT with more sophisticated security. Many exnot trivial. Blockchain was designed for an Internet sce- perts see blockchain as a key technology to provide the
nario with powerful computers, and this is far from the IoT much needed security improvements in IoT. However, one
reality. Blockchain transactions are digitally signed, and of the main challenges in the integration of the IoT with
therefore devices capable of operating with the currency blockchain is the reliability of the data generated by the
 11
 Table 2: IoT devices to be used as blockchain components
 Source IoT device Mode Blockchain
 Raspberry Pi
 BeagleBone Black
 EthEmbedded Odroid XU3/XU4
 Wandboard Ethereum
 full node
 Ethcore Parity
 Ethraspbian

 Raspnode
 Raspberry Pi Bitcoin
 light node
 full node Litecoin
 Bitmain Antrouter R1-LTC miner

IoT. Blockchain can ensure that data in the chain are im- work. This would simplify current security protocols which
mutable and can identify their transformations, neverthe- usually have to exchange PKI certificates and would allow
less when data arrives already corrupted in the blockchain them to be used in devices with lower capabilities.
they stay corrupt. Corrupt IoT data can arise from many One notable IoT project in terms of security with a
situations apart from malicious ones. The well-being of blockchain adoption is Filament [83]. Filament is a hardthe IoT architecture is affected by many factors such as ware and software solution that provides functionality for
the environment, participants, vandalism and the failure Bitcoin-based payments and smart contracts in IoT. Filof the devices. Sometimes the devices themselves and their ament devices have embedded cryptoprocessors that supsensors and actuators fail to work properly from the start. port five protocols: Blockname, Telehash and smart con-
This situation cannot be detected until the device in ques- tracts to operate, and additionally Pennyback and Bittortion has been tested, or sometimes it works properly for a rent protocols. The device identity management is done
while and changes its behavior for some reason (short cir- with Blockname, while Telehash, an open source implecuit, disconnection, programmed obsolescence, and so on). mentation of Kademlia DHT, provides secure encrypted
In addition to these situations, there are many threats that communications, and smart contracts define the way in
can affect the IoT such as eavesdropping, denial of service which a device can be used.
or controlling [98]. For that reason, IoT devices should be
thoroughly tested before their integration with blockchain
 3.1.3. Anonymity and Data Privacy
and they should be located and encapsulated in the right
place to avoid physical damage, in addition to including Many IoT applications work with confidential data, for
techniques to detect device failures as soon as they happen. instance when the device is linked to a person, such as in
 the e-health scenario, it is essential to address the problem
 These devices are more likely to be hacked since their of data privacy and anonymity. Blockchain is presented as
constraints limit the firmware updates, preventing them the ideal solution to address identity management in IoT,
from actuating over possible bugs or security breaches. however as in Bitcoin, there may be applications where
Moreover, it is sometimes difficult to update devices one by anonymity needs to be guaranteed. This is the case of a
one, as in global IoT deployments. Therefore, run-time up- wearable with the ability to hide the identity of the pergrading and reconfiguration mechanisms should be placed son when sending personal data, or smart vehicles that
in the IoT to keep it running over time. Initiatives such safeguard the privacy of the itineraries of users.
as GUITAR [101] and REMOWARE [102] enable network The problem of data privacy in transparent and puband firmware updates in run time and are essential to en- lic blockchains has already been discussed, together with
sure a secure integration of the IoT with blockchain over some of the existing solutions. However, the problem of
time. data privacy in IoT devices entails more difficulty, since
 The IoT and blockchain integration can also have reper- it starts at data collection and extends to the commucussions on the IoT communications [86]. Currently, IoT nications and application levels. Securing the device so
application protocols such as CoAP and MQTT make use that data are stored securely and not accessed by people
of other security protocols such as TLS or DTLS to pro- without permission is a challenge since it requires the intevide secure communications. These secure protocols are gration of security cryptographic software into the device.
complex and heavy in addition to requiring a centralized These improvements should take into account the limitamanagement and governance of key infrastructure, typi- tion of resources of the devices and the restrictions related
cally with PKI. In the blockchain network each IoT device to economic viability. Many technologies have been used to
would have its own GUID (Global Unique Identifier) and secure communications using encryption (IPsec, SSL/TLS,
asymmetric key pair installed once connected to the net- DTLS). IoT device limitations often make it necessary to
 12
use less-constrained devices such as gateways to incorpo- their interactions. Actions would be the result of a relirate these security protocols. The use of cryptographic able and secure processing. Therefore, smart contracts can
hardware could accelerate cryptographic operations and securely model the application logic of IoT applications.
avoids the overload of complex secure software protocols. However, the following challenges should be addressed in
 Protection of data and privacy are key challenges for that integration.
IoT, using blockchain technology the problem of identity On the one hand, working with smart contracts requires
management in IoT can be alleviated. Trust is another the use of oracles which are special entities that provide
key feature of the IoT where the integration of blockchain real-world data in a trusted manner. Validating these
can play a role. In [103] the importance of trust in IoT smart contracts could be compromised since the IoT can
systems is identified as one of the primary goals to ensure be unstable. Moreover, accessing multiple data sources
its success. Data integrity techniques are another option could overload these contracts. Nowadays, smart contracts
to ensure data access at the same time as they avoid over- are distributed and decentralized, but they do not share
loading blockchain with the huge amount of data gener- resources to distribute tasks and address a large amount
ated by the IoT. This can result in public systems, but of computation. In other words, execution of smart conwith an efficient and restricted access control. MuR-DPA tracts is done in just a single node whereas simultaneously
[104] provides dynamic data updates and efficient verifi- the code execution is done by multiple nodes. This discation though public auditing verification. In [105] the tribution is only done for the validation process, instead
authors ensure the data content through another privacy- of using it to distribute tasks. The IoT has leveraged the
preserving public auditing system. For a broad review of distributed capabilities of cloud computing and big data
integrity verification techniques, refer to [106]. to increase its processing power. Since then, data min-
 Last but not least, there are laws that regulate data ing techniques have been able to address the IoT data as
privacy, such as the EU’s data protection directives that a whole, enabling a better understanding of the IoT, i.e,
will need to be revised to cover the new models that the the processing power enlarged by cloud computing. Big
technology makes possible. The adoption of blockchain as data has enabled the processing of large amounts of data
a legal platform should address these regulations so as to simultaneously, allowing knowledge to be extracted from
ensure data privacy following the law. large datasets, which was previously very hard to do. In
 the integration of IoT with blockchain, smart contracts
3.1.4. Smart contracts should leverage their distributed nature to enable the pro-
 Smart contracts have been identified as the killer appli- cessing capabilities provided in other paradigms (big data
cation of blockchain technology, but as mentioned there and cloud computing) and needed in the IoT.
are several challenges yet to be tackled. IoT could benefit Smart contracts should also take into account the hetfrom the use of smart contracts, however the way they fit erogeneity and constraints present in the IoT. Filtering
into IoT applications is diverse. and group mechanisms should be complemented by smart
 From a practical point of view, a contract is a collec- contracts to enable applications to address the IoT detion of code (functions) and data (states) that reside in a pending on the context and requirements. A discovery
specific blockchain address. Public functions in a contract mechanism could enable device inclusion on the fly, makcan be called by devices. Functions can also fire events, ing these applications more powerful. Lastly, actuation
applications can listen for them in order to properly react mechanisms directly from smart contracts would enable
to the event fired. To change the state of the contract, that faster reactions with the IoT.
is, to modify the blockchain, a transaction has to be published in the network. Transactions are signed by senders
and have to be accepted by the network. 3.1.5. Legal issues
 The IoT has the ability to sense and actuate over the The vision of an unregulated blockchain is part of its
Internet in many areas [1]. In the food traceability ex- essence, and partly responsible for the success of Bitcoin.
ample, food packaging would be equipped with sensors As seen, blockchain, specifically in the context of virtual
with the capability to measure environmental conditions currencies, has brought with it a lot of controversy reand connect to the blockchain (sign transactions). In the garding legality. The need, or opportunity, to introduce
blockchain a contract would provide functions to start control elements over the network has come in the form of
shipping, finish shipping and log and query measurements. permissioned, private and consortium blockchains.
When measurements exceeded a predefined threshold, an The IoT domain is also affected by a country’s laws or
event would be fired. Management applications would be regulations regarding data privacy, for instance the data
listening to these events, and the shipping company, re- protection directive. Most of these laws are becoming obtailers, manufacturers and clients would be informed. If solete and need to be revised, especially since the emerno events were raised, then the blockchain would guaran- gence of new disruptive technologies such as blockchain.
tee that the shipment was carried out in optimal condi- The development of new laws and standards can ease the
tions. Smart contracts would provide a secure and reliable certification of security features of devices, and in this way
processing engine for the IoT, recording and managing all help build the most secure and trusted IoT network. In
 13
this sense, laws that deal with information privacy and in- that this technology offers. This section surveys the most
formation handling are still a big challenge to be tackled representative applications and platforms that combine
in IoT and will therefore be an even bigger challenge if the IoT and blockchain.
used in combination with blockchain.
 As stated, the lack of regulation creates disadvantages, 4.1. Blockchain platforms for IoT
because mechanisms for private key retrieval or reset, or Blockchain has been identified as a disruptive technoltransaction reversion are not possible. Some IoT applica- ogy that can strongly affect many industries. The number
tions envision a global, unique blockchain for devices, how- of platforms is so high and in constant change that it is
ever it is unclear if this type of network is intended to be impossible to analyze them all, in this section we focus on
managed by manufacturers or open to users. In any case, the most popular and most suitable for IoT domains.
it is expected it will require legal regulation. These regula- Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency and the first
tions will have an influence on the future of blockchain and blockchain platform. It provides a mechanism to carry
IoT and as such could possibly disrupt the decentralized out monetary transactions in a fast, cheap and reliable
and free nature of blockchain by introducing a controlling, way, which can be integrated into applications as a secure
centralized participant such as a country. payment system. In IoT domain, autonomous devices can
 use Bitcoins to perform micro-payments, working mainly
3.1.6. Consensus as wallets. In general when the use of blockchain is limited
 In the context of IoT applications, the limited-resource to micro-payments, applications are attached to the curnature of devices makes them unsuitable for taking part in rency, which can be a drawback, since depreciation of the
consensus mechanisms, such as PoW, directly. As stated, coin can negatively affect the application. As stated usthere are a wide variety of proposals for consensus proto- ing smart contracts is a common solution when integrating
cols, although they are, in general, immature and haven’t blockchain with IoT. Bitcoin includes a scripting language
been tested enough. Resource requirements depend on that allows specific conditions to be set when carrying out
the particular type of consensus protocol in the blockchain transactions. However, the scripting is quite limited comnetwork. Typically, solutions tend to delegate these tasks pared with other smart contract platforms.
to gateways, or any other unconstrained device, capable As mentioned one of the platforms that has had an imof providing this functionality. Optionally off-chain solu- portant impact in recent times is Ethereum [8]. Ethereum
tions, which move information outside the blockchain to was one of the pioneer blockchains in including smart conreduce the high latency in blockchain, could provide the tracts. Ethereum can be described both as a blockchain
functionality with a built-in programming language (Solidity), and
 Although there are initiatives to incorporate blockchain as a consensus-based virtual machine running globally
full nodes into IoT devices [92, 93], mining is still a key (Ethereum Virtual Machine EVM). The inclusion of smart
challenge in the IoT due to its limitations. IoT is mainly contracts moves the blockchain away from currencies and
composed of resource-constrained devices but globally the facilitates the integration of this technology in new areas.
IoT has a potentially huge processing power, taking into This along with its active and broad community makes
account that it is expected that the number of devices in Ethereum the most popular platform for developing apit will reach anywhere between 20 and 50 billion by 2020. plications. Most IoT applications use Ethereum or are
Research efforts should focus on this field and leverage the compatible with it (see Table 6). The simplest approach
distributed nature and global potential of the IoT to adapt is to define a smart contract where devices can publish
the consensus in the IoT. their measures and policies that react to changes.
 In Babelchain [107] a novel consensus protocol called Hyperledger [9] has also had a great impact. Hyper-
Proof of Understanding (PoU) that aims to adapt PoW ledger is an open-source platform on which various projects
for IoT applications is proposed. With less energy con- related to blockchain have been developed, among them
sumption, the protocol, instead of using miners to solve Hyperledger Fabric, a blockchain deprived of permissions
hash puzzles, proposes translating from different proto- and without cryptocurrency on which commercial implecols. In this way the effort is more concentrated on useful mentations like IBM’s Blockchain platform are based. It
computation while simultaneously tackling a key problem provides different components for consensus and memberin IoT communications. Peers in the network instead of ship. Distributed application can be developed in the
agreeing on transaction status, agree on message meaning blockchain using general purpose languages. IoT devices
(format, content and action). Additionally, the blockchain can supply data to the blockchain through the IBM Watdata provide information to learn, like a learning set. son IoT Platform, which manages devices and allows data
 analysis and filtering. IBM’s Bluemix platform eases the
 integration of blockchain technology by offering it as a ser-
4. Platforms and applications vice. The use of this platform speeds up application prototyping,and several use cases have been developed. There
 Recently blockchain platforms and applications have is an ongoing project on food traceabilty that uses this
emerged from many diverse areas, due to the advantages platform [108].
 14
 The Multichain platform allows the creation and de- tocurrency. An established platform with a cryptocurployment of private blockchains. Multichain uses an API rency like Ethereum can provide the needed infrastructure
that extends the core of the original Bitcoin API with new for a blockchain application. This can be seen as deploying
functionality, allowing the management of portfolios, as- your own cloud infrastructure or using AWS Amazon or
sets, permissions, transactions, etc. In addition, it offers a Google Cloud Platform. However, in the case of blockchain
command-line tool for interacting with the network, and the distribution is the linchpin of its trustworthiness. On
different clients that can interact through JSON-RPC with the other hand, using a non-cryptocurrency platform like
the network such as Node.js, Java, C # and Ruby. Multi- Hyperledger Fabric requires joining a consortium and inchain is a fork of Bitcoin Core, its source code compiles for frastructure to start a blockchain. PBTF and PoS are the
64 bit architectures. In [109] multichain blockchain cluster most used consensuses. Permissions and privacy are in
is deployed on three nodes, one of them an arduino board, most platforms, therefore consortium and global applicaas a proof of concept of an IoT blockchain application. tions can be created from them.
 Litecoin [12], as stated, is technically identical to Bitcoin, but features faster transaction confirmation times 4.1.1. Evaluation
and improved storage efficiency thanks to the reduction of To test the viability of running blockchain platforms
the block generation time (from 10 minutes to 2.5) and the on IoT devices we installed and ran different nodes
proof of work, which is based on scrypt, a memory inten- from different platforms on a Raspberry Pi 3 model B
sive password-based key derivation function. This means with Raspbian Stretch OS and Linux kernel 4.9.59-v7+.
that the computational requirements of Litecoin nodes are To perform these experiments the device was equipped
lower, so it is more suitable for IoT. with an SD card of 128GB (Samsung EVO PLUS MB-
 Lisk [110] offers a blockchain platform in which sub- MC128GA/EU). Raspberry was connected to the Interblockchains or sidechains can be defined with decentral- net through Ethernet. The different types of nodes were
ized blockchain applications and a choice of cryptocurren- installed and run, connected to the public network. We
cies to use (eg. Bitcoin, Ethereum, etc.). Known as the measured energy consumption and collected some meablockchain platform for javascript developers, Lisk also of- surements related to task performance for 30 minutes for
fers support to create and deploy decentralized applica- each test. The energy consumption was obtained by meations within the platform to be used directly by end users, suring the current between the power source and the Raspcreating an ecosystem of interoperable blockchain services. berry Pi, with a Moteino Mega equipped with the INA219
The applications developed can use LSK currency or can DC current sensor. The results were obtained on a PC
create custom tokens. Lisk uses Delegated proof of stake through a serial connection with the Moteino Mega. To
consensus. Lisk is working with Chain of Things to ex- evaluate the task performance, a background process was
amine whether blockchain technology can be effective in run collecting the following task data: percentage of use
establishing security within IoT. of cpu and memory, amount of virtual memory required
 Quorum [39] is a blockchain platform developed to pro- by the task, and the bandwidth consumption (sent and revide the financial services industry with a permissioned ceived bytes). This was done with the top1 Unix command
implementation of Ethereum with support for transaction and the monitor per process network bandwidth usage tool
and contract privacy. It allows multiple consensus mech- nethogs2 . Table 4 summarizes the results. CPU measureanisms and achieves data privacy through cryptography ment is 100% for each core, so the maximum for our quad
and segmentation. The platform has recently integrated core device is 400%.
ZeroCash technology to obscure all identifiable informa- Note that the different types of nodes implement differtion about a transaction. The Quorum platform has been ent functionalities, and the same types of nodes in differused by Chronicled [111] to create secure links between ent blockchains also perform different tasks. Nodes were
physical assets and blockchain. connected to public blockchain networks such as Bitcoin,
 HDAC [76] is an IoT contract and M2M transaction Ethereum and Litecoin to test the device in real working
platform based on Blockchain currently under develop- conditions. In addition, when connected to the public netment. The HDAC system uses a combination of pub- work we had no control of the status of the network,i.e.,
lic and private blockchains, and quantum random num- the number of transactions published during each experber generation to secure these transactions. The HDAC iment were not the same. Therefore, this evaluation is
cryptocurrency-enabled public blockchain can be effec- not intended to be an exhaustive comparison of the pertively used with multiple private blockchains. Hdac IoT formance of the different implementations, but rather to
contract proof of concept will be launched this year. provide an idea of the viability of using blockchain nodes
 Table 3 shows a comparison of the blockchain plat- on IoT and to state technical difficulties.
forms for creating IoT applications surveyed in this sec- The nodes chosen for the experiment were those with
tion. Smart contracts are present in most platforms, thus Raspberry Pi compatibility that run in public networks,
enabling application logic beyond cryptocurrency transactions. In the case of a blockchain deployment, there is 1 https://linux.die.net/man/1/top

a dualism among blockchains with and without a cryp- 2 https://github.com/raboof/nethogs

 15
 Table 3: Blockchain platforms for creating blockchain applications
 Platform Blockchain Consensus Cripto Smart concurrency tracts
 Ethereum Public and PoS Ether yes
 permission- (ETH)
 based
 Hyperledger Fab- Permission- PBTF/SIEVE None yes
 ric based
 Multichain Permission- PBTF Multi- yes
 based currency
 Litecoin Public Scrypt litecoins no
 (LTC)
 Lisk Public and DPoS LSK yes
 permissionbased
 Quorum Permission- Multiple ETH yes
 based
 HDAC Permision- ePoW,Trust- Multiasset yes
 based based

so the nodes can take part of the routing protocol. To tion requirements, measurements were taken during the
be able to compare the results we also measured the en- synchronization and after it. At the moment of testing
ergy consumption of the Raspberry running Raspbian and Litecoin’s blockchain size was 14.03 Gb, 49.47 Gb for the
without any node installed, obtaining 272.09 mA. Rasp- Ethereum chain, and 155.8 Gb for the Bitcoin chain. Note
berry Pi is powered with 5V. that the full Bitcoin node after the synchronization could
 First, we measured the performance of light nodes. not be tested since the current Bitcoin chain size exceeds
The Bitcoin light node (Electrum implementation), for in- the memory of our test scenario. The Ethereum synchrostance, increased the energy consumption by less than 4%, nization took about 5 days (with several reboots, due to
with respect to the Raspberry base measurement (272.09 system failures), and Litecoin about 2 days. Moreover, afmA). Very similar to the values obtained for the Litecoin ter a couple of days of being close to a full synchronization
light node (Electrum implementation) which reached a 5% (fewer than 100 blocks to reach it), we decided to evaluate
increase. The Ethereum light node was not tested because the Ethereum full node in its current state, 99.99% for a
it is currently under development. Regarding the task per- full synchronization. We considered that 99.99% is a good
formance, the CPU usage and virtual memory were also approximation for a full synchronization. The number of
quite similar for both light nodes. There was more differ- new blocks generated and the limited capabilities of the
ence in the use of memory, where Bitcoin consumed 2% Raspberry Pi for that full node made it difficult to reach
additional memory. Bandwidth consumption mainly dif- a full synchronization.
fered in received bytes, where Litecoin downloaded almost When compared with light nodes, the additional func-
36Kb more. Results show that these light nodes run com- tionality that full nodes implement, which is mainly the
fortably on the Raspberry Pi, they provide the functional- storage, is observed in higher consumption values, both
ity to make secure transactions, which is enough to benefit in memory and CPU. Most values obtained after the synfrom blockchain features, and do not require an excessive chronization were lower than during it, as expected. In the
amount memory, nor high energy consumption. The next Ethereum full node after synchronizing, the average CPU
section introduces several solutions where these types of used was 5 times lower, and average memory use 2.8 times
nodes are used in IoT-blockchain applications. lower, with respect to the values during the synchroniza-
 Next the experiments were performed with full nodes: tion.
the Ethereum full node (Go implementation), the Bitcoin The energy consumption, when compared with the
full node (Bitcoin core implementation) and the Litecoin Raspberry base measurement (272.09 mA), increased by
full node (Litecoin core implementation). As stated, the 120% in the Ethereum node during synchronization,
functionality of the Ethereum full node is not the same whereas Bitcoin full node does it with 57% and Litecoin
as the Bitcoin one. First of all, the different consensus with 60%. These values after the synchronization were
protocols, PoS and PoW, have radically different compu- 36% increase for Ethereum and less than 3% for Litecoin.
tational requirements. In addition, full nodes require a The use of CPU and memory also rose in full nodes, espesynchronization process to download the full chain, dur- cially during the synchronization, the highest consumption
ing this process the computational requirements are ex- values were the Ethereum node that reached an average
pected to be higher. To evaluate the different consump- of 256% of CPU usage and 86% of memory. However,
 16
 Table 4: Blockchain nodes evaluation on Raspberry Pi v3 (Synchronizing (s), after synchronization (as))
 avg en- avg avg avg Total Total reergy %CPU %Mem VIRT sent MB ceived
 (mA) (MB) MB
 Bitcoin light node 283.45 2.19 9.6 288 0.074 0.068
 Litecoin light node 275.53 2.05 7.6 209 0.081 0.104
 Ethereum full node (s) 599.72 256.82 85.96 1490 78.9 490
 Ethereum full node (as) 371.26 47.39 29.36 1280 15.3 80.3
 Bitcoin full node (s) 429.05 55.47 27.55 405 48 912
 Litecoin full node (s) 437.62 117.80 19.36 341 17.1 546
 Litecoin full node (as) 280.04 7.01 51.7 679 1.22 2.06

after the synchronization those values decreased to 47% pearance of new applications for payment, exchange and
and 29% respectively. For Litecoin, CPU usage was 117% trading infrastructures for these new currencies.
during synchronization and only 7% after synchronization. Beyond finances, the distributed and trustless ledger
Block validation is CPU intensive, so the CPU usage drop of blockchain has been identified as an ideal solution for
is normal after the chain synchronization. In contrast traceability systems. What were economic transactions in
memory usage in Litecoin increased from 19% to 51% after Bitcoin, have become changes of the plotted objects. In
synchronization. This is probably due to its memory in- this way the chain stores the objects and all their changes,
tensive consensus protocol. As expected bandwidth values allowing a complete, open and reliable traceability, only
soared, when compared with light nodes, since they stored possible through this technology. There are some ongoing
the full chain. Whereas for light nodes bandwidth values projects from prominent companies such as IBM, Unilever,
were in the order of Kb, for full nodes were in the order Walmart and Nestle collaborating for food traceability
of Mb. Bitcoin full node received 13 thousand times more [108] or Renault to track vehicle maintenance history [115].
bytes than its light node, and the Litecoin full node dur- Identity verification has also become a popular applicaing synchronization, 5 thousand times more than its light tion of the technology, blockchain provides an open trusted
version, and barely 20 times more after synchronization. distributed ledger that can be used to store identities. This
 There are very few scenarios where it makes sense to use makes the global management of identities possible. In
a full node IoT. We haven’t found any application that uses the field of e-government many countries have proposed
it in IoT. It could be used in private deployments and for the use of blockchain technologies for instance: for passtest purposes, but we understand that in final applications ports in Dubai [116], e-identity in Estonia [117], Illinois to
there would be other more suitable devices to run these digitize birth certificates [118] and in India for land regisnodes. The evaluation results show that the feasibility of tration [119].
using these nodes on the IoT is very limited. As stated, Additionally, the integration of smart contracts opens
light nodes are a far better fit for limited resource devices up a world of possibilities for many industries: energy, insuch as those in the IoT. surance, mortgages, music royalty payments, real estate,
 The most noteworthy problems during the tests were gambling, betting, etc. Cloud storage, education, or ethe difficulties in finding up-to-date information about the health are other areas in which blockchain applications
different node implementations on the pages found for IoT have been proposed. Table 5 lists some of these applicadevices, along with the high installation times in some tions in different areas.
cases and very high synchronization times for full nodes.
Moreover, the correct configuration for IoT devices has 4.2.1. IoT blockchain applications
been necessary in some cases, such as Ethereum, otherwise Although the use of blockchain in the IoT is relatively
the full node would collapse the Raspberry. The official recent, there are already a large number of proposals where
documentation and implementations have been very useful this technology is used in different ways to improve current
for the deployment of the aforementioned nodes. IoT technology. A summary of some of these proposals is
 shown in Table 6.
4.2. Blockchain applications In fact, IoT can join forces with blockchain in many
 scenarios. Almost all traceability applications can bene-
 In finances, there has been a notable emergence of alter- fit from the inclusion of IoT devices, for instance, sensors
native cryptocurrencies (altcoins, 1486 according to coin- that are attached to the product to be traced can provide
marketcap) that have built a new market and have enabled information during its distribution. Similarly, many apnew forms of payment and investment. Examples of them plications that digitize the world by providing sensed data
are Ripple [74], Litecoin [12], Nxt [65], Peercoin [112], Bit- can be enriched with blockchain technology. It can help to
shares [66], Dogecoin [113], Namecoin [114], Dash[32], and increase data legitimacy or reliability and moreover pro-
Monero [28]. This new market has also led to the ap- vide distributed identity, authentication and authorization
 17
 Table 5: Blockchain applications
Application Classification
Ripple [74]
Litecoin [12]
Nxt [65]
Peercoin [112]
 Cryptocurrency
Dogecoin [113]
Namecoin [114]
Dash [32]
Monero [28]
BitPay [120]
 New payment infrastructures
Abra [121]
BitNation [122]
Onename [123]
 Identity verification
Keybase [124]
ShoCard [125]
Passport management [116]
e-identity [117]
Birth certificates [118] e-government
Land registration [119]
Follow my vote [126]
Tierion [127]
Proof of Existence [128]
Factom [129] Verification of ownership or provenance
Everledger [130]
MIT’s digital diploma [131]
Provenance.org [132]
SkuChain [133]
 Product traceability
IBM Food traceability [108]
Renault vehicle maintenance history tracking [115]
Robomed [134]
 e-health
Medrec [135]
Synechron [136] Energy, insurance and mortgages
Ubitquity [137]
 Real estates
Atlant [138]
Slock.it [85] Renting, sharing and selling
DAO.Casino [139]
Peerplays [140] Gambling and betting
Wagerr [141]
Storj [142] Cloud storage
Sony education history [143] Education
Ujo [144]
 Music royalty payments
Resonate[145]

 18
mechanisms without the need for central authorities. payment can be automated. With the inclusion of Oracles
 Blockchain could be a powerful candidate to make the to report events, claim handling can be automatically hansmart city concept a reality. The concept of the smart city dled.
is based on smart IoT devices that can work autonomously. MyBit [89] plans to build an ecosystem of services where
Blockchain can increase the autonomy of devices since IoT assets (from drones to cars) are owned by a group
it eases interaction and coordination by providing a dis- of people, and the revenues are shared. A new financtributed open ledger where devices can query trusted in- ing model and investment opportunity open to anyone.
formation with reliability. Moreover, the autonomy that Ethereum smart contracts are used to automate processes:
blockchain enables, favors the creation of new IoT market- when the IoT devices generate revenue the investors auplaces. [87, 85, 88, 89]. tomatically receive a share of the profits proportionate to
 As Table 6 shows, Ethereum is the most popular plat- their ownership stake. A central smart contract is responform for IoT blockchain applications. Ethereum provides sible for the control, maintenance and updating of the platmore features than Bitcoin, the inclusion of smart con- form. The platform defines different asset types, and IoT
tracts greatly expands the possible applications. devices are linked to assets, once installed they send and
 In LO3 Energy [87] an energy microgrid that uses request information through an API. Oracles are used to
blockchain has been demonstrated in Brooklyn (USA), connect devices to the network.
southern Germany and South Australia. Microgrids are AeroToken [148] aims to create a real-time navigation
localized groupings of electricity generation, energy stor- and property access authorization system for low-altitude
age, and electrical loads. The project builds a community commercial drone services. They provide a solution to
energy marketplace that creates a decentralized P2P en- drone navigation by voluntarily sharing airspace over propergy network that is coordinated with the broader power erties. This helps to solve the problem of drone operation
grid. It is the first ever energy-blockchain-platform, that permission, building a new sharing marketplace. Propallows devices at the grid edge to securely and directly erty owners offer their airspace using smart contracts in
transact for energy sales among microgrid participants. A the blockchain, and drone service providers pay for a temhybrid device measures a building’s energy production in porary access. The application has been developed using
use and sends data to the network. Ethereum smart contracts.
 The project for Autonomous Decentralized Peer-to-Peer The Chain of Things [146] is a blockchain-enabling IoT
Telemetry (ADEPT) led by IBM and Samsung [80] aims research lab that proposes Maru, an integrated blockchain
to promote device autonomy, and to this end they use and IoT hardware solution. Blockchain provides devices
blockchain technology to ensure code execution on edge de- with universal identity from birth, security and interopvices. ADEPT uses three protocols: Telehash, Bittorrent erability. Three case studies are presented: Chain of
and Ethereum, for messaging, file sharing and blockchain, Security, focused on providing security to IoT through
respectively. Blockchain technology provides authentica- blockchain; Chain of Solar, that aims to connect solar pantion, engagement, contracts and checklists. Their proof of els to the blockchain to store produced energy for a variety
concept consists in smart washing machines that use smart of applications and Chain of Shipping, that plans to imcontracts to buy detergent supplies from retailers. prove security in the shipping and logistics industry. Data
 The blockchain framework proposed by Slock.it [85] logging devices are used to send data to the network. The
aims to address security, identity, coordination and pri- proof of concept has been developed over the Ethereum
vacy over billions of IoT devices. The objective is to build network.
a sharing economy where each IoT asset can be rented Chronicled [111] has developed several IoT products
securely and quickly without the need for any author- provided with cryptographic capabilities with the objecity. They are working on a variety of projects, for in- tive of creating the world’s most trusted IoT and supstance a marketplace to provide a charging infrastructure ply chain ecosystems. Chronicled platform includes a
for electric vehicles, called Blockcharge. This solution uses blockchain synchronization server capable of synchroniza smartplug, a mobile application to activate the plug and ing with multiple blockchain systems such as Quorum,
control the charge, and the blockchain to pay for the ser- Ethereum and Hyperledger. Registration and verification
vices. They are also working on a smart lock to automate of device identity is performed through smart contracts.
apartment renting. The Modum [84] blockchain solution aims to provide
 Aigang [88] is an autonomous insurance network for data integrity for physical products, focused on improving
IoT assets. Aigang has deployed smart contracts over the supply chain processes. The Modum sensors record envi-
Ethereum test-bed that issue policies, conduct risk assess- ronmental conditions during shipments. Modum has been
ment and process claims automatically. They have also designed to work with different platforms. A solution for
created a custom virtual currency (AIX). They offer in- the distribution of medical products has been developed
vestment opportunities in different products with different using Ethereum blockchain. Ethereum smart contracts are
risk levels and potential gains. Smart contracts connect used to verify sensor data each time goods change ownerintelligent devices with insurance policies. Through these ship, the contract validates that the transaction meets the
contracts the devices can order maintenance and insurance customer’s standards. The solution integrates sensor tags
 19
 Table 6: IoT-Blockchain applications
 Application Classification Platform
 LO3 Energy [87] Energy microgrid Ethereum
 ADEPT [80] Smart contracts involving IoT devices Ethereum
 Slock.it [85] Renting/Selling/Sharing smart objects Ethereum
 Aigang [88] Insurance network for IoT assets Ethereum
 MyBit [89] Investment in IoT devices Ethereum
 AeroToken Sharing airspace market for drone navigation Ethereum
 Chain of things [146] Identity, security and interoperability Ethereum
 Chronicled [111] Identity, data provenance and automation Multiplatform
 Modum [84] Data integrity for the supply chain Multiplatform
 Riddle and Code [147] Sharing and machine economy Multiplatform
 Blockchain of things [82] Secure connectivity between IoT devices Multiplatform

that collect measurements during transit, a mobile appli- challenges that blockchain and IoT must address in order
cation, used to connect and activate sensors and change for them to successfully work together. We have identified
ownership, and a dashboard to analyze sensor collected the key points where blockchain technology can help imdata after shipment reception. prove IoT applications. An evaluation has also been pro-
 Twin of Things is a solution for securing the ownership vided to prove the feasibility of using blockchain nodes on
and provenance of everyday objects [147] developed by IoT devices. Existing platforms and applications have also
Riddle and Code. The solution combines blockchain and been examined to complete the study, offering a complete
cryptography to generate a hardware-based digital identity overview of the interaction between blockchain technology
for all connected physical objects. Communication and and the IoT paradigm.
transactions between devices is autonomously and securely It is expected that blockchain will revolutionize the IoT.
performed thanks to blockchain. A highly secure crypto The integration of these two technologies should be adchip enables each device to become a blockchain node. The dressed, taking into account the challenges identified in
chip is produced in the form of an adhesive non-removable this paper. The adoption of regulations is key to the in-
NFC tag and an Android application is used to carry out clusion of blockchain and the IoT as part of government
a blockchain transaction to register the unique, tamper- infrastructures. This adoption would speed up the interacproof identity of the chip. Once validated in the network, tion between citizens, governments and companies. Conit can interact with other devices. The solution has been sensus will also play a key role in the inclusion of the IoT
designed to be blockchain agnostic, it can currently work as part of the mining processes and distributing even more
with Ethereum, Bitcoin and BigchainDB blockchains. blockchains. Nevertheless, a dualism between data confi-
 The Blockchain of Things [82] provides a secure open dence and facilitating the inclusion of embedded devices
communication platform for industrial IoT integration. could arise. Lastly, beyond the scalability and storage
They propose Catenis, a web service layer for rapid Bit- capacity which affect both technologies, research efforts
coin blockchain integration, with end-to-end encryption. should also be made to ensure the security and privacy
It can also be adapted to Ethereum, Hyperledger and other of critical technologies that the IoT and blockchain can
blockchains. In Catenis, each IoT device is represented as become.
a virtual device in a Catenis Hub and Gateways (with in- One of the main concerns about blockchain, and especreased security). Each virtual device will manage a host cially cryptocurrencies, resides in its volatility which has
of Catenis services for the IoT device. also been exploited by people to take unfair advantage of
 this situation. The integration of the IoT and blockchain
5. Conclusion and Future Work will greatly increase the use of blockchain, in such a way as
 to establish cryptocurrencies on the same level as current
 Disruptive technologies always generate great contro- fiduciary money.
versy. Although there are many detractors of virtual
currencies, it seems undeniable that the technology that
sustains them is a significant technological revolution. Acknowledgment
Blockchain is here to stay. However, modifying the technology without adequately guaranteeing its operation or
applying it to scenarios where the cost does not compen- This work was funded by the Spanish projects TIC-1572
sate the improvement are risks into which one can fall (MIsTIca: Critical Infrastructures Monitoring based on
easily. Therefore, the benefits of applying blockchain to Wireless Technologies) and TIN2014-52034-R (An MDE
the IoT should be analyzed carefully and taken with cau- Framework for the Design and Integration of Critical Intion. This paper has provided an analysis of the main frastructure Management Systems).
 20
Author Contributions [18] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, Q. Wen, A survey on the
 security of blockchain systems, Future Generation Computer
 Systems (2017) In press.
 Jaime Chen, Cristian Martin and Ana Reyna have writ- [19] I. Eyal, E. G. Sirer, Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining
ten this paper and have done the research which supports is vulnerable, in: International conference on financial crypit. Manuel Dı́az has collaborated in the conception, re- tography and data security, San Juan, Puerto Rico, Springer,
search and design of the paper. Enrique Soler has reviewed 2014, pp. 436–454.
 [20] J. Bonneau, E. W. Felten, S. Goldfeder, J. A. Kroll,
the work. A. Narayanan, Why buy when you can rent? bribery attacks
 on bitcoin consensus, 2016.
 [21] G. Karame, E. Androulaki, S. Capkun, Two bitcoins at the
Conflicts of Interest price of one? double-spending attacks on fast payments in
 bitcoin., IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2012 (2012).
 [22] Bitcoin average transction confirmation time, Available online:
 The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest https : / / blockchain.info / es / charts / avg - confirmation -
regarding the publication of this manuscript. time, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 [23] H. Finney, The finney attack(the bitcoin talk forum), Available online: https : / / bitcointalk.org / index.php?topic =
 3441.msg48384, 2011. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
6. References [24] E. Heilman, A. Kendler, A. Zohar, S. Goldberg, Eclipse attacks on bitcoin’s peer-to-peer network., in: USENIX Security
 [1] M. Dı́az, C. Martı́n, B. Rubio, State-of-the-art, challenges, and Symposium, Washington, D.C., USA, USENIX Association,
 open issues in the integration of internet of things and cloud 2015, pp. 129–144.
 computing, Journal of Network and Computer Applications [25] Segwit2x backers cancel plans for bitcoin hard fork, Avail-
 67 (2016) 99–117. able online: https://techcrunch.com/2017/11/08/segwit2x-
 [2] J. Rivera, R. van der Meulen, Forecast alert: Internet of things backers-cancel-plans-for-bitcoin-hard-fork/, 2017. Acendpoints and associated services, worldwide, 2016, Gartner cessed: 2018-02-01.
 (2016). [26] E. B. Sasson, A. Chiesa, C. Garman, M. Green, I. Miers,
 [3] World health organization food safety fact sheet, Available E. Tromer, M. Virza, Zerocash: Decentralized anonymous
 online: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs399/ payments from bitcoin, in: Security and Privacy (SP), 2014
 en/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. IEEE Symposium on, San Jose, CA, USA, IEEE, 2014, pp.
 [4] 17 blockchain disruptive use cases, Available online: https: 459–474.
 //everisnext.com/2016/05/31/blockchain-disruptive-use- [27] I. Miers, C. Garman, M. Green, A. D. Rubin, Zerocoin:
 cases/, 2016. Accessed: 2018-02-01. Anonymous distributed e-cash from bitcoin, in: Security and
 [5] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, Privacy (SP), 2013 IEEE Symposium on, Berkeley, CA, USA,
 Available online: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, 2008. IEEE, 2013, pp. 397–411.
 Accessed: 2018-02-01. [28] Monero, https://getmonero.org/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-
 [6] A. M. Antonopoulos, Mastering Bitcoin: unlocking digital 20.
 cryptocurrencies, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2014. [29] Bitcoin fog, Available online: http://bitcoinfog.info/, 2017.
 [7] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, H. Wang, Blockchain Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 challenges and opportunities: A survey, International Journal [30] G. Maxwell, Coinjoin: Bitcoin privacy for the real world, Availof Web and Grid Services (2017). able online: https : / / bitcointalk.org / index.php?topic =
 [8] V. Buterin, Ethereum white paper, Available online: https: 279249.msg2983902#msg2983902, 2013. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 //github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White- Paper, 2013. Ac- [31] A. Greenberg, dark walletis about to make bitcoin money
 cessed: 2018-04-02. laundering easier than ever, URL http://www. wired.
 [9] E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Chris- com/2014/04/dark-wallet (2014).
 tidis, A. De Caro, D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman, [32] Dash, https://www.dash.org/es/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 Y. Manevich, et al., Hyperledger fabric: A distributed op- [33] J. Bonneau, A. Narayanan, A. Miller, J. Clark, J. A. Kroll,
 erating system for permissioned blockchains, arXiv preprint E. W. Felten, Mixcoin: Anonymity for bitcoin with accountarXiv:1801.10228 (2018). able mixes, in: International Conference on Financial Cryp-
[10] J. Kennedy, $1.4bn investment in blockchain start-ups in tography and Data Security, San Juan, Puerto Rico, Springer,
 last 9 months, says pwc expert, Available online: http: 2014, pp. 486–504.
 //linkis.com/Ayjzj, 2016. Accessed: 2018-02-01. [34] T. Ruffing, P. Moreno-Sanchez, A. Kate, Coinshuffle: Practi-
[11] I. Eyal, A. E. Gencer, E. G. Sirer, R. Van Renesse, Bitcoin-ng: cal decentralized coin mixing for bitcoin, in: European Sym-
 A scalable blockchain protocol, in: 13th USENIX Symposium posium on Research in Computer Security, Heraklion, Crete,
 on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 16), Greece, Springer, 2014, pp. 345–364.
 Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 45–59. [35] G. Maxwell, Coinswap: Transaction graph disjoint trustless
[12] Litecoin, https://litecoin.org/, 2011. Accessed: 2018-02-04. trading, CoinSwap: Transactiongraphdisjointtrustlesstrading
[13] Y. Sompolinsky, A. Zohar, Accelerating bitcoin’s transaction (October 2013) (2013).
 processing, Fast Money Grows on Trees, Not Chains. IACR [36] L. Valenta, B. Rowan, Blindcoin: Blinded, accountable mixes
 Cryptology ePrint Archive 881 (2013). for bitcoin, in: International Conference on Financial Cryp-
[14] C. Decker, R. Wattenhofer, A fast and scalable payment net- tography and Data Security, San Juan, Puerto Rico, Springer,
 work with bitcoin duplex micropayment channels, in: Sym- 2015, pp. 112–126.
 posium on Self-Stabilizing Systems, Edmonton, AB, Canada, [37] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, C. Papamanthou, Hawk:
 Springer, 2015, pp. 3–18. The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving
[15] C. Stathakopoulou, C. Decker, R. Wattenhofer, A faster Bit- smart contracts, in: Security and Privacy (SP), 2016 IEEE
 coin network, Tech. rep., ETH, Zurich, Semester Thesis, 2015. Symposium on, San Jose, CA, USA, IEEE, 2016, pp. 839–858.
[16] Bigchaindb: The scalable blockchain database powering ipdb., [38] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, A. Pentland, Enigma: Decentralized
 Available online: https://www.bigchaindb.com/, 2017. Ac- computation platform with guaranteed privacy, arXiv preprint
 cessed: 2018-02-01. arXiv:1506.03471 (2015).
[17] Ipfs is the distributed web, Available online: https : / / [39] Quorum whitepaper, Available online: https://github.com/
 ipfs.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.

 21
 jpmorganchase / quorum - docs / blob / master / Quorum % [58] R3, Available online: https://www.r3.com/, 2017. Accessed:
 20Whitepaper%20v0.1.pdf, 2016. Accessed: 2018-02-01. 2018-02-01.
[40] G. Greenspan, Multichain private blockchainwhite paper, [59] Trusted iot alliance, Available online: https://www.trusted-
 Available online: https : / / www.multichain.com / download / iot.org/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 MultiChain-White-Paper.pdf, 2015. Accessed: 2018-02-01. [60] Alastria: National blockchain ecosystem, Available online:
[41] S. Jehan, Rockchain a distributed data in- https://alastria.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 telligence platform, https : / / icobazaar.com / [61] C. Cachin, M. Vukolić, Blockchains consensus protocols in the
 static / 4dd610d6601de7fe70eb5590b78ed7cd / wild, arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01873 (2017).
 RockchainWhitePaper.pdf, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20. [62] A. Baliga, Understanding blockchain consensus mod-
[42] A. Lazarovich, Invisible Ink: blockchain for data privacy, els, Available online: https : / / www.persistent.com / wp -
 Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2015. content/uploads/2017/04/WP- Understanding- Blockchain-
[43] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, et al., Decentralizing privacy: Using Consensus-Models.pdf, 2017. Accessed: 2018-03-04.
 blockchain to protect personal data, in: Security and Privacy [63] F. Tschorsch, B. Scheuermann, Bitcoin and beyond: A techni-
 Workshops (SPW), 2015 IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, IEEE, cal survey on decentralized digital currencies, IEEE Commu-
 2015, pp. 180–184. nications Surveys & Tutorials 18 (2016) 2084–2123.
[44] D. Houlding, Healthcare blockchain: What goes [64] N. T. Courtois, On the longest chain rule and proon chain stays on chain, Available online: https : grammed self-destruction of crypto currencies, arXiv preprint
 //itpeernetwork.intel.com/healthcare- blockchain- goes- arXiv:1405.0534 (2014).
 chain-stays-chain/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. [65] Nxt white paper, Available online: https : / /
[45] F. Zhang, E. Cecchetti, K. Croman, A. Juels, E. Shi, Town bravenewcoin.com / assets / Whitepapers / NxtWhitepaper -
 crier: An authenticated data feed for smart contracts, in: Pro- v122-rev4.pdf, 2014. Accessed: 2018-03-04.
 ceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer [66] F. Schuh, D. Larimer, Bitshares 2.0: General overview,
 and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, ACM, 2016, Available online: https : / / bravenewcoin.com / assets /
 pp. 270–282. Whitepapers/bitshares-general.pdf, 2017. Accessed: 2018-
[46] K. Delmolino, M. Arnett, A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Step by 03-04.
 step towards creating a safe smart contract: Lessons and in- [67] I. Stewart, Proof of burn. bitcoin. it, Available online: https:
 sights from a cryptocurrency lab, in: International Conference //en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Proof of burn, 2012. Accessed: 2018-
 on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Christ Church, 03-04.
 Barbados, Springer, 2016, pp. 79–94. [68] A. Nember, Nem technical reference, Available online: https:
[47] N. Atzei, M. Bartoletti, T. Cimoli, A survey of attacks on //nem.io/wp- content/themes/nem/files/NEM techRef.pdf,
 ethereum smart contracts (sok), in: International Confer- 2018. Accessed: 2018-03-04.
 ence on Principles of Security and Trust, Uppsala, Sweden, [69] A. Miller, A. Juels, E. Shi, B. Parno, J. Katz, Permacoin:
 Springer, 2017, pp. 164–186. Repurposing bitcoin work for data preservation, in: Security
[48] K. Christidis, M. Devetsikiotis, Blockchains and smart con- and Privacy (SP), 2014 IEEE Symposium on, San Jose, CA,
 tracts for the internet of things, IEEE Access 4 (2016) 2292– USA, IEEE, 2014, pp. 475–490.
 2303. [70] L. Lamport, et al., Paxos made simple, ACM Sigact News 32
[49] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, A. Hobor, Making (2001) 18–25.
 smart contracts smarter, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM [71] M. Burrows, The chubby lock service for loosely-coupled dis-
 SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Secu- tributed systems, in: Proceedings of the 7th symposium on
 rity, Vienna, Austria, ACM, 2016, pp. 254–269. Operating systems design and implementation, Seattle, WA,
[50] C. K. Frantz, M. Nowostawski, From institutions to code: USA, USENIX Association, 2006, pp. 335–350.
 towards automated generation of smart contracts, in: Foun- [72] D. Ongaro, J. K. Ousterhout, In search of an understandable
 dations and Applications of Self* Systems, IEEE International consensus algorithm., in: USENIX Annual Technical Confer-
 Workshops on, Augsburg, Germany, IEEE, 2016, pp. 210–215. ence, Philadelphia, PA, USA, USENIX Association, 2014, pp.
[51] C. K. Elwell, M. M. Murphy, M. V. Seitzinger, Bitcoin: ques- 305–319.
 tions, answers, and analysis of legal issues, Available online: [73] M. Nabi-Abdolyousefi, M. Mesbahi, Sieve method for
 https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43339.pdf, 2013. Accessed: consensus-type network tomography, IET Control Theory &
 2018-02-01. Applications 6 (2012) 1926–1932.
[52] Bitcoin is a fraud that will blow up, says jp morgan boss, Avail- [74] Ripple, https://ripple.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 able online: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/ [75] D. Mazieres, The stellar consensus protocol: A federated
 sep/13/bitcoin- fraud- jp- morgan- cryptocurrency- drug- model for internet-level consensus, Stellar Development Foundealers, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. dation (2015).
[53] Bitcoin could be here for 100 years but it’s more likely to ’to- [76] Hdac, Available online: https://hdac.io/, 2017. Accessed:
 tally collapse,’ nobel laureate says, Available online: https: 2018-02-01.
 //www.cnbc.com/2018/01/19/bitcoin- likely- to- totally- [77] V. Gramoli, From blockchain consensus back to byzantine
 collapse-nobel-laureate-robert-shiller-says.html, 2018. consensus, Future Generation Computer Systems (2017).
 Accessed: 2018-02-01. [78] J. C. Buzby, T. Roberts, The economics of enteric infections:
[54] Bitcoin could hit $100,000 in 10 years, says the analyst who human foodborne disease costs, Gastroenterology 136 (2009)
 correctly called its $2,000 price, Available online: https: 1851–1862.
 //www.cnbc.com/2017/05/31/bitcoin- price- forecast- hit- [79] H. Malviya, How blockchain will defend iot, Available online:
 100000-in-10-years.html, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2883711, 2016. Accessed: 2018-
[55] E. B. Centralny, Virtual currency schemes–a further analysis, 02-01.
 Available online: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ [80] P. Veena, S. Panikkar, S. Nair, P. Brody, Empowering the
 virtualcurrencyschemesen.pdf, 2015. Accessed: 2018-02-01. edge-practical insights on a decentralized internet of things,
[56] Bitlegal, Available online: http://bitlegal.io/, 2017. Ac- Empowering the Edge-Practical Insights on a Decentralized
 cessed: 2018-02-01. Internet of Things. IBM Institute for Business Value 17 (2015).
[57] Regulatory fears hammer bitcoin below $10,000, half its peak, [81] S. Gan, An IoT simulator in NS3 and a key-based authen-
 Available online: https : / / www.reuters.com / article / uk - tication architecture for IoT devices using blockchain, Ph.D.
 global-bitcoin/regulatory-fears-hammer-bitcoin-below- thesis, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 2017.
 10000-half-its-peak-idUSKBN1F60CG, 2017. Accessed: 2018- [82] Chain of things, Available online: https : / /
 02-01. www.blockchainofthings.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-

 22
 01. [105] C. Wang, Q. Wang, K. Ren, W. Lou, Privacy-preserving pub-
 [83] Filament, Available online: https://filament.com/, 2017. Ac- lic auditing for data storage security in cloud computing, in:
 cessed: 2018-02-01. INFOCOM, 2010 Proceedings IEEE, San Diego, California,
 [84] modum, Available online: https://modum.io/, 2017. Accessed: USA, Ieee, 2010, pp. 1–9.
 2018-02-01. [106] C. Liu, C. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, External integrity verifi-
 [85] G. Prisco, Slock. it to introduce smart locks linked to cation for outsourced big data in cloud and iot: A big picture,
 smart ethereum contracts, decentralize the sharing economy, Future Generation Computer Systems 49 (2015) 58–67.
 Available online: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/ [107] Bitcoin fog, Available online: http : / / www.the -
 slock- it- to- introduce- smart- locks- linked- to- smart- blockchain.com / 2016 / 05 / 01 / babelchain - machine -
 ethereum- contracts- decentralize- the- sharing- economy- communication - proof - understanding - new - paper/, 2016.
 1446746719/, 2016. Accessed: 2018-02-01. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 [86] M. A. Khan, K. Salah, Iot security: Review, blockchain so- [108] I. A. Naidu R, Nestle, unilever, tyson and others team
 lutions, and open challenges, Future Generation Computer with ibm on blockchain, http://www.reuters.com/article/
 Systems (2017). us - ibm - retailers - blockchain / nestle - unilever - tyson -
 [87] Lo3energy, Available online: https://lo3energy.com/, 2017. and-others-team-with-ibm-on-blockchain-idUSKCN1B21B1,
 Accessed: 2018-02-01. 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 [88] Aigang, Available online: https://aigang.network/, 2017. Ac- [109] M. Samaniego, R. Deters, Internet of smart things-iost: Using
 cessed: 2018-02-01. blockchain and clips to make things autonomous, in: Cognitive
 [89] My bit, Available online: https://mybit.io/, 2017. Accessed: Computing (ICCC), 2017 IEEE International Conference on,
 2018-02-01. Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, IEEE, 2017, pp. 9–16.
 [90] M. Samaniego, R. Deters, Hosting virtual iot resources on [110] The lisk protocol, Available online: https://docs.lisk.io/
 edge-hosts with blockchain, in: Computer and Information docs/the-lisk-protocol, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 Technology (CIT), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, [111] Chronicled, Available online: https://chronicled.com/, 2017.
 Yanuca Island, Fiji, IEEE, 2016, pp. 116–119. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 [91] M. Aazam, E.-N. Huh, Fog computing and smart gateway [112] S. King, S. Nadal, Peercoin–secure & sustainable cryptocoin,
 based communication for cloud of things, in: In Proceedings of https://peercoin.net/whitepaper, 2012. Accessed: 2017-10-
 the 2nd International Conference on Future Internet of Things 20.
 and Cloud (FiCloud-2014), Barcelona, Spain, Aug 2014, pp. [113] B. Markus, Dogecoin, http://dogecoin.com/, 2013. Accessed:
 27–29. 2017-10-20.
 [92] Ethembedded, Available online: http://ethembedded.com/, [114] Namecoin, https://namecoin.org/, 2014. Accessed: 2017-10-
 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. 20.
 [93] Raspnode, Available online: http://raspnode.com/, 2017. Ac- [115] V. Pradeep, Renault partners with microsoft for
 cessed: 2018-02-01. blockchain-based digital car maintenance book,
 [94] K. Wüst, A. Gervais, Do you need a blockchain?, IACR Cryp- https : / / mspoweruser.com / renault - partners - microsoft -
 tology ePrint Archive 2017 (2017) 375. blockchain- based- digital- car- maintenance- book/, 2017.
 [95] Ant router r1-ltc the wifi router that mines lite- Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 coin, Available online: https : / / shop.bitmain.com / [116] M. C, The end of passport gates? dubai to test ’inantrouter r1 ltc wireless router and asic litecoin miner.htm, visible’ airport checks using facial recognition, http : / /
 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2017/06/13/end-passport-
 [96] Ethraspbian, Available online: http : / / ethraspbian.com/, gates - dubai - test - invisible - airport - checks - using/,
 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01. 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 [97] R. Roman, J. Lopez, M. Mambo, Mobile edge computing, fog [117] e-identity, https://e- estonia.com/solutions/e- identity/
 et al.: A survey and analysis of security threats and challenges, e-residency/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 Future Generation Computer Systems 78 (2018) 680–698. [118] How to get an illinois birth certificate online, https://vital-
 [98] R. Roman, J. Zhou, J. Lopez, On the features and challenges records.us/order- an- illinois- birth- certificate/, 2017.
 of security and privacy in distributed internet of things, Com- Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 puter Networks 57 (2013) 2266–2279. [119] C. R, Indian states look to digitize land deals with blockchain,
 [99] J. Lopez, R. Rios, F. Bao, G. Wang, Evolving privacy: From https : / / www.reuters.com / article / us - india - landrights -
 sensors to the internet of things, Future Generation Computer tech/indian-states-look-to-digitize-land-deals-with-
 Systems 75 (2017) 46–57. blockchain-idUSKBN1AQ1T3, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[100] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, K.-K. R. Choo, A blockchain [120] Bitpay, https://bitpay.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 future to internet of things security: A position pa- [121] Abra, https://www.abra.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 per, Digital Communications and Networks (2017). [122] Bitnation, https://bitnation.co/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-
 URL: http : / / www.sciencedirect.com / science / article / 20.
 pii / S2352864817302900. doi:https : / / doi.org / 10.1016 / [123] Onename, https://onename.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 j.dcan.2017.10.006. [124] Keybase, https://keybase.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[101] P. Ruckebusch, E. De Poorter, C. Fortuna, I. Moerman, Gitar: [125] Shocard, https://shocard.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
 Generic extension for internet-of-things architectures enabling [126] Follow my vote, Available online: https : / /
 dynamic updates of network and application modules, Ad Hoc followmyvote.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
 Networks 36 (2016) 127–151. [127] Tierion, https://tierion.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[102] A. Taherkordi, F. Loiret, R. Rouvoy, F. Eliassen, Optimizing [128] Proof of existence, https://poex.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-
 sensor network reprogramming via in situ reconfigurable com- 10-20.
 ponents, ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks (TOSN) 9 [129] Factom, https://www.factom.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-
 (2013) 14. 20.
[103] C. Fernandez-Gago, F. Moyano, J. Lopez, Modelling trust [130] Everledger, https : / / www.everledger.io/, 2017. Accessed:
 dynamics in the internet of things, Information Sciences 396 2017-10-20.
 (2017) 72–82. [131] Mit digital diploma pilot program, http : / / web.mit.edu /
[104] C. Liu, R. Ranjan, C. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Chen, Mur- registrar / records / certs / digital.html, 2017. Accessed:
 dpa: Top-down levelled multi-replica merkle hash tree based 2017-10-20.
 secure public auditing for dynamic big data storage on cloud, [132] Provenance, https://www.provenance.org/, 2017. Accessed:
 IEEE Transactions on Computers 64 (2015) 2609–2622. 2017-10-20.

 23
[133] Skuchain, http://www.skuchain.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-
 10-20.
[134] Robomed network, https : / / robomed.io/, 2017. Accessed:
 2017-10-20.
[135] A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, A. Lippman, Medrec: Using blockchain for medical data access and permission management, in: Open and Big Data (OBD), International Conference
 on, Vienna, Austria, IEEE, 2016, pp. 25–30.
[136] Synechron, https://www.synechron.com/finlabs/mortgagelending, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[137] Ubitquity, https://www.ubitquity.io, 2017. Accessed: 2017-
 10-20.
[138] Atlant, https://atlant.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[139] Daocasino, https://dao.casino/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[140] Peerplays, https : / / www.peerplays.com/, 2017. Accessed:
 2017-10-20.
[141] Wagerr, https://wagerr.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[142] Storj.io, https://storj.io/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[143] R. J, Sony wants to digitize education records using the
 blockchain, https : / / techcrunch.com / 2017 / 08 / 09 / sony -
 education-blockchain/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[144] ujo, https://ujomusic.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[145] resonate, https://resonate.is/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-10-20.
[146] Chain of things, Available online: https : / /
 www.chainofthings.com/, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
[147] Riddle and code, Available online: https : / /
 www.riddleandcode.com, 2017. Accessed: 2018-02-01.
[148] Aerotoken, Available online: https://aerotoken.com, 2017.
 Accessed: 2018-02-01.

 24

 View publication stats