See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/335011863

A Survey on Big Data for Network Trafﬁc Monitoring and Analysis

Article in IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management · August 2019
DOI: 10.1109/TNSM.2019.2933358

CITATIONS READS
162 964

5 authors, including:

 Andrea Morichetta
 TU Wien
 48 PUBLICATIONS 724 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE

 All content following this page was uploaded by Andrea Morichetta on 16 May 2023.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 1

 A Survey on Big Data for Network Traffic
 Monitoring and Analysis
 Alessandro D’Alconzo‡ , Idilio Drago† , Andrea Morichetta† , Marco Mellia† , Pedro Casas∗
 ∗ AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, † Politecnico di Torino, ‡ Siemens Austria

 Abstract—Network Traffic Monitoring and Analysis (NTMA) allowing heterogeneous data to be collected and evaluated.
 represents a key component for network management, especially This trend makes it hard to design scalable and distributed
 to guarantee the correct operation of large-scale networks such
arXiv:2003.01648v1 [cs.DC] 3 Mar 2020

 applications and calls for efficient mechanisms for online
 as the Internet. As the complexity of Internet services and
 the volume of traffic continue to increase, it becomes difficult analysis of large streams of measurements. More than that, as
 to design scalable NTMA applications. Applications such as storage prices decrease, it becomes possible to create massive
 traffic classification and policing require real-time and scalable historical datasets for retrospective analysis.
 approaches. Anomaly detection and security mechanisms require
 These challenges are precisely the characteristics associated
 to quickly identify and react to unpredictable events while
 processing millions of heterogeneous events. At last, the system with what, more recently, have become known as big data,
 has to collect, store, and process massive sets of historical data for i.e., situations in which the data volume, velocity, veracity and
 post-mortem analysis. Those are precisely the challenges faced variety are the key challenges to allow the extraction of value
 by general big data approaches: Volume, Velocity, Variety, and from the data. Indeed, traffic monitoring and analysis were
 Veracity. This survey brings together NTMA and big data. We
 one of the first examples of big data sources to emerge, and
 catalog previous work on NTMA that adopt big data approaches
 to understand to what extent the potential of big data is being it poses big data challenges more than ever.
 explored in NTMA. This survey mainly focuses on approaches It is thus not a surprise that researchers are resorting to big
 and technologies to manage the big NTMA data, additionally data technologies to support NTMA applications (e.g., [69],
 briefly discussing big data analytics (e.g., machine learning) for
 the sake of NTMA. Finally, we provide guidelines for future work,
 [77], [87], [124]). Distributed file systems – e.g., the Hadoop1
 discussing lessons learned, and research directions. Distributed File System (HDFS), big data platforms – e.g.,
 Hadoop and Spark, and distributed machine learning and graph
 Index Terms—Big Data; Network Measurements; Big Data
 Platforms; Traffic Analysis; Machine Learning. processing engines – e.g., MLlib and Apache Giraph, are some
 examples of technologies that are assisting applications to
 handle datasets that otherwise would be intractable. However,
 I. I NTRODUCTION it is by no means clear whether NTMA applications fully
 Understanding how Internet services are used and how exploit the potential of emerging big data technologies.
 they are operating is critical to people lives. Network Traffic We bring together NTMA research and big data. Whereas
 Monitoring and Analysis (NTMA) is central to that task. previous works documented advances on big data research and
 Applications range from providing a view on network traffic to technologies [34], [116], [126], methods supporting NTMA
 the detection of anomalies and unknown attacks while feeding (e.g., machine learning for NTMA [17], [85]), or specific
 systems responsible for usage monitoring and accounting. NTMA applications [12], [52], [105], [120], there is a lack
 They collect the historical data needed to support traffic of systematic surveys describing how NTMA and big data are
 engineering and troubleshooting, helping to plan the network being combined to exploit the potential of network data fully.
 evolution and identify the root cause of problems. It is correct More concretely, the goal of this survey is to discuss to what
 to say that NTMA applications are a cornerstone to guarantee extent NTMA researchers are exploiting the potential of big
 that the services supporting our daily lives are always available data technologies. We aim at providing network researchers
 and operating as expected. willing to adopt big data approaches for NTMA applications
 Traffic monitoring and analysis is a complicated task. The a broad overview of success cases and pitfalls on previous remassive traffic volumes, the speed of transmission systems, search efforts, thus illustrating the challenges and opportunities
 the natural evolution of services and attacks, and the variety on the use of big data technologies for NTMA applications.
 of data sources and methods to acquire measurements are
 By summarizing recent literature on NTMA, we provide
 just some of the challenges faced by NTMA applications. As
 researchers principled guidelines on the use of big data accordthe complexity of the network continues to increase, more
 ing to the requirements and purposes of NTMA applications.
 observation points become available to researchers, potentially
 Ultimately, by cataloging how challenges on NTMA have been
 The research leading to these results has been funded by the Vienna Science faced with big data approaches, we highlight open issues and
 and Technology Fund (WWTF) through project ICT15-129 “BigDAMA”, with promising research directions.
 the contribution from the SmartData@PoliTO center for data science and
 big data. Authors sincerely thank Prof. Tanja Zseby, Dr. Felix Iglesias, and
 Daniel C. Ferreira from TU Wien for their contributions to the work and early
 versions of the manuscript. 1 http://hadoop.apache.org/
 2

A. Survey methodology
 Knowledge
 We first identify papers summarizing big data research. We
have explored the literature for big data surveys, restricting
 Evaluation
our focus to the last ten years. This literature has served as Interpretation

 Data Analytics
a basis to our definition for big data as well as to limit our Visualization
scope in terms of the considered big data technologies. Information
 Since none of these papers addresses big data for NTMA,
 Modelling
we have followed a similar methodology and reviewed papers and Analysis
in the NTMA domain. We survey how NTMA researchers are
profiting from big data approaches and technologies. We have

 Data Management
 Data
focused on the last 5 years of (i) the main system and networking conferences, namely SIGCOMM, NSDI, CONEXT, Collection
and journals (IEEE TON, IEEE TNSM), (ii) new venues Preprocessing

targeting analytics and big data for NTMA, namely the Big-
Dama, AnNet, WAIN and NetAI workshops, and their parent
conferences (e.g., IM, NOMS and CNSM); (ii) special issues Raw Data
on Big Data Analytics published in this journal (TNSM).
We complement the survey by searching on Google Scholar, Figure 1: KDD [35], [116].
IEEE Explorer, and ACM Digital library. To ensure relevance
and limit our scope, we select papers concerning publication
 (i.e., volume) and need to be captured and analyzed at high
venues, the number of citations, and scope.
 rates or in real-time (i.e., velocity). The data potentially come
 The survey is organized as follows: Sect. II introduces from different sources (i.e., variety) that combine (i) structured
concepts of big data and the steps for big data analytics, giving data such as column-oriented databases; (ii) unstructured data
also some background in big data platforms. Sect. III reviews such as server logs; and (iii) semi-structured data such as
a taxonomy of NTMA applications, illustrating how NTMA XML or JSON documents. Moreover, data can be of different
relates to the big data challenges. Subsequent sections detail quality, with the uncertainty that characterizes the data (i.e.,
the process of NTMA and discuss how previous work has veracity). At last, the analysis of the data brings advantages
faced big data challenges in NTMA. Sect. IV focuses on data for users and businesses (i.e., value). That is, new insights are
capture, ingestion, storage and pre-processing, whereas Sect. V extracted from the original data to increase its value, preferably
overviews big data analytics for NTMA. Finally, Sect. VI using automatic methodologies.
describes lessons learned and open issues. We argue next that NTMA shares these characteristics.
 Hence, NTMA is an example of big data application which can
 II. W HAT IS BIG DATA ? profit from methodologies developed to face these challenges.
A. Definition
 Many definitions for big data have appeared in the literature. B. Knowledge discovery in big data
We rely on previous surveys that focused on other aspects of The process of KDD is often attributed to Fayyad et al. [35]
big data but have already documented its definitions. who summarized it as a sequence of operations over the data:
 Hu at al. [54] argue that “big data means not only a gathering, selection, pre-processing, transformation, mining,
large volume of data but also other features, such as variety evaluation, interpretation, and visualization. From a system
and velocity of the data”. They organize definitions in three perspective, authors of [116] reorganized these operations in
categories: architectural, comparative, or attributive. three groups: input, analysis, and output.
 Architectural and comparative definitions are both abstract. Data input performs the data management process, from the
Following an architectural definition, one would face a big collection of raw data to the delivery of data in suitable formats
data problem whenever the dataset is such that “traditional for subsequent mining. It includes pre-processing, which are
approaches” are incapable of storing and handling it. Similarly, the initial steps to prepare the data, with the integration of
comparative definitions characterize big data by comparing the heterogeneous sources and cleaning of spurious data.
properties of the data to the capabilities of traditional database Data analysis methods receive the prepared data and extract
tools. Those relying on attributive definitions (e.g., [65], [76]) information, i.e., models for classification, hidden patterns, redescribe big data by the salient features of both the data and lations, rules, etc. The methods range from statistical modeling
the process of analyzing the data itself. They advocate what is and analysis to machine learning and data mining algorithms.
nowadays widely known by the big data “V’s” – e.g., volume, Data output completes the process by converting informavelocity, variety, veracity, value. tion into knowledge. It includes steps to measure the informa-
 Other surveys targeting big data technologies [6], [54], tion quality, to display information in succinct formats, and to
[126] and analytics [34], [116] share this view. We will stick assist analysts with the interpretation of results. This step is
to the “5-Vs” definition because it provides concrete criteria not evaluated in this survey and is ignored in the following.
that characterize the big data challenges. We thus consider a The stages identified by Fayyad et al. can be further grouped
problem to belong to the big data class if datasets are large into data management and analytics (i.e., data analysis and
 JVM / OS / Hypervisor

 Hardware

 3

 Big data processing system

 Streaming
 PIG Hive Lucene BlinkDB

 GraphX

 MLib
 General Big graph Big stream
 Impala
 Big SQL-like HBase Shark
 purpose processing processing
 Column (SQL)
 oriented File data
 MapReduce
 Hive/Pig Giraph++ Apache Samza noSQL MapReduce
 Apache Hadoop
 database
 Spark
 MapReduce TEZ (Execution engine)
 Nephele METEOR Pregel+
 Online

 YARN (Cluster resource management) Mesos
 Apache Flink Spark SQL Power Graph M3

 HDFS (Distributed File System)
 Microsoft
 BigQuery GraphX Flink streaming
 Dryad
 JVM / OS / Hypervisor
 Apache HAMA Spark
 Apache Impala Trinity
 BSP on HDFS streaming
 Hardware

 Spark Berkeley
 Apache Storm
 AmpLab
 Figure 3: Hadoop 2.0 stack with Spark (based on [14]).
 BDAS on Tachyon
 & Apache Mesos

 Figure 2: Processing systems (based on [6], [97], [126]). Hive, HAWQ, Apache Drill, and Tajo belong to the SQL-like
 type. Pregel, GraphLab follow the graph processing models
output). Note that differently from [116], we use the term data and, finally, Storm and S4 are examples of the latter.
analysis to refer to the algorithms for extracting information A comprehensive review of big data programming models
from the data, whereas we use data analytics to refer to the and platforms is far beyond the scope of this paper. We refer
whole process, from data analysis to knowledge discovery. readers to [6], [126] for a complete survey.
 We reproduce and adapt this scheme in Fig. 1 and will use it 1) The Hadoop ecosystem: Hadoop is the most widespread
to characterize NTMA papers according to the several stages solution among the general-purpose big data platforms. Given
of the KDD process. its importance, we provide some details about its components
 The KDD process described above applies to any data in Fig. 3, considering Hadoop v2.0 and Spark [14].
analytics. However, the characteristics of the big data impose Hadoop v2.0 consists of the Hadoop kernel, MapReduce
fundamental challenges to the methodologies on each step. and the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS). YARN is the
For example, the data management process will naturally face default resource manager, providing access to cluster resources
much more complex tasks with big data, given the volume, ve- to several competing jobs. Other resource managers (e.g.,
locity, and variety of the data. Data management is, therefore, Mesos) and execution engines (e.g., TEZ) can be used too,
crucial with big data since it plays a key role in reducing data e.g., for providing resources to Spark.
volume and complexity. Also, it impacts the analysis and the
 Spark has been introduced in Hadoop v2.0 onward aiming
output phases, in particular in terms of speed of the analysis
 to solve limitations in the MapReduce paradigm. Spark is
and value of results.
 based on data representations that can be transformed into
 The big data challenges (i.e., the “5-Vs”) call for an apmultiple steps while efficiently residing in memory. In contrast,
proach that considers the whole KDD process in a comprehenthe MapReduce paradigm relies on basic operations (i.e.,
sive analytics framework. Such a framework should include
 map/reduce) that are applied to data batches read and stored
programming models that allow implementing application
 to disk. Spark has gained momentum in non-batch scenarios,
logic covering the complete KDD cycle. We will show later
 e.g, iterative and real-time big data applications, as well as
that a common practice to cope with big datasets is to resort
 in batch applications that cannot be solved in a few stages of
to parallel and distributed computing frameworks that are still
 map/reduce operations.
on expansion to cover all KDD phases.
 Several high-level language and systems, such as Google’s
 Sawzall [92], Yahoo’s Pig Latin [45], Facebook’s Hive [110],
C. Programming models and platforms
 and Microsoft’s SCOPE [21] have been proposed to run on top
 We provide a short overview of the most relevant pro- of Hadoop. Moreover, several libraries such as Mahout [89]
gramming models and platforms for handling big data. While over MapReduce and MLlib over Spark have been introduced
surveying the literature, we will give particular emphasis on by the community to solve problems or fill gaps in the
works that make use of such models and platforms for NTMA. original Hadoop ecosystem. Finally, the ecosystem has been
 Following the taxonomies found in [6], [126], we distin- complemented with tools targeting specific processing models,
guish four types of big data processing models: (i) general such as GraphX and Spark Streaming, which support graph
purpose – platforms to process big data that make little and stream processing, respectively.
assumptions about the data characteristics and the executed Besides the Apache Hadoop distributions, proprietary platalgorithms, (ii) SQL-like – platforms focusing on scalable forms offer different features for data processing and cluster
processing of structured and tabular data, (iii) graph processing management. Some of such solutions include Cloudera CDH,2
– platforms focusing on the processing of large graphs, and Hortonworks HDP,3 and MapR Converged Data Platform.4
(iv) stream processing – platforms dealing large-scale data that
continuously arrive to the system in a streaming fashion. 2 http://www.cloudera.com/downloads/cdh/5-8-2.html
 Fig. 2 depicts this taxonomy with examples of systems. 3 http://hortonworks.com/products/data-center/hdp/

MapReduce, Dryad, Flink, and Spark belong to the first type. 4 https://www.mapr.com/products/mapr-converged-data-platform
 4

 Table I: Categories of NTMA applications [15].
 Traffic classification used to work well by simply inspecting
 Category Description
 Maintenance and planning of networks. information in network and transport protocols. For instance,
 Traffic prediction
 Historically achieved through time series forecasting. Internet services used to be identified by simply inspecting
 Categorize and recognize traffic flows for different
 Traffic classification
 objectives, e.g., QoE, security etc.
 TCP/UDP port numbers. However, traffic classification is no
 Predict and isolate faults longer a simple task [85]. First, the number of Internet services
 Fault management
 and unwanted behaviors in networks. is large and continues to increase. Second, services must be
 Protect the network, react to (and prevent from)
 Network security
 malicious activities and general attacks. identified by observing little information seen in the network.
 Third, little information remains visible in packets, since a
 major share of the Internet services run on top of a handful of
 III. C ATEGORIZING NTMA APPLICATIONS encryption protocols (e.g., HTTPS over TCP). At last, Internet
A. Taxonomy services are dynamic and constantly updated.
 We rely on a subset of the taxonomy of network manage- Many approaches have been proposed to perform traffic
ment applications found in [15] to categorize papers handling classification. They can be grouped according to the strategy
NTMA with big data approaches. The previous work lists eight used to classify the packets: (i) Packet inspection analyzes the
categories, which are defined according to the final purpose content of packets searching for pre-defined messages [16]
of the management application, namely: (i) traffic prediction, or protocol fingerprints; (ii) Supervised machine learning
(ii) traffic classification, (iii) fault management, (iv) network methods extract features from the traffic and, in a training
security, (v) congestion control, (vi) traffic routing, (vii) re- phase, build models to associate feature values to the services;
source management, and (viii) QoS/QoE management. (iii) Unsupervised machine learning methods cluster traffic
 We only survey works that fit on the first four categories for without previous knowledge on the services. As such, they
two reasons. First, whereas the taxonomy in [15] is appropriate are appropriate to explore services for which training data
for describing network management applications, the level of is unavailable [33]. (iv) Behavioral methods identify services
dependence of such applications on NTMA varies consid- based on the behavior of end-nodes [60]. The algorithms
erably. Traffic routing and resource management seem less observe traffic to build models for nodes running particular
dependent on large-scale measurements than traffic prediction services. The models describe, for instance, which servers are
and security, for example. Second, the literature on the use reached by the clients, with which data rate, the order in which
of big data approaches for congestion control, traffic routing, servers are contacted, etc.
resource management, and QoS/QoE management is almost 3) Fault management: Fault management is the set of tasks
nonexistent by the time of surveying. We conjecture that either to predict, detect, isolate, and correct faults in networks.
large-scale datasets targeting problems in these categories are The goal is to minimize downtime. Fault management can
not available, or researchers have not identified potential on be proactive, e.g., when analytics predict faults based on
applying big data approaches in those scenarios. We thus measurements to avoid disruptions, or reactive, e.g., when
ignore the works using big data approaches for those cases. traffic and system logs are evaluated to understand ongoing
 problems. In either case, a key step in fault management is
 the localization of the root-cause of problems [15].
B. NTMA applications In large networks, diverse elements may be impacted by
 Tab. I shows the categories used in our survey. Next, we list faults: e.g., a failed router may overload other routes, thus
examples of NTMA applications in these categories. producing a chain of faults in the network. Diverse network
 1) Traffic prediction: Traffic prediction consists of estimat- elements will produce system logs related to the problem,
ing the future status of network links. It serves as a building and the behavior of the network may be changed in diverse
block for traffic engineering, helping to define, for example, aspects. Detecting malfunctioning is often achieved by means
the best moment to deploy more capacity in the network so of anomaly detection methods that identify abnormal behavior
to keep QoS levels. in traffic or unusual events in system logs. Anomalies, how-
 Traffic prediction is often faced as a time-series forecasting ever, can be caused also by security incidents (described next)
problem [15]. Here both classic forecasting methods (e.g., or normal changes in usage patterns. Analytics algorithms
ARIMA or SARIMA methods) and machine learning (e.g., often operate evaluating traffic, system logs, and active meadeep neural networks) are employed. The problem is usually surements in conjunction, so to increase the visibility of the
formulated as the estimation of traffic volumes based on network and easy the identification of root-causes of problems.
previous measurements in the same links. Changes in network 4) Security: Many NTMA applications have been proposed
behavior, however, make such estimations very complicated. for assisting cyber-security [74]. The most common objective
New services or sudden changes in service configurations (e.g., is to detect security flaws, virus, and malware, so to isolate
the deployment of novel bandwidth-hungry applications) poses infected machines and take countermeasures to minimize dammajor challenges to traffic prediction approaches. ages. Roughly speaking, there are two main approaches when
 2) Traffic classification: Traffic classification aims at iden- searching for malicious network activity: (i) based on attack
tifying services producing traffic [120]. It is a crucial step for signatures; (ii) based on anomaly detection.
managing and monitoring the network. Operators need infor- Signature-based methods build upon the idea that it is posmation about services, e.g., to understand their requirements sible to define fingerprints for attacks. A monitoring solution
and their impact on the overall network performance. inspects the source traffic/logs/events searching for (i) known
 5

messages exchanged by viruses, malware or other threats; or web pages, i.e., exchanging some zettabytes per year. At no
(ii) the typical communication patterns of the attacks – i.e., surprise, the community has spent much work in designing and
similar to behavioral traffic classification methods. Signature- engineering tools for data acquisition at high-speeds; some of
based methods are efficient to block well-known attacks that them are discussed in [32]. Here the main challenges addressed
are immutable or that mutate slowly. These methods however by the community seem to be the scalability of data collection
require attacks to be well-documented. systems and how to reduce data volumes at the collection
 Methods based on anomaly detection [12], [44] build upon points without impacting the data quality.
the assumption that attacks will change the behavior of the Measuring the Internet can be accomplished coarsely in
network. They build models to summarize the normal network two means: (i) active measurements, and (ii) passive measurebehavior from measurements. Live traffic is then monitored ments. The former indicates the process of injecting data into
and alerts are triggered when the behavior of the network the network and observing the responses. It is a not scalable
differs from the baseline. Anomaly detection methods are process, typically used for troubleshooting. Passive measureattractive since they allow the early detection of unknown ments, on the contrary, build on the continuous observation of
threats (e.g., zero-day exploits). These methods, however, may traffic, and the extraction of indexes in real-time.
not detect stealth attacks (i.e., false negatives), which are A network exporter captures the traffic crossing monitoring
not sufficiently large to disturb the network. They sometimes points, e.g., routers aggregating several customers. The exsuffer from large numbers of false positives too. porter sends out a copy of the observed network packets and/or
 traffic statistics to a collector. Data is then saved in storage
C. Big data challenges in NTMA applications formats suitable for NTMA applications. Analysis applications
 then access the data to extract knowledge.
 We argue that NTMA applications belonging to the cate- The components of this architecture can be integrated into a
gories above can profit from big data approaches. Processing single device (e.g., a router or a dedicated network monitor) or
such measurements poses the typical big data challenges (i.e., deployed in a distributed architecture. We will argue later that
the “5-Vs”). We provide some examples to support the claim. big data already emerges since the first stage of the NTMA
 Considering volume and velocity and taking traffic classifi- process and, as such, distributed architectures are common in
cation as an example: it has to be performed on-the-fly (e.g., on practical setups. The large data rate in the monitoring points
packets), and the input data are usually large. We will see later has pushed researchers and practitioners into the integration of
that researchers rely on different strategies to perform traffic many pre-processing functionalities directly into the exporters.
classification on high-speed links, with some works applying The most prominent example is perhaps flow-based monitoralgorithms to hundreds of Gbps streams. ing, in which only a summary of each traffic flow is exported
 Consider then variety. As more and more traffic goes to collectors. Next, we provide a summary of packet- and flowencrypted, algorithms to perform traffic classification or fault based methods used to collect data for NTMA applications.
management, for example, have poorer information to operate. 1) Packet-based methods: Analyzing packets provides the
Modern algorithms rely on diverse sources – e.g., see [113] highest flexibility for the NTMA applications, but also requires
that combines DNS and flow measurements. Anomaly detec- a significant amount of resources. Deep Packet Inspection
tion, as another example, is usually applied to a variety of (DPI) means to look into, and sometimes export, full packet
sources too (e.g., traffic traces, routing information, etc), so to contents that include application headers and payload. The
obtain diverse signals of anomalies. data rate poses challenges (i.e., velocity), which can be faced
 In terms of veracity, we again cite cyber-security. Samples using off-the-shelf hardware [115], provided hardware support
of attacks are needed to train classifiers to identify the attacks is present [58]. Indeed, there exist technologies to perform DPI
on real networks. Producing such samples is a challenging at multiple Gbit/s, while also saving the packets to disk [31].
task. While simple attacks can be reproduced in laboratory, The network monitoring community has proposed multiple
elaborate attacks are hard to reproduce – or, worst, are simu- alternatives to avoid the bottlenecks of packet-based methods.
lated in unrealistically ways – thus limiting the analysis. The classical approach is to perform pre-processing near the
 Finally, value is clearly critical in all the above applications data collection. Filtering and sampling are usually set on
– e.g., in cyber-security, a single attack that goes undetected collection points to export only a (small) subset of packets
can be unbearable to the operation of the network. that pass the filtering and sampling rules. Other ad-hoc transformations may be employed too, e.g., the exporting of packet
 IV. DATA MANAGEMENT FOR NTMA headers only, instead of full packet contents. In a similar
 We now survey how the data management steps (cf. Fig. 1) direction, authors of [75] propose to collect only the initial
are performed in NTMA applications. Big data analytics for packets of each flow, since these packets are usually sufficient
NTMA are instead covered in Sect. V. for applications such as traffic classification.
 As an illustration, Tab. II describes the volume of packet
 traces captured in some real deployments. The first two lines
A. Data collection report the size of packet traces capture at (i) an ISP network
 Measuring the Internet is a big data challenge. There are where around 20 k ADSL customers are connected; (ii) a
more than half a million networks, 1.6 billion websites, and campus network connecting around 15 k users. Both captures
more than 3 billion users, accessing more than 50 billion have been performed in morning hours and last for at least 1
 6

 Table II: Size of real packet traces captured at different vantage points with different methodologies.
 Description Duration pcap (GB) Headers up to L4 (%)
 Full packets of 20 k ADSL users (morning) 60 mins 675 6.8
 Full packets of 15 k Campus users (morning) 100 mins 913 6.3
 Only 5 kB or 5 packets per flow, 20 k ADSL users 1 day 677 22.5

Table III: Estimated measurement streams for a flow exporter
 Flow-based NTMA applications would still face more than
observing 50 Gbit/s on average (source [32], [52]).
 70 Mbit/s if IPFIX is chosen to export data. Since these
 Sampling rate Protocol Packets/s Bits/s numbers refer to a single vantage point, NTMA applications
 1:1 NetFlow v5 4.1 k 52 M that aggregate multiple vantage points may need to face several
 1:1 10.2 k 62 M Gb/s of input data. Finally, the table reports data speeds when
 NetFlow v9
 1:10 4.7 k 27 M employing sampling (see 1:10 rate). Sampling reduces the data
 1:1 IPFIX 12.5 k 75 M volume considerably but limiting NTMA applications.
 At last, NTMA applications often need to handle historical
 data. The storage needed to archive the compressed flow data
hour. More than half of TB is saved in both cases. The table from the vantage point used as an example in Tab. II grows
also shows that the strategy of saving only packet headers up linearly over time, and the archival consumes almost 30 TB
to the transport layer only partially helps to reduce the data after four years [32] of archival.
volume – e.g., around 45 GB of headers per hour would still
be saved for the ISP trace. Finally, the last line shows the size B. Data ingestion
of a full day of capture in the ISP network with a setup similar
to [75] (i.e., saving only 5 packets or 5 kB per flow). Whereas The previous step is the KDD step that depends the most
the data volume is reduced significantly, more than 600 GB of on the problem domain since the way data is acquired varies
pcaps are saved per day. a lot according to the given scenario. Not a surprise, generic
 big data frameworks mostly provide tools and methods for
 Nowadays, DPI is challenged by encryption as well as by
 transporting raw data from its original sources into prerestrictive privacy policies [40]. Alternatives to performing
 processing and analytics pipelines. The process of transporting
DPI on encrypted traffic have been presented [103].
 the data into the frameworks is usually called data ingestion.
 2) Flow-based methods: Flow-based methods process Since data at its source is still unprocessed, handling such raw
packets near the data collection, exporting only summaries data may be a huge challenge. Indeed, large data streams or
of the traffic per flow [52]. A network flow is defined as a high number of distributed collectors will produce a deluge
a sequence of packets that share common characteristics, of data to be parsed and pre-processed in subsequent stages.
identified by a key. NTMA applications that analyze flow Several generic tools for handling big data ingestion can
records have lower transmission requirements since data is be cited: (i) Flume,5 a distributed system to collect logs from
aggregated. Data privacy is better protected and issues related different sources; (ii) Sqoop,6 which allows to transmit data
to encryption are partially avoided. Nevertheless, there is an between Hadoop and relational databases; (iii) Kafka,7 a platunavoidable loss of information, which makes the analysis form that provides a distributed publish-subscribe messaging
more limited. In 2013, Cisco estimated that approximately system for online data streaming; among others. These tools
90% of network traffic analyses are flow-based, leaving the focus on scalability – e.g., they allow multiple streams to be
remaining 10% for packet-based approaches [90]. processed in a distributed fashion. Once data is delivered to
 Diverse flow monitoring technologies have been proposed. the framework, pre-processing can take place on the streams.
Cisco NetFlow, sFlow and IPFIX are the most common Considering NTMA, few solutions have been proposed to
ones. NetFlow has been widely used for a variety of NTMA ingest traffic measurements into big data frameworks. Here the
applications, for example for network security [86]. sFlow main challenges seem to be the transport of data in different
relies heavily on packet sampling (e.g., sampling 1 every 1 000 formats and from various sources into the frameworks. The
packets). This may hurt the performance of many NTMA research community has made interesting progresses in this
applications, even if sFlow is still suitable for detecting attacks front, and we cite two examples.
for example. Finally, IPFIX (IP Flow Information Export pro- Apache Spot8 is an open platform that integrates modules
tocol) is the IETF standard for exporting flow information [52]. for different applications in the network security area. It relies
IPFIX is flexible and customizable, allowing one to select the on Kafka for performing data ingestion. Users and developers
fields to be exported. IPFIX is used for a number of NTMA have to provide Spot with python scripts that parse the original
applications, such as the detection of SSH attacks [53]. measurements into a pre-defined, but flexible, format. Both the
 Even flow-based monitoring may produce very large original data and converted records are loaded and stored in
datasets [32]. For illustration, Tab. III lists the volume of the big data framework.
flow-level information exported when monitoring 50 Gbit/s on 5 https://flume.apache.org
average. The table is built by extrapolating volumes reported 6 http://sqoop.apache.org
by [52] for flow exporters in a real deployment. The table 7 https://kafka.apache.org

includes Cisco’s NetFlow v5 and NetFlow v9 as well as IPFIX. 8 http://spot.incubator.apache.org
 7

 tolerance and high performance. Colossus [79], the successor
 Storage
 infrastructure of GFS and Facebook Haystack [8] are other examples. Open
File System
 Relational
 SQL
 NoSQL NewSQL source derivatives of GFS appeared later, including Apache
 GFS MySQL
 Document Key-value Column Graph
 In-memory
 HDFS and Kosmosfs.
 Oriented stores oriented oriented
 On a higher abstraction level, relational databases suffer per-
 HDFS PostgresSQL MongoDB In-memory DynamoDB BigTable Giraph HStore
 formance penalties with large datasets. NoSQL databases [49]
 Kosmosfs Oracle CouchDB Redis Voldemort HyperTable Neo4j VoltDB are alternatives that emerged for such scenarios. NoSQL
 Microsoft
 SQL-lite CouchBase Memcached Riak OrientDB SQLfire
 databases scale better than the relational ones by over-
 Cosmos
 coming the intrinsic rigidity of database schemas. NoSQL
 Facebook
 Jackrabbit Aerospike Cassandra Titan MemSQL
 Haystack databases adopt different physical data layouts: (i) Key-value
 simpleDB HBase TokuDB databases store data in sets of key-value pairs organized into
 rows. Examples include Amazon’s Dynamo [30] and Mem-
Figure 4: Generic big storage systems (based on [14], [24]). cached;10 (ii) column-oriented databases (inspired on Google’s
 BigTable [23]) store data by column instead of by row. Examples are Cassandra [64] and HBase;11 (iii) document oriented
 A promising project is PNDA (Platform for Network Data databases store data in documents uniquely identified by a key.
Analysis).9 Developed by the Linux Foundation, it is an open- An example is MongoDB;12 (iv) Graph oriented databases
source platform capable of managing and grouping together store graphs – i.e., nodes and edges. They impose a graph
different data sources. It then performs analysis on such data schema to the database, but profiting from it to implement
sources. It does not force data in any specific schema and it efficient operations in graphs. An example is Titan.13
allows the integration of other sources, producing custom code Finally, NewSQL systems aim at providing a similar perforfor the analysis stage. It makes use of standard tools in big mance of NoSQL databases, while maintaining properties of
data frameworks, including Kafka for data ingestion. Here, a relational systems [107], e.g., relational data models and SQL
number of plugins for reading data in virtually all popular queries [19]. An example is Google Spanner.14
NTMA formats is available on the project website. 2) NTMA storage in big data frameworks: Being the In-
 Spot and PNDA experiences clearly show that ingesting ternet a distributed system, a key problem is how to archive
NTMA data into generic frameworks requires some effort measurements in a centralized data store. Here no standard
to plugin the NTMA formats into the frameworks. Once solution exists, despite multiple attempts to provide scalable
such plugins exist, standard ingestion tools like Kafka can be and flexible approaches [96], [112]. The measurements are
employed. The availability of open source code (e.g., PNDA usually collected using ad-hoc platforms and exported in
plugins) makes it easier to integrate these functionalities in formats that are not directly readable by big data frameworks.
other NTMA applications. Therefore, both special storage solutions and/or additional data
 transformation steps are needed.
C. Data storage For example, libpcap, libtrace, libcoral,
 In theory, generic store systems of big data frameworks libnetdude and Scapy are some libraries used for
can be used with NTMA too. In practice, a number of capturing packets. These libraries read and save traces using
characteristics of the big data frameworks complicate the the pcap format (or pcap-ng). Distributed big data file and
storage of NTMA data. In order to ease the understanding of database systems, such as HDFS or Cassandra, are generally
these challenges, we first provide some background in generic unable to read pcap traces directly, or in parallel, since
big data storage systems. Then, we evaluate how the NTMA the pcap traces are not separable – i.e., they cannot be
community is employing these systems in NTMA applications. easily split into parts. One would still need to reprocess the
 1) Generic systems: Fig. 4 reproduces a taxonomy of big traces sequentially when reading data from the distributed
data storage and management systems [14], [24]. Colors rep- file systems. A similar problem emerges for formats used to
resent the media (i.e., memory or persistent media) primarily store flow-based measurements. For example, nfdump is a
exploited by the system. popular format used to store NetFlow measurements. While
 Most big data storage systems focus on horizontal scala- files are split into parts by the collector according to pre-set
bility, i.e., growing the capacity of the system across multiple parameters (e.g., saving one file every five minutes), every
servers, rather than upgrading a single server to handle increas- single file is a large binary object. Hadoop-based systems
ing data volumes. This approach results in large distributed cannot split such files into parts automatically.
systems, which carry many risks, such as node crashes and A number of previous works propose new approaches to
network failures. Consistency, availability, and fault tolerance overcome these limitations: (i) loading the measurements in
are therefore of large concern in big data storage [14], [54]. original format to the distributed system, while extending the
 In terms of file systems, Google has pioneered the devel- frameworks to handle the classic formats; (ii) proposing new
opment by the implementation of the Google File System 10 http://memcached.org
(GFS) [46]. GFS was built with horizontal scalability in 11 https://hbase.apache.org/

mind, thus running on commodity servers and providing fault 12 https://www.mongodb.com/
 13 http://titan.thinkaurelius.com/
 9 http://pnda.io/overview 14 https://cloud.google.com/spanner/
 8

storage formats and tools for handling the big network data; Authors of [124] use an extra pre-processing step to convert
(iii) transforming the network data and importing it into con- measurements from the original format (i.e., pcap in HDFS)
ventional big data storage systems (discussed in Sect. IV-D). into a query-optimized format (i.e., Parquet). This conversion
 Lee and Lee [69] have developed a Hadoop API called is shown to bring massive improvements in performance, but
PcapInputFormat that can manage IP packets and NetFlow only pre-selected fields are loaded into the query-optimized
records in their native formats. The API allows NTMA ap- format. Authors of [98] propose a Hadoop-based framework
plications based on Hadoop to seamlessly process pcap or for network analysis that first imports data originally in
NetFlow traces. It thus allows traces to be processed with- perfSONAR format into Apache Avro. Authors of [67] process
out any previous transformation while avoiding performance flow logs in MapReduce, but transforming the original binary
penalties of reading files sequentially in the framework. A files into text files before loading them into HDFS.
similar direction is followed by Ibrahim et al. [56], who Marchal et al. [77] propose “a big data architecture for
develop traffic analysis algorithms based on MapReduce and large-scale security monitoring” that uses DNS measurements,
a new input API to explore pcap files on Hadoop. NetFlow records and data collected at honeypots. Authors
 In [84], Nagele faces the analysis of pcap files in a take a hybrid approach: they load some measurements into
fast and scalable way by implementing a java-based hadoop- Cassandra while also deploying Hadoop APIs to read binary
pcap library. The project includes a Serializer/Deserializer measurement formats directly (e.g., pcaps). The performance
that allows Hive to query pcaps directly. Authors of [109] of the architecture is tested with diverse big data frameworks,
use the same Serializer/Deserializer to build a Hadoop-based such as Hadoop and Spark. Similarly, Spark Streaming is used
platform for network security that relies on sFlow, Netflow, to monitor large volumes of IPFIX data in [20], with the IPFIX
DNS measurements and SPAM email captures. collector passing data directly to Spark in JSON format.
 Noting a similar gap for processing BGP measurements, In [70] sFlow records of a large campus network are
authors of [87] introduce BGPStream. BGPStream provides collected and analyzed on a Hadoop system in order to
tools and libraries that connect live BGP data sources to classify host behaviors based on machine learning algorithms.
APIs and applications. BGPStream can be used, for instance, sFlow data are collected, fields of interest are extracted and
for efficiently ingesting on-line data into stream processing then ingested into Cassandra using Apache Flume. Sarlis et
solutions, such as Spark Streaming. al. propose a system for network analytics based on sFlow
 All these APIs are however specific, e.g., to HDFS, pcap and NetFlow (over Hadoop or Spark) that achieves 70%
or NetFlow. Thus, similar work has to be performed for each speedup compared to basic analytics implementations with
considered measurement format or analytics framework. Hive or Shark [100]. Measurements are first transformed into
 Some authors have taken a distinct approach, proposing new optimized partitions that are loaded into HDFS and HBASE
storage formats and solutions more friendly to the big network together with indexes that help to speed up the queries.
measurements. Authors of [7] propose DBStream to calculate An IPFIX-based lightweight methodology for traffic clascontinuous and rolling analytics from data streams. Other sification is developed in [83]. It uses unsupervised learning
authors have proposed to extend pcap and flow solutions for word embedding on Apache Spark, receiving as input
both to achieve higher storage efficiency (e.g., compressing “decorated flow summaries”, which are textual flow summaries
traces) and to include mechanisms for indexing and retrieving augmented with information from DNS and DHCP logs.
packets efficiently [41], [42]. These solutions are all built Finally, specifically for big data scenarios, Cisco has published
upon key ideas of big data frameworks, as well as key-value a comprehensive guide for network security using Netflow and
or column-oriented databases. They are however specialized IPFIX [99]. Cisco presents OpenSOC, an integral solution to
to solve network monitoring problems. Yet, the systems are protect again intrusion, zero-day attacks and known threats in
generally centralized, thus lacking horizontal scalability. big data frameworks. OpenSOC includes many functionalities
 to parse measurements and load them into big data frameworks
D. Pre-processing using, for example, Apache Flume and Kafka.
 NTMA algorithms usually operate with feature vectors that All these works reinforce the challenge posed by the lack
describe the instances under study – e.g., network flows, con- of NTMA formats friendly to big data frameworks. At the
tacted services, etc. We, therefore, consider as pre-processing one hand, transformations boost analysis performance, and
all steps to convert raw data into feature vectors. performance seems to be the main focus of the community
 Some papers overcome the lack of storage formats by trans- so far. At the other hand, information may be lost in transforforming the data when ingesting it into big data frameworks. mations. Eventually, data replicated in many formats increase
Similarly, a set of features must be extracted for performing redundancy and make harder integration with other systems.
NTMA, both for packet and flow-based analysis. Next, we re- 2) Feature engineering: Several libraries exist to perform
view works performing such pre-processing tasks for NTMA. feature extraction and selection in big data frameworks. While
 1) Transformations: A popular approach to handle the big many of them are domain-specific, generic examples are found
network measurements is to perform further transformations in Spark ML and Spark MLlib.15 Instead, the research about
after the data leaves the collection point. Either raw pcap or feature extraction and selection in NTMA is scarce in general.
packets pre-processed at the collection point (e.g., sampled or Here the main challenges seem to be the lack of standard or
filtered) are passed through a series of transformations before
being loaded into big data frameworks. 15 https://spark.apache.org/mllib/
 9

 Machine Learning
 Many challenges emerge when applying such algorithms
 Non Distributed Distributed
 to big data, due to the large volumes, high dimension etc.
 Batch Stream Batch Stream

 MOA
 Some machine learning algorithms simply do not scale linearly
 Weka MapReduce StormMOA

 Vowpal Wabbit
 with the input size, requiring lots of resources for processing
 RapidMiner Mahout SaMOA

 Debellor
 big data sets. These problems are usually tackle by (i) pre-
 R Radoop Jubatus
 processing further the input to reduce its complexity; (ii)
 SQL-like engines
 parallelizing algorithms, sometimes replacing exact solutions
 MLib
 by more efficient approximate alternatives.
 Spark

 MLib
 Several approaches have been proposed to parallelize statistical algorithms [51] or to scale machine learning algo-
 TensorFlow on GPU
 rithms [59], [95], [108]. Parallel version of some statistical
 Tensorflow
 algorithms are presented in [10]. Pébay et al. [91] provide
 Petuum
 a survey of parallel statistics. Parallel neural networks are
 KNIME
 described in [2], [80], [125]. Parallel training for deep learning
 Figure 5: Machine learning for big data (based on [13]). are covered in [9], [26], [66].
 Frameworks do exist to perform such analyses on big data.
large-accepted features for each type of NTMA applications. Fig. 5 reproduces a taxonomy of machine learning tools able
Minimally, the community lacks ways to compare and bench- to handle large data sets [13]. Both non-distributed (e.g., Weka
mark systems and features in a systematic way. and R) and distributed (e.g., Tensorflow and MLlib) alterna-
 Most works either refer to old datasets, e.g., [3], [25], [73]. tives are popular. Additional challenges occur with streaming
The work in [57] studies traffic features in classic datasets for data, since algorithms must cope with strict time constraints.
attack/virus detection and DM/ML testing (e.g., DARPA [81] We see in the figure that tools targeting these scenarios are
dataset). Such datasets have been criticized and their use also available (e.g., StormMOA).
discouraged [78]. Authors consider whether the features are In terms of NTMA analytics, generic framework implementsuitable or not for anomaly detection, showing that features ing algorithms that can scale to big data could be employed
present high correlation, thus mostly being unnecessary. too, naturally. Next we explore the literature to understand
 Abt et al. [1] study the selection of NetFlow features to whether big data approaches and frameworks are actually
detect botnet C&C communication, achieving accuracy and employed in NTMA.
recall rates above 92%. In [62] Netflow features undergo feature selection for the case of DDoS detection. In [119] IPFIX
records are used in feature selection processes, obtaining a set B. Literature categorization
of key features for the classification of P2P traffic. All these In our examination, we focus on understanding the depth of
papers handle relatively small datasets. Few authors rely on the application of big data techniques in NTMA. In particular
large datasets [5], but instead propose features that are finely Tab. IV evaluates each work under the following perspectives:
tailored to the specific problem at hand. In a nutshell, each
 • We check whether works face large data volumes. We
work proposes a custom feature engineering, with no holistic
 arbitrarily define thresholds to consider a dataset to be big
solution yet.
 data: All works handling data larger than tens of GBs or
 works handling backbone network use cases. Similarly,
 V. B IG DATA ANALYTICS FOR NTMA
 we consider big data volumes when the study covers
 The next step of the NTMA path is data analysis. We periods of months or years if dataset size is not specified.
recall that we do not intend to provide an exhaustive survey • We verify if popular frameworks are used, i.e., Spark,
on general data analytics for NTMA. In particular, here we Hadoop, MapReduce; we accept also custom implemenfocus on how the main analytics methods are applied to big tations that exploit the same paradigms.
NTMA datasets. Detailed surveys of other NTMA scenarios • We check if machine learning is used for NTMA.
are available, e.g., in [12], [44], [74], [85]. • We verify if big data platforms are used in the ML
 As for data management, generic frameworks exist and process (see Fig. 5).
could be used for NTMA. We next briefly summarize them. • We check velocity, i.e., if works leverage online analysis.
After it, we dig into the NTMA literature. • We address variety, i.e., if authors use more than one data
 source in the analysis.
A. Generic big data frameworks We leave out two of the 5 “V’s”, i.e., veracity and value,
 Several taxonomies have been proposed to describe analysis since it is cumbersome to evaluate them. For example, while
algorithms. Algorithms are roughly classified as (i) statisti- some works discuss aspects of veracity (e.g., highlighting false
cal or (ii) machine learning. Machine learning are further positives of trained classifiers), rarely the veracity of the big
categorized as supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised, data used as input in the analysis is evaluated.
depending on the availability of ground truth and how data is Tab. IV shows that big data techniques are starting to perused for training. Novel approaches are also often cited, such meate NTMA applications. Network security attracts more big
as deep neural networks and reinforcement learning. data research. In general, it is interesting to notice the adoption
 10

of machine learning techniques. However, observe the limited million pages from Wikipedia to identify reliable editors, and
adoption of big data platforms for machine learning. subsequently detect editors that are likely vandals. Comarela
 Next, we dig into salient conclusions of this survey. et al. [29] focus on routing and implement a MapReduce
 algorithm to study multi-hop routing table distances. This
C. Single source, early reduction, sequential analysis function, applied over a TB of data, produces a measure of
 the variation of paths in different timescales.
 From Tab. IV, we can see how most of the works are dealing
 In a nutshell, here big data platforms are enablers to scale
with the big volumes of data. This outcome is predictable
 the analysis on large datasets.
since network traffic is one of the leading sources of big
data. From the last column, variety, we can notice that the
researchers infrequently use different sources together, limiting E. The rare cases of online analysis
the analysis on specific use cases. Only a few works focus on online analysis and even fewer
 As we have seen before in Sect. IV, a group of works applies leverage big data techniques. Besides the previously cited [94],
big data techniques in the first phases of the KDD process. [111], Apiletti et al. in [4] developed SeLINA, a network
This approach allows the analytics phase to be performed analyzer that offers human-readable models of traffic data,
using non-distributed frameworks (Fig. 5). combining unsupervised and supervised approaches for traffic
 For example, in [94] authors use Hadoop for real-time inspection. A specific framework for distributed network anaintrusion detection, but only computing feature values with lytics that operates using Netflow and IPFIX flows is presented
MapReduce. Classic machine learning algorithms are used in [27]. Here, SDN controllers are used for the processing
afterward on the reduced data. Similarly, Vassio et al. [122] use to improve scalability and analytics quality by dynamically
big data approaches to reduce the data dimension, while the adjusting traffic record generation.
classification is done in a centralized manner, with traditional In sum, online analysis in NTMA is mostly restricted
machine learning frameworks. Shibahara et al. [104] deploy a to the techniques to perform high-speed traffic capture and
system to classify malicious URLs through neural networks, processing, described in Sect. IV. When it comes to big data
analyzing IP address hierarchies. Only the feature extraction analysis, NTMA researchers have mostly focused on batch
is performed using the MapReduce paradigm. analysis, thus not facing challenges of running algorithms on
 In summary, we observe a majority of works adopting a big data streaming.
single (big data) source, performing early data reduction with
the approaches described in Sect. IV (i.e., pre-processing data),
and then performing machine learning analysis with traditional F. Takeaway
non-distributed platforms. The usage of ML seems to be widespread, especially for
 network security and anomaly detection. However, just some
D. Big data platforms enabling big NTMA works use machine learning coupled with big data platforms. A
 A small group of papers performs the analytics process with general challenge when considering machine learning for big
big data approaches. Here different directions are taken. In data analytics is indeed parallelization, which is not always
Hashdoop [38], authors split the traffic into buckets according easy to reach. Not all machine learning algorithms can be
to a hash function applied to traffic features. Anomaly detec- directly ported into a distributed framework, basically due to
tion methods are then applied to each bucket, directly imple- their inherent centralized designs. This hinders a wider adopmented as Map functions. Authors of [72] present a distributed tion of big data platforms for the analytics stage, constraining
semi-supervised clustering technique on top of MapReduce, works to perform data reduction at pre-processing stages.
using a local spectral subspace approach to analyze YouTube In sum, in terms of complexity, most ML algorithms scale
user comment-based graphs. Authors of [68] perform both pre- poorly with large datasets. When applied to the often humonprocessing of network data using MapReduce (e.g., to filter gous scale of NTMA data, they clearly cannot scale to typical
out non-HTTP GET packets from HTTP traffic logs) as well NTMA scenarios.
as simple analytics to summarize the network activity per
client-server pairs. Lastly, the Tsinghua University Campus VI. C HALLENGES , OPEN ISSUES AND ONGOING WORK
has tested in its network an entropy-based anomaly detection
system that uses IPFIX flows and runs over Hadoop [111].
 We discuss some open issues and future directions we have
 In traffic classification, Trevisan et al. [114] developed
 identified after literature review.
AWESoME, an SDN application that allows prioritizing traffic
of critical Web services, while segregating others, even if they 1 — Lack of a standard and context-generic big NTMA
are running on the same cloud or served by the same CDN. platform: The data collection phase poses the major chal-
To classify flows, the training, performed on large datasets, is lenges for NTMA. The data transmission rate in computer
implemented in Spark. networks keeps increasing, challenging the way probes collect
 Considering other applications, some works consider the and manage information. This is critical for probes that have to
analysis of large amounts of non-traffic data with big data capture and process information on-the-fly and transmit results
approaches. Authors in [106] use MapReduce as a basis for to centralized repositories. Flow-based approaches scale better,
a distributed crawler, which is applied to analyze over 300 at the cost of losing details.
 11

 Table IV: Analyzed papers divided by application category (rows) and big data characteristics (columns).
 Category Volume? Big data frame- ML based? Big data ML? Velocity - Online Variety?
 work? analysis?
 Traffic Prediction [36] [102] [47] [111] [36] [102] [47] [47] [111] [36]
 [123] [111] [123] [111]
 Traffic Classification [4] [43] [71] [4] [71] [18] [4] [37] [43] [4] [114] [4] [43] [37]
 [114] [122] [114] [122] [127] [71] [101]
 [18] [114]
 Fault Management [88] [5] [50] [38] [27] [27] [5] [50] [118] [38] [63] [38] [61] [27] [61] [27]
 [118] [38] [61] [38] [61] [93] [63]
 [93] [27] [22] [122]
 Network Security [11] [94] [106] [11] [94] [104] [94] [104] [106] [28] [72] [111] [11] [82] [94]
 [55] [82] [68] [106] [72] [28] [72] [28] [39] [111] [48]
 [117] [48] [121] [68] [48] [121] [82] [117]

 To solve the lack of flexible storage formats we have seen must be handled, few papers faced this problem with big data
in Sect. IV-D that researchers have developed APIs or layers approaches. The reasons may be linked to what we discussed
that transform the data in pre-defined shapes. Those APIs earlier, i.e., the lack of generic and standard NTMA platforms.
are not generic and not comprehensive. As an example, in Similarly, as examined in Sect. III, some categories of NTMA
NTMA one would like to associate to a given IP address both applications (e.g., QoS/QoE management) are hardly faced
its geographical (e.g., country) and logical (e.g., Autonomous with big data approaches.
System Number) location. There is no standard library that
 4 — Lack of relevant and/or public datasets limits reprosupports even these basic operations in the frameworks.
 ducibility: To the extent of our survey, only two contributions
 Considering analytics, few researchers tackled the problem disclose a public dataset, namely [93] and [114]. Few works
from a big data perspective. There is a lack of generic use open data, like the well-known MAWI dataset which is
approaches to access the data features, with the ability to used for example in [38], [121], the (outdated) KDD CUP
run multiple analytics in a scalable way. Thus, researchers ’99 [39], [94], and Kyoto2006 [55]. Apart from these cases,
usually rely on single data sources and sequential/centralized public datasets are scarce and often not updated, posing
algorithms, that are applied to reduced data (see Sect. V-C). limitations in reproducibility of researches as well as limiting
 In a nutshell, the community has yet to arrive at a generic the benchmark of new, possibly more scalable, solutions.
platform for the big NTMA problem, and most solutions
appear to be customized to solve a specific problems. 5 — Ongoing projects on big NTMA: We have seen a solid
 increase in the adoption of big data approaches in NTMA.
2 — Lack of distributed machine learning and data mining Yet, we observe a fragmented picture, with some limitations
algorithms in big data platforms limits NTMA: Several especially regarding interoperability and standardization. In
researchers started adopting machine learning solutions to fact, ad-hoc methodologies are proliferating, with no platform
tackle NTMA problems. However, as analyzed in Sect. V, to support the community.
most recent papers focus on “small data”, with few of them In this direction, Apache Spot was a promising platform
addressing the scalability problem of typical big data cases. (see Sect. IV-B). Unfortunately, its development has stopped,
Most papers use big data techniques just in the first steps of thus questioning its practical adoption by the community and
the work, for data processing and feature extraction. Most of practitioners. PNDA is instead actively developed, and the
the machine learning analysis is then executed in a centralized project starts collecting interest from the community, albeit in
fashion. This design represents a lack of opportunity. For its early stage. Beam16 is a framework offering the unification
example, applying machine learning with large datasets could of batch and streaming models, increasing portability and
produce more accurate models for NTMA applications. easing the work of programmers that do not need to write two
 From a scientific point of view, it is interesting to conjecture code bases; yet, no applications for NTMA exists.
the causes of this gap: The reasons may be several, from In sum, there is a lot of work to be done to arrive at a
the lack of expertise to platform limitations. We observe that practical big data solution for NTMA applications. The NTMA
the availability of machine learning algorithms in big data community shall start creating synergies and consolidating
platforms is still at an early stage. Despite the availability solutions while relaying on the consolidated platforms offered
of solutions like the Spark MLlib and ML tools that have by the big data community.
started to provide some big data-tailored machine learning,
not all algorithms are ported. Some of these algorithms are
also simply hard to parallelize. Parallelization of traditional R EFERENCES
algorithms is a general problem that has to be faced for big [1] S. Abt, S. Wener, and H. Baier. Performance Evaluation of Classifidata in general, and for big NTMA in particular. cation and Feature Selection Algorithms for Netflow-Based Protocol
 Recognition. Proc. of the INFORMATIK, pages 2184–2197, 2013.
3 — Areas where big data NTMA are still missing: From [2] J. B. Ahn. Neuron Machine: Parallel and Pipelined Digital Neurocomputing Architecture. Proc. of the CyberneticsCom, pages 143–147,
Tab. IV, it is easy to notice the lack of proposals in some 2012.
important categories. For example, even though fault management is a category in which usually a great amount of data 16 https://beam.apache.org
 12

 [3] F. Amiri, M. R. Yousefi, C. Lucas, A. Shakery, and N. Yazdani. Mutual [29] G. Comarela, G. Gürsun, and M. Crovella. Studying Interdomain
 Information-Based Feature Selection for Intrusion Detection Systems. Routing over Long Timescales. Proc. of the IMC, pages 227–234,
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., 34(4):1184–1199, 2011. 2013.
 [4] D. Apiletti, E. Baralis, T. Cerquitelli, P. Garza, D. Giordano, M. Mel- [30] G. DeCandia, D. Hastorun, M. Jampani, G. Kakulapati, A. Lakshman,
 lia, and L. Venturini. SeLINA: A Self-Learning Insightful Network A. Pilchin, S. Sivasubramanian, P. Vosshall, and W. Vogels. Dynamo:
 Analyzer. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 13(3):696–710, 2016. Amazon’s Highly Available Key-Value Store. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev.,
 [5] B. Arzani, S. Ciraci, B. T. Loo, A. Schuster, and G. Outhred. Taking 41(6):205–220, 2007.
 the Blame Game out of Data Centers Operations with NetPoirot. Proc. [31] L. Deri, A. Cardigliano, and F. Fusco. 10 Gbit Line Rate Packet-toof the SIGCOMM, pages 440–453, 2016. Disk Using n2disk. Proc. of the TMA, pages 441–446, 2013.
 [6] F. Bajaber, R. Elshawi, O. Batarfi, A. Altalhi, A. Barnawi, and S. Sakr. [32] I. Drago, M. Mellia, and A. D’Alconzo. Big Data in Computer Network
 Big Data 2.0 Processing Systems: Taxonomy and Open Challenges. J. Monitoring. In Encyclopedia of Big Data Technologies. Springer
 Grid Comput., 14(3):379–405, 2016. International Publishing, 2018.
 [7] A. Bar, A. Finamore, P. Casas, L. Golab, and M. Mellia. Large-Scale [33] J. Erman, M. Arlitt, and A. Mahanti. Traffic Classification Using
 Network Traffic Monitoring with DBStream, a System for Rolling Big Clustering Algorithms. Proc. of the MineNet, pages 281–286, 2006.
 Data Analysis. Proc. of the BigData, pages 165–170, 2014. [34] A. Fahad, N. Alshatri, Z. Tari, A. Alamri, I. Khalil, A. Y. Zomaya,
 [8] D. Beaver, S. Kumar, H. C. Li, J. Sobel, and P. Vajgel. Finding a S. Foufou, and A. Bouras. A Survey of Clustering Algorithms for Big
 Needle in Haystack: Facebook’s Photo Storage. Proc. of the OSDI, Data: Taxonomy and Empirical Analysis. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics
 pages 47–60, 2010. Comput., 2(3):267–279, 2014.
 [9] Y. Bengio. Learning Deep Architectures for AI. Foundations and [35] U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth. From Data Mining
 Trends in Machine Learning, 2(1):1–127, 2009. to Knowledge Discovery in Databases. AI Magazine, 17(3):37–54,
[10] J. Bennett, R. Grout, P. Pebay, D. Roe, and D. Thompson. Numeri- 1996.
 cally Stable, Single-pass, Parallel Statistics Algorithms. Proc. of the [36] P. Fiadino, V. Ponce-Lopez, J. Antonio, M. Torrent-Moreno, and
 CLUSTR, pages 1–8, 2009. A. D’Alconzo. Call Detail Records for Human Mobility Studies:
[11] K. Benzidane, H. E. Alloussi, O. E. Warrak, L. Fetjah, S. J. Andaloussi, Taking Stock of the Situation in the ”Always Connected Era”. Proc.
 and A. Sekkaki. Toward a Cloud-Based Security Intelligence with Big of the Big-DAMA, pages 43–48, 2017.
 Data Processing. Proc. of the NOMS, pages 1089–1092, 2016. [37] S. Fiadino, P. Casas, A. D’Alconzo, M. Schiavone, and A. Baer.
[12] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita. Network Grasping Popular Applications in Cellular Networks with Big Data
 Anomaly Detection: Methods, Systems and Tools. Commun. Surveys Analytics Platforms. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 13(3):681–
 Tuts., 16(1):303–336, 2014. 695, 2016.
[13] A. Bifet and G. D. F. Morales. Big Data Stream Learning with [38] R. Fontugne, J. Mazel, and K. Fukuda. Hashdoop: A Mapreduce
 SAMOA. Proc. of the ICDMW, pages 1199–1202, 2014. Framework for Network Anomaly Detection. Proc. of the INFOCOM
[14] Big Data Working Group. Big Data Taxonomy. Technical report, Cloud WKSHPS, pages 494–499, 2014.
 Security Alliance, 2014. [39] G. Frishman, Y. Ben-Itzhak, and O. Margalit. Cluster-Based Load
[15] R. Boutaba, M. A. Salahuddin, N. Limam, S. Ayoubi, N. Shahriar, Balancing for Better Network Security. Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages
 F. Estrada-Solano, and O. M. Caicedo. A Comprehensive Survey 7–12, 2017.
 on Machine Learning for Networking: Evolution, Applications and [40] C. Fuchs. Implications of Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) Internet
 Research Opportunities. J. Internet Serv. Appl., 9(16), 2018. Surveillance for Society. Technical Report 1, Uppsala University,
[16] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros. Independent Compar- Media and Communication Studies, 2012.
 ison of Popular DPI Tools for Traffic Classification. Comput. Netw., [41] F. Fusco, X. Dimitropoulos, M. Vlachos, and L. Deri. pcapIndex:
 76(C):75–89, 2015. An Index for Network Packet Traces with Legacy Compatibility.
[17] A. Callado, C. Kamienski, G. Szabo, B. P. Gero, J. Kelner, S. Fer- SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 42(1):47–53, 2012.
 nandes, and D. Sadok. A Survey on Internet Traffic Identification. [42] F. Fusco, M. P. Stoecklin, and M. Vlachos. NET-FLi: On-the-Fly
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., 11(3):37–52, 2009. Compression, Archiving and Indexing of Streaming Network Traffic.
[18] P. Casas, J. Vanerio, and K. Fukuda. GML Learning, a Generic Machine Proc. VLDB Endow., 3(1-2):1382–1393, 2010.
 Learning Model for Network Measurements Analysis. Proc. of the [43] J. Garcia and T. Korhonen. Efficient Distribution-Derived Features for
 CNSM, pages 1–9, 2017. High-Speed Encrypted Flow Classification. Proc. of the NetAI, pages
[19] R. Cattell. Scalable SQL and NoSQL Data Stores. SIGMOD Rec., 21–27, 2018.
 39(4):12–27, 2011. [44] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
[20] M. Čermák, T. Jirsı́k, and M. Laštovička. Real-Time Analysis of E. Vázquez. Anomaly-Based Network Intrusion Detection: Techniques,
 Netflow Data for Generating Network Traffic Statistics Using Apache Systems and Challenges. Comput. Secur., 28:18–28, 2009.
 Spark. Proc. of the NOMS, pages 1019–1020, 2016. [45] A. F. Gates, O. Natkovich, S. Chopra, P. Kamath, S. M. Narayana-
[21] R. Chaiken, B. Jenkins, P.-A. Larson, B. Ramsey, D. Shakib, S. Weaver, murthy, C. Olston, B. Reed, S. Srinivasan, and U. Srivastava. Building
 and J. Zhou. SCOPE: Easy and Efficient Parallel Processing of Massive a High-Level Dataflow System on Top of Map-Reduce: The Pig
 Data Sets. Proc. VLDB Endow., 1(2):1265–1276, 2008. Experience. Proc. VLDB Endow., 2(2):1414–1425, 2009.
[22] M. Chandramouli and A. Clemm. Model-Driven Analytics in SDN [46] S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S.-T. Leung. The Google File System.
 Networks. Proc. of the IM, pages 668–673, 2017. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 37(5):29–43, 2003.
[23] F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, [47] R. Gonzalez, F. Manco, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Mendes, F. Huici, S. Nic-
 M. Burrows, T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and R. E. Gruber. Bigtable: A colini, and M. Niepert. Net2vec: Deep Learning for the Network. Proc.
 Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. ACM Trans. Comput. of the Big-DAMA, pages 13–18, 2017.
 Syst., 26(2):4:1–4:26, 2008. [48] S. Hameed and U. Ali. Efficacy of Live DDoS Detection with Hadoop.
[24] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu. Big Data: A Survey. Mobile Netw. Proc. of the NOMS, pages 488–494, 2016.
 Appl., 19(2):171–209, 2014. [49] J. Han, H. E, G. Le, and J. Du. Survey on NoSQL Database. Proc. of
[25] Y. Chen, Y. Li, X.-Q. Cheng, and L. Guo. Survey and Taxonomy of the ICPCA, pages 363–366, 2011.
 Feature Selection Algorithms in Intrusion Detection System. Proc. of [50] R. Harper and P. Tee. Cookbook, a Recipe for Fault Localization. Proc.
 the Inscrypt, pages 153–167, 2006. of the NOMS, pages 1–6, 2018.
[26] D. Ciresan, U. Meier, and J. Schmidhuber. Multi-Column Deep Neural [51] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical
 Networks for Image Classification. Proc. of the CVPR, pages 3642– Learning: Data Mining, Inference and Prediction. Springer-Verlag New
 3649, 2012. York, 2 edition, 2009.
[27] A. Clemm, M. Chandramouli, and S. Krishnamurthy. DNA: An SDN [52] R. Hofstede, P. Čeleda, B. Trammell, I. Drago, R. Sadre, A. Sperotto,
 Framework for Distributed Network Analytics. Proc. of the IM, pages and A. Pras. Flow Monitoring Explained: From Packet Capture to
 9–17, 2015. Data Analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX. Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
[28] R. Cogranne, G. Doyen, N. Ghadban, and B. Hammi. Detecting 16(4):2037–2064, 2014.
 Botclouds at Large Scale: A Decentralized and Robust Detection [53] R. Hofstede, L. Hendriks, A. Sperotto, and A. Pras. SSH Compromise
 Method for Multi-Tenant Virtualized Environments. IEEE Trans. Netw. Detection Using NetFlow/IPFIX. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
 Service Manag., 15(1):68–82, 2018. 44(5):20–26, 2014.
 13

[54] H. Hu, Y. Wen, T.-S. Chua, and X. Li. Toward Scalable Systems for [83] A. Murgia, G. Ghidini, S. P. Emmons, and P. Bellavista. Lightweight
 Big Data Analytics: A Technology Tutorial. IEEE Access, 2:652–687, Internet Traffic Classification: A Subject-Based Solution with Word
 2014. Embeddings. Proc. of the SMARTCOMP, pages 1–8, 2016.
[55] T. Huang, H. Sethu, and N. Kandasamy. A New Approach to [84] W. Nagele. Large-Scale PCAP Data Analysis Using Apache Hadoop,
 Dimensionality Reduction for Anomaly Detection in Data Traffic. IEEE 2011.
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 13(3):651–665, 2016. [85] T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage. A Survey of Techniques for Internet
[56] L. T. Ibrahim, R. Hassan, K. Ahmad, and A. N. Asat. A Study Traffic Classification Using Machine Learning. Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 on Improvement of Internet Traffic Measurement and Analysis using 10(4):56–76, 2008.
 Hadoop System. Proc. of the ICEEI, pages 462–466, 2015. [86] B. Nickless. Combining Cisco NetFlow Exports with Relational
[57] F. Iglesias and T. Zseby. Analysis of Network Traffic Features for Database Technology for Usage Statistics, Intrusion Detection, and
 Anomaly Detection. Mach. Learn., 101(1-3):59–84, 2015. Network Forensics. Proc. of the LISA, pages 285–290, 2000.
[58] Intel. Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK), 2014. [87] C. Orsini, A. King, D. Giordano, V. Giotsas, and A. Dainotti. BG-
[59] W. Jiang, E. Zavesky, S.-F. Chang, and A. Loui. Cross-Domain PStream: A Software Framework for Live and Historical BGP Data
 Learning Methods for High-Level Visual Concept Classification. Proc. Analysis. Proc. of the IMC, pages 429–444, 2016.
 of the ICIP, pages 161–164, 2008. [88] K. Otomo, S. Kobayashi, K. Fukuda, and H. Esaki. Finding Anomalies
[60] T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos. BLINC: Multilevel in Network System Logs with Latent Variables. Proc. of the Big-
 Traffic Classification in the Dark. Proc. of the SIGCOMM, pages 229– DAMA, pages 8–14, 2018.
 240, 2005. [89] S. Owen, R. Anil, T. Dunning, and E. Friedman. Mahout in Action.
[61] H. Kasai, W. Kellerer, and M. Kleinsteuber. Network Volume Anomaly Manning Publications Co., Greenwich, CT, USA, 2011.
 Detection and Identification in Large-Scale Networks Based on Online [90] M. Patterson. NetFlow Vs. Packet Analysis, 2013.
 Time-Structured Traffic Tensor Tracking. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service [91] P. Pebay, D. Thompson, J. Bennett, and A. Mascarenhas. Design and
 Manag., 13(3):636–650, 2016. Performance of a Scalable, Parallel Statistics Toolkit. Proc. of the
[62] M. Kim, H. Na, K. Chae, H. Bang, and J. Na. A Combined Data IPDPS, pages 1475–1484, 2011.
 Mining Approach for DDoS Attack Detection. Proc. of the ICOIN, [92] R. Pike, S. Dorward, R. Griesemer, and S. Quinlan. Interpreting the
 2004. Data: Parallel Analysis with Sawzall. Sci. Programming, 13(4):277–
[63] S. Kobayashi, K. Otomo, K. Fukuda, and H. Esaki. Mining Causality 298, 2005.
 of Network Events in Log Data. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., [93] A. Putina, D. Rossi, A. Bifet, S. Barth, D. Pletcher, C. Precup, and
 15(1):53–67, 2018. P. Nivaggioli. Telemetry-Based Stream-Learning of BGP Anomalies.
[64] A. Lakshman and P. Malik. Cassandra: A Decentralized Structured Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 15–20, 2018.
 Storage System. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev., 44(2):35–40, 2010. [94] M. M. Rathore, A. Paul, A. Ahmad, S. Rho, M. Imran, and M. Guizani.
[65] D. Laney. 3d Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity, Hadoop Based Real-Time Intrusion Detection for High-Speed Netand Variety. Technical report, META Group, 2001. works. Proc. of the GLOBECOM, pages 1–6, 2016.
[66] Q. V. Le. Building High-Level Features using Large Scale Unsuper-
 [95] V. C. Raykar, R. Duraiswami, and B. Krishnapuram. A Fast Algorithm
 vised Learning. Proc. of the ICASSP, pages 8595–8598, 2013.
 for Learning Large Scale Preference Relations. Proc. of the AISTATS,
[67] Y. Lee, W. Kang, and H. Son. An Internet Traffic Analysis Method
 pages 388–395, 2007.
 with MapReduce. Proc. of the NOMS, pages 357–361, 2010.
 [96] F. D. Sacerdoti, M. J. Katz, M. L. Massie, and D. E. Culler. Wide
[68] Y. Lee and Y. Lee. Detecting DDoS Attacks with Hadoop. Proc. of
 Area Cluster Monitoring with Ganglia. Proc. of the CLUSTR-03, pages
 the CoNEXT, pages 7:1–7:2, 2011.
 289–298, 2003.
[69] Y. Lee and Y. Lee. Toward Scalable Internet Traffic Measurement and
 [97] S. Sakr, A. Liu, and A. G. Fayoumi. The Family of Mapreduce and
 Analysis with Hadoop. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 43(1):5–
 Large-scale Data Processing Systems. ACM Comput. Surv., 46(1):1–
 13, 2013.
 44, 2013.
[70] B. Li, M. H. Gunes, G. Bebis, and J. Springer. A Supervised Machine
 Learning Approach to Classify Host Roles on Line Using sFlow. Proc. [98] T. Samak, D. Gunter, and V. Hendrix. Scalable Analysis of Network
 of the HPPN, pages 53–60, 2013. Measurements with Hadoop and Pig. Proc. of the NOMS, pages 1254–
[71] M. Li, C. Lumezanu, B. Zong, and H. Chen. Deep Learning IP Network 1259, 2012.
 Representations. Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 33–39, 2018. [99] O. Santos. Network Security with NetFlow and IPFIX: Big Data
[72] Y. Li, O. Martinez, X. Chen, Y. Li, and J. E. Hopcroft. In a World That Analytics for Information Security. Cisco Press, Indianapolis, 1 edition,
 Counts: Clustering and Detecting Fake Social Engagement at Scale. 2015.
 Proc. of the WWW, pages 111–120, 2016. [100] D. Sarlis, N. Papailiou, I. Konstantinou, G. Smaragdakis, and
[73] Y. Li, J.-L. Wang, Z.-H. Tian, T.-B. Lu, and C. Young. Building N. Koziris. Datix: A System for Scalable Network Analytics. SIG-
 Lightweight Intrusion Detection System Using Wrapper-Based Feature COMM Comput. Commun. Rev., 45(5):21–28, 2015.
 Selection Mechanisms. Comput. Secur., 28(6):466–475, 2009. [101] L. Schiff, O. Ziv, M. Jaeger, and S. Schmid. NetSlicer: Automated and
[74] H.-J. Liao, C.-H. R. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, and K.-Y. Tung. Intrusion Detection Traffic-Pattern Based Application Clustering in Datacenters. Proc. of
 System: A Comprehensive Review. J. Netw. Comput. Appl., 36(1):16– the Big-DAMA, pages 21–26, 2018.
 24, 2013. [102] K. Shadi, P. Natarajan, and C. Dovrolis. Hierarchical IP flow clustering.
[75] G. Maier, R. Sommer, H. Dreger, A. Feldmann, V. Paxson, and Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 25–30, 2017.
 F. Schneider. Enriching Network Security Analysis with Time Travel. [103] J. Sherry, C. Lan, R. A. Popa, and S. Ratnasamy. BlindBox: Deep
 Proc. of the SIGCOMM, pages 183–194, 2008. Packet Inspection over Encrypted Traffic. Proc. of the SIGCOMM,
[76] J. Manyika and others. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, pages 213–226, 2015.
 Competition, and Productivity, 2011. [104] T. Shibahara, K. Yamanishi, Y. Takata, D. Chiba, M. Akiyama, T. Yagi,
[77] S. Marchal, X. Jiang, R. State, and T. Engel. A Big Data Architecture Y. Ohsita, and M. Murata. Malicious URL Sequence Detection Using
 for Large Scale Security Monitoring. Proc. of the BigData.Congress, Event De-Noising Convolutional Neural Network. Proc. of the ICC,
 pages 56–63, 2014. pages 1–7, 2017.
[78] J. McHugh. Testing Intrusion Detection Systems: A Critique of [105] A. Sperotto, G. Schaffrath, R. Sadre, C. Morariu, A. Pras, and B. Stiller.
 the 1998 and 1999 Darpa Intrusion Detection System Evaluations An Overview of IP Flow-Based Intrusion Detection. Commun. Surveys
 as Performed by Lincoln Laboratory. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., Tuts., 12(3):343–356, 2010.
 3(4):262–294, 2000. [106] M. Spina, D. Rossi, M. Sozio, S. Maniu, and B. Cautis. Snooping
[79] M. K. McKusick and S. Quinlan. GFS: Evolution on Fast-forward. Wikipedia Vandals with MapReduce. Proc. of the ICC, pages 1146–
 Queue, 7(7):10:10–10:20, 2009. 1151, 2015.
[80] T. Mikolov, A. Deoras, D. Povey, L. Burget, and J. Cernocky. Strategies [107] M. Stonebraker. NewSQL: An Alternative to NoSQL and Old SQL
 for Training Large Scale Neural Network Language Models. Proc. of for New OLTP Apps, 2011.
 the ASRU, pages 196–201, 2011. [108] P. Sun and X. Yao. Sparse Approximation Through Boosting for
[81] ”MIT Lincoln Laboratories”. DARPA Intrusion Detection Data Sets, Learning Large Scale Kernel Machines. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.,
 1999. 21(6):883–894, 2010.
[82] P. Mulinka and P. Casas. Stream-Based Machine Learning for Network [109] H. Tazaki, K. Okada, Y. Sekiya, and Y. Kadobayashi. MATATABI:
 Security and Anomaly Detection. Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 1–7, Multi-Layer Threat Analysis Platform with Hadoop. Proc. of the
 2018. BADGERS, pages 75–82, 2014.
 14

[110] A. Thusoo, J. S. Sarma, N. Jain, Z. Shao, P. Chakka, S. Anthony, B IOGRAPHIES
 H. Liu, P. Wyckoff, and R. Murthy. Hive: A Warehousing Solution Idilio Drago is an Assistant Professor (RTDa) at
 over a Map-Reduce Framework. Proc. VLDB Endow., 2(2):1626–1629, the Politecnico di Torino, Italy, in the Department of
 2009. Electronics and Telecommunications. His research
[111] G. Tian, Z. Wang, X. Yin, Z. Li, X. Shi, Z. Lu, C. Zhou, Y. Yu, and interests include Internet measurements, Big Data
 D. Wu. TADOOP: Mining Network Traffic Anomalies with Hadoop. analysis, and network security. Drago has a PhD in
 Proc. of the SecureComm, pages 175–192, 2015. computer science from the University of Twente. He
[112] B. Trammell, P. Casas, D. Rossi, A. Bar, Z. Houidi, I. Leontiadis, was awarded an Applied Networking Research Prize
 T. Szemethy, and M. Mellia. mPlane: An Intelligent Measurement in 2013 by the IETF/IRTF for his work on cloud
 Plane for the Internet. IEEE Commun. Mag., 52(5):148–156, 2014. storage traffic analysis.
[113] M. Trevisan, I. Drago, M. Mellia, and M. M. Munafo. Towards Web
 Service Classification using Addresses and DNS. Proc. of the TRAC,
 pages 38–43, 2016.
[114] M. Trevisan, I. Drago, M. Mellia, H. H. Song, and M. Baldi. AWE-
 SoME: Big Data for Automatic Web Service Management in SDN.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 15(1):13–26, 2018.
[115] M. Trevisan, A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Munafo, and D. Rossi.
 Traffic Analysis with Off-the-Shelf Hardware: Challenges and Lessons Andrea Morichetta (S’17) received the M.Sc. de-
 Learned. IEEE Commun. Mag., 55(3):163–169, 2017. gree in Computer Engineering in 2015, from Politec-
[116] C.-W. Tsai, C.-F. Lai, H.-C. Chao, and A. V. Vasilakos. Big Data nico di Torino. He joined the Telecommunication
 Analytics: A Survey. J. Big Data, 2(1):21, 2015. Networks Group in 2016 as a PhD student under
[117] S. O. Uwagbole, W. J. Buchanan, and L. Fan. Applied Machine the supervision of Prof. Marco Mellia, funded by
 Learning Predictive Analytics to SQL Injection Attack Detection and the BIG-DAMA project. In summer 2017 he had a
 Prevention. Proc. of the IM, pages 1087–1090, 2017. summer internship at Cisco in San Jose, CA. In 2019
[118] R. Vaarandi, B. Blumbergs, and M. Kont. An Unsupervised Framework he spent six months at the Digital Insight Lab of
 for Detecting Anomalous Messages from Syslog Log Files. Proc. of the AIT Austrian Institute of Technology as visiting
 the NOMS, pages 1–6, 2018. researcher. His research interests are in the fields of
[119] S. Valenti and D. Rossi. Identifying Key Features for P2p Traffic traffic analysis, security and data analysis.
 Classification. Proc. of the ICC, pages 1–6, 2011.
[120] S. Valenti, D. Rossi, A. Dainotti, A. Pescapè, A. Finamore, and M. Mellia. Reviewing Traffic Classification. In Data Traffic Monitoring and
 Analysis - From Measurement, Classification, and Anomaly Detection
 to Quality of Experience. Springer, Heidelberg, 1 edition, 2013.
[121] J. Vanerio and P. Casas. Ensemble-Learning Approaches for Network
 Security and Anomaly Detection. Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 1–6,
 Marco Mellia (M’97-SM’08) graduated from the
 2017.
 Politecnico di Torino with Ph.D. in Electronics and
[122] L. Vassio, D. Giordano, M. Trevisan, M. Mellia, and A. P. C. da Silva.
 Telecommunications Engineering in 2001, where he
 Users’ Fingerprinting Techniques from TCP Traffic. Proc. of the Bigheld a position as Full Professor. In 2002 he visited
 DAMA, pages 49–54, 2017.
 the Sprint Advanced Technology Laboratories, CA.
[123] S. Wassermann, P. Casas, T. Cuvelier, and B. Donnet. NETPerfTrace:
 In 2011, 2012, 2013 he collaborated with Narus
 Predicting Internet Path Dynamics and Performance with Machine
 Inc, CA, working on traffic monitoring and cyber-
 Learning. Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 31–36, 2017.
 security system design. His research interests are in
[124] M. Wullink, G. C. M. Moura, M. Müller, and C. Hesselman. ENtraffic monitoring and analysis, and in applications
 TRADA: A High-Performance Network Traffic Data Stream. Proc. of
 of Big Data and machine learning techniques for
 the NOMS, pages 913–918, 2016.
 traffic analysis, with applications to Cybersecurity
[125] J. Yuan and S. Yu. Privacy Preserving Back-Propagation Neural
 and network monitoring. He has co-authored over 250 papers and holds 9
 Network Learning Made Practical with Cloud Computing. IEEE Trans.
 patents. He was awarded the IRTF Applied Networking Research Prize in
 Parallel Distrib. Syst., 25(1):212–221, 2014.
 2013, and several best paper awards. He is Area Editor of ACM CCR, and
[126] Y. Zhang, T. Cao, S. Li, X. Tian, L. Yuan, H. Jia, and A. V. Vasilakos.
 part of the Editorial Board of IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking.
 Parallel Processing Systems for Big Data: A Survey. Proc. IEEE,
 104(11):2114–2136, 2016.
[127] J. Zhao, T. Tiplea, R. Mortier, J. Crowcroft, and L. Wang. Data
 Analytics Service Composition and Deployment on Edge Devices.
 Proc. of the Big-DAMA, pages 27–32, 2018.

 Pedro Casas is Scientist in AI/ML for Networking
 at the Digital Insight Lab of the Austrian Institute of
 Alessandro D’Alconzo received the M.Sc. degree Technology in Vienna. He received an Electrical Enin Electronic Engineering with honors in 2003, and gineering degree from Universidad de la República,
 the Ph.D. in Information and Telecommunication Uruguay in 2005, and a Ph.D. degree in Computer
 Engineering in 2007, from Polytechnic of Bari, Italy. Science from Institut Mines-Télécom, Télécom Bre-
 Since March 2018, he is head of the Data Science tagne in 2010. He was Postdoctoral Research at
 office at the Digital Enterprise Division of Siemens the LAAS-CNRS in Toulouse from 2010 to 2011,
 Austria. Between 2016 and 2018, he was Scientist at and Senior Researcher at the Telecommunications
 the Center for Digital Safety & Security of AIT, Aus- Research Center Vienna (FTW) from 2011 to 2015.
 trian Institute of Technology. From 2007 to 2015, His work focuses on machine-learning and data
 he was Senior Researcher in the Communication mining based approaches for Networking, big data analytics and platforms,
 Networks Area of the Telecommunications Research Internet network measurements, network security and anomaly detection, as
Center Vienna (FTW). His research interests embrace Big Data processing sys- well as QoE modeling, assessment and monitoring. He has published more
tems, network measurements and traffic monitoring ranging from design and than 150 Networking research papers in major international conferences and
implementation of statistical based anomaly detection algorithms, to Quality journals, received 13 awards for his work - including 7 best paper awards. He
of Experience evaluation, and application of secure multiparty computation is general chair for different conferences, including the IEEE ComSoc ITC
techniques to cross-domain network monitoring and troubleshooting. Special Interest Group on Network Measurements and Analytics.

View publication stats