8076 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

 Blockchain for Internet of Things: A Survey
 Hong-Ning Dai , Senior Member, IEEE, Zibin Zheng , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Yan Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT) is reshaping the incumbent In particular, IoT has the following features: 1) decentralindustry to smart industry featured with data-driven decision- ization of IoT systems; 2) diversity of IoT devices and
making. However, intrinsic features of IoT result in a number systems; 3) heterogeneity of IoT data; and 4) network
of challenges, such as decentralization, poor interoperability, privacy, and security vulnerabilities. Blockchain technology brings complexity. All of them result in the challenges includthe opportunities in addressing the challenges of IoT. In this ing heterogeneity of IoT system, poor interoperability,
paper, we investigate the integration of blockchain technology resource constraints of IoT devices, and privacy and security
with IoT. We name such synthesis of blockchain and IoT as vulnerabilities.
blockchain of things (BCoT). This paper presents an in-depth The appearance of blockchain technologies brings the
survey of BCoT and discusses the insights of this new paradigm.
In particular, we first briefly introduce IoT and discuss the opportunities in overcoming the above challenges of IoT. A
challenges of IoT. Then, we give an overview of blockchain tech- blockchain is essentially a distributed ledger spreading over
nology. We next concentrate on introducing the convergence of the whole distributed system. With the decentralized consenblockchain and IoT and presenting the proposal of BCoT archi- sus, blockchains can enable a transaction to occur and be
tecture. We further discuss the issues about using blockchain for validated in a mutually distrusted distributed system without
fifth generation beyond in IoT as well as industrial applications
of BCoT. Finally, we outline the open research directions in this the intervention of the trusted third party. Unlike incumbent
promising area. transaction-management systems where the centralized agency
 needs to validate the transaction, blockchains can achieve the
 Index Terms—Blockchain, industrial applications, Internet of
Things (IoT), smart contract. decentralized validation of transactions, thereby greatly saving
 the cost and mitigating the performance bottleneck at the central agency. Moreover, each transaction saved in blockchains
 is essentially immutable since each node in the network keeps
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 all the committed transactions in the blockchain. Meanwhile,
 HE RECENT advances in information and communi-
T cation technology (ICT) have promoted the evolution
of conventional computer-aided industry to smart industry
 crytographic mechanisms (such as asymmetric encryption
 algorithms, digital signature, and hash functions) guarantee
 the integrity of data blocks in the blockchains. Therefore, the
featured with data-driven decision making [1]. During this blockchains can ensure nonrepudiation of transactions. In addiparadigm shift, Internet of Things (IoT) plays an impor- tion, each transaction in blockchains is traceable to every user
tant role of connecting the physical industrial environment with the attached historic timestamp.
to the cyberspace of computing systems consequently form- Blockchain is essentially a perfect complement to IoT with
ing a cyber-physical system (CPS). IoT can support a the improved interoperability, privacy, security, reliability, and
wide diversity of industrial applications, such as manu- scalability. In this paper, we investigate a new paradigm of
facturing, logistics, food industry, and utilities. IoT aims integrating blockchain with IoT. We name such synthesis
to improve operation efficiency and production throughput, of blockchain and IoT as blockchain of things (BCoT). In
reduce the machine downtime and enhance product quality. particular, BCoT has the following merits.
 1) Interoperability across IoT devices, IoT systems and
 Manuscript received December 2, 2018; revised March 8, 2019 and April
20, 2019; accepted May 28, 2019. Date of publication June 5, 2019; date industrial sectors, where the interoperability is the abilof current version October 8, 2019. This work was supported in part by the ity of interacting with physical systems and exchanging
National Key Research and Development Program under 2016YFB1000101, information between IoT systems. It can be achieved
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61722214 and Grant U1811462, in part by the Macao Science and Technology through the blockchain-composite layer built on top of
Development Fund under Grant 0026/2018/A1, in part by the Program for an overlay peer-to-peer (P2P) network with uniform
Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams under Grant access across different IoT systems.
2016ZT06D211, and in part by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research
and Innovation Programme through the Marie Skłodowska-Curie under Grant 2) Traceability of IoT data, where the traceability is the
824019. (Corresponding authors: Zibin Zheng; Yan Zhang.) capability of tracing and verifying the spatial and tempo-
 H.-N. Dai is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University ral information of a data block saved in the blockchain.
of Science and Technology, Macau, China (e-mail: hndai@ieee.org).
 Z. Zheng is with the School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen Each data block saved in a blockchain is attached with
University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn). a historic timestamp consequently assuring the data
 Y. Zhang is with the Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, traceability.
0373 Oslo, Norway, and also with Simula Metropolitan Center for Digital
Engineering, 1325 Lysaker, Norway (e-mail: yanzhang@ieee.org). 3) Reliability of IoT data is the quality of IoT data
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2920987 being trustworthy. It can be ensured by the integrity
 2327-4662 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8077

 enforced by crytographic mechanisms including asymmetric encryption algorithms, hash functions and digital
 signature, all of which are inherent in blockchains.
 4) Autonomic interactions of IoT system refer to the capability of IoT systems interacting with each other without
 the intervention of a trusted third party. This autonomy can be achieved by smart contracts enabled by
 blockchains. In particular, contract clauses embedded in
 smart contracts will be executed automatically when a
 certain condition is satisfied (e.g., the user breaching the
 contract will be punished with a fine automatically). Fig. 1. IoT consists of perception layer, communication layer, and industrial
 Though BCoT can benefit IoT, there are also a number of applications.
challenges to be addressed before the potentials of BCoT can
be fully unleashed. Therefore, this paper aims to present an
in-depth survey on the state-of-the-art advances, challenges, 2) An overview of key blockchain technologies is
and open research issues in BCoT. then given with a summary of key characteristics
 of blockchains and a taxonomy of the incumbent
 blockchain systems.
A. Comparison Between This Paper and Existing Surveys 3) The core part of this paper is focused on the convergence
 There are several published papers discussing the conver- of blockchain and IoT. In this respect, the opportunities
gence of blockchain with IoT. For example, the work of [2] of integrating blockchain with IoT are first discussed. An
presents a smart home application of using blockchains for architecture of BCoT is then proposed and illustrated.
IoT. Zhang and Wen [3] proposed a business model to sup- 4) The 5G-beyond networks play an important role in conport P2P trading based on smart contracts and blockchains. structing the infrastructure for BCoT. Research issues
However, these studies are too specific to a certain scenario about blockchain for 5G-beyond networks in IoT are
of incorporating blockchain with IoT (e.g., a smart home also discussed.
application). 5) Furthermore, this paper summarizes the applications of
 Recently, several surveys on the convergence of blockchain BCoT and outlines the open research issues in BCoT.
with IoT have been published. In particular, [4] gives a The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
systematic literature review on blockchain for IoT with the cat- Section II first presents an overview on IoT. Section III then
egorization of a number of use cases. The work of [5] presents gives the introduction of blockchain technology. The cona survey on IoT security and investigates the potentials of vergence of blockchain and IoT is discussed in Section IV.
blockchain technologies as the solutions. Reyna et al. [6] Section V discusses the research issues about blockchain
investigated the possibility and research issues of integrat- for 5G-beyond networks. Section VI next summarizes the
ing blockchain with IoT. The work of [7] presents a review applications of BCoT. Open research issues are discussed in
on integrating blockchain with IoT in the application aspect. Section VII. Finally, this paper is concluded in Section VIII.
Ali et al. [8] attempted to give a comprehensive survey on
application of blockchain in IoT. The work of [9] gives a II. I NTERNET OF T HINGS
categorization of applications of blockchain for IoT. In this section, we briefly introduce IoT in Section II-A and
 However, most of the existing surveys suffer from the fol- summarize the challenges of IoT in Section II-B.
lowing limitations: 1) there is no general architecture proposed
for BCoT; 2) there is no study explicitly discussing blockchain
for fifth generation (5G) beyond networks for IoT (however, A. Introduction to Internet of Things
this topic is of great importance for the development of IoT); Today’s industry is experiencing a paradigm shift from conand 3) other important issues like life cycle of smart contracts ventional computer-aided industry to smart industry driven
are missing in most of the existing surveys. by recently advances in IoT and big data analytics (BDA).
 During this evolution, IoT plays a critical role of bridging
 the gap between the physical industrial environment and the
B. Contributions cyberspace of computing systems while BDA can help to
 In view of prior work, we aim to: 1) provide a conceptual extract hidden values from massive IoT data so as to make
introduction on IoT and blockchain technologies; 2) present in- intelligent decisions.
depth analysis on the potentials of incorporating blockchains IoT is essentially a network of smart objects (i.e., things)
into IoT; and 3) give insightful discussions of technical chal- with provision of various industrial services. A typical IoT
lenges enabling BCoT. In summary, the main contributions of system consists of the following layered subsystems (from
this paper are highlighted as follows. bottom to up) as shown in Fig. 1.
 1) A brief introduction on IoT is first given and then accom- 1) Perception Layer: There is a wide diversity of IoT
 panied by a summary of key characteristics of IoT. devices including sensors, actuators, controllers, bar
 Meanwhile, research challenges of IoT are outlined. code/quick response code (QR code) tags, RFID tags,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8078 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

 smart meters, and other wireless/wired devices. These 4) Resource Constraints of IoT Devices: IoT devices, such
 devices can sense and collect data from the physical as sensors, actuators, RFID tags, and smart meters suffer,
 environment. Meanwhile, some of them (like actuators from limited resources including computing resource,
 and controllers) can make actions on the environment. storage resource, and battery power. For example, there
 2) Communication Layer: Various wireless/wired devices, is no battery power for passive RFID tags that can
 such as sensors, RFIDs, actuators, controllers, and only harvest the energy from RFID readers or from
 other tags can then connect with IoT gateways, WiFi ambient environment [14]. Moreover, the resource conaccess points (APs), small base stations (BSs), and straints also result in the vulnerability of IoT devices to
 macro BS to form an industrial network. The network malicious attacks.
 connection is enabled by a diverse of communica- 5) Privacy Vulnerability: Privacy is to guarantee the approtion protocols, such as Bluetooth, near field commu- priate usage of IoT data while there is no disclosure
 nications (NFCs), low-power wireless personal area of user private information without user consent. It is
 networks (6LoWPANs), wireless highway addressable challenging to preserve data privacy in IoT due to the
 remote transducer (WirelessHART) [10], low power complexity and the decentralization of IoT systems, the
 wide area networks (LPWANs) technologies including heterogeneity of IoT systems. Moreover, it becomes a
 Sigfox, LoRa, narrowband IoT (NB-IoT), and industrial trend to integrate IoT with cloud computing since cloud
 Ethernet [11]. computing can empower IoT with extra computing and
 3) Industrial Applications: IoT can be widely used to storage capabilities. However, uploading the confidensupport a number of industrial applications. The typi- tial IoT data to the third-party cloud servers may also
 cal industrial applications include manufacturing, supply compromise the vulnerable privacy of IoT [15].
 chain, food industry, smart grid, health care, and Internet 6) Security Vulnerability: The decentralization and the hetof Vehicles (IoV). erogeneity of IoT systems also result in the difficulty
 in ensuring the security of IoT while the security is
 extremely important for an enterprise. The typical solu-
B. Challenges of Internet of Things tions, such as authentication, authorization, and commu-
 In this paper, we mainly focus on Industrial IoT. We denote nication encryption, may not be appropriate to IoT due to
Industrial IoT by IoT thereafter without loss of generality. The the difficulty in implementing the security countermea-
IoT ensures the connection of various things (smart objects) sures in resource-constrained IoT systems. Moreover,
mounted with various electronic or mechanic sensors, actu- IoT systems are also vulnerable to malicious attacks due
ators, and software systems which can sense and collect to the failure of security firmware updates in time [16].
information from the physical environment and then make Discussion: Some intrinsic limitations of IoT can be overactions on the physical environment. The unique features of come via recent ICT advances. For example, ambient backscat-
IoT pose a number of research challenges exhibiting in the ter assisted communications [14] can help IoT nodes obtain
following aspects. extra energy from ambience. Meanwhile, mobile edge comput-
 1) Heterogeneity of IoT systems exhibits in the heteroge- ing (MEC) can extend the capability of IoT nodes via offloadneous IoT devices, heterogeneous communication proto- ing the computationally intensive tasks to edge servers [17].
 cols and heterogeneous IoT data types (i.e., structured, Moreover, the recent advances in blockchain technologies offer
 semi-structured, and nonstructured). The heterogeneity potential solutions to the challenges, such as poor interoperis also the root of other challenges, such as inter- ability and privacy and security vulnerabilities. In addition,
 operability, privacy, and security (to be explained as blockchain is also beneficial to improve heterogeneity of
 follows). IoT systems. We will discuss these opportunities brought by
 2) Complexity of networks. There are a number of com- blockchain to IoT in Section IV-A after giving a briefing on
 munication/network protocols coexisting in IoT. Typical blockchain technologies in Section III.
 network protocols include NFC, Bluetooth, 6LoWPAN,
 WirelessHART, Sigfox, LoRa, and NB-IoT, all of III. B LOCKCHAIN T ECHNOLOGIES
 which offer different network services. For example,
 In this section, we first give an overview on blockchain tech-
 6LoWPAN and WirelessHART have typically short
 nologies in Section III-A, then summarize the key blockchain
 communication coverage (e.g., less than 100 m) while
 characteristics in Section III-B and present a taxonomy of
 LPWAN technologies can provide the coverage from
 blockchain platforms in Section III-D.
 1 to 10 km [12], [13].
 3) Poor interoperability is the capability of IoT systems
 (both hardware and software) to exchange, make use A. Overview of Blockchain Technologies
 of information and collaborate with each other. Due to 1) Blockchain: A blockchain is essentially a distributed
 the decentralization of IoT systems and the heterogene- ledger spreading over the whole blockchain system [18]. Fig. 2
 ity of IoT systems, it is challenging to exchange the shows an exemplary blockchain consisting of a number of condata between different industrial sectors, strategic cen- secutively connected blocks. Each block (with the exception
 ters, and IoT systems. As a result, the interoperability of the first block) in a blockchain points to its immediately
 of IoT is difficult to be achieved. previous block (called parent block) via an inverse reference

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8079

Fig. 2. Blockchain consists of a number of consecutively connected blocks and the detailed view represents a Merkle tree structure (where TX represents a
transaction).

that is essentially the hash value of the parent block. For exam- 2) Consensus Algorithms: One of the advantages of
ple, block i contains the hash of block i − 1 as shown in blockchain technologies is to validate the block trustfulness in
Fig. 2. The first block of a blockchain is called the genesis a decentralized trustless environment without the necessity of
block having no parent block. In particular, a block structure the trusted third-party authority. In distributed environment, it
consists of the following information: 1) block version (indi- is challenging to reach a consensus on a newly generated block
cating the validation rules to follow); 2) the hash of parent as the consensus may be biased in favor of malicious nodes.
block; 3) timestamp recording the current time in seconds; This trustfulness validation in a decentralized environment can
4) nonce staring from 0 and increasing for every hash calcu- be achieved by consensus algorithms. Typical consensus algolation; 5) the number of transactions; and 6) MerkleRoot (i.e., rithms include proof of work (PoW), proof of stake (PoS), and
the hash value of the root of a Merkel tree with concatenating practical Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) [19].
the hash values of all the transactions in the block) as shown Take PoW as an example. The creation of a newly generin the detailed view of Fig. 2. ated block is equivalent to the solution of a computationally
 A blockchain is continuously growing with the transactions difficult problem. This computationally difficult problem (also
being executed. When a new block is generated, all the nodes know as a puzzle) can nevertheless be verifiable without difin the network will participate in the block validation. A val- ficulty [20]. Each node in the distributed P2P network can
idated block will be automatically appended at the end of participate in the validation procedure. The first node who
the blockchain via the inverse reference pointing to the par- solves the puzzle can append the validated block to the
ent block. In this manner, any unauthorized alterations on the blockchain; this node is also called a miner. It then broadcasts
previously generated block can be easily detected since the the validation results in the whole blockchain system, consehash value of the tampered block is significantly different from quently other nodes validating and updating the new results in
that of the unchanged block. Moreover, since the blockchain the blockchain. A small portion of bonus will then be given
is distributed throughout the whole network, the tampering to this node as a compensation for solving the puzzle.
behavior can also be easily detected by other nodes in the a) Discrepancy solution: In a distributed system,
network. multiple nodes may validate blocks nearly at the same time.
 a) Data integrity guarantee in blockchain: Blockchains Meanwhile, the network latency can somehow result in bifurleverage cryptographic techniques to guarantee data integrity. cated (or forked) chains at the same time. To solve the
In particular, there are two mechanisms in blockchains to discrepancy, most of existing blockchain systems typically
ensure the data integrity. maintain the longest chain as the valid chain because the
 1) An ordered link list structure of blocks, in which each longest chain implies the most tolerant of being compronewly appended block must include the hash value of mised by adversaries. If so, a shorter chain is automatically
 the preceding block. In this manner, a falsification on deserted (i.e., the blue dashed-line box as shown in Fig. 2)
 any of the previous blocks will invalidate the subsequent and the future validation work will continue on the longest
 blocks. chain.
 2) Merkel tree structure, in which each block contains a b) Trustfulness of PoW: The trustfulness of PoW is based
 root hash of a Merkel tree of all the transactions. Each on the assumption that a majority of blockchain nodes is trustnonleave node is essentially a hash value of two con- ful. Generally, 51% of computational capability is regarded
 catenated values of its two children. Therefore, a Merkel as the threshold of PoW being tolerant of malicious attacks.
 tree is typically a binary tree. In this way, any falsifica- The incentive mechanisms can encourage miners to be honest
 tion on the transactions will lead to a new hash value against compromising. Meanwhile, solving the puzzle typiin the above layer, consequently resulting in a falsified cally requires extensive computing power. The probability of
 root hash. As a result, any falsification can be easily solving the puzzle at a miner is often proportional to the
 detected. computational capability and resource of a miner [21].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8080 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

 TABLE I
 TAXONOMY OF T YPICAL C ONSENSUS A LGORITHMS

 Fig. 3. Working flow of blockchains.

 to the end of the chain of transactions consequently forming a
 new block in the blockchain once a miner successfully solves
 PoW schemes require extensive computation to solve the
 the puzzle (i.e., step 3 ). Finally, every node saves a replica
puzzle, thereby resulting in the extensive energy consumption.
 of the updated blockchain when the validated transaction is
Unlike PoW, PoS requires the proof of ownership to validate
 appended to the blockchain (i.e., step 4 ).
the trustfulness of a block since the users with more cryptocurrencies (i.e., more stakes) are more trustful than those
with fewer cryptocurrencies. In PBFT, each node who has the B. Key Characteristics of Blockchain
equal right to vote for the consensus will send its voting state In summary, blockchain technologies have the following key
to other nodes. After multiple rounds of voting procedure, the characteristics.
consensus reaches. 1) Decentralization: In traditional transaction management
 We roughly categorize typical consensus algorithms into systems, the transaction validation has been conducted
two types: 1) probabilistic consensus algorithms and 2) deter- through a trusted agency (e.g., a bank or government).
ministic consensus algorithms. Table I gives the taxonomy. This centralization manner inevitably results in the extra
Probabilistic consensus algorithms including PoW, PoS, and cost, the performance bottleneck, and the single-point
delegated POS (DPOS) typically first save the validated block failure (SPF) at centralized service providers. In conto the chain and then seek the consensus of all the nodes while trast, blockchain allows the transaction being validated
deterministic consensus algorithms first consent to the block between two peers without the authentication, jurisdicand then saved the validated block to the chain. Moreover, tion, or intervention done by the central agency, thereby
probabilistic consensus algorithms often result in multiple reducing the service cost, mitigating the performance
bifurcate chains and the discrepancy is solved by choos- bottleneck, lowering the SPF risk.
ing the longest chain. In contrast, deterministic consensus 2) Immutability: A blockchain consists of a consecutively
algorithms solve the discrepancy through multiple rounds of linked chain of blocks, in which each link is essencommunications in the overlay network. tially an inverse hash point of previous block. Any
 There are many attempts to improve incumbent con- modification on the previous block invalidates all the
sensus algorithms, such as Ripple [22], Algorand [23], consequently generated blocks. Meanwhile, the root
Tendermint, proof of authority (PoA) [24], proof of elapsed hash of the Merkle tree saves the hash of all the comtime (PoET) [25]. Instead of choosing single consensus algo- mitted transactions. Any (even tiny) changes on any
rithm, there is a trend of integrating multiple consensus algo- transactions generates a new Merkle root. Therefore, any
rithms to fulfill the requirements from different applications. falsification can be easily detected. The integration of the
 3) Working Flow of Blockchains: We next show how a inverse hash point and the Merkle tree can guarantee the
blockchain works in an example. Take a money transfer as data integrity.
an example as shown in Fig. 3. Alice wants to transfer an 3) Nonrepudiation: Recall the fact that the private key is
amount of money to Bob. She first initiates the transaction at used to put the signature to the transaction, which can
a computer through her Bitcoin (BTC) wallet (i.e., step 1 ). then be accessible and verified by others via the cor-
The transaction includes the information, such as the sender’s responding public key. Therefore, the crytographically
wallet, the receiver’s address, and the amount of money. The signed transaction cannot be denied by the transaction
transaction is essentially signed by Alice’s private key and can initiator.
be accessible and verifiable by other users via Alice’s pub- 4) Transparency: For most of public blockchain systems
lic key thereafter. Then, the computer broadcasts the initiated (like BTC and Ethereum), every user can access and
transaction to other computers (or nodes) in the P2P network interact with the blockchain network with an equal right.
(i.e., step 2 ). Next, a validated transaction is then appended Moreover, every new transaction is validated and saved

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8081

 in the blockchain, consequently being available for every
 user. Therefore, the blockchain data is essentially transparent to every user who can access and verify the
 committed transactions in the blockchain.
 5) Pseudonymity: Despite the transparency of blockchain
 data, blockchain systems can preserve a certain level
 of the privacy via making blockchain addresses anonymous. For example, the work of [26] presents an
 application of blockchain to preserve the privacy of per- Fig. 4. Life cycle of smart contracts consisting of four consecutive phases:
 sonal data. However, blockchain can only preserve the creation, deployment, execution, and completion.
 privacy at a certain level since blockchain addresses are
 essentially traceable by inference [8]. For example, it is
 shown in [27] that the analysis of blockchain data can written in computer languages including declarative lanhelp to detect fraud and illegal transactions. Therefore, guage and logic-based rule language [30]. Similar to
 blockchain can only preserve the pseudonymity instead the development of computer software, the procedure
 of full privacy. of the smart contract conversion is composed of design,
 6) Traceability: Each transaction saved in the blockchain implementation, and validation (i.e., testing). It is worth
 is attached with a timestamp (recorded when the trans- mentioning that the creation of smart contracts is an
 action occurs). Therefore, users can easily verify and iterative process involving with multiple rounds of negotrace the origins of historical data items after analyzing tiations and iterations. Meanwhile, it is also involved
 the blockchain data with corresponding timestamps. with multiple parties, such as stakeholders, lawyers, and
 software engineers.
 2) Deployment of smart contracts. The validated smart con-
C. Smart Contract tracts can then be deployed to platforms on top of
 Smart contracts are a great advance for blockchain tech- blockchains. Contracts stored on the blockchains cannot
nology [28]. In 1990s, smart contracts were proposed as a be modified due to the immutability of blockchains. Any
computerized transaction protocol that executes the contrac- emendation requires the creation of a new contract. Once
tual terms of an agreement [29]. Contractual clauses that are the smart contracts are deployed on blockchains, all the
embedded in smart contracts will be enforced automatically parties can access the contracts through the blockchains.
when a certain condition is satisfied (e.g., one party who Moreover, digital assets of both involved parties in the
breaches the contract will be punished automatically). smart contract are locked via freezing the correspond-
 Blockchains are enabling smart contracts. Essentially, smart ing digital wallets [31]. For example, the coin transfers
contracts are implemented on top of blockchains. The (either incoming or outgoing) on the wallets relevant to
approved contractual clauses are converted into executable the contract are blocked. Meanwhile, the parties can be
computer programs. The logical connections between contrac- identified by their digital wallets.
tual clauses have also been preserved in the form of logical 3) Execution of smart contracts. After the deployment of
flows in programs (e.g., if-else-if statement). The exe- smart contracts, the contractual clauses have been moncution of each contract statement is recorded as an immutable itored and evaluated. Once the contractual conditions
transaction stored in the blockchain. Smart contracts guarantee reach (e.g., product reception), the contractual proceappropriate access control and contract enforcement. In partic- dures (or functions) will be automatically executed. It
ular, developers can assign access permission for each function is worth noting that a smart contract consisting of a
in the contract. Contract enforcement ensures that the contract number of declarative statements with logical connecexecution is deterministic. Once any conditions in a smart con- tions. When a condition is triggered, the corresponding
tract are satisfied, the triggered statement will automatically statement will be automatically executed, consequently
execute the corresponding function in a predictable manner. a transaction being executed and validated by miners in
For example, Alice and Bob agree on the penalty of violating the blockchains [32]. The committed transactions and
the contract. If Bob breaches the contract, the corresponding the updated states have been stored on the blockchains
penalty (as specified in the contract) will be automatically paid thereafter.
from Bob’s deposit. 4) Completion of smart contracts. After a smart contract
 The whole life cycle of smart contracts consists of four has been executed, new states of all involved parties are
consecutive phases as illustrated in Fig. 4. updated. Accordingly, the transactions during the exe-
 1) Creation of smart contracts. Several involved parties cution of the smart contracts as well as the updated
 first negotiate on the obligations, rights and prohibitions states are stored in blockchains. Meanwhile, the digital
 on contracts. After multiple rounds of discussions and assets have been transferred from one party to another
 negotiations, an agreement can reach. Lawyers or coun- party (e.g., money transfer from the buyer to the supselors will help parties to draft an initial contractual plier). Consequently, digital assets of involved parties
 agreement. Software engineers then convert this agree- have been unlocked. The smart contract has completed
 ment written in natural languages into a smart contract the whole life cycle.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8082 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISONS OF B LOCKCHAIN S YSTEMS 2) Scalability: Although public blockchains can guarantee
 the decentralization, immutability, transparency, nonrepudiation, and traceability, the merits are obtained in the
 cost of low transaction-validation rate, high latency and
 extra storage space consumption, consequently limiting
 the scalability of public blockchains. Compared with
 public blockchains, private and consortium blockchains
 have a better scalability since blockchains are fully controlled by a single group or multiple organizations and
 the consensus can be easily reached.
 3) Flexibility: Similarly, public blockchains have the less
 flexibility than private and consortium blockchains since
 configurations of private and consortium blockchains are
 more adjustable.
 4) Permission: Permission refers to consent or authorization to access the blockchains. In public blockchains,
 public participation is allowed, thereby being permissionless. However, private and consortium blockchains
 can allow one or more users to access and interact with
 blockchains with different permission levels. For example, some users can only read the blockchain data while
 others can either read or initiate transactions.
 5) Consensus: Public blockchains usually use PoW and
 It is worth mentioning that during deployment, execution PoS as the consensus algorithms, which are Byzantineand completion of a smart contract, a sequence of transactions failure tolerant while resulting in extensive resource
has been executed (each corresponding to a statement in the consumption. Private blockchains can easily achieve
smart contract) and stored in the blockchain. Therefore, all the the consensus among the authenticated users. Typical
three phases need to write data to the blockchain as shown in consensus algorithms used for private blockchains
Fig. 4. include PBFT, PoA, and PoET. Moreover, consortium
 blockchains are a hybrid type of public blockchains and
 private blockchains. In particular, Ripple [22] is a variant
D. Taxonomy of Blockchain Systems of PBFT typically used for consortium blockchains.
 We classify blockchain systems into three types: 1) pub- 6) Exemplary Platforms: BTC [33] and Ethereum [34]
lic blockchains; 2) private blockchains; and 3) consortium (or are two typical public blockchain platforms, which are
community) blockchains [38]. Most digital currencies such as mainly used for digital currency. With regard to pri-
BTC (i.e., the ticker symbol of BTC cryptocurrency) and ETH vate blockchains, GemOS [35] is a private blockchain
(i.e., the ticker symbol of Ethereum cryptocurrency) are imple- platform for healthcare and supply chain. In addition,
mented on public blockchains, thereby being accessible by MultiChain [36] is an open source platform granting
anyone in the P2P network. Differently, private blockchains the implementation of private blockchains. As for concan be managed or controlled by a single organization while sortium blockchains, Hyperledger [37] is developing
consortium blockchains sit in limbo between public and pri- business consortium blockchain frameworks. Moreover,
vate blockchains. Table II presents a comparison of three types Ethereum also provides tools for building consortium
of blockchains. blockchains [39].
 In particular, we summary the comparison among public,
private, and consortium blockchains in the following aspects.
 1) Key Characteristics: Public blockchains are fully decen- IV. C ONVERGENCE OF B LOCKCHAIN AND I OT
 tralized while private and consortium blockchains are In this section, we first discuss the opportunities of integratpartially decentralized or fully controlled by a single ing blockchain with IoT in Section IV-A. We then present the
 group or multiple groups. Moreover, it is nearly impos- architecture of the integration of blockchain and IoT (namely
 sible to tamper transactions in public blockchains as BCoT) in Section IV-B. We next discuss the deployment issues
 every node keeps a replica of the blockchain (containing on BCoT in Section IV-C.
 all the transactions) while the dominant organization or
 multiple parties of consortium and private blockchains
 can modify the blockchain. Similarly, public blockchains A. Opportunities of Integrating Blockchain With IoT
 can fully ensure the nonrepudiation, transparency, and As summarized in Section II-B, IoT systems are facing
 traceability of transactions while private and consortium many challenges, such as heterogeneity of IoT systems, poor
 blockchains cannot or can only partially ensure these interoperability, resource constraints of IoT devices, and priproperties. vacy and security vulnerabilities. Blockchain technologies

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8083

Fig. 5. Overview of BCoT architecture. (a) Blockchain-composite layer. (b) P2P overlay network and blockchain node architecture.

can complement IoT systems with the enhanced interop- corporations (DACs) to automate transactions, in which
erability and the improved privacy and security. Moreover, there are no traditional roles like governments or compablockchain can also enhance the reliability and scalability nies involved with the payment. Being implemented by
of IoT systems [6]. In short, we name such integration smart contracts, DACs can work automatically without
of blockchain with IoT as BCoT. BCoT has the following human intervention consequently saving the cost.
potential benefits in contrast to incumbent IoT systems.
 1) Enhanced interoperability of IoT systems. Blockchain
 can essentially improve the interoperability of IoT B. Architecture of Blockchain of Things
 systems via transforming and storing IoT data into We propose the architecture of BCoT as shown in Fig. 5.
 blockchains. During this procedure, heterogeneous types In this architecture, the blockchain-composite layer plays as
 of IoT data are converted, processed, extracted, com- a middleware between IoT and industrial applications. This
 pressed and finally stored in blockchains. Moreover, design has two merits: 1) offering an abstraction from the
 the interoperability also exhibits in easily passing lower layers in IoT and 2) providing users with blockchainthrough different types of fragmented networks since based services. In particular, the blockchain-composite layer
 blockchains are established on top of the P2P overlay hides the heterogeneity of lower layers (like perception layer
 network that supports universal Internet access. and communication layer in IoT). On the other hand, the
 2) Improved security of IoT systems. On one hand, IoT data blockchain-composite layer offers a number of blockchaincan be secured by blockchains since they are stored as based services, which are essentially application programming
 blockchain transactions which are encrypted and digi- interfaces (APIs) to support various industrial applications. As
 tally signed by cryptographic keys (e.g., elliptic curve a result, the difficulty of developing industrial applications can
 digital signature algorithm (ECDSA) [40]). Moreover, also be lowered down due to the abstraction achieved by the
 the integration of IoT systems with blockchain tech- blockchain-composite layer.
 nologies (like smart contracts) can help to improve the In particular, the blockchain-composite layer consists of five
 security of IoT systems by automatically updating IoT sublayers as shown in Fig. 5(a) (from bottom to up).
 device firmwares to remedy vulnerable breaches thereby 1) Data Sublayer: Collects the IoT data from the lower layimproving the system security [41]. ers (e.g., perception layer) and wraps up the encrypted
 3) Traceability and Reliability of IoT data. Blockchain data data with digital signature via asymmetric cryptographic
 can be identified and verified anywhere and anytime. algorithms and hash functions. These consecutively con-
 Meanwhile, all the historical transactions stored in the nected data blocks then form the blockchain after the
 blockchains are traceable. For example, the work of [42] distributed validation. Different blockchain platforms
 has developed a blockchain-based product traceability may choose different cryptographic algorithms and
 system, which provide suppliers and retailers with trace- hash functions. For example, BTC blockchain chooses
 able services. In this manner, the quality and originality SHA-256 as the hash function and ECDSA as the
 of the products can be inspected and verified. Moreover, signature algorithm.
 the immutability of blockchains also assures the relia- 2) Network Sublayer: It is essentially an overlay P2P
 bility of IoT data since it is nearly impossible to alter network running on top of the communication layer.
 or falsify any transactions stored in blockchains. The overlay network consists of either virtual or phys-
 4) Autonomic interactions of IoT systems. Blockchain ical links connecting nodes in the underlying commutechnologies can grant IoT devices or subsystems to nication networks (i.e., wired/wireless communication
 interact with each other automatically. For example, networks). One node only simply broadcasts the block
 the work of [43] proposes distributed autonomous of transactions to its connected peers. Once receiving the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8084 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

Fig. 6. Deployment scenario of BCoT.

 block of transactions, other peers will verify it locally. If particular, there are two modes to store the blockchain data [6]:
 it is valid, the block will be further propagated to other 1) full storage, in which the entire blockchain is stored and
 nodes through the overlay network. 2) partial storage, in which only a subset of data blocks are
 3) Consensus Sublayer: It is mainly involved with the dis- stored locally. Accordingly, we name the nodes with full stortributed consensus for the trustfulness of a block. The age of blockchain data as full nodes and the nodes with partial
 consensus can be achieved by various consensus algo- storage of blockchain data as lightweight nodes. In practice, a
 rithms like PoW, PoS, PBFT, and DPOS (as explained full node can be a cloud server or an edge server with adequate
 in Section III-A2). It is worth mentioning that block computing resources since it requires a large storage space to
 propagation mechanisms (such as relay network prop- save the entire blockchain (e.g., the whole BTC blockchain
 agation and advertisement-based propagation [20]) are occupies nearly 185 GB at the end of September 2018 accordthe prerequisite for the distributed consensus protocols. ing to the statistic report)1 and strong computing capability of
 4) Incentive Sublayer: It is responsible for the following solving consensus puzzles (i.e., mining). On the other hand,
 tasks: a) digital currency issuing; b) digital currency dis- resource-constrained IoT devices (e.g., sensors, IoT objects)
 tribution; c) designing reward mechanism (especially for can be lightweight nodes that can validate the trustfulness
 miners); and d) handling transaction cost. In particular, of a transaction without downloading or saving the whole
 it is important to design appropriate monetary policy blockchain (i.e., only saving partial blockchain data such as
 of digital currency (i.e., money creation and distribu- hash values). It is worth mentioning that the lightweight nodes
 tion), distribute rewards to participants who contribute highly rely on the full nodes.
 to distributed consensus (i.e., mining). Fig. 6 presents a possible deployment scenario of BCoT,
 5) Service Sublayer: It provides users with blockchain- in which cloud servers and edge servers may store the whole
 based services for various industrial sectors include blockchain (or partial blockchain) data while IoT devices may
 manufacturing, logistics, supply chains, food industry only save the partial blockchain data. In addition to the deployand utilities. The blockchain as a service (BaaS) can ment of BCoT, there are also several possible interaction
 be achieved by smart contracts, which can be automati- manners between IoT and blockchain [8]: 1) direct interaction
 cally triggered when a special event occurs. For example, between IoT and blockchain, in which IoT devices can directly
 a payment contract is automatically executed when a access blockchain data saved at edge servers co-located with
 product is well received by a consumer. IoT gateways, Macro BSs (MBSs) or small BS; 2) direct
 It is worth mentioning that the network sublayer that is interaction between IoT nodes, in which IoT nodes can directly
established on top of the communication layer is the abstrac- exchange/access partial blockchain data via D2D links; and
tion of underneath communication networks, consequently 3) hybrid interaction of cloud and edge servers with IoT
offering a universal network access across different networks devices, in which IoT devices can interact with blockchain
as shown in Fig. 5(b). Fig. 5(b) also shows the architecture of data through edge/cloud servers.
a blockchain node, which essentially includes blockchain data There are several initiatives addressing the configuration and
and other elements in the data sublayer. initialization of blockchain at edge servers or at IoT devices.
 For example, Raspnode2 is a project mainly for installing
C. Deployment of BCoT
 The realistic deployment of BCoT is of great impor- 1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/647523/worldwide-bitcoin-blockchaintance. However, due to the constraints of IoT devices, it is size/
challenging to store the whole blockchain at IoT devices. In 2 http://raspnode.com/

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8085

Fig. 7. Blockchain for 5G beyond networks in IoT.

BTC and other blockchains at Raspberry Pi micro comput- to secure spectrum sharing between primary users and cogers. EthArmbian3 offers the customized Ubuntu Linux image nitive users in wireless communication systems. In addition,
for ARM devices, each of which can serve as an Ethereum blockchain may potentially help to share link conditions to
node. Despite these initiatives, most of IoT devices are still multiple IoT nodes with privacy preservation consequently
lightweight nodes due to the limited storage. improving spectral efficiency via traffic optimization [50].
 In addition to the radio spectrum management, blockchains
 V. B LOCKCHAIN FOR 5G B EYOND IN I OT also have the potentials to provide users with the improved
 Although blockchain technology is promising to IoT, there mobile services. For example, 5G networks typically consist of
are still many research issues to be addressed before the a number of fragmented heterogeneous networks. Blockchains
integration of blockchain with IoT, especially for the next- that are built on top of the network layer can help to integeneration networks (i.e., 5G-beyond or 6G networks), which grate different networks with the provision of seamless access
play a critical role in constructing the infrastructure for between different networks. Moreover, smart contracts can
blockchains. Fig. 7 illustrates the potentials brought by automate the procedure of provisions and agreements between
blockchain to 5G-beyond networks in the perspectives from network operators and subscribers while operational cost can
communications, network management, and computing man- be greatly saved [51]. The work of [52] also shows that a
agement. We explain them in details as follows. blockchain-based system can help operating nodes to improve
 their operational and service capabilities. In the future, the
A. Blockchain for Communications synthesis of blockchains and BDA can help service providers
 to extract valuable insights from transactions of subscribers
 The growing demands of mobile data traffic are driv- and offer the better services for users.
ing the more efficient resource management in the 5G
communication systems. For example, radio spectrum is B. Blockchain for Network Management
one of the most important resources [44]. Radio spectrum
management typically includes spectrum auction and spec- Recently, software defined networking (SDN) technology
trum sharing. It is shown in the latest speech [45] given can bestow the flexibility and scalability for distributed
by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) commis- IoT [53]. However, it is shown in [54] that the centralizasioner Rosenworcel that blockchain technology could be used tion of SDN can also result in the single-point-of-failure.
to achieve the dynamic and secure spectrum management Moreover, incumbent SDN devices (such as gateways) are
in 5G and 5G beyond (also known as 6G) communica- also incapable of conducting computational-intensive analytion systems [46], [47]. The benefits of using blockchains sis on data traffic. The integration of blockchain technology
for 5G-beyond networks lie in the secure and traceable with SDN can overcome the disadvantages of SDN. For examtransaction-management without the necessity of a cen- ple, the work of [55] proposes a secure blockchain-based SDN
tral intermediary, consequently saving the management cost. framework for IoT. In particular, a blockchain-based scheme
Yrjölä [48] gave several use cases to illustrate that using has been developed to update the flow rule table in a secure
blockchain technology can benefit radio spectrum sharing in way without the necessity of the intermediary. In addition,
terms of trustfulness, consensus, and cost reduction. Moreover, blockchain can also help to secure the network management
Kotobi and Bilen [49] put forth a blockchain-based protocol of network function visualization (NFV). In particular, it is
 shown in [56] that the integration of blockchain with NFV can
 3 http://raspnode.com/ ensure that the configuration of NFV is immutable, auditable,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8086 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

nonrepudiable, consistent and anonymous. A prototype of the D. Orchestration of Cloud and Edge Computing With
proposed architecture was also developed and implemented in Blockchain
this paper. During the orchestration of cloud and edge computing with
 In addition to SDN and NFV, the appearance of network blockchain, there are several challenges including computaslicing technologies [57] brings the agility and flexibility tional task offloading and incentivizing resource sharing.
of networks to support different functional and performance Offloading the computational tasks to edge servers can sigrequirements. As mentioned in Section IV, different indus- nificantly reduce the delay. Therefore, it is crucial to conduct
trial sectors have diverse application demands on blockchains. edge-cloud interoperation [65]. Nevertheless, it can cause a
For example, a single blockchain is typically used in digital- performance bottleneck and a single-point-of-failure if all the
currency like applications while an enterprise may main- nodes offload their tasks to the same MEC server. The work
tain several blockchains to serve for different purposes. In of [66] presents an offloading method with consideration of
particular, four isolated blockchains are dedicate to enter- load balancing among multiple MEC servers. Meanwhile, it is
prise resource planning (ERP), product lifecycle management worthwhile to investigate how to incentivize both edge severs
(PLM), manufacturing execution systems (MESs), and cus- and cloud servers. For example, [67] presents a contract-match
tomer relationship management (CRM), respectively, [58]. approach to allocate computational resource and assign tasks
Network slicing can essentially offer a solution to the diverse while incentivizing edge severs and cloud servers effectively.
demands of blockchain applications in MEC. For example, Moreover, it is challenging to design an optimal solution to the
each of network instances can be created for the provision of offloading tasks with consideration of spectrum, computation,
a specific blockchain service on top of network slicing and and energy consumption together. The work of [68] essentially
network visualization. However, it is necessary to optimize provides a solution to optimize the offloading energy consumpand allocate both network and computing resources to fulfill tion with consideration of feasible modulation schemes and
the diverse demands in the composite environment of MEC tasks scheduling. However, most of existing studies only conand cloud computing. Moreover, the integration of blockchain sider a task is either done at an edge sever or at a cloud.
and network slicing technologies can also support the reliable In realistic application, a task can be partitioned into multiple
content sharing in content-centric networks (CCNs) [59] and subtasks with task dependency and those subtasks can be either
privacy preservation in data sharing in 5G networks [60]. executed at the edge server or at the cloud server. It is worthwhile to investigate the task partition with consideration of
 subtask dependency in blockchains in the future.
C. Blockchain for Computing Management
 Due to the resource constraints of IoT devices, massive VI. A PPLICATIONS OF B LOCKCHAIN OF T HINGS
IoT data has been typically uploaded to remote cloud servers
for further processing. However, the pure cloud-based com- There is a growing trend in applying blockchain in IoT since
puting paradigm also causes the network traffic bottlenecks, blockchain technologies can help to overcome the challenges
long latency, context unawareness, and privacy exposure [61], of IoT. We then provide an overview of the applications of
thereby limiting the scalability of IoT. Recently, MEC [62] BCoT. It is worth mentioning that there is a wide diversity of
is becoming a crucial complement to cloud computing by applications of blockchains [ranging from smart manufacturing
offloading computing tasks from distant cloud servers to MEC to IoV and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)]. In this paper,
servers typically installed at IoT gateways, WiFi APs, Macro we mainly focus on the industrial applications of BCoT. We
BS, and Small BS, which are close to users. In this manner, the roughly categorize the applications of BCoT into six types as
context-aware, latency-critical, and less-computing-intensive shown in Fig. 8.
tasks can be migrated from remote cloud servers to local MEC
servers, thereby improving the response, privacy-preservation, A. Smart Manufacturing
and context-awareness. The manufacturing industry is experiencing an upgrading
 Blockchain technology has been applied in a variety of from automated manufacturing to “smart manufacturing” [69].
fields due to its capability of establishing trust in a decen- BDA on manufacturing data plays an important role during
tralized fashion. There are still a number of issues needed to this upgrading process. Massive data is generated during every
be solved before MEC can be used in BCoT [63]. In contrast phase of the product life cycle consisting of product designing,
to cloud servers with strong computing capability and exten- raw material supply, manufacturing, distribution, retail, and
sive storage space, mobile edge servers usually have inferior after-sales service. However, the manufacturing data is highly
capability. Moreover, mobile edge servers are heterogeneous fragmented, consequently leading to the difficulty in data
in terms of computing capability, main memory, storage space, aggregation and data analytics. BCoT can address the interopand network connection. As a result, mobile edge servers erability issue by interconnecting IoT systems via P2P network
cannot accommodate the computational demands alone. For and allowing data sharing across industrial sectors. For examexample, a mobile edge server may not be able to solve the ple, several distributed blockchains can be constructed to serve
consensus puzzle in blockchains while a cloud server can serve for different sectors and each blockchain is serving for a sector
for this goal. Therefore, it is worthwhile to investigate the or more than one sector.
orchestration of MEC and cloud computing for the provision BCoT can also improve the security of smart manufacturing.
of blockchain services [64]. One of major bottlenecks limiting the upgrading of factories

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8087

 The work of [73] shows a user case of a motor insurance, in
 which the settlement of claims can be automated via smart
 contracts based on blockchains, thereby improving the efficiency and reducing the claim-processing time. Moreover, it
 is shown in [74] that integrating blockchain with IoT can help
 to reduce the cost, fasten the speed and reduce the risk in the
 supply chain management. Furthermore, a blockchain-based
 machine learning platform [75] was proposed to secure the
 data sharing among different enterprises to improve the quality
 of customer service.

 C. Food Industry
 BCoT can enhance the visibility of the product life cycle
 especially in food industry. In particular, the traceability of
 food products is a necessity to ensure food safety. However,
 it is challenging for the incumbent IoT to guarantee the food
 traceability in the whole food supply chain [76]. For exam-
Fig. 8. Applications of BCoT. ple, a food company may be provisioned by a number of
 suppliers. The traceability requires digitizing the information
 of raw materials from sources to every sector of food manuis that the IoT systems have been maintained in a central- facturing. During this procedure, blockchain technologies can
ized way. For example, IoT firmware needs to be upgraded ensure the traceability and the provenance of food industry
regularly to remedy security breaches. However, most of the data.
firmware updates are downloaded from a central server and There are several proposals in this aspect. For example, the
then are manually installed at IoT devices. It is expensive and work of [77] proposed to use RFID and blockchain technology
in-efficient to install and upgrade the firmware updates in dis- to establish a supply chain platform from agriculture to food
tributed IoT. The work of [41] presents an automatic firmware production in China. This system has demonstrated to guarupgrading solution based on smart contract and blockchains. antee the traceability of food supply chain data. Meanwhile,
In particular, smart contracts describing the firmware upgrad- the work of [78] shows that blockchain technologies can help
ing manners (e.g., when and where to upgrade firmwares) to improve food safety via the provision of the traceable food
are deployed across the whole industrial network. Devices products. Moreover, it is shown in [79] that the integration of
can then download and install the firmware hashes via smart blockchain in food supply chain can allow customers to track
contracts being automatically executed. As a result, the secu- the whole process of food production. Authors also gave a
rity maintenance cost can be greatly saved. In addition, a user case of using blockchain for the organic coffee industry
decentralized blockchain-based automatic production platform in Colombian. Furthermore, [80] proposes a food safety tracewas proposed in [70] to offer a better security and privacy ability system based on the blockchain and electronic product
protection than conventional centralized architecture. code (EPC) IoT tags. In particular, this system can prevent
 data tampering and privacy exposure via smart contracts. A
B. Supply Chain Management prototype of the proposed architecture has been implemented
 to demonstrate the effectiveness.
 A product often consists of multiple parts provided by different manufacturers across countries. However, some forged
(or low-quality) parts may seep into the supply chain. It D. Smart Grid
is quite expensive to apply anti-fraud technologies in every The appearance of distributed renewable energy resources
part of a product. The integration of blockchain and IoT can is reshaping the role of energy consumers from pure consolve this problem. In particular, every part will be asso- sumers to prosumers who can also generate energy (e.g., from
ciated with a unique ID with the creation. Meanwhile, an renewable energy resources) in addition to consuming energy
immutable timestamp is also attached with this ID. The iden- only [81]. Energy prosumers who have extra energy can sell
tification of every part can then be saved into a blockchain, it to other consumers. We name the energy trading between a
which is tamper-resistant and traceable. For example, the work prosumer and a consumer (i.e., peers) as P2P energy trading.
of [71] shows that the part ownership of a product can be However, it is challenging to ensure the secured and trusted
authenticated through a blockchain-based system. Moreover, energy trading between two trading parties in the distributed
the work of [72] presents a traceability ontology with the environment.
integration of IoT and blockchain technologies based on The appearance of blockchain technology brings the oppor-
Ethereum blockchain platform. The proposed framework has tunities to ensure the secured P2P energy trading. Some
demonstrated to guarantee data provenance of supply chain. of recent studies proposed using blockchain technologies
 On the other hand, BCoT can also be used to reduce the to tackle these challenges. For example, the work in [82]
costs in after-sale services in the supply chain management. developed a secure energy trading system based on consortium

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8088 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

blockchains. This system can greatly save the trading cost F. Internet of Vehicles and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
without going through a central broker via the distributed con- IoV essentially integrates vehicle-to-vehicle networks,
sensus of blockchains. Moreover, Aitzhan and Svetinovic [83] vehicle-to-roadside networks, vehicle-to-infrastructure
developed a decentralized energy-trading system based on networks, and vehicle-to-pedestrian networks. The decenblockchain technology. This system demonstrated the effec- tralization, heterogeneity and nontrustworthiness of IoV
tiveness in protecting confidential energy-trading transaction pose the challenges in securing message-transmission and
in decentralized smart grid systems. Furthermore, the work transaction-execution. Integrating blockchain with IoV can
of [84] proposed a blockchain-based mechanism to provide tackle the above challenges. For example, the work of [91]
a secure and transparent energy demand-side management on developed a trust-management platform in IoV on top of
smart grid. blockchains. In particular, the trustworthiness of messages can
 be validated via PoW/PoS consensus executed by roadside
 units (RSUs). Moreover, blockchain technologies can be
E. Health Care
 used to protect both the energy and information interactions
 Health care becomes one of the major social-economic between electric vehicles [92] and hybrid electric vehicles in
problems due to the aging population; it poses new challenges smart grids [93], [94]. In the future, incorporating artificial
in traditional healthcare services because of the limited hos- intelligence, MEC, and blockchain can further optimize the
pital resources. The recent advances in wearable health-care resource allocation in IoVs [95].
devices as well as BDA in health-care data bring the oppor- Recently, UAVs communication networks can comtunities in promoting the remote health-care services at home pensate in-sufficient coverage of wireless communication
or at clinic. As a result, the burden of the hospital resources networks [96]. Meanwhile, UAVs can also be used to deliver
can be potentially released [85]. For example, senior citizens product items [97] and acquire real-time traffic flow data [98].
staying at their homes are wearing the health-care devices at Moreover, the recent study of [99] also shows that UAVs
their bodies. These wearable devices continuously measure can be used to support content-centric networking and MEC.
and collect health-care data including heart beat rate, blood However, it is challenging to assure the trustworthiness in
sugar, and blood pressure readings. Doctors and health-care decentralized nontrusted UAV-networks and restrict the misteams can access health-care data at any time and anywhere behaving UAVs [102]. The integration of blockchain technolvia the health-care networks. However, assessing health-care ogy with UAV-networks can guarantee the mutual-confidence
data also brings privacy and security concerns. The vulnerabil- among UAVs. The work of [100] developed an autonomous
ity of health-care devices and the heterogeneity of health-care platform based on Ethereum blockchain to provide the trustnetworks pose the challenges in preserving privacy an ensuring management of UAVs. Moreover, IBM [101] recently applied
security of health-care data. for a patent to develop a blockchain-based system to pre-
 Incorporating blockchains into health-care networks can serve privacy and assure security of UAV data. In particupotentially overcome the challenges in privacy preservation lar, blocks in blockchains will store the information related
and security assurance of health-care data. For example, the to UAVs including model type, manufacturer, proximity to
work of [86] shows that using blockchain technology can restricted region. Consequently, the misbehavior of UAVs can
protect health-care data stored in cloud servers. Meanwhile, be detected and identified in time.
Griggs et al. [87] developed a blockchain-based system to Summary: Table III summarizes major BCoT applications.
assure the private health-care data management. In particu- In particular, it is shown in Table III that incorporating
lar, the health-care data generated by medical sensors can be blockchain with IoT can bring a number of benefits in the
automatically collected and transmitted to the system via exe- aforementioned applications. In summary, BCoT has merits
cuting smart contracts, consequently supporting the real-time like reducing the cost for trusted third party, assuring security,
patient monitoring. During the whole procedure, the privacy improving data traceability, and verifying the data authenticity
can be preserved via underneath blockchains. Moreover, the and preserving privacy.
work of [88] proposed a blockchain-based solution to manage individual health-care data and support data-sharing across VII. O PEN R ESEARCH I SSUES OF
different hospitals, medical centers, insurance companies and B LOCKCHAIN OF T HINGS
patients. During the whole process, the privacy and security of
health-care data can be assured. Furthermore, Sun et al. [89] Although the convergence of blockchain and IoT brings a
put forth an attribute-based signature scheme in decentralized number opportunities in upgrading the industry, there are many
health-care blockchain systems. On one hand, this scheme can challenges to be addressed before the potentials of BCoT can
verify the authenticity of health-care data and identification of be fully unleashed. In this section, we identify several major
the health-care data owner. On the other hand, this scheme can challenges in incorporating blockchain into IoT and discuss
also preserve the privacy of the health-care data owner. The the potential solutions. Fig. 9 summarizes the open research
recent work [90] presents an in-home therapy management issues for BCoT.
framework integrating IoT and blockchain-based MEC scheme
to provide secrecy and anonymity assurance. The experimen- A. Resource Constraints
tal results on a prototype demonstrate the effectiveness of the Most of IoT devices are resource-constrained. For example,
proposed system. sensors, RFID tags and smart meters have inferior computing

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8089

Fig. 9. Open research issues for BCoT.

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF A PPLICATIONS OF BC OT. operations, such as initiating transactions, validating transactions (i.e., mining) while IoT devices may serve as lightweight
 nodes that only store partial blockchain data (even hash value
 of blockchain data) and undertake some less-computationalintensive tasks (such as initiating transactions) [103]. The
 orchestration of MEC and cloud computing becomes an important issue in the sense of allocating resource in BCoT [104].

 B. Security Vulnerability
 Although incorporating blockchain technologies into IoT
 can improve the security of IoT via the encryption and digital
 signature brought by blockchains, the security is still a major
 concern for BCoT due to the vulnerabilities of IoT systems
 and blockchain systems.
 On one hand, there is a growing trend in deploying
 wireless networks into industrial environment due to the feasibility and scalability of wireless communication systems.
 However, the open wireless medium also makes IoT suffering from the security breaches, such as passive eavesdropping [105], jamming, and replaying attacks [106]. Moreover,
 due to the resource constraints of IoT devices, conventional
 heavy-weighted encryption algorithms may not be feasible to
 IoT [107]. In addition, it is also challenging to manage the
 keys (which are crucial to encryption algorithms) in distributed
capability, limited storage space, low battery power, and environment.
poor network connection capability. However, the decen- Meanwhile, blockchain systems also have their own security
tralized consensus algorithms of blockchains often require vulnerabilities such as program defects of smart contracts [20].
extensive computing power and energy consumption. For In particular, it is shown in [108] that the malicious users
example, PoW in BTC is shown to have high energy con- can exploit border gateway protocol (BGP) routing scheme
sumption [6]. Therefore, the consensus mechanisms with huge to hijack blockchain messages, thereby resulting in the higher
energy consumption may not be feasible to low-power IoT delay of block broadcasting. The work of [109] also shows that
devices. a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) attack stole
 On the other hand, the bulky size of blockchain data also $50 million worth of Ethereum by leveraging the vulnerability
results in infeasibility of fully deploying blockchains across of smart contracts.
IoT. For example, the BTC blockchain size almost reaches Potential Solutions: Security vulnerabilities of BCoT can be
185 GB by the end of September 2018. It is impossible to fully remedied via either the security enhancement of IoT systems
store the whole blockchain at each IoT device. Meanwhile, the or loophole repairing of blockchain. For example, cooperative
massive IoT data generated in nearly real time manner makes jamming scheme [110] was explored to improve the secuthis status quo even worse. Moreover, blockchains are mainly rity of IoT systems while no extra hardware is required for
designed for a scenario with the stable network connection, existing IoT nodes. Meanwhile, [111] exploits key generations
which may not be feasible for IoT that often suffers from based on reciprocity and randomness of wireless channels in
the poor network connection of IoT devices and the unstable long range (LoRa) IoT network. In the perspective of repairnetwork due to the failure of nodes (e.g., battery depletion). ing blockchain loopholes, there are also some advances. In
 Potential Solutions: Incorporating MEC and cloud com- particular, the recent work of [112] proposes a secure relayingputing technologies into BCoT may potentially overcome network for blockchains, namely SABRE, which can prevent
resource constraints of IoT devices. For example, cloud servers blockchain from BGP routing attacks. Regarding DAO attacks,
or some MEC servers may serve as full nodes that store the Corda and Stellar trade the expressiveness for the verifiability
whole blockchain data and participate in most of blockchain of smart contracts [113] so as to avoid DAO attacks.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8090 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

C. Privacy Leakage E. Difficulty in BDA in BCoT
 Blockchain technologies have some mechanisms to pre- There is a surge of big volume of IoT data generated in
serve a certain data privacy of transaction records saved in nearly real time fashion. The IoT data exhibits in massive
blockchains. For example, transactions are made in BTC via volume, heterogeneity and huge business value. BDA on IoT
IP addresses instead of users’ real identities thereby ensuring a data can extract hidden values and make intelligent decicertain anonymity. Moreover, one-time accounts are generated sions. However, it is challenging for apply conventional BDA
in BTC to achieve the anonymity of users. However, these schemes in BCoT due to the following reasons.
protection schemes are not robust enough. For example, it is 1) Conventional BDA Schemes Cannot Be Applied to IoT
shown in [21] that user pseudonyms can be cracked via learn- Devices Due to the Resource Limitations: Since IoT
ing and inferring the multiple transactions associated with one devices have inferior computing capability, the complicommon user. In addition, the full storage of transaction data cated BDA schemes cannot be deployed at IoT devices
on blockchain can also lead to the potential privacy leakage directly. Moreover, the bulky size of blockchain data
as indicated in [114]. also leads to the infeasibility of the local storage of
 Potential Solutions: Recently, mixed coins are proposed to blockchain data at IoT devices. Although cloud comconfuse attackers so that they cannot infer the exact number of puting can address these issues, uploading the data to
real coins spent by a transaction. However, recent study [115] remote cloud servers can also result in the privacydemonstrates the weakness of the coin-mixed schemes via breach and the long-latency [122].
extensive realistic experiments based on Monero.4 Moreover, 2) It Is Difficult to Conduct Data Analytics on Anonymous
the actual transaction can be deduced by leveraging the vul- Blockchain Data: Blockchain technologies can protect
nerability of the coin-mixed schemes. The work of [114] data privacy via encryption and digital signature on
presents a memory optimized and flexible blockchain data stor- data records. However, it often requires the data decrypage scheme, which can somewhat reduce the privacy leakage tion before conducting data analytics. Nevertheless, the
risk. decryption process is often time-consuming thereby
 resulting in the inefficiency of data analytics [123].
 It is challenging to design data analytics schemes on
D. Incentive Mechanism in BCoT
 blockchain data without decryption.
 An appropriate incentive mechanism is a benign stim- Potential Solutions: MEC is serving as a crucial comulus to blockchain systems. For example, a number of plement to cloud computing by offloading computing tasks
BTCs will be rewarded to a miner who first solves the from distant cloud servers to MEC in approximation to
computationally difficult task. Meanwhile, a transaction in users. As a result, MEC can improve the response, privacy-
Ethereum will be charged with a given fee (i.e., gas) to preservation and context-awareness in contrast to cloud compay the miners for the execution of contracts. Therefore, puting. Therefore, offloading BDA tasks to MEC servers
there are two issues in designing incentive mechanisms in can potentially solve the privacy-leakage and long latency
blockchains: 1) the reward for proving (or mining) a block issue of cloud computing with blockchain [124]. Regarding
and 2) the compensation for processing a transaction (or a data analytics on anonymous blockchain data, there are some
contract). recent advances: 1) complex network-based community detec-
 However, it is challenging to design a proper incentive tion [125] to identify multiple addresses associated with an
mechanism for BCoT to fulfill the requirements of different identical user; 2) feature extraction of transaction patterns of
applications. Take digital currency platforms as an example, BTC blockchain data to identify payment relationships [126];
where miners are keen on the price of digital currency. For and 3) analysis of user accounts and operation codes on
instance, the BTC reward for a generated block will be halved Ethereum to detect Ponzi fraud behavior [127].
every 210 000 blocks [116]. The reward decrement will discourage miners to contribute to the solution of the puzzle
consequently migrating to other blockchain platforms. How to F. Scalability of BCoT
design a proper rewarding and publishing mechanism of digi- The scalability of incumbent blockchains also limits the
tal currency is necessary to ensure the stability of blockchain wide usage of blockchains in large-scale IoT. The scalability
systems. of blockchains can be measured by the throughput of trans-
 Potential Solutions: On the other hand, the reputation and actions per second against the number of IoT nodes and the
honesty is an impetus to users in private or consortium number of concurrent workloads [25], [113]. Many blockchain
blockchain systems. Therefore, going beyond digital cur- systems are suffering from the poor throughput. For examrency, reputation credits can be used as incentives in the ple, it is shown in [128] that BTC can only process seven
scenarios like personal reputation systems [117], sharing econ- transactions per second. In contrast, VISA can process nearly
omy [118], data provenance [119], and the medication supply 2000 transactions per second and PayPal has the throughput of
chain [120]. The recent work [121] presents RepChain, which 170 transactions per second [129], [130]. Conoscenti et al. [4]
exploits the reputation of each node to develop the incentive showed that BTC blockchain may not be suitable for IoT due
mechanism. to the poor scalability. In summary, the incumbent blockchain
 systems may not be suitable for the applications with a large
 4 A private digital currency platform (https://getmonero.org/). volume of transactions especially for IoT.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8091

 Potential Solutions: There are two possible directions in [4] M. Conoscenti, A. Vetrò, and J. C. De Martin, “Blockchain for the
improving the scalability of blockchains in IoT: 1) design- Internet of Things: A systematic literature review,” in Proc. IEEE/ACS
 13th Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl. (AICCSA), Agadir, Morocco,
ing more scalable consensus algorithms and 2) constructing Nov./Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
private or consortium blockchains for IoT. Regarding 1), we [5] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for
can choose the consensus-localization strategy to improve the Internet of Things security: A position paper,” Digit. Commun. Netw.,
 vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 149–160, 2018.
throughput of transactions. Meanwhile, we may implement [6] A. Reyna, C. Martín, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. Díaz, “On blockchain
some new blockchain structures such as directed acyclic graph and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities,” Future
(DAG) [131] to allow the nonconflicting blocks from the side- Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 173–190, Nov. 2018.
 [7] T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the
chain to be assembled with the main chain, consequently use of blockchain for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
reducing the cost for resolving bifurcation. In addition, we may pp. 32979–33001, 2018.
consider integrating PoW with PBFT to improve the through- [8] M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli, and
 M. H. Rehmani, “Applications of blockchains in the Internet of
put of PoW similar to sharding protocol proposed in [132], Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
in which less computational-extensive puzzle is first solved in vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1676–1717, 2nd Quart., 2019. [Online]. Available:
PoW and consensus is then reached in multiple small groups. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2018.2886932
 [9] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliafito,
 Regarding 2), transactions in private and consortium “Blockchain and IoT integration: A systematic survey,” Sensors,
blockchains can be processed much faster than public vol. 18, no. 8, 2018, Art. no. E2575. [Online]. Available:
blockchains due to the fully controlled systems and the lim- http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/8/2575
 [10] S. Petersen and S. Carlsen, “WirelessHART versus ISA100.11a: The
ited number of permitted users. Meanwhile, the consensus can format war hits the factory floor,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 5,
also be easily reached in private and consortium blockchains. no. 4, pp. 23–34, Dec. 2011.
Moreover, the fully controlled blockchains also fulfill the [11] K. Mekki, E. Bajic, F. Chaxel, and F. Meyer, “A comparative study
 of LPWAN technologies for large-scale IoT deployment,” ICT Exp.,
requirement that an enterprise needs to have a control on vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2019.
different strategic sectors, e.g., ERP, MES, PLM, and CRM [12] M. Chen, Y. Miao, Y. Hao, and K. Hwang, “Narrow band Internet of
systems [58], [113]. Though there are some attempts, such Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, p. 20557, 2017.
 [13] O. Khutsoane, B. Isong, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “IoT devices and
as GemOS [35], Multichain [36], and Hyperledger [37], more applications based on LoRa/LoRaWAN,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. Conf.
mature private and consortium blockchain platforms serving IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. (IECON), Beijing, China, Oct./Nov. 2017,
for specific industrial sectors are still expected in the future. pp. 6107–6112.
 [14] X. Lu, D. Niyato, H. Jiang, D. I. Kim, Y. Xiao, and Z. Han, “Ambient
 backscatter assisted wireless powered communications,” IEEE Wireless
 VIII. C ONCLUSION Commun., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 170–177, Apr. 2018.
 [15] J. Zhou, Z. Cao, X. Dong, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Security and privacy
 The incumbent IoT systems are facing a number of chal- for cloud-based IoT: Challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1,
lenges including heterogeneity, poor interoperability, resource pp. 26–33, Jan. 2017.
constraints, and privacy and security vulnerability. The recent [16] R. Roman, J. Zhou, and J. Lopez, “On the features and challenges of
 security and privacy in distributed Internet of Things,” Comput. Netw.,
appearance of blockchain technologies essentially offers a vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2266–2279, Jul. 2013.
solution to the issues with the enhanced interoperability, [17] J. He, J. Wei, K. Chen, Z. Tang, Y. Zhou, and Y. Zhang, “Multitier fog
privacy, security, and traceability and reliability. computing with large-scale IoT data analytics for smart cities,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 677–686, Apr. 2018.
 In this paper, we investigate integrating blockchain with IoT. [18] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
We name such synthesis of blockchain and IoT as BCoT. We challenges and opportunities: A survey,” Int. J. Web Grid Services,
provide a comprehensive survey on BCoT. In particular, we vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.
 [19] C. Miguel and L. Barbara, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in
first briefly introduce IoT and blockchain technology. We then Proc. 3rd Symp. Oper. Syst. Design Implement., vol. 99. New Orleans,
discuss the opportunities of BCoT and depict the architecture LA, USA, 1999, pp. 173–186.
of BCoT. We next outline the research issues in blockchain [20] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on
 the security of blockchain systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
for next-generation networks. We further discuss the potential to be published. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
applications of BCoT and outline the open research directions science/article/pii/S0167739X17318332
in BCoT. [21] M. Conti, E. S. Kumar, C. Lal, and S. Ruj, “A survey on security and
 privacy issues of bitcoin,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4,
 pp. 3416–3452, 4th Quart., 2018.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [22] B. Chase and E. MacBrough, “Analysis of the XRP ledger consensus
 protocol,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07242, 2018. [Online]. Available:
 The authors would like to thank G. K.-T. Hon for his https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.07242.pdf
constructive comments. [23] Y. Gilad, R. Hemo, S. Micali, G. Vlachos, and N. Zeldovich,
 “Algorand: Scaling Byzantine agreements for cryptocurrencies,” in
 Proc. ACM 26th Symp. Oper. Syst. Principles, Shanghai, China, 2017,
 R EFERENCES pp. 51–68.
 [1] P. Lade, R. Ghosh, and S. Srinivasan, “Manufacturing analytics and [24] F. R. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, P. Si, and Y. Zhang, “Virtualization
 industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, for distributed ledger technology (vDLT),” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 pp. 74–79, May/Jun. 2017. pp. 25019–25028, 2018.
 [2] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain [25] T. T. A. Dinh, J. Wang, G. Chen, R. Liu, B. C. Ooi, and
 for IoT security and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” in Proc. K.-L. Tan, “BLOCKBENCH: A framework for analyzing private
 IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshops (PerCom blockchains,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Manag. Data (SIGMOD),
 Workshops), Kailua, HI, USA, Mar. 2017, pp. 618–623. Chicago, IL, USA, 2017, pp. 1085–1100. [Online]. Available:
 [3] Y. Zhang and J. Wen, “The IoT electric business model: Using http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3035918.3064033
 blockchain technology for the Internet of Things,” Peer Peer Netw. [26] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. S. Pentland, “Decentralizing privacy:
 Appl., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 983–994, Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: Using blockchain to protect personal data,” in Proc. IEEE Security
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-016-0456-1 Privacy Workshops, San Jose, CA, USA, May 2015, pp. 180–184.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8092 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

 [27] S. S. Chawathe, Clustering Blockchain Data. Cham, Switzerland: [52] S. He, C. Xing, and L.-J. Zhang, “A business-oriented schema for
 Springer, 2019, pp. 43–72. blockchain network operation,” in Blockchain—ICBC 2018, S. Chen,
 [28] J. Ream, Y. Chu, and D. Schatsky, Upgrading Blockchains: Smart H. Wang, and L.-J. Zhang, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2018,
 Contract Use Cases in Industry. London, U.K.: Deloitte Press, 2016. pp. 277–284.
 [Online]. Available: https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/ [53] S. Bera, S. Misra, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Software-defined networking
 signals-for-strategists/using-blockchain-for-smart-contracts.html for Internet of Things: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6,
 [29] N. Szabo, “The idea of smart contracts,” Rep., 1997. pp. 1994–2008, Dec. 2017.
 [Online]. Available: http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/ [54] K. Kalkan and S. Zeadally, “Securing Internet of Things with software
 InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo. defined networking,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 186–192,
 best.vwh.net/smart_contracts_2.html Sep. 2018.
 [30] F. Idelberger, G. Governatori, R. Riveret, and G. Sartor, “Evaluation of [55] P. K. Sharma, S. Singh, Y.-S. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “DistBlockNet:
 logic-based smart contracts for blockchain systems,” in Proc. Int. Symp. A distributed blockchains-based secure SDN architecture for IoT
 Rules Rule Markup Lang. Semantic Web (RuleML), Stony Brook, NY, networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, Sep. 2017.
 USA, 2016, pp. 167–183. [56] I. D. Alvarenga, G. A. F. Rebello, and O. C. M. B. Duarte, “Securing
 [31] C. Sillaber and B. Waltl, “Life cycle of smart contracts in blockchain configuration management and migration of virtual network functions
 ecosystems,” Datenschutz und Datensicherheit - DuD, vol. 41, no. 8, using blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp.
 pp. 497–500, Aug. 2017. (NOMS), Taipei, Taiwan, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–9.
 [32] R. Koulu, “Blockchains and online dispute resolution: Smart contracts [57] I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. Flinck, “Network
 as an alternative to enforcement,” SCRIPTed, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 40, slicing and softwarization: A survey on principles, enabling technolo-
 2016. gies, and solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 3,
 [33] S. Nakamoto. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. pp. 2429–2453, 3rd Quart., 2018.
 [Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [58] C. Esposito, A. Castiglione, B. Martini, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Cloud
 [34] Ethereum: Blockchain APP Platforms. Accessed: Aug. 19, 2018. manufacturing: Security, privacy, and forensic concerns,” IEEE Cloud
 [Online]. Available: https://www.ethereum.org/ Comput., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 16–22, Jul./Aug. 2016.
 [35] GemOS: The Blockchain Operating System. Accessed: Aug. 19, 2018. [59] V. Ortega, F. Bouchmal, and J. F. Monserrat, “Trusted 5G vehicu-
 [Online]. Available: https://enterprise.gem.co/ lar networks: Blockchains and content-centric networking,” IEEE Veh.
 [36] MultiChain: Open Platform for Building Blockchains. Accessed: Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 121–127, Jun. 2018.
 Aug. 19, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.multichain.com/ [60] K. Fan, Y. Ren, Y. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Yang, “Blockchain-based effi-
 [37] (2015). Hyperledger Project. [Online]. Available: cient privacy preserving and data sharing scheme of content-centric
 https://www.hyperledger.org/ network in 5G,” IET Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 527–532, Mar. 2018.
 [38] X. Xu et al., “A taxonomy of blockchain-based systems for architecture [61] C.-H. Chen, M.-Y. Lin, and C.-C. Liu, “Edge computing gateway of
 design,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Archit. (ICSA), Gothenburg, the industrial Internet of Things using multiple collaborative microcon-
 Sweden, 2017, pp. 243–252. trollers,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 24–32, Jan./Feb. 2018.
 [39] Consortium Chain Development. Accessed: Aug. 19, 2018. [Online]. [62] N. Abbas, Y. Zhang, A. Taherkordi, and T. Skeie, “Mobile edge com-
 Available: https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Consortium-Chain- puting: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 450–465,
 Development Feb. 2018.
 [40] D. Johnson, A. Menezes, and S. Vanstone, “The elliptic curve digi- [63] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
 tal signature algorithm (ECDSA),” Int. J. Inf. Security, vol. 1, no. 1, blockchain meets edge computing,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56,
 pp. 36–63, 2001. no. 8, pp. 33–39, Aug. 2018.
 [41] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and smart contracts [64] M. Liu, F. R. Yu, Y. Teng, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Song, “Computation
 for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292–2303, 2016. offloading and content caching in wireless blockchain networks with
 [42] Q. Lu and X. Xu, “Adaptable blockchain-based systems: A case mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 11,
 study for product traceability,” IEEE Softw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 21–27, pp. 11008–11021, Nov. 2018.
 Nov./Dec. 2017. [65] P. Yang, N. Zhang, Y. Bi, L. Yu, and X. S. Shen, “Catalyzing cloud-
 [43] Y. Zhang and J. Wen, “An IoT electric business model based on the fog interoperation in 5G wireless networks: An SDN approach,” IEEE
 protocol of bitcoin,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Intell. Next Gener. Netw. Netw., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 14–20, Sep. 2017.
 (ICIN), Paris, France, 2015, pp. 184–191. [66] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Joint load balanc-
 [44] M. Massaro, “Next generation of radio spectrum management: ing and offloading in vehicular edge computing and networks,”
 Licensed shared access for 5G,” Telecommun. Policy, vol. 41, nos. 5–6, IEEE Internet Things J., to be published. [Online]. Available:
 pp. 422–433, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/ https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2876298
 science/article/pii/S0308596117301416 [67] Z. Zhou, P. Liu, J. Feng, Y. Zhang, S. Mumtaz, and J. Rodriguez,
 [45] J. Eggerton, FCC’s Rosenworcel Talks Up 6G, Future Publ. Ltd., Bath, “Computation resource allocation and task assignment optimization in
 U.K., Sep. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.multichannel.com/ vehicular fog computing: A contract-matching approach,” IEEE Trans.
 news/fccs-rosenworcel-talks-up-6g Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 3113–3125, Apr. 2019. [Online].
 [46] R. Saracco, Let’s Start Talking About 6G! IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA, Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2019.2894851
 Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://sites.ieee.org/futuredirections/ [68] Y. Yang, K. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Luo, and M. Zhou,
 2018/01/25/lets-start-talking-about-6g/ “Meets: Maximal energy efficient task scheduling in homogeneous
 [47] A. Gatherer, What Will 6G Be? IEEE Commun. Soc., New York, fog networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 4076–4087,
 NY, USA, Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.comsoc.org/ Oct. 2018.
 publications/ctn/what-will-6g-be [69] A. Kusiak, “Smart manufacturing,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 56, nos. 1–2,
 [48] S. Yrjölä, “Analysis of blockchain use cases in the citizens broad- pp. 508–517, 2018.
 band radio service spectrum sharing concept,” in Cognitive Radio [70] J. Wan, J. Li, M. Imran, and D. Li, “A blockchain-based solution
 Oriented Wireless Networks. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2018, for enhancing security and privacy in smart factory,” IEEE Trans.
 pp. 128–139. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3652–3660, Jun. 2019. [Online].
 [49] K. Kotobi and S. G. Bilen, “Secure blockchains for dynamic spectrum Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2894573
 access: A decentralized database in moving cognitive radio networks [71] I. Konstantinidis, G. Siaminos, C. Timplalexis, P. Zervas, V. Peristeras,
 enhances security and user access,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, and S. Decker, “Blockchain for business applications: A systematic litno. 1, pp. 32–39, Mar. 2018. erature review,” in Business Information Systems, W. Abramowicz and
 [50] E. H. H. Kure, P. Engelstad, S. Maharjan, S. Gjessing, and A. Paschke, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2018, pp. 384–399.
 Y. Zhang, “Distributed uplink offloading for IoT in 5G het- [72] H. M. Kim and M. Laskowski, “Toward an ontology-driven blockchain
 erogeneous networks under private information constraints,” design for supply-chain provenance,” Intell. Syst. Account. Finance
 IEEE Internet Things J., to be published. [Online]. Available: Manag., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 18–27, 2018.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2886703 [73] A. Tapscott and D. Tapscott, “How blockchain is changing
 [51] E. Langberg, “Blockchains in mobile networks,” Wireless Access finance,” Harvard Bus. Rev., vol. 1, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available:
 Dept., Huawei Technol. Company Ltd., New York, NY, USA, https://hbr.org/2017/03/how-blockchain-is-changing-finance
 Rep. 21, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://e.huawei.com/hk/ [74] N. Kshetri, “1 blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain managepublications/global/ict_insights/201703141505/ ment objectives,” Int. J. Inf. Manag., vol. 39, pp. 80–89, Apr. 2018.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
DAI et al.: BLOCKCHAIN FOR IoT: SURVEY 8093

 [75] Z. Li et al., “A blockchain and AutoML approach for open [96] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Wireless communications
 and automated customer service,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., with unmanned aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE
 vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3642–3651, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, May 2016.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2900987 [97] G. Kimchi et al., “Unmanned aerial vehicle delivery system,” U.S.
 [76] D. Tse, B. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. Cheng, and H. Mu, “Blockchain appli- Patent 9 573 684, 2017.
 cation in food supply information security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. [98] L. Wang, F. Chen, and H. Yin, “Detecting and tracking
 Ind. Eng. Eng. Manag. (IEEM), Singapore, Dec. 2017, pp. 1357–1361. vehicles in traffic by unmanned aerial vehicles,” Autom.
 [77] F. Tian, “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based Construction, vol. 72, pp. 294–308, Dec. 2016. [Online]. Available:
 on RFID & blockchain technology,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Service http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0926580516300887
 Syst. Service Manag. (ICSSSM), Kunming, China, 2016, pp. 1–6. [99] N. Cheng et al., “Air-ground integrated mobile edge networks:
 [78] F. Sander, J. Semeijn, and D. Mahr, “The acceptance of blockchain Architecture, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
 technology in meat traceability and transparency,” Brit. Food J., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 26–32, Aug. 2018.
 vol. 120, no. 9, pp. 2066–2079, 2018. [100] A. Kapitonov, S. Lonshakov, A. Krupenkin, and I. Berman,
 [79] R. Bettín-Díaz, A. E. Rojas, and C. Mejía-Moncayo, “Methodological “Blockchain-based protocol of autonomous business activity for multiapproach to the definition of a blockchain system for the food agent systems consisting of UAVs,” in Proc. Workshop Res. Educ.
 industry supply chain traceability,” in Computational Science and Its Develop. Unmanned Aerial Syst. (RED-UAS), Linköping, Sweden,
 Applications—ICCSA 2018. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int., 2018, 2017, pp. 84–89.
 pp. 19–33. [101] A. Kumar, A. Kundu, C. A. Pickover, and K. Weldemariam,
 “Unmanned aerial vehicle data management,” U.S. Patent
 [80] Q. Lin, H. Wang, X. Pei, and J. Wang, “Food safety traceabil-
 Appl. 15 463 147, 2018.
 ity system based on blockchain and EPCIS,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
 [102] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV communications for 5G and
 pp. 20698–20707, 2019.
 beyond: Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE Internet Things
 [81] C. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Zhou, M. Cheng, and C. Long, “Peer-to-peer J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241–2263, Apr. 2019. [Online]. Available:
 energy trading in a microgrid,” Appl. Energy, vol. 220, pp. 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2887086
 Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/ [103] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Joint computation
 science/article/pii/S0306261918303398 offloading and user association in multi-task mobile edge comput-
 [82] Z. Li, J. Kang, R. Yu, D. Ye, Q. Deng, and Y. Zhang, “Consortium ing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 12313–12325,
 blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial Internet of Dec. 2018.
 Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3690–3700, [104] T. X. Tran, A. Hajisami, P. Pandey, and D. Pompili, “Collaborative
 Aug. 2018. mobile edge computing in 5G networks: New paradigms, scenarios,
 [83] N. Z. Aitzhan and D. Svetinovic, “Security and privacy in decentralized and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 54–61,
 energy trading through multi-signatures, blockchain and anonymous Apr. 2017.
 messaging streams,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 15, [105] X. Li, H. Wang, H.-N. Dai, Y. Wang, and Q. Zhao, “An analytical
 no. 5, pp. 840–852, Sep./Oct. 2018. study on eavesdropping attacks in wireless nets of things,” Mobile Inf.
 [84] C. Pop et al., “Blockchain based decentralized management of demand Syst., vol. 2016, Dec. 2016, Art. no. 4313475.
 response programs in smart energy grids,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 1, 2018, [106] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A sur-
 Art. no. E162. vey on Internet of Things: Architecture, enabling technologies, security
 [85] K. Wang, Y. Shao, L. Shu, C. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Mobile big data and privacy, and applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 5,
 fault-tolerant processing for eHealth networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 30, pp. 1125–1142, Oct. 2017.
 no. 1, pp. 36–42, Jan./Feb. 2016. [107] Y. Yang, L. Wu, G. Yin, L. Li, and H. Zhao, “A survey on security and
 [86] C. Esposito, A. D. Santis, G. Tortora, H. Chang, and K. R. Choo, privacy issues in Internet-of-Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4,
 “Blockchain: A panacea for healthcare cloud-based data security no. 5, pp. 1250–1258, Oct. 2017.
 and privacy?” IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 31–37, [108] M. Apostolaki, A. Zohar, and L. Vanbever, “Hijacking bitcoin: Routing
 Jan./Feb. 2018. attacks on cryptocurrencies,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy
 [87] K. N. Griggs, O. Ossipova, C. P. Kohlios, A. N. Baccarini, (SP), San Jose, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 375–392.
 E. A. Howson, and T. Hayajneh, “Healthcare blockchain system using [109] S. Adhami, G. Giudici, and S. Martinazzi, “Why do businesses go
 smart contracts for secure automated remote patient monitoring,” J. crypto? An empirical analysis of initial coin offerings,” J. Econ.
 Med. Syst., vol. 42, no. 7, p. 130, Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available: Bus., vol. 100, pp. 64–75, Nov./Dec. 2018. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916–018-0982-x http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0148619517302308
 [88] M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, A. Zaman, T. Wang, G. Wang, H. Tao, and [110] L. Hu et al., “Cooperative jamming for physical layer security enhance-
 M. M. Hassan, “Blockchain and big data to transform the health- ment in Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 1,
 care,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Data Process. Appl. (ICDPA), 2018, pp. 219–228, Feb. 2018.
 pp. 62–68. [111] W. Xu, S. Jha, and W. Hu, “LoRa-Key: Secure key generation system
 [89] Y. Sun, R. Zhang, X. Wang, K. Gao, and L. Liu, “A decentralizing for LoRa-based network,” IEEE Internet Things J., to be published.
 attribute-based signature for healthcare blockchain,” in Proc. 27th Int. [112] M. Apostolaki, G. Marti, J. Müller, and L. Vanbever, “SABRE:
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), 2018, pp. 1–9. Protecting bitcoin against routing attacks,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 Security Symp., 2019, pp. 1–15.
 [90] M. A. Rahman et al., “Blockchain-based mobile edge computing
 [113] T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and
 framework for secure therapy applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 J. Wang, “Untangling blockchain: A data processing view of
 pp. 72469–72478, 2018.
 blockchain systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 30, no. 7,
 [91] Z. Yang, K. Yang, L. Lei, K. Zheng, and V. C. M. Leung, “Blockchain- pp. 1366–1385, Jul. 2018.
 based decentralized trust management in vehicular networks,” IEEE [114] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “MOF-BC: A memory opti-
 Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1495–1505, Apr. 2019. [Online]. mized and flexible blockchain for large scale networks,” Future Gener.
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2836144 Comput. Syst., vol. 92, pp. 357–373, Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available:
 [92] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang, “Blockchain-enabled security in elec- http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17329552
 tric vehicles cloud and edge computing,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3, [115] M. Möser et al., “An empirical analysis of traceability in the
 pp. 78–83, May/Jun. 2018. Monero blockchain,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2018, no. 3,
 [93] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, S. Maharjan, Y. Zhang, and E. Hossain, pp. 143–163, 2018.
 “Enabling localized peer-to-peer electricity trading among plug-in [116] K. Saito and M. Iwamura, “How to make a digital currency on a
 hybrid electric vehicles using consortium blockchains,” IEEE Trans. blockchain stable,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 58–69,
 Ind. Informat., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3154–3164, Dec. 2017. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.05.019
 [94] J. Kang et al., “Blockchain for secure and efficient data sharing in [117] A. Yasin and L. Liu, “An online identity and smart contract manvehicular edge computing and networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., to agement system,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf.
 be published. (COMPSAC), vol. 2. Atlanta, GA, USA, 2016, pp. 192–198.
 [95] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, G. Qiao, and Y. Zhang, “Artificial [118] A. Bogner, M. Chanson, and A. Meeuw, “A decentralised sharing app
 intelligence empowered edge computing and caching for Internet of running a smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. 6th
 Vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., to be published. Int. Conf. Internet Things, 2016, pp. 177–178.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8094 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2019

[119] X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, C. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat, and L. Njilla, Zibin Zheng (SM’16) received the Ph.D. degree
 “ProvChain: A blockchain-based data provenance architecture in cloud in computer science and engineering with the
 environment with enhanced privacy and availability,” in Proc. 17th Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
 IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Clust. Cloud Grid Comput. (CCGRID), Madrid, in 2011.
 Spain, 2017, pp. 468–477. He is currently a Professor with the School of
[120] D. G. Glover and J. Hermans, “Improving the traceability of the Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University,
 clinical trial supply chain,” Appl. Clin. Trials, vol. 26, no. 11, Guangzhou, China. His current research interests
 pp. 36–38, Nov. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://search.proquest.com/ include service computing, cloud computing, and
 docview/1984377517?accountid=28120 blockchain.
[121] C. Huang et al. (2019). RepChain: A Reputation Based Secure, Fast and Dr. Zheng was a recipient of the Outstanding
 High Incentive Blockchain System Via Sharding. [Online]. Available: Ph.D. dissertation Award of the Chinese University
 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.05741.pdf of Hong Kong in 2012, the Association for Computing Machinery’s Special
[122] P. Wang, R. X. Gao, and Z. Fan, “Cloud computing for cloud manufac- Interest Group on Software Engineering Distinguished Paper Award at the
 turing: Benefits and limitations,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., vol. 137, no. 4, International Conference on Science and Engineering, in 2010, the Best
 pp. 1–9, 2015. Student Paper Award at the International Conference on Web Services,
[123] N. Wang et al., “PrivTrie: Effective frequent term discovery under local in 2010, and the IBM Ph.D. Fellowship Award at 2010. He served as a
 differential privacy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), 2018, Program Committee Member for the IEEE International Conference on Cloud
 pp. 1–12. Computing, the International Conference on Web Services, the International
[124] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, Z. Chen, Q. He, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain Conference on Service Computing, the International Conference on Serviceand deep reinforcement learning empowered intelligent 5G beyond,” Oriented Computing, and the International Symposium on Service-Oriented
 IEEE Netw. Mag., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 10–17, May/Jun. 2019. System Engineering.
[125] C. Remy, B. Rym, and L. Matthieu, “Tracking bitcoin users activity
 using community detection on a network of weak signals,” in Complex
 Networks & Their Applications VI. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int.,
 2018, pp. 166–177.
[126] P. Tasca, A. Hayes, and S. Liu, “The evolution of the bitcoin economy:
 Extracting and analyzing the network of payment relationships,” J. Risk
 Finance, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 94–126, 2018.
[127] W. Chen, Z. Zheng, J. Cui, E. Ngai, P. Zheng, and Y. Zhou,
 “Detecting Ponzi schemes on Ethereum: Towards healthier blockchain technology,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.
 (WWW), Lyon, France, 2018, pp. 1409–1418. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3178876.3186046
[128] K. Croman et al., “On scaling decentralized blockchains,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Financ. Cryptography Data Security, 2016, pp. 106–125.
[129] J. Vermeulen, Bitcoin and Ethereum vs Visa and Paypal—
 Transactions Per Second, Altcoin Today, London, U.K., Apr. 2017.
 [Online]. Available: http://www.altcointoday.com/bitcoin-ethereum-vsvisa-paypal-transactions-per-second/
[130] S. Albrecht, S. Reichert, J. Schmid, J. Strüker, D. Neumann, and
 G. Fridgen, “Dynamics of blockchain implementation—A case study
 from the energy sector,” in Proc. 51st Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci.,
 2018, p. 10.
[131] Y. Lewenberg, Y. Sompolinsky, and A. Zohar, “Inclusive block chain
 protocols,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Financ. Cryptography Data Security,
 2015, pp. 528–547.
[132] L. Luu, V. Narayanan, C. Zheng, K. Baweja, S. Gilbert, and
 P. Saxena, “A secure sharding protocol for open blockchains,” in
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), Vienna,
 Austria, 2016, pp. 17–30. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/
 10.1145/2976749.2978389

 Hong-Ning Dai (SM’16) received the Ph.D. degree Yan Zhang (SM’10) received the Ph.D. degree form
 in computer science and engineering from the the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
 Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. He is a Full Professor with the Department of
 He is an Associate Professor with the Faculty Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. His
 of Information Technology, Macau University current research interests include next-generation
 of Science and Technology, Macau, China. He wireless networks leading to 5G and green and
 has published over 90 peer-reviewed papers in secure CPSs (e.g., smart grid, healthcare, and
 top-tier journals and conferences, including ACM transport).
 Computing Surveys, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS Dr. Zhang was a recipient of the 2018
 ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS , the IEEE Highly Cited Researcher (top 1% by cita-
T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS tions) Award according to Clarivate Analytics. He is an Associate
ON I NTELLIGENT T RANSPORTATION S YSTEMS , the IEEE T RANSACTIONS Technical Editor of the IEEE Communications Magazine, an Editor
ON C OMPUTATIONAL S OCIAL S YSTEMS , ACM/Springer Wireless Networks, of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON G REEN C OMMUNICATIONS AND
and IEEE INFOCOM. He is also the holder of one U.S. patent. His research N ETWORKING, the IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS,
interests include Internet of Things, BDA, and blockchains. and the IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, and an Associate Editor of
 Dr. Dai was a recipient of the One ESI Highly Cited Paper Award by IEEE ACCESS. He serves as chair positions in a number of conferences,
Clarivate Analytics, the BOC Excellent Research Award of the Macau including IEEE GLOBECOM 2017, IEEE VTC-Spring 2017, IEEE PIMRC
University of Science and Technology in 2015 for his outstanding research 2016, IEEE CloudCom 2016, IEEE ICCC 2016, IEEE CCNC 2016, IEEE
performance. He has served as a Guest Editor for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS SmartGridComm 2015, and IEEE CloudCom 2015. He serves as a TPC
ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS and an Editorial Board Member in several member for numerous international conference including IEEE INFOCOM,
peer-reviewed journals, such as IEEE ACCESS, the International Journal IEEE ICC, IEEE GLOBECOM, and IEEE WCNC. He is the IEEE Vehicular
of Industrial Engineering Computations, and the International Journal Technology Society (VTS) Distinguished Lecturer. He is also a senior
of Wireless and Mobile Communication for Industrial Systems. He is a member of IEEE ComSoc, IEEE CS, IEEE PES, and IEEE VTS. He is a
professional member of ACM. fellow of IET.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:52:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.